Abstract
How can we better understand the process of therapeutic art-making for stroke rehabilitation, and what are design opportunities for virtual reality art-making for people with stroke-related impairments? We investigated this question in a two-part study with 14 amateur artists with disabilities resulting from stroke: a three-week field study and a technology probe consisting of experiential virtual reality interviews. We uncovered what participants made, the aesthetics of the materials and the process of making. The field study revealed inspirations around identity, situatedness of choices for tools in the social and physical environment, and a breadth of application techniques (e.g., dripping paint or use of tape) that varied in need for fine motor control. The experiential virtual reality interviews highlighted the need for control, the affordances of the medium, and the challenges in viewing and reflecting on work. Emergent art reflected qualities of the 3D paint and free-form gesture. Virtual reality and traditional art-making contrasted in the speed and finality of application, opportunities for iteration and reflection, and in the need for dexterity. We discuss strengths, weaknesses and implications for design of virtual reality art-making for those with stroke-related impairments.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Accessibility

Virtual reality

Stroke

Art-making

Digital art

3D Painting

1. Introduction
Art is immersive and virtual reality art may be especially so. Virtual reality (VR) provides a sense of presence fostered by a head-mounted display that situates the user in an immersive environment. VR has been lauded as a promising form of rehabilitation because of its ability to provide rich visual experiences and transferable skills Wilson et al. (1997), control over dynamic environments and measurements of responses Schultheis and Rizzo (2001), and the ability to present greater risks than would be possible in real life Standen and Brown (2005). While VR is heralded as a way to transcend social and physical boundaries, accessibility barriers continue to exist as basic assistive features such as auto-reading are absent Tefilo et al. (2016). Our work focuses on artists with disabilities from stroke as power users Kara et al. (1997) and lead users Von Hippel (1986) for VR art-making.

A stroke occurs when the blood supply to the brain is disrupted, resulting in brain damage and loss of ability. Stroke is the most common cause of adult disability worldwide What is stroke? (2017). Recovering from stroke requires sustained adherence to physical therapy that consists of dozens of repetitions of basic movements and tasks of daily life, such as reach and grasp, and which are perceived as tedious Bassett (2003). Lack of motivation for and adherence to therapy worsens therapeutic outcomes Maclean et al. (2000). Rehabilitation in VR meets some of these challenges because patients can perform their physical exercise while the immersion draws attention away from discomfort and pain Lohse et al. (2014); Thomson et al. (2014). VR can also be done at home and gesture activity and progress can be tracked. To be fully successful, a rehabilitation program for stroke must not only be effective and draw attention away from pain, but also be engaging and draw patients out of a state of grief Hackett et al. (2005). Immersive gaming is a burgeoning area which can engage patients in cognitive flow and continuous physical movement exploration Burke et al. (2010). VR game-based stroke interventions tend to focus on improving physical function or cognitive aspects. Depression and anxiety are common psychological disorders post-stroke, but these are neglected in current treatments Ali et al. (2014). We aim to begin to address this gap by better understanding current practices for therapeutic art-making and investigating design opportunities for VR art-based stroke rehabilitation.

Art therapy is an effective treatment for stroke Kongkasuwan et al. (2016). Art-therapists work with clients in art-making directed by therapeutic goals. Art therapy supports physical, cognitive and emotional healing through the creation of art including painting, drawing, sculpting, mixed media or other methods. The malleability and interaction possibilities of the materials are critical. Art-therapists’ expertise in materiality enables them to work with clients through the art-making process to transcend disabilities. Art-therapists overcome communication impairments by using “making” as expression  Lazar et al. (2018). Art-therapists also offer unobtrusive physical assistance to empower clients Lazar et al. (2016). To understand current therapeutic art-making practices and design opportunities for virtual art-making for stroke rehabilitation, we study the context of post-stroke art-making. We used VR art as a technology probe Hutchinson et al. (2003) within the context of an institution that offers art classes, open studio time and art therapy. Our work makes three contributions:

1.
Empirical results from a field study of traditional art-making by 14 stroke survivors with disabilities. We found that these artists i) utilized the physical and temporally unfolding properties of the materials to create beauty without excessive fine motor precision, ii) used a social, situated and reflective process of tool selection, and iii) created work that blended inspirations and accomplishments from their previous and current identity.

2.
Themes derived from experiential VR interviews using a state of the art 3D tool as a technology probe. We found that the affordances of VR as a medium shifted making away from meditative, physically-supported fine motor activity to free-form mid-air gesture. The experience was immersive, physical and sometimes out of control. Creations were abstract, intentional or emergent.

3.
Implications for the design of VR art-making which have been identified from two types of research inquiry. The contrasts of the social, reflective and unhurried nature of traditional art-making and the unfolding of traditional materials, with the speed, proximity and finality of 3D paint lead us to recommend social, situated, reflective, physical and meaning-making considerations for VR art interaction.

2. Related work
2.1. Digital art-Making
Art creativity support has been an object of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) study since the 1990s Shneiderman (2007), including focus on artists’ experiences. Halverson Halverson (2013) described digital art-making as sense-making representations, where artists developed a story about themselves, learned how the digital medium and tools could represent that story, and ultimately produced digital representations that reflect a relationship between the story and the tools Halverson (2013). Expertise, or “getting smart,” in the context of art-making “means coming to know the potential of the materials in relation to the aims of a project or problem” Eisner (2002). Thus the artist’s expertise and their tools are inextricably linked and their work is shaped by the relationship. Just as McLuhan stated “the medium is the message” McLuhan (1964), artistic digital materials and tools provoke ideas, questions and themes in artists Devendorf (2014).

Digital technologies for art have different aesthetic and felt properties. Berge Berge (1997), an artist who created site-specific installations in virtual environments, describes the computer as a tool that “allows me to move freely about my work, regardless of my wheelchair” Berge (1997). Nam, an artist who also creates digital landscapes, focuses on affect in the digital artistic process using a computer to process image and videos Nam (2015). Nam describes a meditative state that comes about through persistence, intimacy with materials and contemplation Nam (2015). Over a six-month study with a mixed-media artist who used a tablet and smartpen, Treadaway Treadaway (2009) studied the processes of drawing, digital drawing, digital print, and cut and paste collage and found that the haptic engagement with physical materials was pleasurable. Digital work was less enjoyable but resulted in effects that could not be created otherwise Treadaway (2009). A project on digital making with LEDs and interactive soundscapes found that seniors engaged with the materials and with each other around the material, but found some of the LED materials too small to handle with their hands Seo et al. (2018). One of the earliest studies of VR art was Keefe et al.’s 2001 project CavePainting  Keefe et al. (2001), a system with physical props, such as brushes and buckets, and gesture interaction in an immersive cave environment. Skilled artists and art students who had little digital art experience found the gesture and prop interaction intuitive, and were very excited about the full-body experience of art-making.

In another study, 3D painting and sculpting programs were paired with mid-air gestures captured through a Leap motion device, and tested with four artists, two with physical impairments from arthrogryposis and multiple sclerosis  Creed et al. (2014). Creed et al. Creed et al. (2014) found that setting the firmness of the strokes was problematic and in particular the absence of force feedback that artists were used to with a traditional canvas felt “strange”. One of the artists said that the opacity control could simulate brushwork but that tablets were more responsive. Vi et al. Vi et al. (2017) conducted a six week field study on interactive experiences in an art gallery in London UK and found that mid-air haptic interaction facilitated an emotional engaging, immersive experience with art, and that participants felt that ‘touching without touch’ was uplifting.

Perera et al. Perera et al. (2007) studied traditional and digital art-making tools that artists with upper limb disabilities used. Traditional aids included using brushes affixed to a head stick and a foot grip and working with an assistant. A paralysed artist created illustrations for children’s books using a controller with her eyebrows and Microsoft paint. Her pieces took hundreds of thousands of eyebrow movements and 50 to 100 hours to complete. Another artist who focused on abstract geometric shapes used voice recognition software to control a paint program. Parera et al. Perera et al. (2006) contrasts the experience of the artists who use digital tools with those who use traditional ones: the digital artists felt more independent but that the making was more mechanistic. Those who used traditional tools felt that the tools enabled working intuitively and freely. Parera et al.’s approach in contrasting digital and mechanistic tools enabled them to uncover physical and experiential aspects of digital art-making. We frame our own research with this type of contrast.

2.2. Art-Making for rehabilitation
Art therapy is based on the idea that the process of creative expression in making art enriches wellbeing and facilitates reparation Malchiodi (2011). Digital art-making has been explored as a means of providing art therapy remotely. Collie et al. Collie and Čubranić (1999) created a system for remote group art therapy which consisted of audio-conferencing and hand-drawn computer images made with a brush, marker, pastel, spray paint, eraser, color-matcher, and pointer. The design was evaluated with simulated art therapy sessions with 10 art therapy experts. The authors argue that with appropriate social protocols, art therapy is suited to being delivered remotely Collie, Čubranić, 1999, Collie, Čubranić, 2002. Chat forums have also been explored as a potential venue for delivering distance art therapy, with explorations of designs that support social interaction and awareness Jones et al. (2014).

Lazar et al. Lazar et al. (2018) examined the engagement of people with complex communication difficulties in art therapy. They found that art therapy stimulates engagement in collaborative design through using materials as language. Therapists and clients used materials to build new pathways for expression and to enable co-creative engagement in design. Cornejo et al. Cornejo et al. (2016) conducted a study in analyzing art therapy for older adults with dementia in regards to sharing and privacy among the vulnerable populations and how online systems can support behavior sharing. Design implications include consideration of vulnerability, sharing and privacy complexity among this population. Lazar et al.’s and Cornejo et al.’s research suggest that studying therapeutic art-making while reflecting on design opportunities can yield rich design considerations. We espouse this approach.

Stroke survivors often have difficulties with verbal communication, a shorter life span, reduced quality of life and feeling hopeless Patten and Metz (2002); Utas Akhan et al. (2015); Wagner et al. (2008). Art-making has the potential to enable patients to express themselves and communicate non-verbally and visually Ali et al. (2014). Art-making helps stroke survivors express emotions via drawing, body language, pictures and symbols reflecting life experiences Kongkasuwan et al. (2016). Expressive and creative activities enhance stroke survivors’ quality of life and reduce their anxiety, depression, and isolation Ali et al. (2014); Eum and Yim (2015); Kongkasuwan et al. (2016); Utas Akhan et al. (2015). Art therapy helps stroke survivors view their lives more positively Aydın (2012); Meijer-Degen and Lansen (2006) and helps them to cope with physical impairments by focusing on enjoyment and artistic creation rather than their pain  Utas Akhan et al. (2015).

Akhan et al. Utas Akhan et al. (2015) investigated the outcome of clay sculpture-based art therapy in stroke and epilepsy patients. The use of clay in art therapy built confidence, patience, creativity and non-verbal communication skills through the process of touching and modelling, and was found to significantly improve mental health. Ali et al. Ali et al. (2014) examined the effectiveness of art therapy for well-being, anxiety and depression among stroke survivors. In this study, patients produced art objects with clay and crayons, and created stop motion animation films using still images on camera and an iPad. Most participants preferred clay over other physical and digital materials, due to its lesser need for manual dexterity. Ali et al. Ali et al. (2014) reported that participants felt engaged and safe, the creation process was creative and meaningful, and they concluded that the intervention was feasible.

Kongkasuwan et al. Kongkasuwan et al. (2016) investigated the efficacy of creative art therapy along with physical therapy in improving physical and cognitive function and quality of life in survivors of stroke. Creative art activities included music meditation, singing, group healing circle, self-reflection and expressing thoughts and feelings. The combination of conventional therapy with creative art therapy significantly improved physical and cognitive function and increased the quality of life among stroke patients, as compared to performing physical therapy alone. Both groups improved in physical and cognitive function and quality of life. Both groups decreased in depression and anxiety. The intervention group benefited from larger improvements than the control group. Kim et al. Kim et al. (2008) investigated art therapy for early-chronic stroke survivors. Activities included drawing objects, self-portraits, portraits of family members, three-point perspectives and figure-drawing, as well as using clay to create objects. Participants at the chronic stage experienced improvements in emotion, cognition, visual perception and physical functions, including tasks of daily living. Traditional art-making and art therapy improve stroke-related outcomes but there are currently no clear design considerations for therapeutic digital art-making. Our work takes a step toward addressing this gap by investigating what is offered by traditional and digital art making and drawing out implications for future design directions.

2.3. Virtual reality art-Making for rehabilitation
Most VR interventions for rehabilitation are game-based and most focus on improving physical function Alankus and Kelleher (2012); Jack et al. (2001). More recently, some also support cognition, such as memory and attention Cameirão et al. (2016); Faria et al. (2016); Vourvopoulos et al. (2014). One 3D immersive VR intervention Farrow and Reid (2004) focused on patients’ experiences and found that patients felt motivated as the intervention fostered a new interest or rekindled interests they had pre-stroke. Hacmun et al. Hacmun et al. (2018) analyzed VR features for use for art therapy and found that presence, immersivity, point of view, and perspective within the virtual environment, along with virtual materials and unreal characteristics give VR much potential for the practice of art therapy.

To date, there are only two studies on digital art-making for stroke rehabilitation. One study of digital art used VR with older adults recovering from stroke, who also had dementia and depression Paczynski et al. (2017). It found that participants enjoyed VR art, engaged with it and showed improvements in their physical and cognitive functioning. Worthen-Chaudhari et al. Worthen-Chaudhari et al. (2013) conducted a feasibility study on integrative graphic art feedback for acute post-stroke neurorehabilitation. Their interactive digital art application records drawing with upper limb gestures. The drawings were projected in real-time. Patients felt engaged and the visual feedback helped them to understand their movements. The authors’ study suggested two design opportunities: supporting a state of flow for a longer period and providing a physical object (e.g., printed version) that can be kept and shared with others. These authors found that the ways in which people interacted with their system suggested opportunities for design, in line with the ‘technology probe’ method that studies technology use from social science and design perspectives Hutchinson et al. (2003). We build upon this research to study how post-stroke participants make traditional and VR art so that we can derive design implications for a VR art stroke rehabilitation.

3. Research question
Given the rehabilitative potential of art-making, how can we better understand the process of therapeutic art-making by survivors of stroke, and what are design opportunities for VR art-based stroke rehabilitation?

4. Methods
To identify VR art-based stroke rehabilitation design opportunities, we conduct two types of inquiry: an in-context field study of traditional art-making by stroke survivors and a single use of VR art-making as a technology probe.

This project took place over weekly field site visits to an institution that offers art programs and art therapy programs. The program visited was entitled: “Leading a Creative Life” with the description “Enabling people with stroke to express themselves creatively through visual arts practice”, which had weekly sessions that lasted for 2 hours and 30 minutes. The first three visits consisted of a field study of art-making. These were followed by one technology probe interview per participant.

Study protocols were approved by our institutional ethics committee. 13 participants provided written consent and one provided oral consent. We used written documents, oral rephrasing and visual aids to make the consent process accessible Johansson et al. (2015).

4.1. Field study protocol
For three weekly sessions, we observed the art-making and took written notes and photos. The principles guiding our social behaviour when onsite were to be friendly and clear in our purpose (through the informed consent process), and to minimize disruption of participants’ art-making. When we arrived onsite we greeted every participant, one by one. We asked each participant if they were willing to chat about their art. We followed participants’ cues of responses and eye contact to choose whether to ask follow-up questions. If participants indicated they were willing to speak with us, we asked questions such as: “I’d love to hear about what you’re making. Could you tell me about it?” and “I’d like to better understand how you’re making this. Could you tell me more?”

Our protocol guided observations of participants’ activities, tasks, objects and materials used, and upper limb gestures and body parts involved to identify design opportunities inspired by physical dexterity aspects such as how hands and fingers were used to make art. The observation protocol prompted notes on the configuration of the studio room, types of art activities and non-art activities done by the participants, the art tools they were using, their interactions among others and with the art teachers, and how they physically performed the art tasks. After every site visit, the research team met to debrief. We shared notes and stories from what we had observed. We remarked on what each found “interesting” and unpacked why they felt it was interesting, and if relevant, noted implications for design. We annotated our field notes with these additional reflections. The protocol evolved over the course of the 3-week period as researchers discussed insights gained and further questions regarding potential implications for design.

To select the best-fitting VR controllers for participants, we brought two sets of VR controllers (HTC Vive and the Oculus Rift) on the third week. We asked participants to choose which controllers they preferred to use during the VR art-making sessions.

The controllers have different sizes, shapes and weights, and we wanted to offer participants a choice for which to use. Planning the logistics enabled us to reduce unnecessary setup time and maximise time for art-making.

When we approached participants to choose a controller, some shared expectations. Some expressed curiosity and desire to use VR technology for art-making and some expressed hesitation, especially around their proficiency with technology. P8 said that he “is not advanced in technology” and P3 said that she is “not into computers”. We took care to emphasize that the VR art-making was not a test. We discuss this protocol next.

4.2. Technology probe experiential interview protocol
Technology probes are “open-ended” technologies  Hutchinson et al. (2003) that provide flexibility of use to enable data collection on social science, design and engineering implications of design Boehner et al. (2007). By experiential VR interviews, we mean artifact-based and contextual inquiry approaches that focus on participants’ experiences, actions and reflections in context. Participants’ experiences were self-directed and creative rather than focusing on feature coverage or evaluation.

We conducted one-on-one experiential interviews in person while the participant used VR. Each participant had a single session. We used Google’s Tilt Brush Tilt Brush by Google (2018) as our probe because it was an open-ended painting tool and because it works with two different controllers: HTC Vive and Oculus Rift. Participants used the controllers that they chose during the last week of the field study period. We brought a swivel chair to the field site to enable participants to have a greater reach of the VR canvas. For safety, participants were asked to remain seated.

Our approach was grounded in an art therapy approach where there were no ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ answers or actions  Lazar et al. (2017). We emphasized that there was not a right or wrong way to draw or use the system. We began the experiential VR interviews with a few questions and a step-by-step introduction to the VR equipment. First, one of the authors put on the headset and used the controllers to write “Hello” and draw a simple sun. Participants were able to see the view from the headset on the laptop screen. Then, we invited participants to hold the controllers (without using the headset) and draw something while looking at the laptop screen. The purpose was to introduce one VR technology component at a time. Then, we asked participants if they would put on the headset for one minute. For participants with aphasia or communication complexities, we used a visual aid to confirm their consent. Participants experienced the headset for a period of less than a minute and then we helped them to remove it. With the headset off, we asked them if they could see in the virtual environment, whether they experienced any discomfort, and whether they would consent to putting on the headset again. Participants could discontinue at any time without needing to explain.

We offered variations in the setup so that each participant felt comfortable. For instance, one option was to use the controllers to paint while looking at the laptop screen instead of using the head-mounted display.

If participants did not spontaneously start painting, we suggested they draw a simple shape: “Try drawing a square or a circle”. We worded the statement to emphasize that the choice of what to make was up to the participant and that the accuracy of what they drew would not be judged. We used the concept of ‘Third hand’ Lazar et al. (2016) to ground our experiential session with a collaborative and supportive activity: that of selecting a color on the palette. Both controllers are required for color selection. Our protocol initially had the second controller adhered to the table in front of the participant. If participants expressed a desire for color selection, we asked for permission to assist with manipulating the second controller. For participants whose second hand was functional, we asked for their permission to guide their hand on the controller. When interacting with participants in this capacity, we observed their gaze, how they were moving the controllers and what buttons they were selecting in the context of the art they were making. These observations led to a tentative understanding of they wanted to accomplish. We asked them to let us know whether we were being helpful for what they wanted to accomplish.

Participants who used the HTC Vive controller were able to hold the controller in either hand as both controllers were designed for use for the left and right hand. Oculus Rift controllers were designed for a specific left and right hand. We adapted the Oculus controllers for two of our participants (P7 and P10) who make art with their left hands. In Google’s Tilt Brush, the left hand controller is designed to be used as the color picker and tool selection. We adapted the right Oculus controller for the left hand because the right controller must be used for drawing functionality. P7 opted to change the controller to her right hand and P10 completed the interview using his left hand for the right Oculus controller. The Oculus controller has many buttons, some non-functional for the Google’s Tilt-brush application. We invited participants to specifically use the trigger button to draw and to ignore the other buttons. We applied tape over several buttons to simplify the controller.

After color selection, if participants did not spontaneously start painting, we offered the suggestion of drawing a tree and at the same time, invited participants to draw anything that they liked. Participants directed the timing of the art sessions and could finish when they chose. Due to timing constraints, after 35 minutes we let participants know that they should bring their art-making to a close. After that, we asked participants to describe the experience. We asked for perceptions of VR art and a comparison to traditional art. Participants were offered a print-out of their VR artwork. The experiential VR interviews were video recorded and transcribed for analysis.

4.3. Qualitative analysis
Our data set included 98 pictures, and 1214 item-level notes comprising observations, field quotes, and transcriptions. One author reviewed and annotated the content of each picture such as its background, performed activity, and participant ID, etc. After the field study, all authors read all data and discussed it, familiarizing ourselves with the content. After the experiential VR interviews, two authors read all the transcripts and notes and created affinity diagrams. Then, the whole data set was re-analyzed using thematic analysis Braun and Clarke (2006). Two authors generated 15 subthemes. Then two authors reviewed all subthemes holistically and reinterpreted the findings to arrive at three mirrored primary themes for the field observation and interview studies findings (Table 2).

4.4. Field site
The field site was an art institution with a medium-sized studio. The studio houses an extensive collection of art books. In the program that we visited, each of the 4 main tables was shared by 3 or 4 artists. The program environment was casual, with soft background music and a live background singer and guitar performer for part of each session.

Before each session, program facilitators prepared the art tools and stations for each artist at their usual place around the tables. There were 3 - 4 facilitators and 2 - 3 teacher assistants for a session of 12 - 14 artists. In the hour before the class starts, the facilitators prepared the room by making coffee and placing each artist’s painting on the table at the usual place where they sit. They also placed art-making tools and materials such as buckets of water on the tables. As the facilitators retrieved each artist’s piece, the piece sparked conversations on the artist’s work. Discussion of the piece was the primary topic in terms of emphasis and time, though the facilitators also shared comments about the artist or their process. For example, the facilitators commented: [regarding the artwork] “it’s a quantum leap,” and “it’s so much more gestural”. The facilitators discussed artistic qualities such as the composition and the technique. For example, a facilitator commented: “the foreground is dark, but I see what he is doing, looking from a place in the shadows into a bright scene”. Impairment was not discussed as an impediment but rather as an element of personal style. For example, a facilitator commented “her paintings are weighted on the right, but I think that should be exploited” indicating it was a unique and positive style trait. During sessions, facilitators walked around the class observing the artists’ art-making, chatting about their paintings, offering ideas and fetching materials. Only people with stroke and complex disabilities were admitted to the art program we visited. Facilitators referred to all clients as artists. At the time of the study, no clients were gaining income through art. In this art-making program, facilitators encouraged artists to develop their own artistic style.

4.5. Participants
Our study included adults enrolled in the art program who had had a stroke. Some had comorbidities such as early-stage Parkinson’s Disease and mild dementia. 10 males and 4 females aged 55 - 84 years old participated. Seven participants used both hands to make art, six used only their right hand and one used his left hand. Table 1 provides demographic details.


Table 1. Participants’ demographic details (‘–’ indicates not available), number of studio sessions attended during field study, and participation in experiential VR interviews.

ID	Gender	Age	Functional Hands	Field Sessions	Controller	Experiential VR Interviews
P1	F	79	Both	3	Oculus	X
P2	F	84	Right	3	Oculus	X
P3	F	60	Right	2	Oculus	X
P4	M	–	Right	3	Oculus	X
P5	M	55	Right	3	Oculus	-
P6	M	55	Both	3	HTC Vive	X
P7	F	73	Both	2	Oculus	X
P8	M	–	Right	1	n/a	-
P9	M	60	Both	3	HTC Vive	X
P10	M	75	Left	3	Oculus	X
P11	M	–	Both	1	n/a	-
P12	M	78	Both	2	HTC Vive	X
P13	M	55	Right	1	HTC Vive	X
P14	M	73	Both	0	Oculus	X

Table 2. Primary themes from the field study and experiential virtual reality interviews.

Themes	Field Observations	Experiential Virtual Reality Interviews
What They Made	Inspirations and Accomplishment	Abstract, Intentional, Emergent
Aesthetics of Materials	Physical and Unfolding	Color and Materiality of 3D Paint
Process of Making	Social, Situated, Reflective	Immersive, Physical, Out of Control
Several participants (P1, P3) chose not to use the headset for the experiential VR interviews. P1 preferred not to put on a headset because she was concerned about the risk of having another stroke. P3 put on the headset for a brief period of time and decided to discontinue using it. She let us know that the headset felt heavy and made her head itch. When wearing the headset, we observed that she did not tilt her head to the angle that would enable her to see the virtual art in 3D space. After the headset was removed we communicated that a different angle may enable her to better see the art but she preferred not to put it back on. One participant (P5) withdrew after a few minutes into the VR experience. The participant rested his hand with the controller on his lap. This may have been due to the weight of the controller or the range of motion of his limb. We suggested that the participant place his elbow on the table, which he tried for a few seconds before he let us know that he preferred not to continue. We thanked him for his time. Our protocol asked whether participants were able to see the VR paint. One participant using a headset mentioned midway through their interview that they were experiencing difficulties seeing: “I can’t see that much. That’s very blurry” (P13).

5. Findings
We first discuss the findings from the field study and then the findings from the experiential VR interviews. Interpreting data and drawing out insights between field observations of traditional art-making and VR art-making is not straightforward and may be considered “wicked” Rittel and Webber (1973). In this exploratory work we did not predetermine a framework for contrasts. We were able to group themes from our thematic analysis into three primary themes: What They Made, Aesthetics of Materials and Process of Making. These primary themes make up the structure (and subheadings) for our findings and enable us to compare important aspects of traditional and VR art-making in context (Table 2).

5.1. Themes from art-Making field observations
5.1.1. What they made: Inspirations and accomplishments
We were struck by the rich inspirations that participants drew from and what they made: paintings of portraits, landscapes, and living things such as birds, butterflies, etc. These visual inspirations were mixed with other types of inspirations, such as pure color and poetry. P1 mixed different colors in her art to explore color. P2 and P14 were interested in poetry and incorporated it into their paintings. For example, P2 painted a landscape with trees and railway tracks from her childhood memories and overlayed poetry onto the scene (Fig. 3a). P14 painted seascapes and symbolic animals based on a poem that he had memorised. P3 was a classical pianist before her stroke, and included musical notes within a large shell with radiating lightning bolts. She mixed colored pencils and paint in her work. Some participants were inspired by and utilized photos. For instance, P10 used P7 as a model for his painting. He drew an image of P7 beside him while she was making art. P4 and P12 also used photos. P13 drew a landscape from his childhood home and shared its meaning with us: “The art and the Buddha come together and make up to me, make me stronger”. Participants took pride in their art-making accomplishments. Two participants kept photos of their art on their smartphones and appeared glad to show them to us (Fig. 2a). P12 won a prize from an art competition. Facilitators celebrated his achievement by announcing it to everyone in the studio and sharing special desserts.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (644KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. 2a. Photos of artworks on phone and 2b. studio context.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Participants’ artworks. From first row left: 3a. Example of mixing inspirations: a painting with overlayed poetry; 3b. Example of alternative methods: a painting from a dripping and rotating method. Second row: 3c. Example of alternative tools: texture from sponges; 3d. Example of social inspiration: a painting of a peer. Third row: 3e. Example of a personal artistic style, abstract in this case, carried on in VR art; 3f. Second example of a personal artistic style, exploration of color and shape in this case, carried on in VR art.

5.1.2. Aesthetics of materials: Physical and unfolding
Participants used a variety of materials and tools expressed intention around their physicality and the implications. For example, P10 used a pencil to draw because he felt he created more “detailed” work. Most participants used brushes, watercolor, crayons and pencil colors to make art. Other art tools that we observed included tape, rulers, rollers, pencils and other items such as rocks. P6 preferred to use tape to make shapes on the canvas because of the “clean” lines he could achieve with tape. Participants used other methods that demonstrated a facility with physical materials, including dripping paint on the canvas (Fig. 3b), throwing paint and creating layers of colors.

An aspect that emerged as notable was the temporal unfolding nature of art materials. By unfolding, we mean malleable physical material progressively changing over time, which enabled participants to interact with the materials during that period of time. For instance, P12 used sponges to create butterflies (Fig. 3c). He dipped the sponge into the watercolor and lightly applied it onto the canvas to create a “light” butterfly “texture.” The watercolor took a moment to expand as it saturated the fibers of the canvas, and P12 continued light applications over a period of minutes. P6 used tape to create a border on his canvas and applied the dripping technique with paint to create bleeds (Fig. 3b). P6 held the canvas in his hands and slowly rotated it in order to change the direction and shape of the dripping paint as it dried. Participants used layers of paint to create visual layers on their canvas. One participant painted the canvas with white paint to make the canvas appear whiter and thicker. The technique of creating layers utilizes knowledge of how long it takes the paint to dry and the malleable nature of intermediate levels of dryness. We observed participants using a hair dryer and wiping their paint slowly using a towel or tissue to achieve the level of dryness that they sought.

5.1.3. Process of making: Social, situated, reflective
Art-making in the studio was a social process, as we observed participants speaking to each other casually with intermittent conversation throughout each session. P1 and P2 sat beside each other and exchanged ideas about the progress of their work, for example, what colors could be applied to the canvas. Facilitators walked around and checked in with participants and discussed on-going work. Sometimes this led to suggestions or active assistance. A social interaction led to the sponge technique discussed above. P12 let the facilitator know he wanted a “light-textured” effect to paint butterfly wings and the facilitator introduced a sponge technique. One participant (P5) painted collaboratively with his caregiver who supported him by painting as instructed or assisting with his painting. Other social interactions occurred around participants who used others as models. For instance, P10 and P7 sat beside each other and P10 used P7 as a model for his drawing (Fig. 3d). P10 drew P7 while P7 was painting. Another topic related to the social aspect of art was around anticipated audience. We observed discussions where participants considered the anticipated audience when reflecting and making decisions about their work.

The social and physical environment of the studio supported situated decision-making around tool use. In the instant of desiring additional choices for tools, participants could visually scan the studio for potential tools. Facilitators introduced tools in the environment when they came up in conversation. Less conventional tools included tiles, rollers, and tape. P6 used a roller to quickly paint a thick white layer onto a canvas. P12 used sponges to create a light textured effect.

Another set of tools were sketch surfaces such as blank white paper or notebooks. Participants used these to “test out” the colors and brushes. P14 used a personal sketch book to explore and practice his painting techniques before applying it to his canvas.

Art-making was an iterative and reflective process. We observed reflective activities as most participants viewed their artwork from different viewpoints and distances. This type of reflection often co-occurred with social interactions with facilitators. We observed facilitators walking around the studio, engaging participants in discussion, and offering to pick up a participant’s artwork to enable him or her to view it from different perspectives. We observed that facilitators shared other techniques to give participants a ‘fresh’ perspective; these included rotating the canvas 90 and 180 degrees. Facilitators also partially covered the work or drew attention to certain parts of it. Participants may perceive the work differently by looking at its components in isolation or looking at it as a whole, a technique referred to as “focus-and-context” in Human Computer Interaction (HCI) Keim et al. (2008). In one case, a participant looked at the blue paint from a different angle and noted that the blue paint looked like water. This insight changed the direction of the artwork. P10 explains: “the picture has to be like a dance figure—if it’s awkward, keep changing it until it looks right—until the figure is in a dance pose”. He continued, bringing in the perspective of a future audience: “If there is less in the picture, there is more for the mind to imagine”. Another technique for reflection was showing the work under different light. Facilitators or participants carried the artwork around the studio, or nearer to a window, so that it could be seen with various amounts of sunlight. The participants and facilitators often discussed color choices during these interactions. In the following section we discuss the VR experience through the same three primary themes: what they made, aesthetics of materials, and the process of making.

5.2. Themes from virtual reality art-Making
The experiential VR interviews began with prompts for warm-up activities of making simple shapes and objects to facilitate a relatively accessible and structured way to start drawing in VR. Two participants (P2 and P7) began making art immediately without prompts.

5.2.1. What they made: Abstract, intentional, emergent
Participants made abstract, intentional and emergent artworks. We discuss each quality in turn. P1 and P7 made abstract shapes that appeared kinetic and to have arisen from gestures (e.g., Figs. 4a, 4b). P2, P3, and P7 drew lines or circles, or engaged in repeating sweeping gestures, to create shapes and patterns.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (2MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Participants’ artworks. From the first row: Abstract (4a, 4b), Intentional (4c, 4d) and Emergent (4e, 4f).

Studio facilitators took the initiative of walking by the VR setup to observe VR art-making from the laptop screen. One studio facilitator commented on the continuity in participants’ artistic style. She reported that she could see their style within their VR artwork. P1 painted a relatively abstract nature background with a quail (Fig. 3e) with large brush strokes, and in the VR she created sweeping round shapes (Fig. 4a). P7 explored color and patterns in her traditional work (Fig. 3f) and kinetic shapes in her VR artwork (Fig. 4b).

P6 and P13 made artworks that we describe as intentional because participants began and finished creating objects. We note that these intentions may be emergent, which we discuss below. Examples of objects that we observed were: a box and lines (P6), an elephant (P9; Fig. 4c), a mountain (P13; Fig. 4d), and several figures (P10; Fig. 4e and Fig. 5). P12 and P14 created VR artworks that were thematically related to their traditional artworks: P12 created a butterfly and P14 created an albatross. The authors describe the thematic subjects of the elephant, butterfly and albatross as “intentional” because we believe that the participants set out their intention prior to the use of the 3D paint, and followed through their intention without being influenced by the nature or application of the 3D paint. These pre-set intentions are in contrast to the emergent subjects of art which emerged from the nature of the 3D paint.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (558KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Artwork that may appear distorted from various angles.

Two participants described the emergent nature of their works: that the inspiration for the work arose from the quality of the VR paint strokes and paint quality. P4 commented that he was inspired by the “electric” shine of the VR paint, which led him to create “Ghost in an electric frame” (Fig. 4f). P10 commented that he felt compelled to create quickly and that his drawings reflect a “quirkiness” from quick, casual brush strokes (Fig. 4e). We further describe the materiality of the VR paint next.

5.2.2. Aesthetics of materials: Color and materiality of 3D paint
Color is a perennial consideration in art, and VR art is no exception. Getting the ‘right’ color is an important part of the artistic process. One of the studio facilitators said: “Choosing colors is good for the brain. If the artists take 20 minutes to blend the right color, it’s time well-spent”. We opted to start participants off with a luminous VR brush and participants commented that the colors in VR appear to have white “mixed in”. In searching for the ‘right’ color, participants faced usability issues with color selection. One conceptual lead that participants had to face was fine-grained color selection from a color wheel rather than mixing. P13: “I’m just confused. I want to share the color”.

Pointing one controller to the color picker to select a precise color within the color wheel requires ‘pixel-level’ precision, which was not straightforward for some participants. Two participants (P6, P9) worked with a researcher to select colors and the rest were to select colors independently. Two participants (P2, P14) reported that they were not able to find the colors that they wanted. P2 wanted a brown color and P14 wanted black, white and a bright blue. Those colors are not immediately visible on the color wheel; they require a first step of color selection and a second step of saturation/desaturation, which was not intuitively apparent. When using the color picker (Fig. 6), five participants selected a color from the large color wheel and six chose colors from small color circles below the main color wheel. One participant (P14) discovered the color picker’s slider to adjust the brightness of the color.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (251KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Google’s Tilt Brush Color Picker. Image label for reuse  Pruen (2019).

Several aspects of the 3D paint’s materiality were unexpected. By materiality, we mean the material’s tactile quality, viscosity, change in hardness over time (e.g., through drying), its response to gravity, the visual manifestation of these qualities or lack of these qualities. One aspect came up when a few participants spontaneously asked how to “erase” part of what they drew (P6, P10, P14). The researcher maneuvered the secondary controller to assist in erasing. The eraser was surprising since it instantly erased a whole stroke instead of erasing gradually or erasing a part of a stroke.

Most participants’ art appeared planar rather than 3 dimensional. Seven of the participants (P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P9, P12) appeared to apply brush strokes to a 2 dimensional plane instead of making use of the 3 dimensional space. We noted that when participants attempted to select a stroke to erase, they made several attempts to select the gesture. It seemed that seeing the exact depth and / or maneuvering the controller to the correct depth was not straightforward, especially when viewed from various angles (Fig. 5). Others were able to perceive the depth of strokes, and appreciated it. One participant (P14) commented on the 3D ‘effect’ in VR as compared to creating a 3D object on a 2D surface, “In the system, you can do in one stroke. In 2D drawing, in order to get the 3D effect, you have to color alongside of it and do the stroke in various ways until you can see the effect”.

When drawing in VR, most participants drew ‘quickly’, with loose and fast gestures rather than slow and controlled gestures. Hence, participants created a relatively full visual scene in a matter of minutes without pausing. One participant (P7) commented that she felt like she was doing “fast movements” when drawing in VR, faster than she would like: “I want it nice, like, move slowly”. P12 commented that doing VR art was a lot “faster” and created a “clear” picture compared to doing traditional art where the picture emerged slowly and was created “slowly”. The unconstrained nature of mid-air gesture may contribute to an affordance of speed. We explore how this relates to perceptions of control next.

5.2.3. Process of making: Immersive, physical, out of control
Several participants commented positively on the immersive nature of VR art. P4: “The 3 dimensional is quite fascinating”. P10: “It was like watching movie and I felt I get that full space”. P12: “In terms of the surrounding you can see such a close concept. It’s cool. I love it”. P13: “It’s amazing because in 3D...the space [is] just like a galaxy”.

An aspect that studio instructors commented on several times was participants’ posture and upper-limb reach and elongation, a quality which we describe as physical (Fig. 7). We also noted that participants’ posture and physical movement were expanded around their bodies compared to what we observed during the field study period. As mentioned above, in VR participants painted quickly and filled the visual scene directly in front of them within minutes. This may have prompted participants to tilt their upper body upward and twist or swivel to one or both sides to reach more blank canvas space to paint in. Not all participants discovered the canvas around their bodies. P13: “I want to find the space somewhere empty... That was very hard”.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (660KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Physical movement during art-making in VR.

Control was a reoccurring topic in the experiential VR interviews. The lack of control was related to manipulation of the controller and the perception of inability to achieve desired results.

Participants discussed their perceived control of the controller. P1: “I feel like I haven’t got ... control over it yet. I’d like to be able to control them. It’s doing its own thing ... It’s not doing what I’d like to be doing’. P1 stated her desire to do “sweeps” but that this was not what she was doing. P1: “I’m trying to do more like a sweep and bring it in and make it round. Like when you put a brush down here, you put it down like that and then swirl it there. That’s what I’m trying to do sort of thing. I thought it was color that sort of thing you may be able to put it down and then zoom it being in the middle. It’s small. I’d like it wide. Wider and coming around”. P1 gestured during this description to show the dimensions and curves she sought. P3 discussed what challenged her and compared the physicality of VR to other tools: “More hand control because here is just harder for me to control all of them... People with a bigger hand, mine is small hand” and “I find more fun with pencils because you can feel it with the hand and just can control. I have more control of my fingers and for me is fun to have a control with fingers and pencil”. Tools can become neutral extensions of the body, where people have the ability to feel and grip the tool with varying sensitivity, and feel the drawing surface through the tool.

The lack of control may also be related to the propensity toward speed. A lack of surface to provide force feedback when applying paints, pencils, etc., makes gestures free-form—they are not constrained by a surface. Mid-air gestures may require more strength and may lead to losing precision with fatigue. P12 reported that: “It takes a lot of control. Your arms tire very quickly”. The controller has a trigger but does not make use of the human ability to apply fine pressure with the fingers and hands.

The inability to achieve a desired shape was negative for some participants. P2: “I couldn’t get the result I wanted. It’s something that I couldn’t achieve in here... It’s a waste of time”. P1 and P2 also reported that they did not achieve what they wanted.

In summing up their overall feelings from the sessions, eight participants enjoyed the VR art experience and three of them (P1, P2, P3) reported that overall they did not enjoy it. P4 commented that traditional art: “is what I’m used to. It’s like getting adapt to the mind and to other mediums and things. I think if you use this, you need to adapt some time to know it”. P6 shared similar sentiments: “I still like what I do [traditional art]. That is totally brand new [VR]), but it’s cool”.

Participants were offered print-outs of their artwork. There were mixed reactions to the print-outs. We note that the visual angle and perspective that were provided by default from the application showed the artwork from a different angle than when participants were immersed in VR. P7 was positive about her artwork and said that it turned out “nice”. P6 experimented with placing the hardcopy of VR artwork within his multimedia physical canvas. P10 thanked the authors for the printout and did not want a copy of it. This was unexpected for the authors as we saw the work as whimsical and expressive. P2 did not comment and threw away the hardcopy. P1 commented that the finished piece did not look as she hoped.

6. Discussion
Field site observations of art-making along with a probe of experiential VR art-making by people with stroke-related impairments revealed rich practices for inspiration and process as well as unmet user needs and opportunities for the design of VR art-making applications. The use of two modes of inquiry enabled us to observe contrasts between art-making with traditional materials versus 3D virtual paint, suggesting what might be “missing” from VR.

The lens of embodiment can help us interrelate themes to better understand experiences of traditional and VR art-making. The concept of embodiment stems from recognition of the body as fundamental for perception and thought Dourish (2004). In the virtual reality computing community focused on stroke rehabilitation, embodiment tends to refer to the connection of a participant’s own body with that of a virtual avatars or with virtual limbs in terms of body-ownership, self-location, and presence Borrego et al. (2019). Embodiment framed within its phenomenological roots means “a participative status, a way of being, rather than a physical property” (p.125, Dourish (2004)) or a “physical manifestation”. Dourish defines embodied interaction as “the creation, manipulation, and sharing of meaning through engaged interaction with artifacts” (p.126, Dourish (2004)).

With regards to What They Made, observation of participants’ traditional art practice revealed inspirations from memories, poetry, color, inspirations from around them such as portraits of others, and exploration of identity through the work. Hours were spent on pieces and participants took pride in their accomplishments. We interpret their pride as a signal that their creations were meaningful.

A limitation of our research is the constrained timing for the VR probe of art-making: only minutes were spent on pieces. Participants did not have time to develop knowledge and facility with the materials. Despite the brevity of the VR art-making sessions, we witnessed that the affordances of VR shaped what artists made. 3D paint applied through gestures supported abstract and kinetic creations. Participants got to know the materials by creating spontaneously or by continuing themes in their traditional work. The glowing and instant finality of the Aesthetics of Materials of the 3D paint inspired emergent ideas such as electricity and whimsy. The theory of embodiment links the fast-moving, unconstrained quality of the physical gestures that participants made to resulting art, which we described as “emerging” from the qualities of interaction. We can also consider how these qualities influenced the meaning ascribed to the experience. Before even putting on a headset, some participants spoke of hesitation with technology, contrasting the confidence which they had in their traditional art. The technological virtual world they entered did not support many of their usual basic understandings of reality such as how matter responds to physical gravity, basics of light and shadow, and force-feedback of materials.

The Process of Making with real and virtual paint differed in support for social interaction, situated decision-making, reflection, physicality and meaning-making. We discuss each of these qualities to draw out implications for the design of VR art-making for stroke rehabilitation. When qualities of physical art-making were beneficial to our participants, we discuss them. We explore how physical art-making might suggest ways to improve current VR art-making, and we also explore features and effects that could only exist in VR.

6.1. Support for social interaction through awareness and shared displays
When making traditional art, participants were focused but also engaged in casual and spontaneous social interaction. A lack of mobility spurred some social interaction, as participants asked facilitators (as well as researchers) to fetch tools or other items. Social interactions facilitated rich benefits including situated choices for tools as well as reflection on art pieces. There was a stark contrast of less social interaction when in VR.

During the experiential VR interviews, we setup an open laptop screen showing what was seen through the headset. We observed studio facilitators and peers glancing at the laptop screen to see what participants were making, and sometimes commenting to us but not engaging with participants. Participants were not aware of these interactions, which was a loss compared with traditional art-making. The VR headset hindered co-located social interaction by blocking the sight of co-located peers and making it more onerous for co-located peers to get the attention of the participant. We could support co-located social interaction by using augmented reality headsets instead of VR headsets, as these would enable eye contact. If using VR for art-making, we could facilitate co-located interaction by sharing the VR display on a larger screen for co-located peers to see, and by detecting and displaying when others are nearby in VR. To engage remote people, we could share the VR displays to peers’ devices, for remote others to interact with the participant and potentially also with the VR art. To foster different kinds of social interactions, we could consider facilitating remote others such as therapists, friends, and family, to watch and interact with players in real time LaViola Jr et al. (2017).

One social application of digital art-making is in remote art therapy. Collie et al. Collie and Čubranić (1999) argued that art therapy is suited to being delivered remotely and created a system that supported group art therapy through audio-conferencing and hand-drawn computer images made by clients using tools such as a brush, marker, pastel, spray paint, eraser, color-matcher, and pointer. As clients drew, icon-sized images were shown to the group, giving clients an awareness of others’ drawings. 10 art therapy experts participated in simulated art therapy sessions and discussed their experiences face-to-face. When the audio conference was silent for some time, participants felt as if they lost connection to the group. The co-researchers developed social protocols to support awareness that others were looking at one’s drawing. There is potential for therapy-derived social protocols to be supported by dedicated functionality for therapeutic social support in VR art making.

6.2. Support for situated decision-Making for tool selection
Situated decision-making refers to how contextual factors influence human action such that it is necessarily ad hoc rather than planned Suchman (1987). The studio context provided a rich environment of tools, materials, and existing art pieces, all at different levels of perceptual salience based on recent use and other factors. We observed participants making use of the social and physical environment for situated thinking regarding their own artwork. In contrast, all tools in the VR application are available from a tool palette, which does not benefit from the social facilitation of tool introduction and different perceptual salience based on use by others. We can imagine a VR novice mode that could pepper tools throughout the environment or throughout a user journey so that the participant can encounter them one by one as their experience and expertise grows. We can imagine making tool selection a social process. We can also imagine future research that would seek to better understand the contextual and internal thoughts that lead artists to break from their work to consider new tools or techniques, in order to better support that decision-making.

6.3. Support for reflection through time for iteration and perspective
Our research found that the time scale differed for art-making with real paint versus VR paint. Lazer et al. Lazar et al. (2017) used a critical lens of dementia to draw attention to the way designers instantiate time in their designs and the effects. The unfolding materiality of real paint gives artists a window of time to see how the paint is adhering to a canvas and intermingling with other materials. The progressive and malleable nature of paint enables participants to be in a moment but also extend a moment of time as a process unfolds over a matter of seconds or minutes. The instantaneous application of VR paint shortens the moment of interaction because the interaction terminates as the gesture is completed. We see temporal flexibility as an important dimension for supporting older artists, who may move more slowly, and those with impairments. We imagine VR paint which allows further manipulation. We could allow colors to ‘age’ (similar to oil paint) and even enable malleability beyond what is possible in the real world. For example, future work could study whether virtual paint that takes time to ‘dry’, from seconds to minutes, can foster re-engaging with existing brush strokes and support greater feelings of control.

The lack of social interaction in VR brought with it a lack of socially-supported reflection. We observed that participants were able to gain perspective on their art through discussion, through observing their art piece from several meters back and through observing it rotated. Participants benefited from viewing their artwork from a different angle, distance and illumination. A change in point-of-view did not occur for most participants as most did not discover the ‘teleport’ function during the VR session. In principle, VR users can move their bodies within the VR space to view their work from different perspectives. Our participants were aged 55 and above, and some had reduced mobility. During the experiential VR interviews, none attempted to move the chair or their bodies to see their work from a different points of view. But this was in line with what we observed during the field study, as we observed participants remain seated at their art-making stations for most of the 2.5 h sessions. When working in CavePainting  Keefe et al. (2001), Keefe et al. noted that artists took a few steps back from projection walls in order to view their entire painting from different angles. Despite the limitation of the short period with the probe, we believe that current teleport functionality should be redesigned to be simpler and more intuitive for low-mobility users. For users to have access to more space in the virtual world, we can imagine ways to extend limited mobility by creating smaller drawings, closer to the body, and casting them into the environment. This insight benefits from our own experiences Höök et al. (2018), as we have begun drawing in front of our bodies at arm’s length, but quickly feel crowded once the space in front of our bodies is filled. Casting art away from the self has exciting possibilities, for example, drawing a smaller landscape and then stepping into it, as we note our participants’ inspirations from landscapes. Another benefit of casting objects away would be similar to functionality in modeling tools (e.g., Maya, Blender) that enables designers to place images of an object from multiple viewpoints into 3D space as an aid for perspective in the 3D design process.

6.4. Support for physicality through engagement with materials and space
In the design of 3D interfaces, it is crucial to consider users’ posture as it affects comfort and fatigue during interaction LaViola Jr et al. (2017); Veas and Kruijff (2010). In our research we observed participants changing their upper body posture when engaging in VR art-making compared with traditional art-making. For some, the full upper body was involved in art-making. We consider the potential for increased physical upper body activity as one of the outstanding benefits of VR, as stroke rehabilitation requires repetitive physical activity. As stroke may impair range of movement, using virtual reality to change the scale of translation from movement to brushstrokes may yield interesting effects: translating larger physical movements into small strokes may encourage more upper limb movement. Translating smaller physical movement into large brushstrokes may enable those with small movement ranges and/or less mobility to fill a scene.

Our participants remarked on the physicality of making art with digital materials, as other artists have. Treadaway Treadaway (2009) studied the experience of drawing digitally using a tablet and pen, which was found to be very limiting in both expression and intention. The artist found that the lack of haptic sensitivity of the digital drawing devices created a lack of intimacy in the creative process. Digital crafting provoked less emotional response, which was attributed to less physical engagement in the making process. For our study, physical engagement changed from tangible force feedback with physical brushes to larger unconstrained gestures. Our participants described this embodiment as a lack of control. In traditional art, muscular tension, grip, gesture and pressure are evidenced in the visual, while in VR this nuance is not captured. Tacit knowledge of materials enables the body to engage in rhythmic automatic making processes developed over time through repeated practice. The artists’ attention drifts between physical making and reflection. We observed this in the field observations. Treadaway described the physical acts of touching, holding, moving, pressing, shaping materials and tools as deeply satisfying Treadaway (2009), which they compared with the less physically stimulating digital tools. Our participants described a similar contrast as they emphasized the manner in which they held the brush to create fine detail, and how they enjoyed that process. Virtual brush strokes created with a controller and trigger yielded less sense of control. For some, the embodied experience of their upper limbs freely hurtling through a virtual space was already associated with intimidating technology, which led to negative feelings of being out of control, while others “dove in” to the kinetic experience. Feelings of lack of control may be framed differently in a social context. In previous research on an art therapy group Collie and Čubranić (1999), the lack of control when making art with a mouse made participants feel at ease because it ‘leveled the playing field’. Leveling the playing field brings out the notion of quality or outcome of the art. We observed participants engaging in fast uncontrolled paint strokes. We imagine building in aesthetic guidance and support so that participants can focus on engagement more than a particular outcome. For example, by adding symmetrical matching strokes or filters, participants’ brush strokes could be manipulated to support the aesthetic principles of balance and unity.

We noted that both hands were necessary for color-selection and that most of our participants were unable to engage in color selection independently. There is evidence that bimanual training may support stroke rehabilitation Rose and Winstein (2004). To support accessibility we recommend a customisation function to enable color selection with a single controller.

6.5. Support for meaning-Making through perception and embodied representation
Individuals seek to make meaning from their embodied experiences, including making sense of their perceptions, their art, and themselves in the virtual environment. Materiality impacts perception through immediate visual, olfactory and tactile links Strong et al. (1996) as well as through agency that enables and constrains interaction Rogerson et al. (2016). Our participants commented on the visual materiality of 3D paint and had difficulty reaching segments of paint. This may have been due to its visual representations. Visually, 3D paint may present challenges, especially to novice users:

•
3D paint incorporates no depth cues, so when users use the same stroke color it is difficult to see which stroke is closer or on top. There is no surface shading to assist in portraying depth.

•
If artists are used to a 2D canvas and create strokes that are not co-planar in 3D, the perceived order of strokes can change when changing the viewpoint, making it difficult to interpret the image (Fig. 5). This problem is exacerbated by lack of precision in gestures and 3D positioning.

•
VR artwork may elicit a higher cognitive load since 3D strokes must be mentally fused in space. Further, the paint strokes may result in more complex appearances, such as wireframe meshes rather than continuous surface meshes.

•
In 2D, silhouette and feature lines for a single view point are sufficient, whereas for 3D depth properties must be drawn and users may consider the desired appearance for any number of angles.

The 3D paint strokes have no tactile qualities so one can move through the material as if there is nothing there. We can imagine supporting perception of paint with tactile feedback when moving through it.

Print-outs of VR art were not well received overall. We theorize a disconnection between the experience of making art in VR and how the art looked when rendered in 2D after the fact. The lens of embodiment suggests that the printed screenshot may have been rejected as it was relatively meaningless and disconnected from the embodied experience of art-making. To represent an embodied experience, we must better understand what was meaningful about the experience. An animated graphic that captures the making from the perspective of participant may be more meaningful. In a feasibility study on integrative graphic art feedback for acute post-stroke neurorehabilitation, Worthen-Chaudhari et al. recommended that future work should include supporting a state of flow for a longer period and providing a physical object (e.g., 3D printed version) that can be kept and shared with others. Others have incorporated 3D printing into VR for art therapy Marks et al. (2017), and we leave it to future work to unpack what representation would be valued by participants.

Approximately eight months after the project, the studio organised a panel discussion to discuss collaborations with the studio and one co-author was invited. The studio director, facilitators and other members of the community attended. The co-author described the thematic results. The facilitators and director expressed fascination at their studio dynamics being described in terms of social situated decision-making and support for reflection. They were interested to learn how VR blocks or impairs these types of social and environmental interactions and that we consider these important areas for improvement.

The VR art that participants made appears to us as creative expression, which is in line with art therapy goals. However participants may not have been adequately able to craft their creative expression in VR due to reduced mobility, reduced control and lack of engagement with materials. The VR headset made several participants nervous as they declined to use it. This fuels healthy hesitation on the appropriateness of VR headsets for a stroke population. Augmented reality (AR) is an alternative technology that can provide similar benefits in terms of fostering upper limb and upper body movement by placing a canvas around the body of the participant. Augmented reality has the additional benefit of a lighter headset that is similar to glasses. We anticipate this would be more acceptable to participants. Further it would enable co-located social interaction. Taken together, there is a case for exploring VR and AR art-making to simultaneously support art therapy goals (supporting creative expression) and physical therapy goals (improving range of movement in upper limbs), though there are currently drawbacks that detract from the AR/VR experience.

7. Conclusion
Art-making is an important activity for our participants with impairments from stroke. Making art enabled them to reify inspirations, explore elements from their past and present identity, immerse themselves in fine-motor tasks such as brushwork and blending colors, engage with each other and facilitators socially, learn new techniques based on situated needs, and create opportunities for pride in their lives. VR art-making has some potential as a rehabilitation medium because it enables artists to use the space around their bodies as a canvas through physical gesture. VR also has important drawbacks such as stimulating fear and blocking social interaction and interaction with the environment. While increased upper limb activity is a strong benefit, VR art does not currently support many key aspects of traditional art, such as social support for situated decision-making and perspective-taking for reflection and we recommend future exploration of augmented reality. VR art has affordances for fast, loose brushstroke gestures due to unconstrained upper limb motion and the temporality of 3D paint. There is a large disconnect between the experience of making and what currently can be shown as the outcome. We note that basic VR art functionality is not accessible because both hands are needed for basic tasks like color selection. VR art-making has some promise but needs significant improvements to support social interaction, situated decision-making, reflection, physical engagement with digital materials and meaning-making before it will be appropriate for artists with stroke-related impairments.