There are rising rates of depression on college campuses. Mental health services on our campuses are working at full
stretch. In response researchers have proposed using mobile sensing for continuous mental health assessment. Existing work
on understanding the relationship between mobile sensing and depression, however, focuses on generic behavioral features
that do not map to major depressive disorder symptoms defined in the standard mental disorders diagnostic manual (DSM-5).
We propose a new approach to predicting depression using passive sensing data from students’ smartphones and wearables.
We propose a set of symptom features that proxy the DSM-5 defined depression symptoms specifically designed for college
students. We present results from a study of 83 undergraduate students at Dartmouth College across two 9-week terms
during the winter and spring terms in 2016. We identify a number of important new associations between symptom features
and student self reported PHQ-8 and PHQ-4 depression scores. The study captures depression dynamics of the students at
the beginning and end of term using a pre-post PHQ-8 and week by week changes using a weekly administered PHQ-4.
Importantly, we show that symptom features derived from phone and wearable sensors can predict whether or not a student
is depressed on a week by week basis with 81.5% recall and 69.1% precision.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile computing; • Applied computing → Life
and medical sciences;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Mobile Sensing, Mental Health, Depression

1 INTRODUCTION
Clinical depression or major depressive disorder (MDD) is one of the most common and debilitating health
challenges of our time. In 2015, an estimated 6.7% of all U.S. adults had at least one major depressive episode in
the past year [63]. Major depressive disorder accounts for a staggeringly high proportion of illness-related burden
worldwide [55, 72], and is the second leading cause of years lost to disability in the U.S. [54]. College age young
adults 18 to 25 are more likely to have major depressive episodes than any other age groups. In 2015, an estimated
10.3% of young adults had a major depressive episode over the past year with 6.5% reporting the episode resulted
in severe impairment [63]. The college years introduce major stressors for young adults that may exacerbate
students’ propensity for psychopathology, including increased academic pressures, social challenges, unfamiliar
living and physical environments, financial pressures, and cultural differences that affect self-worth [33, 37].
Furthermore, students must negotiate loss of familiar support systems and social networks (e.g., high school
friends). Consequently, many young adults can feel overwhelmed, struggle to find their place, and become
more susceptible to depression or other mood disorders. Surveys at colleges across the U.S. found that 53% of
respondents experienced depression at some point after entering college with 9% reporting suicidal ideation [26].
A recent study of Facebook profiles showed that 25% of students displayed depressive symptoms [53]. In addition,
a 2016 study by the American College Health Association found that 38.2% of students at 2- and 4-year institutions
reported feeling “so depressed that it was difficult to function” in the past year [3]. At Dartmouth College, a 2016
survey shows that depression and anxiety are the most common health problems, exceeding national averages
in the adult population; 19% of Dartmouth students report being diagnosed with depression, and 24% say that
depressive symptoms had harmed their academic performance [19]. Importantly, up to 84% of college students
who screen positively for depression never seek mental health services [22]. Many students become aware (i.e.,
insight to illness) of their depression only after experiencing significant functional deterioration [37]. Many
colleges offer mental-health services and counseling, but the stigma associated with mental illness is a major
barrier to care-seeking [12, 18]. Evidence also suggests that higher education institutions’ current approaches
are not addressing depression adequately [37]. Depression rates continue to increase [26]. There is a need to
understand what is happening on our campuses with these increasing depression rates. One thing is clear: the
demand for mental services on US campuses is increasing with many institutions not capable of dealing with the
rising needs of students. Clinicians, mental health counsellors, teachers, and administrators on our campuses do
not understand why this inflection toward higher rising risk has occurred.
Identifying early warning signs of depression (i.e., “red flags”) could mitigate or prevent major depression
disorder’s negative consequences [13, 37]. However, if students do not pay attention to their clinical condition or
do not seek care when needed, depression can lead to devastating outcomes, including self-injurious behavior
and suicide [26, 27]. There is a growing realization in academia and industry that everyday mobile phones
and wearables (e.g., fitbits, smartwatches), which passively collect and analyze behavioral sensor data 24/7, will
complement traditional periodic depression screening methods (e.g., PHQ-9 survey [40, 41, 67]) and visits to mental
health specialist – ultimately, if validated at scale mobile sensing has the potential to replace periodic screening
questionnaires such as PHQ-9. Recently, researchers have made progress in understanding the relationship
between behavioral sensor data from phones and mental health [6, 14, 45, 61, 62, 75]. In addition, there is
considerable activity in the startup space in the area of mental health. A number of companies are starting to
use mobile technologies to assess and help people living with depression [28, 71]. However, while progress is
being made (e.g., significant correlations between mobile sensing data and depression have been found across
different studies [61, 75]) to the best of our knowledge there is no mobile passive sensing technology capable
of predicting rising risk, impending depressive episodes, or occurrence from a combination of smartphone and
wearable passive sensing to date.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:3
The standard mental disorders diagnostic manual (DSM-5 [5]) defines 9 common symptoms associated with
major depression disorders: depressed mood, loss of interest or pleasure in activities, sleep changes, weight change,
fatigue or loss of energy, restlessness or feeling slow, diminished interest or pleasure in activities, diminished ability
to concentrate, feelings of worthlessness, and thoughts of death and suicide. Existing work [6, 14, 45, 61, 62, 75]
have found relationships between depression and generic behavioral features from passive sensing. However,
they do not discuss how these behavioral features are associated with the well-defined depression symptoms.
In this paper, we take a different approach and propose for the first time a set of depression sensing symptom
features (called symptom features for short) derived from phone and wearable passive sensor data that represent
proxies for the DSM-5 depression symptoms in college students; that is, we design a set of behavioral features to
capture the characteristics of the depression symptoms that take into account lifestyles of students (e.g., going to
class, working in study areas, socializing on campus). Specifically, we hypothesize: (1) the sleep change symptom
can be measured by sleep duration, start time, and end time inferred from passive sensor data from phones
[15, 74, 75]; (2) the diminished ability to concentrate symptom can be associated with excessive smartphone use
[20, 44], specifically when measured in study spaces across campus (e.g., libraries, study rooms, quiet working
areas associated with cafes, dorms, etc.) where students typically focus on their course work; (3) the loss of
interest or pleasure in activities symptom may cause changes in activity and social engagement patterns [5], thus
can be associated with changes in activity, conversation, and mobility patterns inferred from mobile sensing
data; and finally (4) the depressed mood symptom and fatigue or loss of energy symptom relate to changes in
physiology, thus, may be associated with changes in heart rate data passively measured by wearables (e.g., prior
work found heart rate data is associated with depressed mood [35, 38] and fatigue [65]). To test our hypothesis,
we conduct a study of 83 undergraduate students at Dartmouth College across two 9-week terms during the
winter and spring terms in 2016. Each student installed an updated StudentLife app [75] on their own Android or
Apple phones and were given a Microsoft Band 2 [52] for the duration of a 9-week term. The StudentLife app
continuously collects behavioral passive sensing data from smartphones and physiological sensing data from
Microsoft Band 2 [52]. We compute the symptom features from the passive sensing data and conduct correlation
analysis between the symptom features and PHQ-8/PHQ-4 depression outcomes. We look at the correlations
between the symptom features and the PHQ-8 [43] and PHQ-4 [42] depression groundtruth. We further look to
predict PHQ-4 depression subscale states (i.e., non depressed and depressed) [42] using the proposed symptom
features.
The contributions of this paper as follows; specifically:
• We propose a set of passive sensor based symptom features derived from phones and wearables that we
hypothesize proxy 5 out of the 9 major depressive disorder symptoms defined in DSM-5. To test this
hypothesize, we conduct a study with 83 undergraduate students from Dartmouth College across two
9-week term during the winter and spring in 2016. PHQ-8 and PHQ-4 are self-reported at the beginning
and the end of each term, and weekly across the term, respectively, and serve as groundtruth for the study.
• We find a number of correlations between the proposed symptom features and PHQ-8 item scores. The
findings evaluate the efficacy of the symptom features to capture depression symptoms.
• We identify a number of correlations between the symptom features and PHQ-8; specifically, we find
students who report higher PHQ-8 scores (i.e., are more depressed) are more likely to use their smartphone
more particularly at study places (r = 0.391,p < 0.001) in comparison with all day phone usage (r =
0.282,p = 0.010); have irregular sleep schedules (i.e., more variations in bed time (r = 0.301,p = 0.024) and
wake time (r = 0.271,p = 0.043); spend more time being stationary (r = 0.374,p = 0.009) and visit fewer
places during the day (r = −0.269,p = 0.023).
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:4 • R. Wang et. al.
• We use ANOVA to compare the means of the symptom features between the non depressed group and the
depressed group, as defined in PHQ-8 [43]. We show that these two groups are clearly identified in our data
set.
• We show that a lasso regularized linear regression model predicts pre PHQ-8 scores with MAE = 2.4 and
predict post PHQ-8 scores with MAE = 3.60. The predicted PHQ-8 scores strongly correlate with the
groundtruth.
• We identify a number of symptom features capturing depression dynamics during the term that are
associated with the PHQ-4 depression subscale using regression analysis for longitudinal data; specifically,
students who report higher PHQ-4 depression subscale score (i.e., are more depressed) are around fewer
conversations (p = 0.002), sleep for shorter periods (p = 0.024), go to sleep later (p = 0.001), wake up later
(p = 0.027), and visit fewer places (p = 0.003) during the last two week period.
• We use lasso regularized logistic regression [69] to predict whether or not a student is depressed on a week
by week basis. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) [31] of the prediction model is 0.809. We show that
the logistic model predicts students’ depressed state with 81.5% recall and 69.1% precision.
• We present a case study of a student that captures the depression dynamics across the term as an anecdotal
example of the insights that behavioral sensing data can offer into the life of a student. In this case the
student shows elevated depression as the term progresses with behavioral curves indicating less sleep, less
conversational interaction, and fewer places visited. There is an inflection point after which the student
recovers and shows resilience without seemingly any known clinical intervention (e.g., they do not visit
the student health center on campus).
To the best of our knowledge we are the first to propose a set of symptom features derived from mobile phones
and wearables based on specific depression symptoms defined in DSM-5 and specifically designed to capture
the dynamics of depression for college students. As in the case of the original StudentLife study [75] we plan to
release the depression data set in due course for other researchers to study student health issues. The structure of
the paper is as follows. We present related work on mental health sensing in Section 2, followed by a detailed
description of the “symptom features” in Section 3. We describe the sensing system, study design, and the dataset
in Section 4. We describe our methods in Section 5. Following that, we discuss the correlations between the
symptom features and PHQ-8 in Section 6. In Section 7, we present the results of using the symptom features to
regress and predict PHQ-4 depression subscale. We discuss implications of our methods and results in Section 8,
and limitations in Section 9. Finally, we present some concluding remarks in Section 10.
2 RELATED WORK
There is an increasing body of influential work on mobile sensing for mental health [6, 10, 11, 14, 45, 61, 62, 75].
In what follows, we focus on work related to depression sensing in addition to work on other mood disorders
that has inspired us.
In [59] the authors use an early mobile sensing platform device [16] equipped with multiple embedded sensors
to track a 8 older adults living in a continuing care retirement community. The authors demonstrate that speech
and conversation occurrences extracted from audio data and physical activity infer mental and social well-being.
The StudentLife study [75] investigates the relationship between passive sensing behaviors from mobile phones
including conversation, sleep, activity and co-location with mental health outcomes, such as, depression, stress,
loneliness, and flourishing for 48 college students over a 10-week term. The authors found for the first time
significant correlations between passive sensing data from phones and the PHQ-9 depression scale [40, 41, 67].
Researchers at Northwestern University [62] find that mobility and phone usage features extracted from mobile
phone data correlates with depressive symptom severity measured by PHQ-9[40, 41, 67] for 40 participants
recruited from the general community over a two week period. Results show features from GPS data, including
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:5
circadian movement, normalized entropy, location variance, and phone usage features, including usage duration
and usage frequency, are associated with depressive symptom severity. It is important to note that the research
team were able to reproduce the findings from their initial study [61] using the StudentLife dataset [75]. The
replication of the Northwestern University researchers’ study results [62] using a different dataset indicates that
the mobility features could be broadly applicable in depression sensing across different communities; that is,
students on a small college campus and people recruited in a metropolitan area.
There seems to be growing evidence that mobility features have significant signal when it comes to depression
sensing. Canzian et al [14] develop an expanded set of mobility features over [61, 62] and found that location
data correlates with PHQ-9 [40, 41, 67]. The authors show that the maximum distance traveled between two
places strongly correlates with the PHQ score. Mobility features are used to track the trajectory of depression
over time. Recently, the same team [51] report their preliminary results from a 30 day 25 participant study
on the association between human-phone interaction features (e.g., interactions with notifications, number of
applications launched) and PHQ-8 scores. Demirci et al.[20] conduct an study with 319 university students to
investigate the relationship between smartphone usage and sleep quality, depression, and anxiety. They divide
the participants into a smartphone non-user group, a low smartphone use group, and a high smartphone use
group based on the Smartphone Addiction Scale (SAS)[44]. The authors find the Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI) [8, 9] score is higher in the high use group than the low use group. This study is solely based on self-report
and does not have a sensing component but illustrates that interaction usage could be important in depression
sensing.
In [24], the authors present a study of 79 college-age participant from October 2015 to May 2016 in which they
find a number of mobility features (e.g., home stay duration, normalized entropy) correlate with PHQ-9. The
authors report using SVM with RBF kernel [66], they can predict clinical depression diagnoses with the precision
of 84%. Wahle et al. [73] recruit 126 adults to detect depression levels from daily behaviors inferred by phone
sensing, in addition to exploring intervention. In the study 36 subjects with an adherence of at least 2 weeks
are included in the analysis. The authors compute features based on activity, phone usage, and mobility. They
report 61.5% accuracy in predicting a binary depression state. In [2], the authors investigate difference in speech
styles, eye activity, and head poses between 30 depressed subjects and 30 non-depressed subjects. The authors
report 84% average accuracy in predicting the depression state using a combination of the speech style, eye
activity, and head pose features. In [58] Place et al., report on a 12 week study with 73 participants who report at
least one symptom of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [77] or depression. The study assess symptoms of
depression and PTSD using features extracted from passive sensing, including the sum of outgoing calls, count
of unique numbers texted, absolute distance traveled, dynamic variation of the voice, speaking rate, and voice
quality. They report area under the ROC curve (AUC) for depressed mood is 0.74. Chow et al.[17] hypothesizes
that time spent at home is associated with depression, social anxiety, state affect, and social isolation. The authors
use passive sensing from phones to compute a participant’s time spent at home during a day. The study recruits
72 undergraduates and finds participants with higher depression tended to spend more time at home between the
hours of 10 am and 6 pm. The DeepMood project [68] develops a recurrent neural network algorithm to predict
depression. The authors conduct a study with 2382 self-declared depressed participants using self-reports to
collect self-reported mood, behavioral log, and sleeping log. They report their long short-term memory recurrent
neural networks (LSTM-RNNs) [34] model predict depression state with AUC-ROC 0.886.
Detecting bipolar disorder is to some degree related to work on depression sensing. The MONARCA project
[32, 56, 57, 60] first reported on findings from mobile sensing and bipolar disorder. The authors [57] discuss
correlations between the activity levels over different periods of the day and psychiatric evaluation scores
associated with the mania-depression spectrum. The findings reported in [1] show the automatic inference of
circadian stability as a measure to support effective bipolar management. Maxuni et al. [49] extend these insights
by using speech and activity levels to successfully classify stratified levels of bipolar disorder.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:6 • R. Wang et. al.
In summary, the existing work use either self-report or behavioral features extracted from mobile sensing to
predict depression states. The proposed features, however, are not based on specific depression symptoms. We
are the first to propose passive sensing features that are proxies to depression symptoms defined in DSM-5 [5]
and specifically designed to capture the characteristics of students’ college life.
3 DEPRESSION SENSING USING SYMPTOM FEATURES
How we assess depression has not changed in 30 years. Mental health specialists rely on depression screening tools
(e.g., Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) [40, 41, 67], Major Depression Inventory (MDI) [7], Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI) [8], Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) [30]) and clinical interviews to assess the severity
of the symptoms of major depressive disorder as defined in the DSM-5 [5]. These questionnaires rate the frequency
of the symptoms that factor into scoring a severity index called a “depression score”. These tools, however, rely
on periodic subjective self-reports. A person is said to suffer from a depressive episode if they experiencing at
least 5 of the 9 depression symptoms during the same 2-week period, including either depressed mood or loss
of interest or pleasure in activities, the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning [5], and the symptoms are not attributable to other medical
conditions [5]. Existing work on predicting depression using mobile phone sensing focuses on using generic
behavioral features to predict or correlate the depression scale. We take a different approach and hypothesize
that mobile sensor data from phones and wearables represent proxies for the DSM-5 depression symptoms in college
students; that is, we design a set of behavioral features to capture the characteristics of the depression symptoms
that take into account lifestyles of students (e.g., going to class, working in study areas, socializing on campus). In
what follows, we describe the depression symptom features that represent 5 of the 9 major depressive disorder
symptoms. The symptom feature implementation details are described in Section 5.1.
Sleep changes may result in students experiencing difficulty sleeping (insomnia) or sleeping too much
(hypersomnia) and changes in sleep schedules. Many times because of the demands of the term (e.g., assignment
due dates, exams, social life, sports, etc.) students experience changes in the regular sleep patterns as demands on
the term increase. We infer students’ sleep time, wake up time, and sleep duration using passive sensing from
phones [15]. We use phone sensing to determine if depressed students sleep more or less than non-depressed
students and if depressed students have more irregular sleep schedules; that is, more variation in the time they
go to bed and wake up. As a result we can accurately infer the sleep changes symptom.
Diminished ability to concentrate may cause students to appear distracted, unfocused, and unable to
perform well. We use phone usage to measure if a student is more likely to be distracted. Previous work [20]
shows that smartphone overuse may lead to increased risk of depression and/or anxiety. Specifically, we measure
the number of unlocks of the phone and associated usage duration across the day and at specific locations; for
example, dorm, in study areas and in the classroom, etc. When a student is at the classroom or study areas, they
are supposed to focus on work at hand or studying. In such locations we assume the more phone usage (i.e.,
spend more time on their phones) may indicate they are having difficulty focusing on their work. We hypothesize
that phone usage in the classroom and study places is a potential indicator of a student’s diminished ability to
concentrate in comparison to regular phone use in social spaces, dorm, gym, or walking around campus. By
using phone location data and contextual labeling of the campus [76] we can differentiate these different use
cases accurately.
Diminished interest or pleasure in activities may cause changes in students’ activity and social engagement
patterns that are not easily explained by external forces like deadlines or exams. We can observe changes in a
student’s physical activity (i.e., more/less active) and mobility (e.g., visit more/fewer places on campus). Specifically,
we look at the time spent at different types of places. On campus buildings and spaces in buildings are usually
associated with a primary function (e.g., study area, classroom, library, gym, social, cafes, etc). Most Dartmouth
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:7
undergraduate students study in a large number of shared study spaces across campus including libraries and
typically dormitory buildings are used to rest, sleep and socialize and rarely used to study. We compute time spent
in all areas but specifically in study places and dorms; specifically, we compute a number of behavioral features
including dwell time at locations, phone usage (unlock frequency and duration), and the number and duration of
conversation students are around in these spaces. All the location based behavioral features are normalized by
the dwelling duration. We use the fusion of these features to proxy a student’s diminished interest or pleasure in
activities.
Depressed mood and Fatigue or loss of energy are difficult to detect from passive behavioral sensing from
phones. Instead we consider heart rate from wearables. Previous work has found that heart rate data is associated
with depressed mood [35, 38] and fatigue [65]. We determine if depressed students’ heart rate is different from
non-depressed students. We consider this might be a potential signal and proxy for depressed mood or fatigue or
loss of energy. In addition, we also determine if more depressed students visit on-campus health facilities more.
4 DATA COLLECTION
We collect a smartphone and wearable sensing dataset from 83 Dartmouth College undergraduate students across
two 9-week terms during winter (56 students) and spring (27 students) terms in 2016. The average age of the
participants is 20.13 (std=2.31) and 40 are male and 43 are female (26 are Asian, 5 are African American, 24 are
Caucasian, 1 is multiracial, and 26 not specified). This study is approved by the Institutional Review Board at
Dartmouth College. Figure 1 shows the sensing system, symptom feature mappings, and the depression ground
truth. In what follows, we discuss the sensing system, the study design, and the dataset.
4.1 Mobile Sensing System for Phones and Wearables
The StudentLife sensing app is built based on our prior sensing work [1, 46, 74, 75] for Android. For this study
we implemented the StudentLife app on iOS phones as well. The StudentLife app continuously infers and record
participants’ physical activities (e.g., stationary, in a vehicle, walking, running, cycling), sleep (duration, bed
time, and rise time) based on our prior work on sleep inference using phones [15], and sociability (i.e., the
number of independent conversations a participant is around and their duration). The app also collects audio
amplitude, location coordinates, and phone lock/unlock events. A built-in MobileEMA component [75] is used
to administer self-reported PHQ-4 [42] EMAs. The app uploads the data to the secured server when the user is
charging their phones and under WiFi. StudentLife is extended to collect data from wearables; specifically, we
collect physiological data from Microsoft Band 2 [52] given to each of the students in our study. The StudentLife
app collects the heart rate, galvanic skin response (GSR), skin temperature, and activity data from the band in
real time. Band data is uploaded to the StudentLife app over Bluetooth and then uploaded to our servers as
described above. Note, during data modeling and analysis we found poor data quality issues associated with GSR
and skin temperature data from the band. First, the GSR sample rate provided by the Microsoft Band SDK [52]
is too low (0.2 HZ) to be useful in analysis. Such a low sample rate limited extracting useful GSR features. We
also found that the skin temperature sensor reading is affected by the ambient environment temperature. The
temperature differences between indoor and outdoor during New Hampshire winter can be as large as 70 degree
Fahrenheit. We observed significant drops in skin temperature when participants are outside during the winter
term. For these reasons we collected but did not uses GSR and skin temperature data in our modeling. While the
StudentLife app infers sleep data from the phone only within +/- 25 mins of error [15] the band has much better
sleep measurements. However, because the band only lasted one day due to limited battery and the demands of
continuous sensing most students wore the band during the day and recharged it at night. The result is that we
have limited sleep data from the band. We therefore only use sleep measurements from our phone data. Even
though we collect GSR, sleep, skin temperature we end up only using heart rate and activity data from the band.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:8 • R. Wang et. al.
PHQ-4
weekly depression
from EMA
Raw Sensing Data Symptom Features
PHQ-8
term depression
from survey
sleep time
wake up time
sleep duration
sleep changes
phone usage @ study places
phone usage @ dorm
phone usage during a day
diminished ability to concentrate
conversation
physical activity
number of places visited
time stay @ dorm
time spent @ study places
diminished interest in activities
heart rate
depressed mood &
loss of energy
light
GPS
accelerometer
microphone
lock/unlock
heart rate
Depression Measurement
Fig. 1. We continuously collect behavioral passive sensing data from Android and Apple iOS smartphones and physiological
sensing data from Microsoft Band 2. We compute the symptom features from the passive sensing data. The symptom features
map smartphone and wearable passive sensing to 5 depression symptoms defined in DSM-5: sleep changes, diminished ability
to concentrate, diminished interest in activities, depressed mood, and fatigue or loss of energy. We look for associations
between the symptom features and the PHQ8/PHQ4 depression outcomes.
4.2 Depression Groundtruth
We use the self-reported PHQ-8 [43] and PHQ-4 [42] as groundtruth for depression outcomes in our study.
This is a widely used measure with excellent validity. PHQ-8 is administered at the beginning and the end of
the study period as a pre-post depression measures. PHQ-4 is administered once a week and used to capture
depression dynamics across the term. The PHQ-8 scores 8 of the 9 major depressive disorder symptoms over the
past two weeks where each item (i.e., question) is scored by the user from 0 (not at all) to 3 (nearly every day).
The PHQ-8 does not score the thoughts of death and suicide symptom nor do we consider this in our study. The
resulting PHQ-8 depression score ranges from 0 to 24 indicating five levels of depression: (1) none to minimal
depression (range 0-4); (2) mild depression (range 5-9); (3) moderate depression (range 10-14); (4) moderately
severe depression (range 15-19); and finally (5) severe depression (20 to 24). The score can also be interpreted as no
depression (range 0-9) and current depression (range 10-24) according to [43]. Figure 2(a-b) shows the distribution
of the pre-post PHQ-8 responses. The mean score for the pre PHQ-8 is 6.09 (std = 4.33), where 16 out of 82
students are in the depressed group (PHQ-8 ≥ 10). The mean score for the post PHQ-8 is 6.69 (std = 5.46), where
17 out of 71 students are in the depressed group. We receive fewer post PHQ-8 surveys because some participants
do not complete the survey.
The PHQ-4 is an ultra-brief tool for screening both anxiety and depression disorders over the past two weeks.
It uses a depression subscale to score depression and an anxiety subscale to score anxiety. We only consider
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:9
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 0 5 10 15 20 25
number of participants
PHQ-8 score (pre)
(a) The distribution of pre PHQ-8 scores
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 0 5 10 15 20 25
number of participants
PHQ-8 score (post)
(b) The distribution of post PHQ-8 scores
 0
 70
 140
 210
 280
 350
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
number of responses
PHQ-4 depression subscale score
(c) The distribution of PHQ-4 depression subscale scores
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
number of participants
PHQ-4 depression subscale score
(d) The distribution of mean PHQ-4 depression subscale scores
Fig. 2. The distribution of the PHQ-8 and PHQ-4 responses. (a) The mean score for the pre PHQ-8 is 6.09 (N = 82,std = 4.33),
where 16 students are in the depressed group (PHQ-8 ≥ 10). (b) The mean score for the post PHQ-8 is 6.69 (N = 71,std = 5.46),
where 17 students are in the depressed group. (c) The mean score of the PHQ-4 depression subscale is 1.34 (N = 707,std = 1.50),
where 108 responses are above the depressed cutoff (≥ 3). (d) The mean per-participant PHQ-4 depression subscale score is
1.31 (std = 1.17), where 4 participants’ mean PHQ-4 depression subscale score is above the depressed cutoff (≥ 3).
the depression subscale in our study on depression. The depression subscale comprises 2 questions from the
PHQ-4 that score the diminished interest or pleasure in activities symptom and the depressed mood symptom. The
score of the depression subscale ranges from 0-6, where a score of 3 or greater is considered depressed according
to [42]. We collected in total 707 PHQ-4 responses across the terms. Figure 2(c) shows the distribution of the
PHQ-4 depression subscale scores from all responses. The mean score of the PHQ-4 depression subscale is 1.34
(std = 1.50), where 108 responses are above the depressed cutoff (≥ 3). Figure 2(d) shows the distribution of each
student’s PHQ-4 depression subscale. The mean per-student PHQ-4 depression subscale score is 1.27 (std = 1.15),
where 5 students’ mean PHQ-4 depression subscale score is above the depressed cutoff (≥ 3).
5 METHODS
In what follows, we present our symptom features and methods to evaluate the efficacy of using the symptom
features to predict depression severity in college students.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:10 • R. Wang et. al.
5.1 Symptom Features
We present our symptom features listed in Table 1 that capture the 5 out of 9 major depressive symptoms based
on data collected using phone and wearable passive mobile sensing data.
Table 1. Depression symptom features.
DSM symptom Symptom features
sleep changes
sleep duration
sleep start
sleep end
diminished ability to concentrate
unlock duration
unlock duration at dorm
unlock duration at study places
diminished interest or pleasure in activities
stationary time
conversation duration
number of places visited
time at dorm
time at study places
depressed mood and fatigue or loss of energy heart rate
Sleep. We compute three sleep features to measure the sleep change symptom: sleep duration, sleep onset time,
and wake time. We assume students experiencing this symptom may sleep significantly more or less than
normal, or experience irregular sleep schedules (i.e., more variations in sleep onset time or wake time). The sleep
inferences are based on four phone sensors: ambient light, audio amplitude, activity, and screen on/off [15]. The
sleep classifier does not infer naps. It simply computes the longest period of inferred sleep. The sleep classifier
approximates sleep duration within +/- 30 minutes and has been used in a number of other studies [1, 74, 75].
Physical activity. Students who experience the diminished interest or pleasure in activities symptom may change
their activity pattern (e.g., being less mobile and more stationary) [5]. We compute the stationary duration during
a day to measure students’ sedentary levels. The app continuously infers physical activities using the Android
activity recognition API [29, 74] and iOS Core Motion [4]. Activity recognition infers whether a user is on foot,
stationary, in vehicle, on bicycle, tilting, or doing an unknown activity. We compute the non-physically active
duration (i.e., the stationary duration) using the still label from the classifier. Both Android and iOS activity
recognition API detects the stationary state with high accuracy.
Speech and conversational interaction. Students who experience the diminished interest or pleasure in activities
symptom may experience social withdrawal and change their social engagement patterns [5]. We compute
the number of independent conversations and their duration everyday as a proxy for social interaction. The
StudentLife app infers the amount of speech and conversation a participant is around [74, 75]. In [74, 75] we
discuss the detailed in design of the conversation classifier that continuously runs on the phone in an energy
efficient manner (i.e., duty cycled). In brief, it represents a two level classifier. At the lowest level we detect
speech segments and at the higher level we determine if the set of segments represent a unique conversation. The
conversation classifier does not identify speakers. Therefore, we do not know that if the participant is actively
involved in the conservation or not (e.g., they could be sitting at a table in a cafe where others around them are
speaking). However, we have validated this in a number of studies and it is capable of capturing levels of social
interaction.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:11
Location and mobility. There is evidence that people’s mobility patterns are related to depression. We use
mobility and location features as a proxy for the diminished interest or pleasure in activities symptom. Prior work
indicates [14, 24] that people with this symptom avoid leaving their homes. We compute students’ distance
traveled, the number of places visited and time spend at dorms and study areas across campus based on location
data [14, 62, 75] and a semantic understanding of locations across Dartmouth campus. We use DBSCAN [23] to
cluster GPS coordinates collected during the day to find significant places that students dwell at. The DBSCAN
algorithm groups location/GPS coordinates that are close together as a significant place where students visit. We
compute the number of places visited as a feature. We label every on-campus building and spaces in buildings
(e.g., classrooms, study area, dorms, libraries, cafes, social spaces, gyms, etc.) according to their primary function;
for example, we label each student’s dorm as the place where they dwell between 2-6 am. In addition, we also
determine the number of times a student visits the on-campus health center as a contextual mobility feature.
Phone usage. We use phone usage to measure the diminished ability to concentrate symptom. Phone overuse
has been linked to depression in college students [20, 44]. We compute the number of phone lock/unlock events
and the duration that the phone is unlocked during a day, when a student is at their dorms and study areas. To
avoid the impact of stay duration on the location based phone usage features (e.g., a student tends to record
higher phone usage when they stay at a place longer), we normalize the phone usage features for location based
usage data by duration of their stay. Excessive smartphone usage at study places or in the classroom may indicate
students are experiencing difficulty in concentrating on the work at hand.
Heart rate. We use students’ physiological signals to detect if they are experiencing depressed mood or fatigue
or loss of energy symptoms. Previous work has found that heart rate variability is associated with depressed
mood [35, 38] and fatigue [65]. The average of beat-to-beat or NN intervals (AVNN) is one of the heart rate
variability measures [48]. The heart rate (HR) is the inverse of the AVNN in milliseconds: HR = 60000/AVNN.
The StudentLife app collects heart rate data from Microsoft Band 2 in real time. The accuracy of wrist heart rate
monitors depends on many factors. The heart rate measured by Microsoft Band 2 is accurate when the user wears
the band correctly (i.e., not too loose nor too tight) and is relatively stationary during measurement periods.
Based on our testing we found that the heart rate error is within 2 beats for the band. However, the accuracy
suffers if moving their arms because of motion artifacts in the signal. In order to get an accurate measure of daily
heart rate, we compute the median heart rate during each day. The median heart rate is a more robust measure of
daily heart rate than the mean, maximum, and minimum heart rate because median heart rate is less likely to be
influenced by outliers.
5.2 Feature Set Construction
We construct a PHQ-8 dataset and a PHQ-4 dataset to look at association between the symptom features and the
depression groundtruth.
The PHQ-8 dataset uses students’ pre-post PHQ-8 responses as the ground truth. We look to find correlations
between the PHQ-8 scores and the symptom features. In addition to the PHQ-8 scores, we include the PHQ-8
depression group assignment (i.e., non depressed group (range 0-9) and depressed group (range 10-24) as defined
in [43]) as students’ binary pre-post depression state. We compute the term mean, standard deviation, and the
slope of each symptom features described in Section 5.1. The term mean features describes the average of the
daily symptom features over the 9-week term. For example, the mean time spend at study places is the average
time a student spends at study places every day during the term. The term standard deviation describes the
variations in the daily symptom features. For example, a higher standard deviation in sleep start time and end
time indicates that the student has an irregular sleep schedule. The term slope features describe how the daily
symptom features change over the term. We fit the daily feature time series with a linear regression model and
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:12 • R. Wang et. al.
use the regression coefficient as the slope. The slope describes the direction and the steepness of change. For
example, a positive slope in conversation duration indicates the student is around more and more conversations
as the term progresses, whereas a negative slope indicates the surrounding conversations decrease over time.
The absolute value of the slope shows how fast the conversation duration changes. In addition to the symptom
features, we also include the mean PHQ-4 score from each student in the dataset. The correlations between the
mean PHQ-4 and PHQ-8 show the validity of the EMA administered PHQ-4.
The PHQ-4 dataset uses students’ weekly self-administered PHQ-4 depression subscale scores as the groundtruth.
We include the PHQ-4 depression group assignment (i.e., non depressed group (range 0-2) and depressed group
(range 3-6) as defined in [42] as students’ binary weekly depression state. For each PHQ-4 response, we compute
the mean symptom features using data from the past 2 weeks. This is because PHQ-4 asks for participants’
symptoms during the last two weeks.
5.3 PHQ-8 Association and Prediction Analysis
We test our hypothesis that the mobile sensing derived depression features represent proxies for the depression
symptoms for college students by first running Pearson correlation analysis to assess the relations between the
term symptoms features and the pre-post PHQ-8 item scores. Each of the PHQ-8 items maps to one of the major
depression disorder symptoms defined in DSM 5 except the suicidal ideation symptom. The correlations between
the PHQ-8 item scores and symptom features may give us preliminary insight about whether or not the symptom
features are likely to be associated with individual symptoms.
We then run Pearson correlation analysis to assess the relations between the term symptoms features and the
pre-post PHQ-8 scores. PHQ-8 scores are validated depression severity measures. The correlations suggest how
the symptom features are related to the overall depression severity. We report the correlation coefficients and the
p values. We also apply the False Discovery Rate (FDR) [78] to address the multiple testing problem [21, 25].
In addition to the correlation analysis, we use ANOVA [64] to test whether or not the mean of the symptom
features are significantly different between the non depressed group and the depressed group. The PHQ-8 defines
a non depressed group (< 10) and a depressed group (≥ 10) [43]. We use ANOVA [64] to test whether or not the
mean of the symptom features are significantly different between the non depressed group and the depressed
group. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is a statistical model that is widely used to analyze the differences among
group means [64]. We report the F statistics and the p value from ANOVA. The F statistics indicate the ratio
of between-group variability and the within-group variability. The p value indicates whether or not the group
means are significantly different.
Finally, we use lasso regularized linear regression [69] to predict pre-post PHQ-8 scores. The lasso regularization
selects features that are predictive of the outcome by penalizing irrelevant features’ weights to zeros [69].
Before training the model, we normalize each feature to have zeros mean and one standard deviation. Feature
normalization avoids the different feature scales adversely affecting regularization. We use 10-fold cross-validation
to select the regularization hyperparameter, which controls the penalizing strength of non-zero-weight features.
We choose the hyperparameter that minimizes the mean squared error (MSE). We report the mean absolute error
and correlations between the predicted PHQ-8 scores and the groundtruth. We use the population PHQ-8 mean
as the prediction baseline to compare the prediction performance.
5.4 PHQ-4 Regression and Prediction Analysis
We further test our hypothesis by identifying a number of associations between 2-week symptom features and
the PHQ-4 depression subscale scores using regression analysis. We use the 2-week symptom features to predict
if a student is considered depressed according the PHQ-4 depression subscale. The periodic PHQ-4 responses are
longitudinal across the term where every student provides multiple responses. Ordinary linear regression and
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:13
correlation cannot be applied to analyze longitudinal data because the responses from the same individual are
likely correlated. We run bivariate regression analysis using the generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) [50]
to understand associations between the 2-week symptom features and the PHQ-4 depression subscale scores.
GLMM is a widely used model to analyze longitudinal data. It describes the relationship between two variables
using coefficients that can vary with respect to one or more grouping variables. In our case, the group variable is
student. GLMM better explains the intra-individual differences. We normalize each symptom feature to have zero
mean and one standard deviation. The regression coefficient of a normalized feature b can be interpreted as a unit
increase in the feature value is associated with b increases in the associated PHQ-4 depression subscale value. A
positive coefficient indicates that a greater feature value is associated with a greater depression score, whereas a
negative coefficient indicates that a greater feature value is associated with a smaller depression score. PHQ-4 are
collected at a weekly rate. The 2-week symptom features may artificially create dependency among consecutive
PHQ-4 scores. To address the dependency problem, we first run GLMM on all PHQ-4 data, then we remove
consecutive PHQ-4 responses by skipping a week’s PHQ-4 response. The skip-a-week dataset is half of the PHQ-4
dataset in size. We compare the regression results from the complete PHQ-4 dataset and the skip-a-week dataset.
Similar results from the two datasets would suggest dependency does not have an impact on the analysis.
We then use lasso regularized logistic regression [69] to predict whether or not a student is depressed week by
week (i.e., the reported PHQ-4 depression subscale is ≥ 3). We use the PHQ-4 data to train a logistic regression
model to predict each student’s PHQ-4 for a given week. We first use 10-fold cross-validation to select the
regularization hyperparameter, which controls the penalizing strength of non-zero-weight features. We then
choose the hyperparameter that maximizes the regression deviance to train a generic PHQ-4 prediction model.
We report the prediction performance from the 10-fold cross-validation.
6 PHQ-8 RESULTS: ASSESSING DEPRESSION ACROSS THE TERM
In what follows, we first report the correlations between the symptom features and PHQ-8 item scores to show
whether or not the symptom features are likely to be associated with individual symptoms. We then report the
correlations between the symptom features and PHQ-8 scores. Finally, we report ANOVA results to show whether
or not the mean of the symptom features are significantly different between the non depressed group and the
depressed group.
6.1 Correlations Between Symptom Features and PHQ-8 Item Scores
In what follows, we discuss the relationship between the specific PHQ-8 item scores and the proposed symptom
features. Figure 3 shows the correlation matrices of the term mean symptom features and eight pre-post PHQ-8
item scores. We omit correlations with p > 0.05. In what follows, we discuss our findings.
Higher sleep changes (more irregular sleep patterns) item score is associated with shorter sleep duration
(in line with our hypothesis), longer unlock duration during the day at dorm and study places, more time being
stationary, and spending more time at on-campus health facilities. The sleep start time and end time, however,
are not correlated with the sleep changes item score.
Higher mood item score is associated with longer unlock duration at dorm and study places, more time being
stationary, and spending more time at on-campus health facilities. The heart rate is not correlated with the mood
item score.
Higher loss of energy (fatigue) item score is associated with spending more time at dorm. The heart rate is
not a predictor of this PHQ-8 item.
Higher diminished ability to concentrate item score is associated with longer unlock duration at study
places (in line with our hypothesis) and more time being stationary.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:14 • R. Wang et. al.
loss of interest
mood
sleep
fatigue
appetite
worthlessness
concentrate
psychomotor
sleep duration
sleep end
sleep start
unlock duration
unlock duration at dorm
unlock duration at study places
stationary time
conversation duration
number of places visited
time at on-campus health facilities
time at dorm
time at study places
heart rate
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
(a) PHQ-8 pre
loss of interest
mood
sleep
fatigue
appetite
worthlessness
concentrate
psychomotor
sleep duration
sleep end
sleep start
unlock duration
unlock duration at dorm
unlock duration at study places
stationary time
conversation duration
number of places visited
time at on-campus health facilities
time at dorm
time at study places
heart rate
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
(b) PHQ-8 post
Fig. 3. The correlation matrix of proposed symptom features and PHQ-8 pre-post item scores. Correlations with p > 0.05 are
omitted.
Higher diminished interest in activities item score is associated with longer unlock duration at study
places, more time being stationary (in line with our hypothesis), and visiting fewer places a day (in line with our
hypothesis).
Higher feeling worthless item score is associated with longer unlock duration during the day at dorm and
study places, spending more time at on-campus health facilities, more time being stationary, and visiting fewer
places a day.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:15
Higher psychomotor retardation/agitation item score is associated with longer unlock duration during the
day, at dorm, and at study places.
Higher appetite changes item score is associated with visiting fewer places a day, longer unlock duration
during the day, at dorm, and at study places.
We find more statistically significant correlations between the symptom features and the post PHQ-8 item
scores. We believe this is because post PHQ-8 scores better capture students depression states during the term
whereas pre PHQ-8 scores capture the depression states when students started the academic term. The symptom
features computed from the data collected during the term better capture students’ depression symptoms during
the term. The results show there are indeed association between the proposed symptom features and symptoms
scores. We also find that some symptom features correlate with symptoms that are considered relevant. For
example, phone use data (e.g., unlock duration) is associated with sleep changes.
6.2 Correlations Between Symptom Features and PHQ-8 Depression Scores
Table 2. Pearson correlations between the term symptom features and pre-post PHQ-8 scores
PHQ-8 pre PHQ-8 post
r p r p
sleep duration all > 0.05 > 0.05
sleep start std 0.236 0.059 0.301 0.024
sleep end std 0.183 0.145 0.271 0.043
unlock duration mean 0.282 0.010* 0.268 0.024
unlock duration at dorm mean 0.245 0.027 0.206 0.085
unlock duration at dorm std 0.270 0.014* 0.222 0.062
unlock duration at study places mean 0.391 < 0.001** 0.322 0.006*
unlock duration at study places std 0.260 0.018 0.120 0.319
stationary time mean 0.256 0.040 0.347 0.009*
conversation duration slope 0.467 < 0.001** 0.223 0.062
number of places visited mean -0.066 0.556 -0.269 0.023
time at on-campus health facilities mean 0.210 0.059 0.029 0.812
time at dorm all > 0.05 > 0.05
time at study places all > 0.05 > 0.05
heart rate all > 0.05 > 0.05
PHQ-4 depression subscale mean 0.743 < 0.001** 0.849 < 0.001**
PHQ-4 depression subscale std 0.328 0.003* 0.521 < 0.001**
PHQ-4 depression subscale slope 0.045 0.688 0.438 < 0.001**
*FDR < 0.1, **FDR < 0.05
The correlation results are presented in Table 2. In what follows, we discuss the correlation results in detail.
Sleep duration, sleep start time, and sleep end time are proxies to measure the sleep changes symptom. We do not
find correlations between sleep duration and PHQ-8 score. However, we find students who have more variations
in their bed time schedule report higher pre (r = 0.236,p = 0.059) and post (r = 0.301,p = 0.024) PHQ-8 scores.
Students who have more variations in their wake up time report higher post PHQ-8 scores (r = 0.271,p = 0.043).
The results show that students with more irregular sleep patterns tend to be more depressed.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:16 • R. Wang et. al.
Phone unlock duration during the day, at their dorms, and in study places are proxies to measure the diminished
ability to concentrate symptom. We find all 3 unlock duration features correlate with the PHQ-8 scores. In general,
students who use their phones more during the day report higher pre PHQ-8 score (r = 0.282,p = 0.010) and post
PHQ-8 scores (r = 0.268,p = 0.024). When students are at their dorms, those who use their phone more report
higher pre PHQ-8 score (r = 0.245,p = 0.027). We find strong correlations when students are at study places
where the typically goal is to focus on school work. Students who spend more time using their phones in study
areas report higher pre PHQ-8 scores (r = 0.391,p < 0.001) and higher post PHQ-8 scores (r = 0.322,p = 0.006).
The results show that context aware device usage can be used to detect distractions and measure the ability of
students to concentrate.
Stationary time during the day, conversation duration, number of places visited, and time spent at dorms and
study places are proxies to measure the diminished interest or pleasure in activities symptom. Students who
report higher post PHQ-8 scores are likely to spend more time being stationary (r = 0.256,p = 0.040 for the pre
survey and r = 0.374,p = 0.009 for the post survey) and visit fewer places during the day (r = −0.269,p = 0.023
for the post survey). Students who report higher pre PHQ-8 scores see an increase in conversation duration
(i.e., conversation duration slope) as the term progresses (r = 0.467,p < 0.001). However, there is no correlation
between the mean conversation duration and the post PHQ-8 scores. We speculate this is because students who
are depressed at the beginning of the term are not social at the beginning of the term. However, as the term
progresses, students become more socially engaged. This may because some students in the cohort seek help at
on campus health facilities.
The daily median heart rate is a proxy for the depressed mood symptom and the fatigue or loss of energy
symptom. However, it does not correlate with the PHQ-8 score. Students who report higher pre PHQ-8 scores
at the beginning of the term spend more time at the campus health center (r = 0.210,p = 0.059). However, the
correlation does not hold for the post PHQ-8 scores. The results show that although students who are more
depressed at the beginning of the term actively seek medical help, students who become depressed during the
term may not seek out help at campus health center. When talking to the clinicians and mental health counselors
at the Dartmouth campus health center they indicate that the peek demand time they see students is during
midterm weeks, during once per term social festivals, and at the end of term (week before, during and after the
final exam period). Clearly, there seems to be a barrier for depressed students to visit the campus health center.
Many issues might stop a student reaching out including not understanding they are experiencing depression or
stigma associated with mental illness. The result is consistent with what other colleges experience [22].
We administer weekly PHQ-4 EMAs to track how students’ depression changes as the term progresses. We
compute the PHQ-4 depression subscale term average for each student and compare the subscale scores with
the PHQ-8 scores. The PHQ-4 depression subscale scores strongly correlate with both pre (r = 0.743,p < 0.001)
and post (r = 0.849,p < 0.001) PHQ-8 scores. The result show that PHQ-4 responses are consistent with PHQ-8,
which gives us confidence to use the PHQ-4 depression subscale to track depression changes during the term.
The PHQ-4 depression subscale standard deviation correlate with both pre (r = 0.328,p = 0.003) and post
(r = 0.521,p < 0.001) PHQ-8 scores. It suggests students who are more depressed have more variations in
depression severity over the term. The PHQ-4 depression subscale slope correlate with post (r = 0.438,p < 0.001)
PHQ-8 scores but not with the pre scores, which suggests the symptom severity may increase over the term for
students who are more depressed by the end of the term.
6.3 Depression Groups Mean Comparison
We show the ANOVA group comparison results in Table 3. In what follows, we discuss the group differences in
sleep, conversation, and study behaviors.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:17
Table 3. ANOVA significance of mean term symptom feature differences between the non depressed and depressed group
PHQ-8 pre PHQ-8 post
F p F p
unlock duration mean 5.179 0.026 5.733 0.019
unlock duration at study places mean 11.599 0.001 6.084 0.016
unlock duration at study places std 5.694 0.019 1.426 0.237
unlock duration at dorm mean 4.748 0.032 6.121 0.016
unlock duration at dorm std 5.042 0.027 5.443 0.023
conversation duration slope 13.46 < 0.001 0.379 0.540
time at study places slope 4.199 0.044 0.546 0.462
PHQ-4 depression subscale mean 22.240 < 0.001 57.256 < 0.001
PHQ-4 depression subscale std 0.312 0.578 11.207 0.001
PHQ-4 depression subscale slope 0.319 0.574 6.716 0.012
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
study duration (hours)
depression groups
(a) time at study places
-0.1
-0.05
 0
 0.05
 0.1
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
study duration slope
depression groups
(b) time at study places slope
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
unlock duration at study places
depression groups
(c) unlock duration at study places
Fig. 4. The distribution of the time at study places, the slope of the time at study places over the term, and the unlock
duration at study places of the pre-post PHQ-8 non depressed group and depressed group. Students from the depressed
group
Figure 4 shows the depression groups’ distribution of the time spent at study places, the slope of the time spent
at study places over the term, and the unlock duration at study places. Figure 4(a) shows that there is no significant
differences in time spend at study places between non depressed and depressed groups. Figure 4(b) shows that
the pre PHQ-8 depressed group students spend a decreasing amount of time at study places whereas the non
depressed group students spend same amount of time at study places across the term (F = 4.199,p = 0.044).
Figure 4(c) shows that the PHQ-8 pre and post depressed group students spend more time using their phones
at study places. The differences are significant with F = 11.599,p = 0.001 for the pre PHQ-8 groups and
F = 6.084,p = 0.016 for the post PHQ-8 groups. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the conversation duration
and the conversation duration slope of the pre-post PHQ-8 depression groups. Figure 5(a) shows that there is no
significant differences in the mean conversation duration of the pre and post PHQ-8 depressed groups. However,
the pre PHQ-8 depressed group shows a large in-group variation in conversation duration. Figure 5(b) shows
that the pre PHQ-8 depressed group’s conversation duration slope is positive whereas the non depressed group
has a slight negative slope. The difference is significant with F = 13.46,p < 0.001. The result shows that students
in the pre PHQ-8 depressed group are around an increasing amount of conversations as the term progresses
whereas students in the pre PHQ-8 non depressed group are around decreasing amount of conversations. The
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:18 • R. Wang et. al.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
conversation duration (hours)
depression groups
(a) conversation duration
-200
-150
-100
-50
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
conversation duration slope
depression groups
(b) conversation duration slope
Fig. 5. The distribution of the conversation duration and the conversation duration slope of the pre-post PHQ-8 non depressed
group and depressed group.
difference in conversation duration slope does not exist in post PHQ-8 groups. The result is consistent with the
correlation analysis.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
sleep duration (hours)
depression groups
(a) sleep duration
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
sleep start std
depression groups
(b) sleep start standard deviation
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
< 10 ≥ 10 < 10 ≥ 10
pre post
sleep end std
depression groups
(c) sleep end standard deviation
Fig. 6. The distribution of sleep duration, sleep start time standard deviation, and sleep end time standard deviation for the
pre-post PHQ-8 non depressed group and depressed group. The group differences are not statistically significant according
to ANOVA.
Figure 6 show the distribution of sleep duration, sleep start time standard deviation, and sleep end time standard
deviation of the non depression group and the depression group for pre-post PHQ-8. Figure 6(a) shows that the
sleep duration of the depressed group is shorter than the non depressed. Figure 6(b-c) show that students in the
depressed group have more variations in sleep start and end times. The differences, however, are not statistically
significant (p > 0.05) according to ANOVA.
6.4 Predicting PHQ-8 Scores
Pre PHQ-8 scores. The lasso regularization selects 10 features to predict pre PHQ-8 scores. Specifically, it
selects phone usage at study places, the stationary time, time spend at on-campus health facilities, sleep start
time standard deviation, unlock duration at dorm standard deviation, unlock duration at study places slope,
conversation duration slope, number of places visited slope, time at on-campus health facilities slope, and heart
rate slope. The MAE of the baseline model, where the mean PHQ-8 score is used as the predicted PHQ-8 score, is
3.44. Our prediction model predict the pre PHQ-8 scores with MAE of 2.40, which is 1.04 lower than the baseline.
The predicted PHQ-8 score strongly correlate with the groundtruth with r = 0.741,p < 0.001.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:19
Post PHQ-8 scores. The lasso regularization selects 5 features to predict post PHQ-8 scores. Specifically, it
selects phone usage at study places, the stationary time, number of places visited, sleep start time standard
deviation, and conversation duration slope. The MAE of the baseline model is 4.29. Our prediction model predict
the pre PHQ-8 scores with MAE of 3.60, which is 0.59 lower than the baseline. The predicted PHQ-8 score strongly
correlate with the groundtruth with r = 0.578,p < 0.001.
Most of the selected features have shown significant linear correlations with the PHQ-8 outcomes, as shown in
previous sections. Interesting enough, the lasso regularization selects the heart rate term slope to predict the pre
PHQ-8 scores, whereas heart rate term slope does not show correlations with the PHQ-8 scores. We suspect the
heart rate data may provide extra information in predicting PHQ-8 scores when combined with other symptom
features.
7 PHQ-4 RESULTS: TRACKING DEPRESSION WEEKLY DYNAMICS
In what follows, we further test our hypothesis by identifying a number of associations between 2-week symptom
features and the PHQ-4 depression subscale scores using regression analysis. We use the 2-week symptom
features to predict if a student is considered depressed according the PHQ-4 depression subscale.
7.1 Regression Analysis
Table 4 shows the bivariate generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) [50] regression results. We report the
coefficient b and the p value associated with the variable (i.e., the 2-week symptom feature) from the bivariate
regression between the 2-week symptom features and the PHQ-4 depression subscale scores. The value of
the coefficient indicates the direction and strength of the association between symptom features and PHQ-4
depression subscale scores. The p-value indicates the probability that the coefficient is equal to zero. A low
p-value (i.e., < 0.05) indicates that the coefficient is not equal to zero and likely to be the learned value.
The results suggest students who are around fewer conversations per day (p = 0.002), sleep less (p = 0.024),
and visit fewer places (p = 0.003) are likely to be more depressed. Students who go to sleep late (p = 0.027) and
wake up late (p = 0.001) are likely to be more depressed. The regression coefficients and p-values are similar
between the full PHQ-4 dataset and the skip-a-week dataset, which suggests the dependency does not have an
impact on the analysis.
Table 4. Associations between symptom features and PHQ-4 depression subscale score
all skip a week
coefficient p coefficient p
number of conversations -0.269 0.002 -0.222 0.037
sleep duration -0.156 0.024 -0.222 0.025
sleep end 0.151 0.027 0.236 0.012
sleep start 0.223 0.001 0.317 0.001
number of visited places -0.211 0.003 -0.224 0.016
7.2 Prediction Analysis
The regularization selects 9 features to make the prediction as shown in Table 5. Specifically, it selects the
stationary time, the number of conversations, heart rate, sleep end time, time spend at a dorm, time spend at
study places, phone usage at study places, and the number of places visited. Similar to predicting PHQ-8 scores,
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:20 • R. Wang et. al.
the regularization selects the heart rate feature as a predictor. It further suggests the heart rate feature helps
predicting depression outcomes.
Table 5. Selected features to predict PHQ-4 depression subscale non depressed and depressed group
lasso selected features
stationary time, number of conversations, heart rate, sleep end, time
at dorm, time at study places, unlock duration at study places, unlock
number at study places, number of places visited
Figure 7 shows the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve [31] of the logistic regression model obtained
from the 10-fold crossvalidation. The ROC curve show the different true positive rate and false positive rate using
a different threshold to determine if the logistic regression output is a positive case (i.e., depressed) or not. The
area under the ROC curve (AUC) [31] is a widely used metric to evaluate a binary classifier. AUC ranges from 0.5
to 1. Higher score indicates better performance. Our PHQ-4 state model’s AUC is 0.809, which indicate good
prediction performance. The model archives 81.5% of the recall (i.e., 81.5% of the depressed cases are correctly
identified) and 69.1% of the precision (i.e., 69.1% of the inferred depressed cases are correct).
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
true positive rate
false positive rate
Fig. 7. The ROC curve of using lasso logistic regression to predict PHQ-4 depression states. The area under the ROC curve
(AUC) is 0.809.
7.3 Case Study Showing Depression Dynamics
Many of the students in this study have interesting behavioral curves and depression dynamics. Here we highlight
one anecdotal case study. Figure 8 shows the depression dynamics of a student’s PHQ-4 depression subscale score,
number of conversations they are around, sleep duration, bed time, wake time, and number of places visited over
a 9-week term. We do not want to identify this student by detailing their academic or demographic information.
The curves show the student starts the term in a non depressed state but their PHQ-4 depression subscale score
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:21
deteriorates as the term progresses and peaks during week 4 (anecdotal this is the mid term week but we have no
evidence that this is causal). The student’s depression subscale score drops after week 4 and the student reports a
non depressed state in week 6 before dropping to 0 in week 8. If we now compare the students behavioral data
from the StudentLife app we can observe some interesting trends in the sensor data. Comparing the student’s
sleep data, the number of places visited every day and number of conversations they are around before and
after their PHQ-4 depression subscale score peaks in week 4, we can observe that this student is around fewer
conversations, sleep less, goes to bed later at night and wakes up earlier in the morning, and visit fewer places.
This all seems indicative of a busy student who might be experiencing increased stress and anxiety because of the
increasing academic demands of the term if we only looks at the behavioral curves from sensing data. However,
seeing the depression dynamics from the PHQ-4 confirms that this student is struggling with the elevated levels
of depression. The student has coping skills that are unknown to us and recovers from this increased risk without
(from our data) any visits to the campus health center. As the term ends the student recovers showing resilience
their behavioral sensing curves sleeping earlier, getting up later and therefore sleeping longer, visiting more
locations on campus during the day, and being around more conversation indicating more engagement with
fellow students and less isolation. All around a healthier person at the end of term. We do not present this example
as some common set of curves we analyzed but an interesting one that gives insights into this student’s academic
term.
8 DISCUSSION
Existing research on using passive sensing to predict depression do not design features that explicitly map to
depression symptoms defined in DSM 5. For example, prior work propose location features [14, 61, 62] based on
the assumption that depressed persons would travel less and have more irregular mobility patterns. In this paper,
we propose to use well-known symptoms to guide us design passive sensing features that are more likely to be
associated with depression. Incorporating the symptom domain knowledge and the behavioral characteristics of
the population (e.g., college students), we can come up with novel behavioral features that leverage multiple
sensor streams. For example, with the knowledge of college students’ daily routine, we can leverage multiple
sensors on the smartphone to assess students are likely to be distracted when they should be studying.
The proposed symptoms features might not be able to generalize to other populations. For example, people
with other occupations (i.e., non students) do not usually go to classes. Generic features, such as distance traveled
and conversation duration, might not generalize well. We would expect salespersons would be around more
conversations than people working in quite offices. Our method shows that we need to tailor behavioral features
to different populations.
There are different approaches that can be taken to address the mental health classification and detection
problem. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) has launched the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC)
[36, 39] project to create a framework for studying mental disorders. The RDoC framework centers around
dimensional psychological constructs that are relevant to human behavior and mental disorders [36, 39]. The
psychological constructs include negative valence systems, positive valence systems, cognitive systems, systems
for social processes, arousal/regulatory systems. RDoC proposes to measure the systems using molecular, genetic,
neurocircuit and behavioral assessments [36, 39]. We imagine that future mobile sensing approaches for mental
health assessment could focus on developing new sensing modalities and physiological and behavioral features
to predict the RDoC constructs. We are pursuing this idea in a related project on auditory verbal hallucinations.
9 LIMITATIONS
While the current study provides evidence that passive sensing may help up track and predict real-world changes
in mental health, specifically depression, there are a number of limitations to our study. The sample size of our
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
43:22 • R. Wang et. al.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
week
phq-4 score
 16
 18
 20
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
week
number of conversations
 6.2
 6.4
 6.6
 6.8
 7
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
week
sleep duration (hr)
02:30
02:45
03:00
03:15
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
week
sleep start (AM)
09:00
09:15
09:30
09:45
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
week
sleep end (AM)
 4
 5
 6
 7
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
week
number of locations
Fig. 8. The dynamics of a student’s PHQ-4 depression subscale score, number of conversations around, sleep duration, bed
time, wake time, and number of places visited over a 9-week term. The student starts the term in a non depressed state
but their PHQ-4 depression subscale score deteriorates as the term progresses and peaks during week 4 and drops to 0 in
week 8. The student is around fewer conversations, sleep less, goes to bed later at night and wakes up earlier in the morning,
and visit fewer places before week 4. As the term ends the student recovers showing resilience and their behavioral sensing
curves sleeping earlier, getting up later and therefore sleeping longer, visiting more locations on campus during the day, and
being around more conversation.
study dataset is relatively small relative to the number of features and quantity of data acquired for each of those
features. As such, the results here should be considered relatively exploratory and preliminary. There is a need
for the community interested in depression sensing to take the next step and conduct a large scale, longitudinal
study with a diverse cohort well beyond students. Only then we can conclusively say something strongly about
the application of passive sensing to mental health. While our results show associations between symptom
features and depression groundtruth, associations cannot tell us if changes in behavior would benefit or worsen
depression severity. Future studies, need to be designed with the aim to find causalities between the proposed
symptom features and changes in depression as discussed in [70]. Another limitation is that all of the subjects
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 43. Publication date: March 2018.
Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing • 43:23
were Dartmouth undergraduates. While our results are statistically significant and encouraging they are limited
to students at Dartmouth College. There are a number of other on-going studies looking into a wide-variety of
student health issues as part of the CampusLife Consortium [47]. Results from these studies may shine a light on
differences across different campuses (e.g., small Ivy in small town, large research university in city).
We evaluate the symptom features using the PHQ-8 item scores. The item scores, however, might not be a good
indicator of symptoms because individual PHQ-8 items have not been validated against depression symptoms
defined in DSM-5. Future studies may need to collaborate with clinicians to get better individual symptom
measures.
Finally, the use of early wearables (in our case the Microsoft Band 2) present problems for longitudinal studies.
The band could only hold a charge for approximately 14 hours while continuously sensing. This meant students
would have to charge their bands before bed to get any data from the band during the night. Students had to
take the band off while showering. Neglecting to put the band back on after showering would also cause losing
data. Newer bands such as the Gamin Vivosmart 3 can run for 4 days and are waterproof potentially increasing
compliance for wearables and making them more useful.
10 CONCLUSION
We proposed depression symptom features derived from phone and wearable passive sensor data that proxy 5 out
of the 9 major depressive disorder symptoms defined in the DSM-5 for college students. We found students who
report higher PHQ-8 scores (i.e., are more depressed) are more likely to use their phones more particularly at
study places (r = 0.391,p < 0.001) in comparison with all day phone usage (r = 0.282,p = 0.010); have irregular
sleep schedules (i.e., more variations in bed time (r = 0.301,p = 0.024) and wake time (r = 0.271,p = 0.043); spend
more time being stationary (r = 0.374,p = 0.009) and visit fewer places during the day (r = −0.269,p = 0.023).
We identified a number of symptom features capturing depression dynamics during the term associated with the
PHQ-4 depression subscale groundtruth. Specifically, students who report higher PHQ-4 depression subscale
scores (i.e., are more depressed) are around fewer conversations (p = 0.002), sleep for shorter periods (p = 0.024),
go to sleep later (p = 0.001), wake up later (p = 0.027), and visit fewer places (p = 0.003) during the last two week
period. We showed that the symptom features can predict whether or not if a student is depressed each week
with 81.5% recall and 69.1% precision. We believe the methods and results presented in this paper open the way
for new forms of depression sensing going forward.