The vision of embedding connectivity into billions of everyday objects runs into the reality of existing communication
technologies — there is no existing wireless technology that can provide reliable and long-range communication at tens of
microwatts of power as well as cost less than a dime. While backscatter is low-power and low-cost, it is known to be limited
to short ranges. This paper overturns this conventional wisdom about backscatter and presents the first wide-area backscatter
system. Our design can successfully backscatter from any location between an RF source and receiver, separated by 475 m,
while being compatible with commodity LoRa hardware. Further, when our backscatter device is co-located with the RF
source, the receiver can be as far as 2.8 km away. We deploy our system in a 4,800 f t 2 (446 m2) house spread across three
floors, a 13,024 f t 2 (1210 m2) office area covering 41 rooms, as well as a one-acre (4046 m2) vegetable farm and show that we
can achieve reliable coverage, using only a single RF source and receiver. We also build a contact lens prototype as well as a
flexible epidermal patch device attached to the human skin. We show that these devices can reliably backscatter data across a
3,328 f t 2 (309 m2) room. Finally, we present a design sketch of a LoRa backscatter IC that shows that it costs less than a dime
at scale and consumes only 9.25 μW of power, which is more than 1000x lower power than LoRa radio chipsets.
CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Communication hardware, interfaces and storage; • Human-centered computing →
Ubiquitous and mobile computing;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Energy-aware communication & Novel physical layer technologies; Wireless, mobile, and
sensor networks
1 INTRODUCTION
Embedding cheap connectivity into billions of everyday objects has been a long-standing vision in the ubiquitous
computing community. There is however a significant disconnect between the ubiquity articulated by this vision
and the capabilities of today’s communication technologies. Active radio technologies including Wi-Fi, ZigBee,
SigFox [20], LoRa [7] and LTE-M [19] provide reliable coverage and long ranges but are power consuming
and cost at least 4–6 dollars [15, 22]; making them too expensive for embedding into objects at scale. Further,
Fig. 1. LoRa backscatter deployment. The LoRa Backscatter device consumes 9.25 μW, operates at 100s of meters and can be powered by
flexible printed batteries and button cells (10 cents), a capability that cannot be achieved with radios. The RF source transmits a single tone
that the backscatter device uses to synthesize CSS signals. The challenge is that at the receiver, the backscatter signal is not only drowned by
noise but also suffers interference from the RF source.
given their high peak current and power requirements, active radios significantly deteriorate battery life and are
incompatible with emerging small, flexible and ultra-thin printed batteries [13, 17, 18] that promise innovative
applications across healthcare, wearable devices and cosmetics [23, 43, 44].
Backscatter promises to be an extremely low power, smaller and cheaper alternative to active radios. Given
the absence of expensive radio analog components including RF oscillators, decoupling capacitors and crystals,
backscatter designs including passive RFID and Wi-Fi backscatter [35, 37] cost only a few cents to manufacture at
scale [6]. Further, they consume three to four orders of magnitude lower power and peak current than radios and
hence can operate with emerging flexible, printed and ultra-thin printed battery technologies. However, despite
all these benefits, current backscatter designs have seen very limited adoption beyond RFID applications. This is
because current backscatter designs are unreliable, limited in operating range, and in fact today cannot achieve
robust coverage across rooms [11, 31, 35, 60] as outlined in Fig. 2 and Table 1 1 . Furthermore, since RF signals
get significantly attenuated by the human body, backscatter range is limited to tens of centimeters in several
healthcare and wearable device applications [35].
This paper questions the conventional wisdom that backscatter is a short-range system. Specifically, we ask if
one can achieve wide-area backscatter communication with a range of hundreds of meters, if not kilometers. A
positive answer would give us the best of both worlds: long-range reliable communication capabilities of radios
at the low-power and cost of backscatter hardware. This enables, for the first time, wide area connectivity for
everyday objects and opens applications in domains like smart cities [1], precision agriculture [2], industrial,
medical and whole-home sensing [35], where backscatter is currently infeasible.
To appreciate why this is hard, consider the deployment in Fig. 1. Here the backscatter device reflects signals
from an RF source to synthesize data packets that are then decoded by a receiver. The challenge is that, before
arriving at the backscatter device, the signals from the RF source are already attenuated. The backscatter device
can reflect these weak signals to synthesize data packets which get further attenuated as they propagate to
the receiver. Our experiments show that with a separation of 400 m between the RF source and receiver, the
backscattered signal is at -134 dBm. In contrast, the direct signal from the RF source at the receiver is more than
a million times stronger at -45 dBm. Thus, the backscatter signal is not only drowned by noise but also suffers
significant interference from the RF source.
We present the first wide-area backscatter communication system. Achieving this requires us to satisfy two
key constraints. First, the backscatter device should code information in a way that can be decoded at the
receiver down to and below -135 dBm signal strength and reliably operate in the presence of strong out-of-band
interference. Second, instead of using a custom receiver for the backscattered signal that can be prohibitively
expensive (e.g., RFID readers), the backscattered signals should be decoded on readily and cheaply available
commodity hardware that would expedite the adoption and development of our design.
To do so, we first profile existing radio technologies in Table. 1, which shows that LoRa provides the highest
sensitivity of -149 dBm and supports bit rates of 18 bps to 37.5 kbps, which are sufficient for most IoT applications.
1We note that active RFID does not use backscatter. Instead, it uses radios, is power consuming and costs between 15–100 dollars [28, 58].
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:3
 1
 10
 100
 1000 Range (m)
RFID
Passive
 Wi-Fi
LoRa
 Backscatter
Fig. 2. We compare the operating distance of existing backscatter systems.
Table 1. Communication Technologies. We show the sensitivity and supported data
rates for different communication technologies and the feasibility of powering them from
different sources.
Technology Sensitivity Data
Rate
Whole
Home
Coverage
Button
Cell
Tiny
Solar
Cell
Printed
Battery
Wi-Fi (802.11
b/g) -95 dBm 1-54 Mbps ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
LoRa -149 dBm 18 bps–
37.5 kbps ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Bluetooth -97 dBm 1-2 Mbps ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Sigfox -126 dBm 100 bps ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
ZigBee -100 dBm 250 kbps ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Passive
Wi-Fi -95 dBm 1-11 Mbps ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
RFID -85 dBm 40–
640 kbps ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
LoRa
Backscatter -149 dBm 18 bps–
37.5 kbps ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Further, LoRa is resilient to both in-band and out-of-band interference [10]. Specifically, the Sx1276 receiver
hardware from SEMTECH can reliably decode LoRa packets in the presence of 95 dB higher out of band interference [10]. This is significant because as described above, in typical backscatter deployments, the backscattered
signal at the receiver can be as low as -135 dBm and this signal must be decoded in the presence of a strong
single tone out of band interference as high as -45 dBm. 95 dB out of band interference specifications of Sx1276
Lora receivers by SEMTECH satisfy these stringent requirements. Motivated by this, we present the design and
implementation of the first LoRa backscatter system. At a high level, the RF source transmits a single tone signal,
which our backscatter devices use to synthesize LoRa compatible packets. To achieve this, we make two key
technical contributions.
• We introduce the first chirp spread spectrum (CSS) backscatter design. LoRa uses CSS modulation where, as
shown in Fig. 4(a), a ‘0’ bit can be represented as a continuous chirp that increases linearly with frequency, while
a ‘1’ bit is a chirp that is cyclically shifted in time. Thus, CSS requires continuously changing the frequency as a
function of time, which has not been demonstrated on backscatter hardware. This is challenging since while
existing backscatter approaches can generate DBPSK/DQPSK (802.11b/ZigBee [35, 37]) and 2-FSK (Bluetooth [31])
transmissions, they are all limited to discrete digital values. Building on existing radio architectures, we design the
first backscatter design in §3.2 that can synthesize continuous frequency modulated chirps, while consuming as
low as 9.25 μW which is 3 orders of magnitude lower power compared to LoRa radios. We also reverse-engineer
the proprietary LoRa PHY layer in §3.4 to backscatter LoRa-compatible packets.
• We present the first backscatter harmonic cancellation mechanism. Backscatter uses a switch to either reflect
or absorb the incident RF signals and create square waves. This however creates third and fifth harmonics in
adjacent frequency bands when backscattering the signal from the RF source, resulting in interference and
affecting network performance. State-of-the-art single-sideband backscatter designs [35] ignore these harmonics
and hence create out-of-band interference. Since LoRa has a high sensitivity, this affects other LoRa devices
operating in adjacent bands. In §3.3, we present a low-power backscatter design that cancels these sideband
harmonics and improves spectral efficiency.
Building on the above techniques, we design a link-layer protocol that enables multiple long range backscatter
devices to share the spectrum. We also design a LoRa backscatter IC and estimate the power consumption using
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:4 • V. Talla et al.
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
Power Consumption (uW)
Backscatter
Active Radio
RFID
LoRa
 Backscatter
Passive
 Wi-Fi
ZigBee
SigFox
Bluetooth
LoRa
Wi-Fi
(a) Power Consumption.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8Cost ($)
Backscatter
Active Radio
LoRa
 Backscatter
Passive
 Wi-Fi
RFID
Bluetooth
SigFox ZigBee
LoRa
Wi-Fi
(b) Cost of Communication.
Fig. 3. We compare power consumption and cost of different communication technologies including backscatter and radio techniques.
Cadence and Synopsis software toolkits [14, 21]. Our results show that our IC design is comparable in area to
RFID and consumes as little as 9.25 μW while generating continuous frequency modulated chirps and performing
harmonic cancellation.
Below, we summarize our evaluation in various deployment scenarios.
• We evaluate our design in various line-of-sight scenarios. Our results show that even when the RF source and
receiver are separated by 475 m, the backscatter device could operate at all locations between them. Further,
when the backscatter device is co-located with the RF source, the LoRa receiver can decode transmissions from
as far as 2.8 km from the backscatter device.
• We deploy our system in a one-acre vegetable farm, a 4,800 f t 2 (446 m2) house spread across three floors and a
13,024 f t 2 (1210 m2) office space spanning 41 rooms separated by wood, concrete walls and metal structures.
Our results show reliable backscatter coverage across all these deployments, using only a single RF source and
receiver.
• Finally, we show that our design can also enable backscatter in applications that are not favorable for RF
propagation. Specifically, we evaluate a contact lens form factor antenna in-vitro and show that it can easily
backscatter data from across a 3,328 f t 2 (309m2) room using only a single RF source and receiver. This is orders of
magnitude larger than the 35 inch (89 cm) range achieved by prior designs [35]. We also build a flexible epidermal
patch sensor that backscatters data in the above room, while being attached to human skin.
2 THE CASE FOR LORA BACKSCATTER AND RELATED WORK
To demonstrate that LoRa backscatter is the best fit for achieving ubiquitous connectivity, we first compare it
with existing solutions and show how it fares across the spectrum of power consumption, cost, size, sources of
power and operating range. We then discuss prior work and compare our LoRa backscatter system with state of
the art backscatter approaches.
• Operating range. Fig. 2 shows the range of different radio and backscatter communication solutions. Radios
including Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and ZigBee operate up to 100s of meters while wide area LoRa and SigFox deployments
extend operation to kilometers. However, existing backscatter solutions such as RFID and Passive Wi-Fi are
limited to tens of meters of operating distance in best-case scenarios. LoRa backscatter instead extends backscatter
operation to 100s of meters. This achieves the whole home and office coverage of Wi-Fi and ZigBee radios while
delivering the cost, size and power benefits of backscatter described below.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:5
Table 2. Comparison of LoRa backscatter with existing backscatter systems. d1 is the distance between the backscatter device and
the RF source. d2 is the distance between the backscatter device and the receiver.
Technology Data Rates Deployment # 1 (d1, d2) Deployment # 2 (d1, d2)
Passive Wi-Fi [37] 1-11 Mbps 2 m, 30 m 4.5 m, 4.5 m
Interscatter [35] 2-11 Mbps 1 m, 27 m N/A
BLE backscatter [31] 1 Mbps 0.9 m, 8.5 m 4.5 m, 4.5 m
BackFi [52] 1-5 Mbps N/A 5 m (Full Duplex)
LoRea [61] 2.9 kbps 1 m, 225 m N/A
HitchHike [69] 0–300 kbps 1 m, 50 m N/A
FSK Backscatter [62] 1.2 kbps 3 m, 268 m 25 m, 25 m
LoRa backscatter 50 bps–37.5 kbps 5 m, 2.8 Km 237.5 m, 237.5 m
• Power consumption. Fig. 3(a) shows the power consumption of popular radio and existing backscatter solutions.
Radios including Wi-Fi, BLE, ZigBee, Lora and SigFox all consume between 10 to 500 mW, which is 3–4 orders of
magnitude higher than the power consumption of backscatter systems including RFID, Passive Wi-Fi and the
LoRa backscatter system. LoRa backscatter consumes three orders of magnitude lower power than LoRa radios
and would significantly extend the battery life. Further it can easily operate for more than 10 years on button
cells and printed batteries that are fraction of the size of batteries used with LoRa radios.
• Cost and size. Fig. 3(b) plots the cost of active radio and backscatter communication solutions. Radios are at
least an order of magnitude more expensive compared to backscatter solutions. This is because an active radio
requires analog RF components such as local oscillators, mixers and amplifiers that consume significant silicon
area. Since, the cost of an IC is directly proportional to silicon area, the analog components increase the cost of
radios. Additionally, radios require external components such as crystals, matching inductors and decoupling
capacitors all of which increase the overall cost. In contrast, backscatter solutions are primarily digital in nature
and scale with Moore’s law that significantly reduce the area and consequently the cost of the backscatter IC
to few cents. Also, backscatter communication modules can be built with just an IC, printed antenna and tiny
battery and do not require external components like crystals, inductors and decoupling capacitors which reduces
the component, manufacturing and assembly costs as well as the overall size.
• Sources of Power. Flexible thin film printed batteries are an emerging source of power which result in cheap, thin
and small form factor solutions. However, a key challenge with printed batteries is that they have very limited
capacity and peak current requirements. Radios due to their high active power consumption and peak current
are incompatible with such technologies. Thin small inexpensive solar cells and button cells, which cost only 10
cents, also suffer from similar limitations. However, LoRa backscatter consume tens of microwatts of power and
can operate for ten years on button cells and 10 cm2 area printed batteries. Additionally, LoRa backscatter can be
powered with a tiny 2 cm2 size photodiode which makes the overall connectivity module small and inexpensive.
In summary, LoRa backscatter provides the first connectivity solution at a fraction of the cost, size and power
consumption of radios while providing reliable and long ranges and being compatible with emerging thin film
printed battery solution and inexpensive button cells and tiny solar cells.
Comparison to prior backscatter research. LoRa backscatter builds on recent work on backscatter communication [30,
32, 34, 42, 47, 67, 68]. The closest to our work is recent work that backscatters ambient signals like TV [41, 50],
Wi-Fi [36, 37, 52, 69, 70], Bluetooth [31, 51, 70] and ZigBee [35, 51]. A comparison of the LoRa backscatter system
with existing backscatter systems in terms of data rates and ranges is shown in Table 2. In the table, deployment
# 1 refers to the scenario where the backscatter device is placed near the signal source (d1) and the receiver is
placed at a distant location (d2). In deployment #2, the backscatter device is equidistant to the signal source and
receiver (d1 = d2) and demonstrates the practical operating range of backscatter systems.
As seen from Table 2, existing backscatter systems have a range of 10 m, when the backscatter device is 6 m
away from the RF source and 50 m when the backscatter device is 1 m away [69]. [61, 62] uses FSK modulation
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:6 • V. Talla et al.
(a) Symbol 1 (b) Symbol 2 (c) FFT output 1 (d) FFT output 2
Fig. 4. CSS modulation & Receiver FFT processing. The two figures on the left shows two chirp symbols, where the second symbol is a
cyclic shifted version of the first, offset by half the chirp duration. BW and S F are the bandwidth and spreading factor respectively. The time
delays in the chirp translate to a peak in the FFT domain. The two plots on the right show the FFT output corresponding to the two symbols.
to increase the backscatter range. Specifically, the authors show that when the backscatter tag is 3 m from the RF
source, the receiver can be 246 m away. In more realistic scenarios, when the tag is around 25 m from the signal
source and the receiver, their packet error rate was 100%. In a similar setup, we can deliver packets even when
the receiver is 2.8 km away. Our design uses CSS modulation and achieves much higher sensitivities. As a result,
we achieve 1–2 orders of magnitude higher communication ranges and thus enable wide-area backscatter.
3 SYSTEM DESIGN
LoRa backscatter uses chirp spread spectrum (CSS) to design a wide-area backscatter communication system. In
this section, we first provide an overview of CSS. We then present our hybrid analog-digital backscatter design to
create CSS transmissions as well as our harmonic cancellation mechanism. We then describe how to synthesize
CSS packets that are compatible with the LoRa physical layer by reverse-engineering LoRa. Finally, we outline a
link-layer protocol that enables multiple CSS backscatter devices to co-exist with each other.
3.1 Understanding CSS
CSS modulation and demodulation. Chirp spread spectrum (CSS) uses linear frequency modulated chirp
pulses to convey information. A key characteristic that CSS leverages is that a time delay in the chirp signal
translates to a frequency shift at the output of the FFT. CSS modulation uses this to encode data as cyclic time
shifts in the baseline chirp. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show two chirp symbols, where the first symbol is represented
by the baseline chirp and the second is represented by a cyclic shifted chirp, offset by half the chirp duration.
The receiver demodulates these symbols by first multiplying the incoming signal with the baseline chirp and
then performing an FFT. Since multiplication in the time domain is correlation in the frequency domain, the
resulting operation results in a peak in the FFT frequency bin corresponding to the time delay in the received
chirp. Figures 4(c) and 4(d) show the resulting FFT for the two chirps. The figure shows that the FFT has a peak in
the first FFT bin for the first symbol (corresponding to zero-time delay) and has a peak in the middle FFT bin for
the second symbol (corresponding to half a chirp delay). Thus, by tracking FFT peaks, we can decode the data.
Note that one can transmit multiple bits within each chirp symbol. Specifically, say the receiver performs a N
point FFT. It can distinguish between N different cyclic shifts which result in a peak in each of the N FFT bins.
Thus, we can transmit loд2N bits within each chirp. In the figure, N is set to 2S F , where SF is the spreading factor
of CSS modulation, which we discuss next.
CSS parameters and bit rates. There are three parameters that determine the bit rate achieved while using
CSS modulation: 1) chirp bandwidth, 2) spreading factor and 3) symbol rate. As shown in figs. 4(a) and 4(b), if BW
denotes the bandwidth, the frequency of the baseline chirp increases linearly between −BW
2 and +BW
2 . The data
bits are encoded as cyclic shifts of this baseline chirp, where each cyclic shift represents a modulated symbol.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:7
Fig. 5. Hybrid analog-digital backscatter. The digital baseband processor generates the frequency plan that is converted in the analog
domain to control the output frequency of a VCO. The time shifted versions of the VCO output are mapped according to the dataset of the
approximated exponential signal to their respective backscatter impedance values using a SP8T RF switch.
The spreading factor, SF , is the number of bits encoded in each chirp duration. From earlier discussion, a chirp
with N samples can encode loд2N bits. Thus, a CSS chirp with a spreading factor SF has 2S F samples. Finally, the
symbol rate is the number of chirp symbols per second.
With a bandwidth of BW , the Nyquist sampling rate is 1
BW samples per second. Thus, given a spreading factor
of SF , the length of each symbol is given by 2S F
BW seconds and so the symbol rate is BW
2S F symbols per second. Since
each chirp can represent SF bits, the bit rate can be written as, BW
2S F SF . Thus, one can achieve different bit rates by
either changing the bandwidth or the spreading factor. As we see in §3.4, LoRa also uses error coding codes on
top of CSS modulation, giving it a third degree of freedom, in addition to chirp bandwidth and spreading factor,
to adapt bit rate.
Case for using CSS modulation in backscatter systems. We outline the unique properties of CSS which
make it a great fit for wide area backscatter application.
• CSS achieves high sensitivity by using an efficient tradeoff between bandwidth and data rates when the signal
is drowned in noise [26]. Consequently, Sx1276 Lora receiver can decode CSS data packets down to -149 dBm.
• CSS is resilient to fading, Doppler and in-band interference that are common in wide-area deployments [57].
We demonstrate in §5.2 that CSS is indeed resilient to out-of-band interference. Specifically, CSS receivers can
correctly decode packets in the presence of a 95 dB higher out of band single tone interference.
• Unlike DSSS techniques (e.g., GPS) that have a long signal acquisition time at low SNRs, CSS has significantly
lower acquisition overhead [8, 27, 57]. This reduces the overhead of transmitting data. In addition, CSS transceivers
do not require fine-grained frequency synchronization. This is because small offsets in the oscillators at the
transmitter and receiver result in a frequency offset that which can be corrected during the FFT operation. As a
result, CSS receiver hardware can be significantly cheap while operating at a high sensitivity.
3.2 Synthesizing CSS with Backscatter
Challenge. The key challenge is that the complexity of generating CSS signals in the digital domain scales exponentially with the spreading factor used in the CSS transmissions. To understand this, consider CSS modulation
with a spreading factor of two. As described earlier, a CSS signal with a spreading factor SF can have 2S F cyclic
shifts. Thus, the four cyclic shifts shown in Fig. 6 correspond to CSS modulation with a spreading factor of two.
To create this signal, the backscatter device needs to generate at least the four frequencies, f0, ··· , f3, shown in
the figure. More generally, to synthesize a CSS modulation with a spreading factor of SF , the backscatter device
must create signals at 2S F frequencies. As we see in §3.4, LoRa receivers use spreading factors between 6 and
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:8 • V. Talla et al.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Fig. 6. Four CSS symbols when spreading factor is 2.
12. This translated to 64–4096 frequencies. Backscattering all these frequencies requires either using 64–4096
oscillators or running the digital clock at a frequency of lcm(f0, f1, ··· , f4096). The first approach is expensive
and power consuming while the latter requires using a clock frequency of GHz, which is power consuming and
defeats the purpose of using backscatter.
Our solution. We present the first backscatter design that can generate CSS modulated signals. Our design uses
a backscatter switch topology which is functionality equivalent to radios but consumes three orders of magnitude
lower power [55, 65]. Specifically, we use a hybrid digital-analog backscatter design where we use the energy
efficient digital domain to create a frequency plan for the continuously varying CSS signal and then map it to
the analog domain using a low-power DAC. For example, to create the second cyclic shift in Fig. 6, the digital
baseband creates the frequency plan f1, f2, f3, f0, which the analog domain uses to create the desired frequencies.
Fig. 5 shows the architecture for our backscatter design. It has the digital baseband processor, digital to analog
converter (DAC) and a voltage-controlled oscillator. The voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) is a device that
outputs a clock with a frequency that is proportional to the input voltage. We vary the frequency output of the
oscillator by using the DAC to generate the appropriate voltages. Specifically, the digital baseband processor
outputs an SF bit number, where SF is the CSS spreading factor. This allows us to output 2S F voltage levels at the
output of the SF -bit DAC. The analog voltage output of the DAC controls the frequency of the VCO.
The challenge however, is that, as shown in figs. 4(a) and 4(b), in a CSS encoded packet, the frequency of
the signal varies from a negative frequency ( −BW
2 ) to a positive frequency ( BW
2 ). A voltage-controlled oscillator
however only outputs signals at positive frequency. So, we need a mechanism to synthesize negative frequencies
using backscatter. From basic communication theory, negative frequencies essentially can be written as complex
signals. Specifically, the complex exponent, ej2π (±f )t can be written as cos2πft ± jsin2πft. Thus, generating
negative frequencies requires us to generate both the in-phase cosine signal as well as the out-of-phase sine
signal at the desired frequencies. To do this, existing solutions approximate the sine and cosine signals using the
square wave output by the VCO. This however results in out-of-band harmonics. In the next section, we describe
our harmonic cancellation mechanism.
We note that the receiver receives both the single-tone signal from the RF source as well as the backscattered
LoRa packets. Since the backscatter signal is much weaker, the single-tone creates in-band interference. To
address this, we shift the single-tone outside the desired band and transform it into out-of-band interference.
At a high level, if the RF source transmits the single-tone signal e2π fc t and the backscatter signal generates the
complex signal, e2π (Δf +fLoRa )t , then the resulting backscattered RF signal is e2π ((fc+Δf )+fLoRa )t . Here Δf is a small
fixed offset and fLoRa is the varying frequency corresponding to the baseband LoRa modulation. The above
equation shows that by using a small frequency offset, Δf , we can create the LoRa signals in a band centered at
fc + Δf which is different from that of the single tone, fc .
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:9
3.3 Backscatter Harmonic Cancellation
As described earlier, prior backscatter designs [35, 37] use square waves to approximate sine and cosine waves
which results in harmonics. To understand why this happens, we recall that a square wave at a rate of Δf can be
written as a sum of cosine waves using the following expression:
Square(Δf t) = 4
π
∞
n=0
1
2n + 1
cos(2π (2n + 1) Δf t)
If the RF source transmits cos(2π fc t) and the backscatter device is switching with a square wave operating at
Δf frequency, signal transmitted by the backscatter device can be written as cos(2π fc t)Square (Δf ). As a result,
in addition to generating the desired signal at fc + Δf , the above operation also generates the mirror copy at
fc − Δf , 9.5 dB lower harmonic at fc ± 3Δf , 15 dB lower harmonic at fc ± 5Δf and additional lower power
harmonics. Recent work [35] has demonstrated how one can eliminate the mirror copy being generated at fc −Δf
using single side band backscatter technique. However, this technique still preserves the third, fifth and other odd
order harmonics. The third and fifth order harmonics are only 9.5 and 15 dB lower than the desired backscattered
signal and hence create interference on the wireless channel. More importantly, since the LoRa protocol has very
low sensitivities, LoRa devices operating in channels overlapping with the third and fifth harmonics experience
in-band interference from backscatter devices.
Our Solution. Our insight is to use a different signal from the square wave to approximate a cosine and sine
wave. On a high level, one can think of an analog signal as a discrete signal with infinite distinct voltage levels
and smooth transitions, which results in a clean spectrum without any harmonics. However, square wave has
only two levels with discontinuous step transitions, which results in high frequency components. Our key idea
with harmonic cancellation is to introduce additional voltage levels to better approximate a sinusoidal signal, by
imitating radios [54, 64], and obtain a cleaner frequency spectrum.
Consider the approximation of a cosine wave in Fig. 7, using a signal with four voltage levels. This approximated
cosine wave can be written as the sum of three square waves slightly shifted from one other, S0 (t), S1 (t) and
S2 (t), as shown in the figure. Here T is the time period.
S0 (t) = 4
√
2
π
∞
n=0
sin[(2n + 1)2πΔf (t + T
4 )]
2n + 1
S1 (t) = 4
π
∞
n=0
sin[(2n + 1)2πΔf (t + T
8 )]
2n + 1
S2 (t) = 4
π
∞
n=0
sin[(2n + 1)2πΔf (t + 3T
8 )]
2n + 1
Using the above expression for the three signals, we can now express the approximated cosine waveform as,
cosapprox (2πΔf t) = S0 (t) + S1 (t) + S2 (t)
= 4
π
∞
n=0
sin[(2n + 1)2πΔf (t + T
4 )][2 cos((2n + 1) π
4 ) + √
2]
2n + 1
The sine wave can now be generated by simply shifting the cosine waveform by quarter of the time period.
Using these approximations for the sine and cosine parts of the waveform, the exponential, ej2πΔf t , can now be
mathematically written as,
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.     
105:10 • V. Talla et al.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 7. Approximation of a cosine wave with multi-level signal. We approximate the cosine wave as a sum of three digital signals
S0 (t), S1 (t) and S2 (t) resulting in a multi-level signal.
ej2πΔf t = cos (2πΔf t) + sin (2πΔf t)
≈ cosapprox (t) + sinapprox (t)
= 2
π
∞
n=0
1
2n + 1
[2 cos((2n + 1)
π
4
) +
√
2]
[ej(2n+1)2πΔf t ((−1)
n + 1) + e−j(2n+1)2πΔf t ((−1)
n − 1)]
Let us now consider what happens with the above equation for different values of n. When n is zero, the
term corresponding to the negative frequency in the second parenthesis computes to zero and only the positive
frequency is preserved resulting in single side band generation.
n = 1 and 2 correspond to the third and fifth harmonic respectively. For these cases cos[(2n + 1) π
4 ] = −
√
2
2 and
so the above equation computes to zero cancelling the third and fifth harmonics. Thus, by using the above four
level signal, we can cancel the third and fifth harmonics as well as achieve single sideband modulation at the
same time. More generally, when n is of the form (8k + 3) and (8k + 5), cos[(2n + 1) π
4 ] = −
√
2
2 and hence all the
corresponding harmonics will be cancelled. In summary, the four-level approximated exponential signal cancels
at least the third and fifth order harmonics.
If required, subsequent harmonics can be cancelled by adding more levels. Specifically, addition of each level
cancels the next higher order harmonic. For example, five voltage levels cancel the seventh harmonic and ninth
harmonic is cancelled with six voltage levels. Finally, every backscatter switch has a finite delay, which provided
additional filtering and automatically suppresses higher order harmonics (greater than 9), without the need for
additional levels.
In our implementation, we use four levels to cancel the third and fifth order harmonics. We generate the
approximated signals on the backscatter device in the digital domain. The four-level cosine signal takes one of
four values {0.9239, 0.3827, −0.3827, −0.9239}. Fixing the cosine value, lets the sine take one of two values. Thus,
the exponential ej2πΔf t can take one of eight complex values. We create these complex values by leveraging
existing backscatter techniques [35, 60] that change the impedance connected to the antenna. Fig. 5 shows the
architecture of our system where we switch the antenna between eight different complex impedance values
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017. 
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:11
Fig. 8. LoRa packet structure.
to generate the eight complex values corresponding to our exponential signal. Specifically, we implement the
exponential wave approximation in a digital logic block called the switch mapper. It takes as input the eight
phases of the VCO output to correspond to the time instances when waveform S0, S1 and S2 and their time shifted
versions (corresponding to the sine wave) undergo transitions. We generate the eight phases of the clock signal by
just shifting the signal in one-eighth of the time period increments and the switch mapper outputs the 3 control
bits which toggle the switch between 8 impedance values to generate the approximate exponential wave. Using
this technique, we can successfully cancel the mirror image as well as the third and fifth harmonics, thereby
improving the spectral efficiency of backscatter systems.
3.4 Synthesizing LoRa Packets
LoRa achieves its high sensitivity numbers using CSS modulation. The physical layer specification for LoRa
however is proprietary and is not publicly available. So, we reverse-engineer the LoRa physical layer using
the patents filed by Semtech [27, 57], which is the key LoRa chipset manufacturer. We also use the Semtech
1276 starter kit [10] that provides an interface to transmit LoRa packets with various bitrates and an arbitrary
payload. Finally, we analyze the transmissions from the LoRa chipsets on a USRP.
Packet Structure. Fig. 8 shows the structure of a LoRa packet, in the form of a spectrogram. The figure shows
a sequence of repeating chirps at the beginning to represent the preamble. LoRa supports a variable length
preamble between 6 and 65535 chirp symbols. To convey the end of the preamble to the receiver, the preamble
ends with synchronization symbols and two and a quarter down-chirp symbols where the chirp goes from the
positive to negative frequency. After down-chirps, the packet has an optional header with information about the
bit rate used. This is followed by a CSS-encoded payload. An optional 16-bit CRC is send at the end of the packet.
Bit Rates. LoRa bit rates depend on three parameters: the error correction coding rate, chirp bandwidth and
spreading factor. LoRa supports four different hamming code rates and eight chirp bandwidths of 7.8 kHz,
10.4 kHz, 20.8 kHz, 31.25 kHz, 62.5 kHz, 125 kHz, 250 kHz and 500 kHz. Further, the spreading factor can be set
independently to one of seven values: 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. The LoRa hardware allows these three parameters
to be independently modified resulting in a total of 224-bit rate settings between 11 bps and 37.5 kbps.
We use the above packet format to synthesize LoRa packets with backscatter. We note the following.
• LoRa bandwidth and spreading factor are set a-priori and assumed known at the transmitter and receiver. The
header can include information about the bit rate and payload size used, but is optional and its overhead can be
reduced by statically configuring these parameters, which we do in our backscatter system.
• To achieve a high sensitivity, the phase of the LoRa chirps has to change continuously with time and has the
same value at the beginning and the end of the chirp [27, 57]. To achieve this with backscatter, at each frequency,
we increase the phase by 2π
S F . This ensures that the phase at the beginning and end of each chirp symbol is the
same and so we can maintain phase continuity across chirp symbols.
• To comply with FCC regulations, LoRa uses frequency hopping while using lower-data rate transmissions that
occupy significant amounts of time on the channel. Specifically, while using a chirp bandwidth of 125 kHz, LoRa
divides the 900 MHz ISM band into 64 channels starting at 902.3 MHz, with increments of 200 kHz. Similarly, with
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:12 • V. Talla et al.
a chirp bandwidth of 500 kHz, LoRa divides the band into 8 channels in increments of 1.6 MHz. The transmitter
performs frequency hopping between these channels to transmit data to be compliant with FCC. For backscatter,
FCC only regulates the signal source and not the backscatter device [9]
2. Thus, we instead hop the frequency of
the single-tone transmitter. The backscatter device however uses the same frequency offset, Δf and is oblivious
to this frequency hopping mechanism. To ensure that the backscattered LoRa transmissions always lie in the
LoRa channels, we hop the frequency of the single-tone source at a constant frequency offset of Δf from the LoRa
channels. Specifically, to generate the backscatter signals at the LoRa channels, f1, f2, ··· , fn, the single-tone
source performs frequency hopping across f1 − Δf , f2 − Δf , ··· , fn − Δf .
3.5 Link-Layer Protocol
We describe how the RF source arbitrates the channel between backscatter devices. Then we explore concurrent
transmissions from multiple backscatter devices.
Arbitrating the channel between backscatter devices. At a high level, we use TDMA to allocate the wireless channel
between different backscatter devices. Specifically, the RF source divides time into slots and transmits the single
tone signal once in each slot. Each backscatter device only transmits during its assigned slot.
The above protocol requires the backscatter devices to detect the beginning of the single tone from the RF
source. To do this, our design uses existing energy detector hardware circuits that consume between 98 nW and
2.4 μW and can detect input signals as low as -71 dBm [33, 53]. Note that this is larger than the -148 dBm LoRa
sensitivity. This is however the power of the RF source at the backscatter device, while the latter is the power of
the backscattered signal at the LoRa receiver. In all our experiments, the signal strength at the backscatter device
was at least -45 dBm. We note that to improve the accuracy of detecting the signal from the RF source, we can
also use a preamble signal like an alternating ON-OFF keying sequence of energy and no energy. This reduces
the probability of confusing random transmissions in the 900 MHz band for our RF source.
To synchronize the slots across different backscatter devices, the RF device uses a unique ON-OFF keying
sync pattern at the beginning of the TDMA round robin. This allows devices to determine the slot boundaries
for a whole round-robin duration. We note that the backscatter devices do not need to have their receivers ON
all the time. In particular, depending on the application, the backscatter device only transmits when it has new
data. Similarly, the RF source does not transmit the single-tone signal during a time slot, if the corresponding
backscatter device is not scheduled.
Concurrent LoRa transmissions using backscatter. So far, we assume that only a single backscatter device can
transmit at a time. However, LoRa divides the 900 MHz band into 64 125 kHz LoRa channels each of which
can have a LoRa transmission. Thus, using a single RF source, we can enable up to 64 backscatter devices to
transmit concurrently on different LoRa channels to their corresponding receivers. Taking it a step further, CSS
transmissions that use different spreading factors on the same LoRa channel are uncorrelated with each other [10].
Thus, in principle, we can have multiple backscatter devices with different spreading factors use the same LoRa
band and transmit concurrently to their receivers, increasing the overall network throughput.
We note that we can use the energy detector circuit to transmit ACKs on the downlink channel. However, given
the resilience of CSS modulation and the high sensitivity values, performing application level error correction
codes is sufficient to deliver data to the receivers, with a high probability, without the need for explicit ACKs.
4 HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION
We first built a proof of concept prototype using commercial off-the shelf (COTS) components and used it to
characterize the performance and operating range of our system. Then, we design an integrated circuit based
2As a result, RFID tags do not have an FCC ID, while RFID readers have to get approved by FCC and have an FCC ID.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:13
on the hybrid analog-digital architecture for harmonic cancellation proposed in §3.2 to quantify its power
consumption.
COTS implementation. Our COTS implementation consists of an RF and a baseband section. The RF section is
implemented on a four layer FR4 substrate and consists of three cascaded ADG904 [5] switches to create a SP8T
switch network. The switch toggles a 2 dBi whip antenna [4] across the eight impedance states required for the
harmonic cancellation technique. In our optimized implementation, we use 47 pF , 3.3 nH||82 Ω, 21 nH||680 Ω,
8.2 nH||330 Ω, 1.8 k Ω, 1.5 pF ||56 k Ω, 9.1 pF ||560 Ω and 3.9 pF as our impedance values to achieve the desired
complex values while incurring a loss of only 4 dB in our backscatter switch network.
We implement the baseband section using the DE0-CV development board for an Altera Cyclone V FPGA [12, 16].
We generate CSS modulated packets in digital domain using Verilog HDL and output square waves corresponding
to the real and imaginary components of the signal to the RF section by interfacing the two digital I/Os on the
FPGA to the SP8T switch network through level shifters.
IC design. We present a LoRa backscatter IC design simulated in TSMC 65 nm LP CMOS process [3] using
industry standard EDA tools. Our IC is composed of three main components: digital baseband processor, frequency
synthesizer and the backscatter switch network.
Baseband Processor. It takes payload data and packet specifications such as spreading factor, bandwidth and code
rate as input and synthesizes the LoRa packet in accordance to the structure described in §3.4. Next, it maps
the bits in the packet to a frequency plan that is used by the frequency synthesizer block to create the chirp
spread spectrum signal. We describe the behavioral model for LoRa packet in Verilog and use Design Compiler
by Synopsis [21] to synthesize the transistor level implementation. Our baseband processor consumes 1.25 μW to
generate a LoRa packet with spreading factor of 12, 31.25 kHz bandwidth and (8,4) hamming code.
Frequency Synthesizer. We integrate the DAC and VCO in Fig. 5 into a single frequency synthesizer block. A
frequency synthesizer or phase locked loop (PLL) takes a low frequency clock source as input and up converts it
to a higher frequency. The ratio of the output frequency to the reference frequency is set by a divide ratio. We
use the baseband processor output to directly control the divide ratio of the frequency synthesizer and modulate
the output frequency to generate CSS modulated data. We use Johnson counter to generate the four versions of
the clock which are shifted by one eighth of the time period. The four shifted versions and their complements are
used to represent the eight phases of the clock signal. The frequency synthesizer consumes 4.5 μW to generate
31.25 kHz CSS packets with a spreading factor of 12 and a 3 MHz offset.
Backscatter Switch Network. The backscatter switch network takes the eight phases of the clock (four time shifted
versions and their complements) and maps the eight phases to RF switches corresponding to their respective
impedance values. The switches are implemented using NMOS transistors that toggle the antenna between eight
discrete impedance states consisting of resistors and capacitors. We limit the impedances to only resistors and
capacitors since inductors consume huge area and are prohibitively expensive in IC’s. This results in a more
constraint constellation map and 3 dB loss in backscattered signal but is a reasonable compromise for low cost.
During active operation, the backscatter switch network consumes 3.5 μW to backscatter CSS modulated packets
at 3 MHz offset. In total, the IC consumes 9.25 μW .
4.1 Cost Analysis
Backscatter communication systems consume 3–4 orders of magnitude lower power than their counterpart
radios [11, 31, 35, 37, 56, 60]. This is because instead of using complex and power hungry analog front end
components of radios, backscatter systems use switches to modulate reflections. As a result, backscatter systems
are not only extremely low power, but also consume significantly smaller area. This is a key benefit of backscatter
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:14 • V. Talla et al.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
-160 -150 -140 -130 -120 -110 -100
PER(%)
RSSI (dBm)
45 bps
183 bps
732 bps
4.39 kbps
10.9 kbps
13.6 kbps
21.8 kbps
(a) Receiver Characterization. PER as a function of RSSI values reported by the receiver for different data rates.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
-155 -150 -145 -140 -135 -130
PER(%)
RSSI (dBm)
-30dBm
-40dBm
-45dBm
-50dBm
(b) Resilience to Out-of-band interference. PER as a function of
RSSI values for different interference power levels.
Fig. 9. We characterize our receiver by measuring PER as a function of reported RSSI in presence and absence of out of band interference.
systems because for a given technology node, the cost is directly proportional to the die area. Since active radios
(e.g. Wi-Fi, LoRa, BLE) are composed of complex and area intensive components such as power amplifiers, mixers,
local oscillators operating at RF frequencies, the RF front end in these systems (excluding the digital baseband)
typically occupies about 10 mm2 of die area [24, 29, 38, 39, 46]. In contrast, backscatter systems such as RFID tags
are much simpler and occupy significantly lower area. The typical die area for the communication module in
RFID based backscatter systems is in the order of 0.15mm2 [30, 45, 63, 67, 68]. As a result, the cost of a backscatter
chip is at least 60 times lower.
Our LoRa backscatter system uses a similar architecture to an RFID tag with some key additions. We use an
All-Digital Phased-Lock Loop (ADPLL) and an eight-stage backscatter network implemented using area efficient
resistor and capacitors (metal in metal capacitors are implemented on higher metal layers on top of existing
semiconductor structures) which occupies less than 0.01 mm2. Therefore, the die area and the cost structure for
our communication module would be similar to that of an RFID tag and would be at least 60 times less than
active radios.
5 EVALUATION
We first characterize the LoRa receiver at different bit rates and sensitivities and evaluate its ability to decode
the backscattered signals in the presence of single tone interference from the RF source. Then we evaluate the
operating range as well as our harmonic cancellation technique.
5.1 Receiver Characterization
As described in §3.1, the data rate and sensitivity of a CSS modulated packet is determined by the spreading
factor, bandwidth and coding rate. In this section, we will use the Semtech SX1276 receiver and evaluate the
trade-off between sensitivity and data rates supported by the hardware.
To do this, we use a wired experimental setup to ensure that variations due to multipath do not impact our
results. We use two SX1276 chipsets and configure them to be both the CSS transmitter and receiver. We connect
the antenna port on the two chipsets using variable attenuators and an RF cable. As described in §3.4, LoRa
supports 224-bit rate configurations between 11 bps and 37.5 kbps. We implement seven rates spread across
21.8 kbps and 45 bps by picking the appropriate spreading factor, bandwidth and coding rate. We use variable
attenuators to change the power of the received packet. Specifically, for each of the data rates, we start with a
low attenuation value where we receive all packets and increase the attenuation till we stop receiving all packets.
We transmit 1000 packets with eight-byte payload and two byte CRC and measure the packet error rate (PER).
Fig. 9(a) plots the PER as a function of the RSSI values reported by the receiver chipset for the seven data
rates. As expected, we observe that the sensitivity is inversely proportional to the data rate of the packet. For
the highest data rate of 21.8 kbps, receiver can decode packets with PER of less than 1% up to an RSSI value of
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:15
-119dBm while for the lowest tested data rate of 45 bps we receive packets down to an RSSI of -142 dBm. Below
an RSSI value of -142 dBm, the receiver cannot correctly decode packets for any of the tested data rates. Finally,
we note that similar to Wi-Fi, the RSSI values reported by the chipset do not correspond to the actual power level
of the received packet. However, the reported RSSI value is a good indicator and is proportional (though not
linear) to the power level of the received packet.
5.2 Resilience to Out-of-band interference
Next, we evaluate how well the receiver can decode backscattered packets in the presence of out-of-band
interference from the RF source. Specifically, the RF source transmits at a frequency offset from the backscatter
signal and hence, can create out-of-band interference. To check this, we setup the following test bench: we
connect the RF source, backscatter prototype and the receiver using a circulator setup to isolate the results from
multipath. Specifically, we use a variable attenuator and connect the RF source transmitting the single tone at
905 MHz to the first port of the circulator. The LoRa backscatter hardware prototype is connected to the second
port using another attenuator. The SX1276 receiver configured to receive packets at 906 MHz is connected to the
third port of the circulator with an RF cable. We set the LoRa backscatter device to backscatter packets with a
spreading factor of 12, bandwidth of 31.25 kHz and a (8,4) hamming code with 8-byte payload and 2 bytes of CRC
at a frequency offset of 1 MHz.
The out of band interference experienced by the receiver is a function of the distance between the RF source
and the receiver and depends on the deployment scenario. To cover different scenarios, we use the attenuator
corresponding to the RF source to vary the power of the interference experienced by the receiver. We set the
power of the interference at the receiver to -30 dBm, -40 dBm, -45 dBm and -50 dBm which translates to distances
of 50 m, 200 m, 300 m and 500 m respectively between the RF source and receiver in free space. Next, we change
the attenuator corresponding to the backscatter device to decrease the power of the backscattered packet. We
measure PER as a function of the RSSI values reported by the receiver for different interference power level.
Fig. 9(b) plots the results which show the following:
• The receiver sensitivity is inversely proportional to out of band interference. When the interference is -30 dBm,
the receiver can decode packets down to an RSSI value of -139 dBm. As this interference reduces to -45 dBm and
-50 dBm, which is closer to values seen in our deployments, the receiver can correctly decode packets down to
RSSI values of -146 and -148 dBm respectively.
• With out-of-band interference, the receiver can decode packets at lower RSSI numbers than in §5.1. This is
because the RSSI values reported by the chipsets are just an approximate indicator of link quality and do not
represent the absolute measure of power or sensitivity.
• In setup with -40dBm and -50 dBm out of band interference, an offset of 1 MHz at the backscatter device
achieves sensitivities that were within a few dB of the theoretical limit. We can increase the offset for better
sensitivities when facing a higher interference power.
5.3 Operational Range
We evaluate the operating range of the LoRa backscatter system in two different scenarios. We use the SX1276
LoRa development kit connected to a power amplifier as the RF source and configure it to transmit 30 dBm into
a 6 dBi patch antenna at 915 MHz. This is the maximum power permitted by FCC on the 900 MHz ISM band.
We configure the backscatter device to transmit LoRa packets at a frequency offset of 3 MHz with a spreading
factor of 12, bandwidth of 31.25 kHz and a (8,4) hamming code with 3-byte payload and 2 byte CRC. The SX1276
transceiver chip decodes packets received at 918 MHz and we log the RSSI values for packets that pass CRC.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:16 • V. Talla et al.
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
 0 50 100 150 200
 1000
 10000
 100000
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
d1 (m)
RSSI (d= 200 m) Bitrate
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
 0 100 200 300 400 500
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
d1 (m)
RSSI (d= 475 m) Bitrate
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
 0 100 200 300 400 500 600
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
d1 (m)
RSSI (d= 600 m) Bitrate
Fig. 10. RSSI in Deployment scenario 1. d is the distance between the RF source and receiver. We move the backscatter device along
the line joining them. This figure also shows the corresponding LoRa bit rate at which we successfully receive all our ten packets from the
backscatter device without any loss.
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
d2 (m)
RSSI (d1= 5 m) Bitrate
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
d2 (m)
RSSI (d1= 10 m) Bitrate
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
 0 500 1000 1500
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
d2 (m)
RSSI (d1= 30 m) Bitrate
Fig. 11. RSSI in Deployment scenario 2. d1 (d2) is the distance between the backscatter device and RF source (receiver). We fix the
location of the backscatter device and RF source and move the receiver away from the backscatter device.
Deployment scenario 1. The first scenario we consider is a deployment where the RF source and the receiver are
separated from each other and the backscatter device can be at any location between them. To test this, we place
the RF source and the receiver at a distance d, as shown in Fig. 10, and move the backscatter device in a straight
line between them. At each location of the backscatter device, we measure the RSSI value reported by the receiver.
Due to the large operating range, we ran the experiments on a straight road next to open fields. Fig. 10 plots the
RSSI values for three different distances between the signal source and the receiver. The x-axis represents d1, the
distance between the RF source and the backscatter device. The plots show the following,
• We get a low RSSI when the backscatter device is at the midpoint between the RF source and the receiver.
This is because the signal from the RF source attenuate as 1/d2
1 before arriving at the backscatter device. The
signals generated by backscattering these attenuated signals further attenuate as 1/d2
2 . Thus, the backscatter
signal strength at the receiver scales as 1/d2
1d2
2 which is minimum when d1 = d2.
• Our system operates at all locations up to a maximum separation of 475 m between the RF source and the
receiver. At 600 m, the backscatter device only works close to either the RF source or the receiver. This shows
that our design has an operational range of 475 m.
Deployment scenario 2. In the second scenario, we fix the distance between the backscatter device and the RF
source and move the receiver away from the backscatter device and measure RSSI. This is a scenario where the
backscatter device is close to the RF source — an example deployment is one where the sensor is in the wall and
the RF source is placed nearby where it can be plugged in. Our initial experiments in this setup showed that we
could achieve very large ranges. So, we test this scenario on the same road, which spans multiple kilometers.
Specifically, we set the RF source and backscatter device on the roadside. We change the separation between the
RF source and the backscatter devices between three values of 5, 10 and 30 meters. For each separation value, we
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:17
drive the receiver away from the backscatter device, alongside the road and measure the RSSI of CRC passed
packets at the granularity of 200 m.
Fig. 11 plots RSSI as a function of the distance between the backscatter device and the receiver. It shows results
for three different distances between the RF source and the backscatter device. The plots show that the receiver
can receive packets at a distance of 2.8 km from the backscatter device, when the backscatter device and the
RF source are separated by 5 m. We note that the receiver could decode all transmitted packet at all reported
locations. When we increase distance between the RF source and the backscatter device, the operating distance
reduces. At 30 m separation, the receiver could receive packets up to 1 km.
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
 895 900 905 910 915 920 925 930 935
Magnitude in dBm
Frequency in MHz
14 dB 38 dB LoRa Packet
3rd
Harmonic
5th Harmonic
Single-sideband LoRa
Harmonic cancellation
(a) Efficacy of harmonic cancellation.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-110 -107.5 -105 -102.5 -100
CDF
RSSI (dBm)
Concurrent Tx On
Concurrent Tx Off
(b) Concurrent Transmissions.
Fig. 12. The plot on the left demonstrates the efficacy of our harmonic cancellation technique. The right plots CDF of RSSI of a LoRa
backscatter device in the presence and absence of another LoRa backscatter device concurrently transmitting in adjacent band.
5.4 Efficacy of harmonic cancellation
Next, we evaluate how well our harmonic cancellation technique works in practice. To do this, we capture the
spectrum of the signal generated using our harmonic cancellation backscatter hardware and compare it to a
baseline hardware that does not implement harmonic cancellation. Specifically, for the baseline we replicate the
state-of-the-art single-sideband Wi-Fi hardware from [35] and adapt it using the techniques in §3.2 to generate
LoRa packets. We use the Semtech SX1276 development kit to generate the single tone signal at 915 MHz. Since
the third and fifth harmonics span a wide band, we use a spectrum analyzer to capture the signal. To avoid
interference from other wireless devices, we connect the Semtech kit to port 1 of a circulator, the backscatter
hardware to port 2 and measure the spectrum of the backscattered signal by connecting a spectrum analyzer to
the third port of the circulator. We set our backscatter hardware to transmit LoRa packets with spreading factor
of 6, bandwidth of 500 kHz and a (8,4) hamming code with 8-byte payload and 2 byte CRC at a 3 MHz offset.
The red line in Fig. 12(a) shows the spectrum of the backscattered LoRa packet with the single-sideband
hardware. The plot shows a single tone signal at 915 MHz, which is the RF source and the desired LoRa packet
at 918 MHz. In addition, we see the third and fifth harmonics at 906 MHz and 930 MHz respectively. These are
14 dB and 22 dB lower than the desired backscatter LoRa packet. These numbers are 4.7 dB and 7 dB lower than
our analysis with square wave in §3.2 because in frequency modulated systems, the higher order harmonics are
spread across frequency proportional to the order of the harmonic. Note that the third and fifth harmonics occur
on opposite sides of the desired LoRa transmission at 918 MHz because of single-sideband architecture. The key
observation however is that the third and fifth harmonics create interference in the 900 MHz band.
The blue line shows the spectrum of the backscattered LoRa packet with our harmonic cancellation backscatter
hardware. The spectrum shows that the third (906 MHz) and fifth harmonics (930 MHz) are 38 dB lower than
the backscattered LoRa packet at 918 MHz and is close to noise. This demonstrates the efficacy of our harmonic
cancellation technique. We note that while in theory we should get perfect cancellation, in practice backscatter
hardware built using switches and passive components have tolerances and variances that introduce small errors.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:18 • V. Talla et al.
(a)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125
50 150 500 1500 2500 12500
CDF
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
(b)
Fig. 13. Office Deployment. We receive backscattered packets across one floor of an office building with 13,024 f t 2 (1210 m2) area.
5.5 Concurrent Backscatter Transmissions
Finally, we present a proof-of-concept evaluation of LoRa backscatter when multiple backscatter devices concurrently transmitting signal from a single RF source. We use two backscatter devices and configure them to
continuously transmit packets at different frequency offsets of 0.75 MHz and 1 MHz. Since the two devices create
transmissions on different LoRa bands, they can concurrently transmit to their receivers. We set the RF source
to transmit a single tone at 905 MHz and deploy the system in a large atrium measuring 104 by 32 feet. We
place the RF source and the two receivers at either ends of the room. We fix the location of the first backscatter
device at the center of the atrium. We move the second backscatter device (operating at 1 MHz offset) across ten
different locations of the atrium. Fig. 12(b) shows the CDF of the RSSI values of packets transmitted by the first
backscatter device in the presence and absence of concurrent transmissions by the second device. The plots show
that concurrent transmissions have negligible impact on the performance of the first backscatter device.
6 APPLICATION DEPLOYMENTS
We show two classes of applications enabled by LoRa backscatter. The first set of applications home/office
sensing and precision agriculture leverage the large operational range of our communication system. We then
demonstrate the use of LoRa backscatter in applications with unfavorable RF propagation conditions such as
implantable and epidermal devices. In all our application deployments, we set the backscatter device to transmit
with a spreading factor of 12, bandwidth of 31.25 kHz and a (8,4) hamming code with three-byte payload and two
bytes of CRC. We use the SX1276 receiver to log the RSSI value of packets that pass the CRC.
6.1 Wide-Area Applications
We deploy our system in two wide-area applications: home sensing and precision agriculture and evaluated the
system in real world deployment scenarios.
6.1.1 Whole-Home and Office Sensing. Prior backscatter techniques such as [36, 37] have tried to replace
power-consuming radios in home sensing applications with backscatter but suffer from limited range and do not
provide the coverage required for a practical home deployment. We deploy our system in a 4,800 f t 2 (446 m2)
home spread across three floors in a major metropolitan US city. The layout and floor plan of the house is shown
in Fig. 14. We put the RF source at one corner of the house on the third floor and place the receiver in the basement.
We move the backscatter device across the three floors of the occupied house in 6 x 6-foot grid increments and
report RSSI of the received packets at each location.
Fig. 14 plots the RSSI of the received backscattered packets at each of the three floors as well as the outside
lawn area. We use a 1 MHz offset on the backscatter device. Our results show that the across the entire house,
our system was able to achieve RSSI values greater than -144 dBm which translates to reliable wireless coverage
across the entire house at 45 bps, with a single RF source and receiver. These rates are sufficient for most home
automation devices such as temperature sensors that transmit small packets sporadically.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:19
(a) Basement (b) First Floor (c) Second Floor
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120 -115
150 500 1500 2500 12500 18000 37500
CDF
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
Basement
First Floor
Second Floor
Outside Lawn
(d) CDF
Fig. 14. Home Deployment. We receive packets across the 4,800 f t 2 (446 m2) house spread across three floors.
Next, we deploy our system with a 3 MHz offset on the backscatter devices in an office space spanning 13024 f t 2
(1210 m2). As shown in Fig. 13, the deployment spans 41 offices that are separated by double sheet-rock (plus
insulation) walls with a thickness of approximately 5.7 inch (14.5 cm). We place a RF source and receiver on the
two end of the space as shown in the figure. We note that the receiver is behind a heavily insulated set of rooms
including the restroom and supply closets with concrete and metal structures separating them. We move the
backscatter device into different offices across the whole floor in 26 by 26-foot grid increments and report the
RSSI of received packets at each location. Fig. 13 plots the CDF of the RSSI of received backscattered packets
across the whole space, demonstrating wide-area backscatter coverage in significant multi-path environments.
(a)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120
50 150 500 1500 2500 12500 18000
CDF
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
(b)
Fig. 15. Precision Agriculture. We receive backscattered packets across a one-acre (4046 m2) farm.
6.1.2 Precision Agriculture. We deploy LoRa backscatter in a one-acre (4046 m2) vegetable farm owned by our
organization. We set the RF source and the receiver at the opposite ends of the farm, whose aerial view is shown
in Fig. 15. We divide the farm into 45 ft by 45 ft grids and placed the backscatter device with a 1 MHz offset
at ground level between plants and bushes. We measure RSSI values by placing the backscatter device across
20 locations at the center of the grids. These locations are a combination of line of sight and non-line of sight
positions to the RF source and/or receiver due to presence of green houses and storage sheds across the farm.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
105:20 • V. Talla et al.
Fig. 15 plots the CDF of the RSSI of the packets received across the entire farm. The plot shows that the median
RSSI is -137 dBm and the minimum RSSI was -143 dBm. This demonstrates that using a single RF signal source
and receiver, we could provide reliable backscatter communication across a one-acre (4046 m2) farm. We note that
typical farms are much larger and might require more RF signal sources and receivers. However, since Semtech
SX1276 transceiver is relatively cheap and the cost of the backscatter devices is in the order of a few cents, we
could achieve cost and power saving by deploying backscatter in agriculture applications.
6.2 RF-Challenged Applications
A key advantage of CSS is its high sensitivity, which enables long-range operation. This sensitivity also enables
long ranges in extremely challenging RF environments such as implantable and body worn devices.
6.2.1 Smart Contact Lens. Smart contact lens can measure vital indicators such as glucose, sodium and
cholesterol in tears and enable long term unobtrusive real-time tracking of such vital parameters [40, 66]. Although
progress has been made in miniaturization of the sensor IC, antenna and packaging, real time communication
remains a bottleneck [35]. Radio communication is not applicable since it consumes orders of magnitude higher
power than available on miniature batteries on contact lens form factor devices [25, 40, 48]. Since the environment
is highly unfavorable to RF propagation, only extremely short range backscatter of tens of centimeters has been
feasible using both custom hardware [40, 66] and standards-compliant Wi-Fi/BLE hardware [35]. Such short
ranges limit applicability and renders backscatter less practical.
We leverage LoRa backscatter to demonstrate that a smart contact lens can communicate using CSS modulated
backscatter at orders of magnitude larger distances than was feasible with prior approaches. We built a contact
lens form factor antenna shown in Fig. 16(a). The antenna is a 1 cm diameter loop 30 AWG wire encapsulated
between two soft contact lenses for biocompatibility and structural integrity. We immerse the antenna in contact
lens solution and connect it to our COTS prototype.
We deploy the contact lens in a large atrium measuring 104 ft by 32 ft. We place the RF source and the receiver
at the two ends of the room. We set the backscatter device to transmit LoRa packets at a 1 MHz offset and place
the contact lens form factor antenna at the center of 12 ft by 10 ft grids. We log the reported RSSI value of the
received packets at each of the tested locations. Fig. 16(b) plots the CDF of the received RSSI. Our results show
reliable connectivity across the entire atrium, which is order of magnitude larger range than prior designs [35, 40].
(a) Contact Lens
Antenna Prototype
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-140 -135 -130 -125 -120 -115
500 1500 2500 12500 18000 37500
CDF
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
(b) Contact Lens CDF (c) Epidermal Patch
Sensor Prototype
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-135 -130 -125 -120 -115 -110 -105
1500 2500 12500 18000 37500 37500 37500
CDF
RSSI (dBm)
Bitrate (bps)
(d) Epidermal Patch Sensor CDF
Fig. 16. Smart Contact Lens and Flexible epidermal patch sensor. We show the RSSI and data rate distribution across an entire
3,328 f t 2 (309 m2) atrium.
6.2.2 Flexible Epidermal Patch Sensor. Finally, flexible patch sensors can be used to monitor temperature,
sweat, ECG and other vital signs in real time [25, 49]. These sensors are worn on the body and are in unfavorable
RF environments since the antenna gets significantly detuned and degrades the link quality.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 105. Publication date:
September 2017.
LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity • 105:21
We use our system to prototype a form factor flexible epidermal patch sensor. To build our prototype, we use
the sticker form factor antenna of an Alien swiggle RFID tag [11] and connect it to our COTS hardware. Using
this approach, we can leverage the cost and size of RFID tags and create small, inexpensive and reliable epidermal
patch sensors. We use a matching network to tune the impedance of the antenna when it’s in contact with the
human skin. We attach the sticker form factor antenna prototype on a subject’s hand and test the device across
the 3,328 f t 2 (309 m2) atrium using the same deployment as the contact lens prototype with a 1 MHz backscatter
offset. Fig. 16(d) plots the CDF of RSSIs for the received packets. Our results show that we can provide reliable
connectivity with an RSSI greater than -132 dBm.
7 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We present the first backscatter system that can achieve the ranges required to enable wide-area communication.
In this section, we outline avenues for future research.
Achieving higher data rates. Our current design achieves all the bit rates supported by LoRa. However, an
interesting research direction is to achieve higher data rates at the desired ranges which can be accomplished by
using a combination of multiple frequency bands to concurrently transmit or multiple antenna designs.
LoRa-independent design. A reader might ask a very relevant question: does this technology depend on the
wide adoption of LoRa? The answer is that if LoRa is successful, our technology can ride on top of its adoption.
However, the key component of our wide area backscatter design is the CSS modulation, which can provide long
ranges and high sensitivities independent of LoRa.
Sensitivity to orientation, multipath and obstacles. Unlike RFID and existing backscatter systems such as Passive
Wi-Fi, LoRa backscatter can operate down to sensitivity of -149 dBm and in the presence of strong in-band and
out of band interference. As a result, in typical applications, LoRa backscatter has sufficient wireless link budget
margin which allows it to be robust to signal loss due to antenna orientation mismatch, multipath and obstacles
in the path. We demonstrate this characteristic of our system by evaluating RF challenging applications such as
contact lens, epidermal patch sensor and wide area deployments such as agriculture, home in §6.
Networking LoRa backscatter devices. The focus of this paper was to design and implement the LoRa backscatter
physical layer. In §3.5 we described how LoRa backscatter uses TDMA to communicate across multiple-backscatter
devices. However, since TDMA has an upper bound on throughput, we believe that there are several research
opportunities in networking 100-1000s of tiny devices that use LoRa backscatter communication modules near
each other. This is a topic of future research and out of scope of this paper.
RF Power harvesting. LoRa backscatter is independent of how it is powered. We noted that our current design can
be powered using very small solar cells, button cells as well as printed batteries, given its low power consumption.
One can also explore research opportunities for long-range power harvesting [59] from the RF source.