Abstract
We prove #P-completeness results for counting edge colorings on simple graphs. These strengthen the corresponding results on multigraphs from [4]. We prove that for any κ≥r≥3 counting κ-edge colorings on r-regular simple graphs is #P-complete. Furthermore, we show that for planar r-regular simple graphs, where r∈{3,4,5}, counting edge colorings with κ colors for any κ≥r is also #P-complete. As there are no planar r-regular simple graphs for any r>5, these statements cover all interesting cases in terms of the parameters (κ,r).

Keywords

Edge coloring
Complexity of counting problems
#P-completeness
Platonic solids
Four color theorem
Holant problems

1. Introduction
A proper edge κ-coloring, or simply an edge κ-coloring, of a graph G is a labeling of its edges using at most κ distinct symbols, called colors, such that any two incident edges have different colors. The number of (proper) edge κ-colorings of G is an important graph parameter, and can be naturally expressed as the Holant value on the graph G where every vertex of G is assigned the All-Distinct constraint function.

Given a graph G, it is an interesting problem to determine how many colors are required to properly edge color G. The minimum number needed is called the edge chromatic number, or chromatic index, and is denoted by 
. An obvious lower bound is 
, the maximum degree of the graph. Vizing's Theorem [13], [5] states that  colors always suffice for simple graphs (i.e., graphs without self-loops or parallel edges). Whether  colors suffice depends on the graph G, and is clearly a problem in NP.

Consider the edge coloring problem over 3-regular simple graphs G. It is well known that if a 3-regular graph G contains a bridge (i.e., a cut consisting of one edge) then it has no edge 3-coloring. This follows from a parity argument; see [8] and also a simple proof in section 2 of [7]. For bridgeless planar 3-regular simple graphs, Tait [11] proved in 1880 that an edge 3-coloring always exists iff the Four Color Conjecture (now Theorem) holds. Thus, to the existence question of an edge 3-coloring on a planar 3-regular simple graph, the answer is that there is an edge 3-coloring iff the graph is bridgeless. It follows that edge 3-colorability for 3-regular graphs, as a problem in NP, when restricted to planar simple graphs is solvable in P by the trivial algorithm of checking that the graph is bridgeless. However note that the correctness of this algorithm is certainly not trivial: by Tait's Theorem, this correctness is equivalent to a proof of the Four Color Theorem.

Without the planarity restriction, Holyer [7] proved that determining if a 3-regular simple graph has an edge 3-coloring is NP-complete. Leven and Galil [9] extended this result to all : edge κ-colorability over κ-regular simple graphs is NP-complete for all .

We say a polynomial time reduction f from Sat to a decision problem Π is parsimonious if it preserves the number of solutions, i.e., for any instance Φ of Sat, the number of solutions to the problem Π on the instance  is the same as the number of satisfying assignments of Φ. A parsimonious reduction from Sat to Π also implies that the counting version of the problem Π is #P-complete. Most NP-completeness reductions from Sat to decision problems are, or can be made to be, parsimonious [1], [10].

However, the reductions by Holyer [7] and by Leven-Galil [9] are not parsimonious. In fact, we have the following result from [14] (p. 118, attributed to an unpublished work by Edwards and Welsh [6]) that for any , no parsimonious reduction exists from Sat to edge κ-coloring, unless P = NP, which we explain below using a reduction due to Blass and Gurevich [2] with a slight modification.

To discuss the (non)-existence of parsimonious reductions from Sat, we define a solution to edge κ-coloring as a partition of the edge set into κ pairwise disjoint matchings (some of which may be empty). For graphs G with maximum degree , if 
, then all κ matchings must be nonempty. A theorem due to Thomason [12] says that, for , among graphs with 
 and ignoring isolated vertices, the only graph that has a unique (proper) edge κ-coloring is the star 
 (uniqueness in the sense of counting partitions). Without the assumption 
, and again ignoring isolated vertices, here is a complete list of graphs having a unique edge κ-coloring (again uniqueness in the sense of counting partitions): Clearly 
. Suppose 
. Let σ be a proper κ-coloring using 
 colors, and let 
 be the set of α-colored edges. Then every non-empty 
 consists of a single edge, for otherwise one can split it by an unused color from  and violate the uniqueness. Moreover, for any , if 
 and 
 are non-empty then the two edges are incident, for otherwise we can recolor the edge in 
 by α and violate the uniqueness. It follows that, in addition to 
, the graph G can only be 
 (a cycle of length 3) or among 
 or just the empty graph, and indeed these graphs have a unique edge κ-coloring according to the definition by counting partitions. Obviously it is linear time verifiable whether a graph G is one of 
 () or 
 or the empty graph, with a finite union of isolated vertices.

Now suppose for a contradiction that a parsimonious reduction f exists from Sat to edge κ-coloring, for some . Let Φ be an instance of Sat in conjunctive normal form, 
, where each 
 is a disjunction of literals on the variables 
. Let y be a new variable. Define another Boolean formula
 Clearly 
 has the following satisfying assignments, 
, together with  and all satisfying assignments 
 to Φ. Therefore 
 has exactly one more satisfying assignment than Φ does. It follows that if Φ≠ Sat, then 
 has a unique satisfying assignment, which implies that 
 has a unique solution for edge κ-coloring; if Φ∈ Sat, then 
 has more than one satisfying assignments, which implies that 
 does not have a unique solution for edge κ-coloring. But uniqueness of solutions to edge κ-coloring is linear time testable by Thomason's theorem. This would imply P = NP.

Remark

We remark that the notion of unique edge κ-coloring in the sense of counting partitions is the standard one; by contrast if we are to count the number of coloring assignments, we would incur a factor κ! for graphs with 
, and there would be no parsimonious reduction for a trivial reason. In the rest of the paper, we will adopt the notion of counting edge colorings by counting the number of proper edge coloring assignments. For , a fortiori for κ-regular graphs, if 
, then the number of solutions according to the two definitions differ by exactly a factor κ!. Thus our #P-hardness results in Theorem 1.1, Theorem 1.2 also imply that counting edge κ-coloring is #P-complete in the sense of counting partitions, by simply restricting to κ-regular graphs.

It is reasonable to suppose that this lack of parsimonious reductions for edge coloring is the reason that it remained an open problem for some decades whether the counting problem for edge coloring is #P-complete, until it was proved in [4]. The proof in [4] is carried out as part of a classification program on counting problems, in particular a certain subclass of Holant problems on higher domain sizes. However, as is generally true for Holant problems, the #P-hardness applies to multigraphs, i.e., parallel edges and loops are allowed. We note that the reduction carried out in [4] indeed produces multigraphs. By contrast, a simple graph does not have parallel edges or loops. Our main purpose in this paper is to prove the following results (extending the corresponding results in [4] to simple graphs).

Theorem 1.1

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over r-regular simple graphs for any integers .

Theorem 1.2

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over planar r-regular simple graphs for any integers  and .

Note that for , simple planar r-regular graphs do not exist, by Euler's formula. See Theorem 3.1.

Because these are hardness results, the weaker statement also holds without the restriction on regularity, or on planarity, thus for any , #κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete for simple graphs with maximum degree Δ. Obviously if  there are no proper edge κ-colorings. For , the problem can be easily solved in polynomial time, since for maximum degree at most 2, a graph is a disjoint union of cycles and paths. Thus Theorem 1.1, Theorem 1.2 settle the complexity of counting edge colorings for simple graphs for all parameter settings of  or .

Our proofs of Theorem 1.1, Theorem 1.2 start with the #P-hardness results for edge colorings in [4] on multigraphs, and design reductions from multigraphs to simple graphs. At the heart of the reductions are some geometrically inspired gadget constructions using the Platonic solids, such as the icosahedron (see Fig. 6).

2. Preliminaries
Counting κ-edge colorings can be naturally expressed as a Holant problem on a domain of size κ. Let us first recap the framework of Holant problems on the domain .

Fix a positive integer . A constraint function, or signature, f has an arity , and is a mapping from 
. When , we think of f as a scalar. For the reason of Turing computability we assume all signatures take complex algebraic values.

A Holant problem  is parameterized by a set of signatures . An input to the problem  is a signature grid  consisting of a (multi)graph , where π assigns to each vertex  some 
 of arity , and assigns its incident edges to its input variables.

Definition 2.1

Given a set of signatures , we define the counting problem  as:

Input: A signature grid ;

Output: 
, where the sum is over all edge assignments ,  denotes the incident edges of v and 
 denotes the restriction of σ to .

By default G is a multigraph so it may have self-loops or parallel edges. A simple graph does not have self-loops or parallel edges. We may restrict the Holant problem to signature grids where input graphs G are simple graphs, or simple planar graphs. We use  to denote the problem restricted to planar signature grids.

A function 
 can be represented by listing its values according to the lexicographical order of the input tuples which is a vector in 
. A signature is called symmetric if it is invariant under a permutation of its variables. An example is the Equality signature 
 of arity r (on domain ), which outputs value 1 if all r input values are equal, and 0 otherwise. Here 
 is the scalar 1; 
 is the univariate function that takes constant value 1. A binary signature, i.e., a signature of arity 2, can be represented by a  signature matrix. E.g., the binary Equality signature 
 is represented by the identity matrix 
.

Replacing a signature  by a constant multiple cf, where , does not change the complexity of . It introduces a global nonzero factor to 
.

We allow  to be an infinite set. We say  is (P-time) tractable, if 
 is computable in polynomial time where the input description of Ω includes the signatures used in Ω. We say  is #P-hard if there exists a finite subsethe set of  for which the problem is #P-hard. The same definitions apply for  when Ω is restricted to planar signature grids. We use 
 and 
 to denote polynomial time Turing reduction and equivalence, respectively.

We say a signature f is realizable or constructible from a signature set  if there is a graph fragment, called a gadget, which is a graph with some dangling edges such that each vertex is assigned a signature from , and the resulting graph defines f by the Holant sum with inputs on the dangling edges. If f is realizable from a set , then we can freely add f into  while preserving the complexity. Formally, such a notion is defined by an -gate [3]. An -gate is similar to a signature grid  for  except that  is a graph with some dangling edges D. The dangling edges define external variables for the -gate. (See Fig. 1 for an example.) We denote the regular edges in E by  and the dangling edges in D by . Then we can define a function Γ for this -gate as
 
 where 
 is an assignment on the dangling edges and 
 is the value of the signature grid on an assignment of all edges in G, which is the product of evaluations at all internal vertices. We also call this function Γ the signature of the -gate, or informally, of the gadget.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (60KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. An -gate with 5 dangling edges.

An -gate is planar if the underlying graph G is a planar graph, and the dangling edges, ordered counterclockwise corresponding to the order of the input variables, are in the outer face in a planar embedding. A (planar) -gate can be used in a (planar) signature grid as if it is just a single vertex with the particular signature. An -gate is simple if the underlying graph is simple. Also, a binary -gate is an -gate with two dangling edges. We also call an -gate r-regular if the underlying graph G is r-regular, i.e., the degrees of all of its internal vertices (including the contributions of the dangling edges) are r.

Using the idea of planar -gates, we can reduce one planar Holant problem to another. Suppose g is the signature of some planar -gate. Then 
. The reduction is simple. Given an instance of , by replacing every appearance of g by the -gate, we get an instance of . Since the signature of the -gate is g, the Holant values for these two signature grids are identical.

An arity r signature on domain size κ is fully specified by 
 values. A symmetric signature of arity r on domain  can be specified by  
  values, namely the signature value is determined by how many variables (
) take the first value in , and how many variables (
) take the second value in , etc., such that 
.

The signature that defines the problem of edge coloring is the All-Distinct function. The signature

Image 1
, or 
 for short, has arity r on domain size κ. It outputs value 1 when all inputs are distinct and 0 otherwise. Here 
 is the scalar 1; 
 is the univariate function that takes constant value 1. When 
, the problem  is called #κ-EdgeColoring.
We prove our #P-completeness results for counting edge colorings over (regular) simple graphs by reducing from the corresponding results for multigraphs (Theorem 1.1 in [4]). We restate it below for easy reference.

Theorem 2.2

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over planar r-regular multigraphs for any integers .

In this paper, we show two results, Theorem 1.1, Theorem 1.2, about the counting complexity of edge colorings over (regular) simple graphs, one for the planar case and the other for the general (i.e., not necessarily planar) case. As noted before, the only interesting cases are for , and in the planar case for . We handle both the planar and nonplanar cases together, but we first prove it for the case  in Section 3 and then for the case  in Section 4.
We remark that when the underlying graph has a loop, then there is no proper edge colorings so the corresponding Holant value is 0. Hence we may assume that our reduction proof for Theorem 1.1, Theorem 1.2 starts with the problem of edge colorings on loopless multigraphs in Theorem 2.2.

3. Case 
We start with the statement of Theorem 2.2 specialized with . We want to prove a corresponding statement for simple graphs, i.e., graphs without self-loops or parallel edges. We first recall a well-known fact that for , there are no planar r-regular simple graphs. This is a topological fact from Euler's formula; for completeness we include a simple proof. For any simple plane graph G, i.e., a planar graph with a planar embedding, let ,  and  be respectively the number of vertices, edges and faces formed by G. Then Euler's formula says that If G is an r-regular simple graph, then counting the ends of every edge once we get . Similarly , since at every vertex we encounter r incident faces, but each face is counted at least three times on a simple graph G. Hence 
 
 
. In particular .

For  we prove the following for planar κ-regular simple graphs.

Theorem 3.1

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over planar κ-regular simple graphs for .

Proof

We reduce the problem of #κ-EdgeColoring over planar κ-regular multigraphs to planar κ-regular simple graphs in polynomial time, for .

Let G be any planar κ-regular multigraph. As mentioned before, we may also assume G has no self-loops. We will replace every edge of G by a suitable gadget with two external edges to obtain a planar κ-regular simple graph 
. The key property of the gadget is as follows: Every proper edge κ-coloring assigns the same color to the two external edges 
 and 
, and such a coloring exists. Note that, by permuting the set , for any fixed color value for 
 and 
 there are the same number c of extensions to a proper edge κ-coloring of the gadget. With this property, the number of proper edge κ-colorings of 
 is 
 times that of G, where  denotes the number of edges of G.

For , consider the gadget 
 in Fig. 2. Replacing every edge of G by 
, we get a planar 3-regular simple graph 
. To prove the key property for 
, suppose 
 is assigned a color Red, then its two adjacent edges 
 and 
 must be assigned the other two colors Blue and Green in some order. Then the middle vertical edge 
 is assigned Red, and its remaining two adjacent edges 
 and 
 must be assigned Blue and Green in a unique way (depending on the colors of 
 and 
). It follows that 
 is also assigned Red, and we found exactly  proper edge 3-colorings. A proper edge 3-coloring, in which 
 and 
 receive the same color, can be seen in Fig. 3.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (25KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The gadget for 3-regular graphs.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (36KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. A proper edge 3-coloring of the gadget H3 where e1,e2 have the same color. (For interpretation of the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

For , consider the gadget 
 in Fig. 4. Replacing every edge of G by 
, we get a simple planar 4-regular graph 
. Suppose the middle horizontal edge e is assigned Red. Then 
 and 
 are assigned two other colors, say Blue and Green, in some order. Let the 4th color be Yellow. Then 
 and 
 must be assigned Yellow and Red in some order. In particular exactly one of 
 or 
 is assigned Yellow. It can be easily shown that the color (Blue or Green) of the edge (
 or 
) that is on the same internal face as this edge colored Yellow (
 or 
) must be the color of both the external edges 
 and 
, and once 
 or 
 is chosen to be colored Yellow there is a unique extension. This implies that the gadget 
 satisfies the key property with the constant : If the two external edges 
 and 
 are to be Blue, say, then e must be not Blue, and one of 
 and 
 must be Blue, and the rest are all forced, with the unique choice of 
 or 
 that shares a face with the Blue edge in 
 colored Yellow. Thus there are  choices. A proper edge 4-coloring, in which 
 and 
 receive the same color, can be seen in Fig. 5.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (27KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The gadget for 4-regular graphs.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (47KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. A proper edge 4-coloring of the gadget H4 where e1,e2 have the same color.

We remark that the gadgets 
 and 
 are obtained from breaking one edge in a tetrahedron and an octahedron, respectively.

For , we use a similar construction, but we will argue slightly differently. Let H be any plane 5-regular simple graph that can be edge 5-colored. Such graphs exist; for concreteness we can take the icosahedron which is shown in Fig. 6 and a specific 5-coloring can be seen in Fig. 7. Because H is 5-regular, , so  is even. Now remove one edge of H on the external face, say, the red dotted edge on the back of the icosahedron, we will name the end vertices u and v. This defines a graph 
. Define 
 to be the graph obtained from 
 by adding two external edges 
 and 
 from u and v (in the case of the icosahedron see Fig. 8, Fig. 9). We claim that 
 satisfies the key property. To prove that we only need to show that any edge 5-coloring of 
 must use the same color on the two external edges. For a contradiction, suppose this is not so. Then for some 5-coloring of 
, there are two distinct colors Red and Green, say, such that the two external edges are colored Red and Green, respectively. Consider the set S of edges in 
 colored Red or Green. Clearly the two external vertices are incident to edges in S. Since all other vertices of 
 have degree 5, all vertices of 
 are also incident to edges in S. Thus S must be a vertex disjoint union of (zero or more) alternating Red-Green cycles, and exactly one alternating Red-Green path starting and ending with the two external edges. This alternating path starts and ends with distinct colors, and therefore it has an even number of edges and thus an odd number of vertices. The alternating cycles have an even number of vertices. This is a contradiction to . (The exact value  for 
 is a constant and is unimportant to the existence of this reduction.) □

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (31KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. An icosahedron.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (83KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. A possible proper edge 5-coloring of the icosahedron.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (49KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The gadget for 5-regular graphs.

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (90KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. A proper edge 5-coloring of the gadget H5 (the icosahedron gadget) where e1,e2 have the same color.

The idea of the proof can also be adapted to prove the following theorem without the planarity requirement.

Theorem 3.2

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over κ-regular simple graphs for all .

Proof

Let H be a κ-regular simple graph that admits a proper edge κ-coloring. For now assume such a graph exists. If we consider any color, the edges with that color form a perfect matching of H, because the number of colors and the regularity parameter are both κ. Hence H has an even number of vertices.

Take any two adjacent vertices u and v. Now remove one edge  of H; this defines a graph 
. Define 
⁎
 to be the graph obtained from 
 by adding two external edges 
 and 
 incident to u and v, respectively. 
⁎
 will be the gadget replacing every edge in a κ-regular multigraph G to produce a κ-regular simple graph 
. By the same proof above we see that in any edge κ-coloring of 
, the  incident edges at u receive the same set of  colors as the  incident edges at v. Thus 
⁎
 satisfies the key property stated in the proof of Theorem 3.1. This completes the proof, provided we exhibit one such graph H.

Let . Since , we have . We take the vertex set of H to be the additive group 
. We define κ edge disjoint perfect matchings, and the edge set of H as their union. For , let 
, and 
. Let 
 and 
 be respectively the orbits of 
 and 
 by the subgroup 
. (Here, 
 consists of multiples of 2ℓ in the cyclic additive group 
 and is isomorphic to the cyclic additive group 
, and the orbit of a set E consists of the images of the set E under the group action of 
 acting on the set of edges  with 
,  by cyclic shifts, i.e., 
 sends  to .) Thus
 
 
 Note that  and so . If κ is odd, then add one more perfect matching . This defines κ edge disjoint perfect matchings. □

4. Case 
In this section, we prove similar results for simple graphs where . We use 
 to denote the all-1 κ by κ matrix. We call a gadget r-regular if its internal vertices all have degree r.

Theorem 4.1

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over planar r-regular simple graphs for all  and .

Proof

We reduce the problem #κ-EdgeColoring over planar r-regular multigraphs, which is #P-complete by Theorem 2.2, to planar r-regular simple graphs in polynomial time. Then the statement of the theorem follows.

For now let us suppose we can construct a binary planar r-regular simple gadget f consisting of only 
 signatures. We say a function is domain invariant if it is invariant under any permutation of the input domain elements. Clearly 
 is domain invariant, and so f is also domain invariant. Hence its κ by κ signature matrix has the form 
 for some nonnegative integers a and b, i.e., it has values a and b on and off the main diagonal, correspondingly. In particular, A is symmetric. For any , consider a binary gadget 
 obtained by connecting f sequentially n times, with 
 (see Fig. 10). Note that the order in which the dangling edges of f are connected to each other makes no difference in this construction because A is symmetric. Obviously, each gadget 
 for  is still a planar r-regular simple gadget with a domain invariant signature matrix 
. Assume further that we can satisfy .

Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (34KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Recursive construction to interpolate the binary Equality signature =2. All vertices are assigned the gadget f. The dangling edges of f can be connected in any order.

Let  be an input instance to 
, where  is a planar r-regular multigraph. Here every vertex in V is assigned a symmetric signature 
. Let  be the subset of the edges of G each of which is parallel to at least one other edge. For any , we construct 
 to be the instance of 
 obtained by replacing every edge in F by the gadget 
. Clearly, the underlying graph 
 of 
 is simple planar r-regular and has size polynomial in n and the size of Ω. Let , which is also the number of the gadgets 
 used in 
. Let 
 be a signature grid obtained from Ω by placing the binary Equality signature 
 in the middle of every edge in F. Clearly, 
. We show how to compute this value from the values 
 where  in polynomial time.

The matrix 
 has eigenvalues 
 and 
 for . Since it is real symmetric, it can be orthogonally diagonalized over , i.e., there exist a real orthogonal matrix S and a real diagonal matrix 
 such that 
. As  we have 
 for . Also 
. It follows that the matrices A and D are nondegenerate. Clearly 
, for all , and is also symmetric.

We can write the  entry 
 by a formal expansion, for every  and some real 
's that are dependent on S, but independent of n and 
, where . By this formal expansion of the symmetric matrix 
, we have 
.

In the evaluation of 
, we stratify the (edge) assignments in 
 based on the colors assigned to the dangling edges of the binary gadgets 
 in 
 as follows. Denote by 
 a nonnegative integer tuple with entries indexed by ordered pairs of numbers and that satisfy 
. Let 
 be the sum over all assignments of the products of all signatures in 
, except the contributions by the gadgets 
 such that the endpoints of precisely 
 constituent gadgets 
 receive the assignments  (in either order of the end points) for every . Let  denote the set of all such possible tuples τ, where  
 . Then
 
 
 
 
 
 Expanding out the last sum and rearranging the terms, we get(4.1)
 
 
 
 for some numbers 
 independent of 
's.

This can be viewed as a linear system with the unknowns 
 with the rows indexed by n. The number of unknowns is  
  which is polynomial in n and the size of the input instance Ω, since κ is a constant. The values 
 can all be computed in polynomial time.

On the other hand, it is clear that
 
 
 We show next how to compute the value 
 from the values 
 where  in polynomial time. The coefficient matrix of the linear system (4.1) is Vandermonde. However, when , it is not of full rank because the coefficients 
 are not pairwise distinct, and therefore it has repeating columns. Nevertheless, when there are two repeating columns we replace the corresponding unknowns 
 and 
 with their sum as a new variable; we repeat this replacement procedure until there are no repeating columns. Since all 
, for , after the replacement, we have a Vandermonde system of full rank. Therefore we can solve this modified linear system in polynomial time and find the desired value 
 
 
.

Remark

The above proof did not use the fact in this specific case 
. The general Vandermonde argument does not need this property.

We are left to prove that we can construct a binary planar r-regular simple gadget f with distinct diagonal and off diagonal values  in its signature matrix A. From the previous section we know that for every  there exists a binary connected planar r-regular simple gadget. For example, one can take f to be the gadget 
 described in Theorem 3.1, i.e., the ones shown in Fig. 2, Fig. 4, Fig. 8, correspondingly. The connectedness of each 
, 
 and 
 is self-evident. In the proof of Theorem 3.1, we also showed that in each respective case , 
 can be r-colored so that the two dangling edges are colored with the same color. Fix such a coloring. Since now we are given , we can modify this coloring to change the color of one of the dangling edges to one of the remaining  colors different from the r colors used. This still produces a proper κ-edge coloring but in which the dangling edges are now colored differently. Therefore . If , then we are done.

Suppose , so we can write 
. 
 can be written as the column vector 
 times the row vector 
. Clearly, in terms of evaluating signature value, replacing an internal edge within the gadget f with another copy of the gadget f itself is equivalent, up to a nonzero scalar b, to cutting this edge in half and assigning the unary signature 
 to the two new degree one vertices. Now choose a path P in the gadget 
 starting in one dangling edge and ending in the other. Since f is connected, such a path exists. Suppose it has s internal nodes, where . Let g be the binary gadget obtained by replacing every edge in f that is not in P by a new copy of f (by the symmetry of f, the order of the dangling edges of f in the replacement bears no difference). It is easy to see that g is a binary connected planar r-regular simple gadget. Note that we can connect the unary signature 
 to any one of the n dangling edges of 
, where , and the resulting signature has  dangling edges, which takes value 1 iff all  dangling edges take distinct input values and the unary signature 
 can take any of the remaining  values via the linking edge. In other words, this results in the signature 
, so it is the signature 
, up to a nonzero scalar . Thus g, as a constraint function, is equivalent to simply a path P with 
 assigned to the intermediate vertices. Hence, (up to an easily computable nonzero constant) its signature matrix is 
. It is easy to verify that 
 has the form 
 for some 
, and 
 is the difference of the diagonal value and the off diagonal value, in particular nonzero. Hence all the necessary conditions on g are satisfied and we can use g instead of f. □

Finally, we deal with the nonplanar case for .

Theorem 4.2

#κ-EdgeColoring is #P-complete over r-regular simple graphs for .

Proof

As in the proof of Theorem 4.1, we reduce the problem #κ-EdgeColoring over planar r-regular multigraphs, which is #P-complete by Theorem 2.2, to (non-necessarily planar) r-regular simple graphs in polynomial time. Then the statement of the theorem follows.

Following the steps of the proof of Theorem 4.1, we see that it suffices to produce a binary connected r-regular simple gadget f that is r-colorable with the additional condition that the dangling edges are colored with the same color. The only difference is that we do not require f to be a planar gadget (and for  this would be impossible).

Let 
, 
 and  be pairwise disjoint sets of vertices. We take the vertex set of f to be  where u, v will be the external endpoints of the two dangling edges. Next, we define the edge set of f to be  where
 Here 
 and 
 are the dangling edges of f; there is a complete bipartite graph 
 between 
 and 
, while 
 is connected to all of the former, and 
 is connected to all of the latter. It is easy to see that f is indeed a binary connected r-regular simple gadget. (See Fig. 11, Fig. 13 as an example for  and , respectively.)

Fig. 11
Download : Download high-res image (16KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. The gadget used in the proof of Theorem 4.2 for r = 3.

We will exhibit a proper r-edge coloring of f. For this, we first label the r colors by the elements of the additive group 
. Now define the edge coloring of f as follows: each 
 is colored  for , each 
 and each 
 is colored i, for , and 
 are colored 0. It is easy to see that this coloring satisfies all the necessary requirements. (A coloring is shown in Fig. 12, Fig. 14 for  and , respectively.) □

Fig. 12
Download : Download high-res image (43KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. A proper edge 3-coloring of the Fig. 11 where e1,e2 have the same color. Here the colors Red, Green, Blue respectively correspond to colors 0,1,2.

Fig. 13
Download : Download high-res image (26KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The gadget used in the proof of Theorem 4.2 for r = 4.

Fig. 14
Download : Download high-res image (66KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 14. A proper edge 4-coloring of the Fig. 13 where e1,e2 have the same color. Here the colors Red, Green, Blue, Yellow respectively correspond to colors 0,1,2,3.