Abstract
In this paper we consider doubly symmetric Dyck words, i.e. Dyck words which are fixed by two symmetry operations α and β introduced in [1]. We study combinatorial properties of doubly symmetric Dyck words, leading to the definition of two recursive algorithms to build these words. As a consequence we have a representation of doubly symmetric Dyck words as vectors of integers, called track vectors. Finally, we show some bijections between a subfamily of doubly symmetric Dyck words and a subfamily of integer partitions. The computation of the sequence fn of doubly symmetric Dyck words of semi-length n shows surprising properties giving rise to some conjectures.

Keywords
Dyck languages
Enumerative combinatorics
Integer sequences

1. Introduction
A Dyck word w is a word on an alphabet with two letters, here denoted by , having the same number of a's and b's and such that, for any prefix u of w, the number of occurrences of the letter b is not greater than that of the letter a. Dyck words play an important role in the theory of Formal Languages as established in [4]. Moreover, any Dyck word of semi-length n can be represented as a lattice path (called Dyck path) consisting of up steps, corresponding to the letter a, and down steps, corresponding to the letter b, running from  to  freely above the x axis. Dyck words (paths) of semi-length n are enumerated by the nth Catalan number (sequence A000108 in [13]) like several other combinatorial objects. Chapter 6 of Stanley's book [14] considering these different families of objects gives an insight of their main properties, illustrating the many facets of their role in Combinatorics.

In our paper we study a subfamily of Dyck words introduced in [1] here called doubly symmetric Dyck words. To define these words, we need to introduce the family 
 of Dyck words with an additional occurrence of b at the end.

We consider a first symmetry operation defined on Dyck paths, (denoted β) that is the reflection along the vertical line in the middle of the path. In terms of words it consists of reading the word from right to left and exchanging the occurrences of a and b. Clearly, the operation β can be extended to words in 
.

Then we define another symmetry operation α, on the words of 
, which is more sophisticated. This operation is related to a transformation appearing in a paper in Algebraic Combinatorics on Diagonal Harmonics [10] and in another devoted to the determination of a parameter of configurations in the Chip Firing Model on Graphs [5]. See next section, for the definition of this operation. Dyck words w such that w b is fixed by β and α will be called doubly symmetric here.

In [1], these two symmetry operations are considered as involutions on Dyck words that keep their lengths invariant. These kinds of transformations are not new in the literature, since they were considered by many authors ([3], [6], [7], [9], [11], [12]). The composition of α and β, denoted γ, is then considered. The authors of [1] prove that γ is a permutation, and moreover that the fixed points of γ are precisely the words which are fixed both for α and β. Therefore, the number of doubly symmetric Dyck words is equal to the number of fixed points of γ.

It is known (see [14]) that the number of Dyck paths of semi-length n which are symmetric according to the operation β is equal to the number of prefixes of Dyck words of length n, hence to the central binomial coefficient:  
 
 .

On the other side, the number 
 of fixed points of γ was first studied in [1] by associating a pair of integers  to each fixed point, where n is the semi-length of the Dyck path and such that p and  are relatively prime and are characterized by a combinatorial algorithm. This characterization does not give a way to obtain the fixed points recursively, but enables to compute 
 for small values of n. In particular, the sequence 
 begins with: then the sequence increases in a seemingly chaotic way.

In this paper we point out that the first 16 values of the sequence 
 coincide with the terms of Sequence A116473 of [13], enumerating integer partitions with exactly n subpartitions. However, for greater values of n, the two sequences are different, even if they remain quite close (as explained in more detail in Section 6). The main aim of this paper is to provide some arguments and tools in order to understand and explain this chaotic behavior.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly recall the main facts about Dyck words (resp. paths), the definition of the set 
, and the mappings α and β. Section 3 introduces the mapping γ as the composition of α and β, then some combinatorial properties of its fixed points are presented.

The main result of our paper consists in showing two ways to recursively build doubly symmetric Dyck words. The first one, presented in Section 4, relies on two transformations, each one allowing to build a doubly symmetric Dyck word from another with smaller length (Theorem 2). This construction may be reformulated as a transformation on triples of integers giving a binary tree for the generation of all doubly symmetric Dyck words. The second construction (Section 5) is based on the unique representation of doubly symmetric Dyck words as vectors of integers (called track vectors). This representation enables us to obtain some properties about the sequence 
 enumerating the fixed points of γ. In particular, we describe a way to determine the number of occurrences of the letter a in the word w using its track vector. Moreover, we prove that if  and  is not an odd power of 2 then 
. We point out that further studies on the sequence 
, including the determination of lower bounds, and the fact that 
 tends to infinity as n grows, have been carried out in [3].

In Section 5 we study some combinatorial connections between integer partitions and track vectors. Indeed, the representation in terms of track vectors enables to build a bijection between a subfamily of doubly symmetric Dyck words and a subfamily of partitions of integers. This bijection explains the equality of the first 16 values of 
 and Sequence A116473 of [13]. Some conjectures on this sequence are also proposed.

Eventually, in Section 7 we draw conclusions and then we suggest some future developments.

2. Preliminaries
Dyck words on the alphabet  represent Dyck paths in the quarter positive part of the integer lattice consisting of up steps from  to , denoted by the letter a, and down steps from  to , denoted by the letter b. Paths are better for the visual intuition, instead words are useful for writing proofs. However, paths and words are just two different representation of the same combinatorial object. For instance, the word  is represented in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (5KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. A Dyck path.

For a word 
⁎
, we denote by 
, with , the number of occurrences of the letter x in w. Hence, the length of w, denoted by , is equal to 
. We also use the mapping δ associating any word w with the integer 
.

The word u is a prefix of w if there is a (possibly empty) word v such that . In particular, u is strict if . So, a Dyck word is a word w such that  and  for any prefix u of w.

For any word 
 where 
, we denote by 
 be the word obtained by reading w from right to left, so that 
. Moreover, we denote by 
 
 the word obtained from w by replacing any occurrence of b by an occurrence of a and vice versa. Formally, 
 
 
 
 
, where, for any :
 
 

The height of a Dyck word w is the maximum value of , as u ranges over all prefixes of w. We will often use the following notion.

Definition 1

The principal prefix of a Dyck word w is the shortest prefix u of w such that  is equal to the height of w.

Notice that the words which are principal prefixes of Dyck words are often called “culminating words” or “bidirectional ballot sequences” and their enumeration was considered in [2]. They are mentioned in the Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences as A167510. The number of Dyck words of semi-length n which have a principal prefix of length k is given for the first values by: 
 
Even if it is not difficult to show that the number of Dyck words of semi-length n with a principal prefix of length 2 and those of semi-length  with a principal prefix of length  are both equal to 
, the sequences with other lengths for the principal prefixes do not appear in the Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences.

In this paper we consider a slight modification of Dyck words, since we add a letter b at the end of the word.

Definition 2

For , let 
 be the set of words with n occurrences of the letter a and  occurrences of the letter b. Let 
 be the set of words w in 
 satisfying:(1)

The definitions of the height and that of a principal prefix can be extended naturally from Dyck words to words in 
.

2.1. The mapping α
We say that two words u and v are conjugate if there exist (possibly empty) words 
 and 
 such that 
 and 
. It is well known [8] that the number of different conjugates of a word w divides its length and that if a word u v is equal to one of its conjugates v u, where u and v are not empty, then there exists a word w and an integer  such that 
. This shows that an element in 
 has  different conjugates.

Lemma 1

(Cycle Lemma)
Any word w of 
 has exactly one factorization into two factors  such that v u is an element of 
. Moreover the factorization into two factors  is such that u is the smallest prefix of w attaining the minimal value for .

The previous lemma may be illustrated by using necklaces. A 2-ary necklace with n blue beads and  red ones is represented by  points on a circle where n are colored blue and  colored red. (See Fig. 2.)

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (15KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. A 2-ary necklace with 6 blue beads and 7 red ones. (For interpretation of the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Such a necklace may be coded by words in 
 by choosing a starting point on the circle then turning counter clockwise around the circle and writing a when meeting a blue point and writing b when meeting a red one. Two conjugate words in 
 correspond to the choice of different initial points and are codes of the same necklace. The Cycle Lemma states that there is a unique initial point for which the code obtained is an element of 
. (See Fig. 3.)

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (15KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The necklace and the initial point for which the code is a a b a b a a b b b a b b ∈ D6.

Translating the symmetry operation α from necklaces to their codes gives the following:

Definition 3

Let 
. Then  is the unique conjugate of 
 which belongs to 
.

Example 1

Let . Then 
 can be decomposed as 
 and the conjugate  is in 
, hence:

The following statement is Proposition 2 in [1].
Proposition 1

The mapping α is an involution. Moreover, the word w satisfies  if and only if w is the concatenation of two palindromes, namely,
 In this factorization v is the longest prefix of w such that  is equal to the height of w.

Observe that the fact that α is an involution is clear from its description in terms of necklaces.

2.2. The mapping β
The mapping β is perhaps the easiest involution on Dyck words. It consists in reading the word from right to left and replacing each occurrence of the letter b by an occurrence of the letter a, and vice versa. We extend this definition to the elements of 
 as follows. Given 
, where , we define:
 
 
 
 

Example 2

Notice that this symmetry operation β is such that for 
 we have 
, and that w and  have the same number of peaks and the same height.

Having introduced the permutations α and β, now we introduce the central notion in this paper:

Definition 4

A Dyck word w is said to be doubly symmetric if 
 is a fixed point for α and β.

3. The permutation γ and a first characterization of its fixed points
In this section we recall the definition of the permutation γ and state the main results concerning its fixed points obtained in [1].

Definition 5

The mapping γ is defined on 
 as the composition of α and β:

Since α and β are permutations it follows that γ is a permutation as well. Indeed in [1] the following characterization of the fixed points of γ is obtained.

Proposition 2

The word 
 is a fixed point of γ if and only if it is fixed by α and β.

The previous result states that a fixed point of γ is just a doubly symmetric Dyck word with the addition of a final b. Let us denote by 
 the set of words in 
 which are fixed points of γ.

The definition of γ can be given in a more effective way, as proved in [1]:

Proposition 3

Let 
 be such that , where u is the principal prefix of w. Then:

One can express this Proposition by saying that to compute  one has first to compute the conjugate  of w where  are as above. Then one has to replace each occurrence of the letter b by an occurrence of the letter a and each occurrence of the letter a by an occurrence of the letter b, except the letter in position , (where p is the length of u) where there is an occurrence of b.

Definition 6

For any  such that  let 
 be such that:(2)
 

The way to determine  may be summarized by:
Proposition 4

Let w be a word in 
, and p be the length of its principal prefix. Denote 
 and . Then for :(3)
 
 

Proof

Taking the conjugate 
 of  is equivalent to state 
 for any . Equation (1) expresses the exchanging of  occurrences of the letters in this word to obtain . □

In [1] a characterization of the fixed points of γ is obtained. Some useful notions and results are summarized below.

Theorem 1

Let  the word 
 with a principal prefix of length p, then 
 if and only if the two following conditions are satisfied:(4)(5)
 
 

By Equation (5), Theorem 1 shows that for any  there is at most one element of 
 with a principal prefix of length p. It gives a way to build this word 
 if it exists. To do so, we use a permutation on the integers , constructed as follows.

Let , and assume . The permutation τ on  is such that 
. This permutation has only one cycle, which may be written 
 with 
. Let w be the word given by 
, 
 if 
 such that g is odd, and 
 if 
 such that g is even. If w is in 
, and its principal prefix has length p then one has .

Example 3

Consider  and , then  and the permutation τ is the cycle: so that 
 for  and 
 for  giving the word: . This word is in 
 and has a principal prefix  which has length 4, hence it is such that  and 
.

Taking  gives: Since this implies 
, and 
, hence there is no word in 
 which principal prefix has length 3.

Let 
, with , be the number of fixed points of γ in 
. To determine 
, we can take all integers p such that  and , then check for each p as below if there is an element of 
 with a principal prefix of length p. The first values of 
 up to  are listed below, where these can be read from left to right, top to bottom, in the following table. The algorithm uses 
 operations to determine 
. 
  Examining the table above one notices that for  we have that 
. This can be proved when n is not a power of 2 or if 
 with  by using the characterizations we will introduce in the next sections. Recently Castronuovo proved this inequality for 
 in [3].

The following conjectures seem difficult to prove:

Conjecture 1

The number of doubly symmetric Dyck words 
 satisfies 
 if . This fact seems difficult to prove.

Conjecture 2

For any k there exists a value 
 such that for 
 one has 
 proving that the sequence tends to infinity. Moreover 
.

We noticed when computing 
 for  that this lower bound is only attained by 
.
4. Building doubly symmetric Dyck words recursively
The previous characterization of the elements of 
 is useful to count them but it does not give an insight of the way one can build them. The aim of this Section is to give a recursive characterization of them which allows to build the elements of 
 by using those of 
 where 
.

First in Lemma 2 and Lemma 3 we give two different factorizations of a word 
 using its principal prefix u. Then in Proposition 5 we show how from a word 
 one can build two different words of 
 and 
 with 
. These two words will be denoted  and . We then establish the central Theorem of this section which states that for any word w in 
 there exists either a unique word 
 such that 
 or a unique word 
 such that 
.

Lemma 2

Let 
, then the principal prefix u of w satisfies:
 and .

Proof

Let p be the length of u and , we have to prove that the first p occurrences 
 of w and the last p ones 
 are such that 
 
. But this follows directly from Equation (5), taking . We also have to prove that , if  there would exist a suffix of u equal to a prefix of 
. Since u is a prefix of the word w in 
 each prefix 
 of 
 is such that 
, if such a prefix is also a suffix of u this gives 
 and  contradicting the fact that u is the principal prefix of w. □

Lemma 3

Let 
 and let u be its principal prefix, then there exists an integer  and a prefix 
 of u such that
 where 
 is a prefix of u.

Proof

The proof essentially uses Theorem 1. Indeed Equation (5) implies that if 
 and u is its principal prefix then one has 
 where 
 is a prefix of 
. All we have to prove is that 
 where p is the length of u. Assume that 
 then 
 where 
 is a strict prefix of 
. Since 
 one has 
 giving that 
 which is a prefix of u satisfies 
, contradicting the fact that u is the principal prefix of w. □

Example 4

It is easy to check that w is a word of 
.

The principal prefix of this word is given by

Hence Lemma 2 gives the following factorization:
 and

Notice that Lemma 3 gives also 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

We now show how from a word 
 one can build two words fixed by γ with lengths greater than that of w.

Proposition 5

Let 
 and let u be its principal prefix and v the word given by the factorization in Lemma 2, then we have
 where p is the length of u.

Proof

We first consider 
: clearly one has 
. Any prefix 
 of 
 with length not greater than p is a prefix of w hence 
, if it is of length greater than p and less than 2p then 
 where 
 is a prefix of 
 then 
 
 is a prefix of u and we have 
 
 giving 
 
. Hence 
 is in 
. To show that 
 is fixed by γ we use Proposition 3 and Lemma 3. We notice that u is the principal prefix of 
. Lemma 3 gives
 hence we have
 Noticing that u is the principal prefix of 
 Proposition 3 gives:
 
 Since , we have also
 
 Giving

Consider now 
. It is not difficult to prove that any of its prefix 
 is such that 
. The length of 
 is equal to , but since 
 we have , giving 
 and 
.

We now proceed as above in order to prove that 
 is fixed by γ. We notice that the principal prefix of 
 is 
, denoting 
 and applying Proposition 3 we have
 
 
 It remains to prove that
 which follows from
 □

Definition 7

The transformations G and S on words in 
 are such that for 
 with factorization 
, where u is the principal prefix of w, one has:

Example 5

Applying G to 
, we get
 depicted in Fig. 7.

Applying V to 
, we get:
 depicted in Fig. 7, where w is the word of Example 4.

We now show how from a word 
 with  one can find a word 
 in 
 with 
 such that 
 or 
. For such w we will consider two cases comparing the lengths of u which is the principal prefix of w and v such that 
. Notice that if  then by Lemma 3 we would have 
, hence  so that  and 
 which contradicts 
. Hence we consider two cases, namely  and .

Theorem 2

Let 
 where , then from the factorization 
 given by Lemma 2 one obtains a fixed point 
 of γ of length 
 in the following way.

1.
If the length of v is greater than that of u then 
, where 
 is a prefix of u and . In that case we have 
, and 
.

2.
If the length of u is greater than that of v, one has 
. In that case 
 
, and 
.

Proof

1. We consider first the case where , in that case applying Lemma 3 we have 
 and 
, where 
 is the prefix of 
 with length 
. Since  we have . Consider 
 and compute  and 
. In order to do that it is better to write
 Proposition 3 gives:
 
 Since  we obtain(6)
 
 To compute 
, we notice that the principal prefix of 
 is u.

Since , computing 
 as we did for  we get
 
 Using Equation (6) we have
 which gives 
.

2. Consider now the case when . Then let . We get by Lemma 2: 
. Applying Proposition 3 and , we have:
 This shows that 
 is a prefix of u, then we may write 
. We first notice that 
 is the principal prefix of 
 
, this follows from the fact that 
 is the principal prefix of 
.

We have that 
 
. Since 
 is the principal prefix of w, we have 
 and:
 
 From  we obtain:(7)

Let us compute 
 from 
 
 we obtain:
 
 Using Equation (7) we get:
 
 thus completing the proof. □

Corollary 1

Any word 
 may be obtained from the word  by a unique sequence of operations G and S.

Proof

We proceed by induction on n. Let w in 
 and the factorization 
, let 
 the word obtained by Theorem 2. If  then 
 and if  then 
. Using the inductive hypothesis we get the result. □

We give an example for illustration of Theorem 2:

Example 6

Applying Theorem 2 to the word w we obtain the word 
, as follows:

the length of u (that is 15) is greater than the length of v (that is 11), therefore 
 is a prefix of  
 
 
  
 
 
 .

Another interesting example is the following:

Example 7

The principal prefix of this word is given by:

Hence the factorization is:
 and then 
.

4.1. From doubly symmetric Dyck words to pairs of integers
Moreover, using Theorem 2 we obtain:

Corollary 2

Let  define an element of 
, and set . Then also  and  define words of 
. Moreover, any word in 
 can be uniquely defined by a sequence of such operations starting from .

Proof

Let 
 where the principal prefix u has length p. Then one has  and:
 From this we have 
 and its principal prefix is u as w. Also 
 and its principal prefix is 
 of length . □

We can illustrate this construction using the following binary tree. Each node of the tree contains three integers which we denote , where we have for each such node . Each node represents an element w of 
 with a principal prefix of length p it allows to build two words corresponding to the left and the right sons. The left son corresponds to the word  in 
 which has a principal prefix of length p. The right son corresponds to the word in 
 which has a principal prefix of length . All the words in 
 are obtained at distance at most  from the root.


Download : Download high-res image (51KB)
Download : Download full-size image
We give an example for illustration of Section 4.1:

Example 8

Let us consider again the word This word is obtained in the following way:

•
We start from  associated with the word 
.

•
We apply the operation G and we get  associated with the word 
.

•
We apply the operation S, with , and we get  associated with the word 
.

•
We apply the operation G and we get  associated with the word

•
We apply the operation S, with , and we get  associated with the word

5. Track vectors
We now use Corollary 1 in order to associate to any fixed point w of γ a sequence of positive integers 
 describing the sequence of operations G and S used to build w from . If one uses 
 operations S then one operation G, then 
 operations S then one operation G and so on, then we will have 
. We call this sequence the track vector of w. More precisely the 
 are equal to 1 plus the number of operations S used at the beginning, then between two operations G, and eventually at the end. For instance consider the word: It is obtained starting from the word:  by first performing G giving , then S giving: then G giving: and eventually S giving w. Since operation G is used twice the track vector has length 3 and the values of 
 are 
 so that the track vector of w is .

Formally,

Definition 8

Let w be a word in 
 obtained from  performing operation S 
 times, then operation G, then operation S 
 times and so on until eventually operation G and ending with 
 times operation S, where 
 for . Then the track vector of w is 
, where 
, . According to this notation, the integer k is said to be the breadth of w.

Proposition 6

Let 
 be the track vector of 
. Then, the track vector of 
 is 
 and while the track vector of 
 is 
.

Remark 1

The reason why we sum 1 to each of the 
 in the definition of the track vector is twofold. First, because the equations given in the sequel have a simpler form. Then, the fact that 
 makes the track vector similar to the integer partitions that we are going to consider in the next section.

Now we provide an algorithm which enables to obtain the word w from its track vector 
. Precisely, it builds iteratively two words 
 and 
 for .

Initial step: Let 
 and 
.

For  (Iterative step):

–
 
,

–
 
 
.

The word w is equal to 
 and its principal prefix is 
.

Conversely, if v b is a fixed point of α and u is its principal prefix, then, for any  and 
, the word 
 
 is a fixed point of γ.

Proof of the validity of the algorithm

It is not difficult to show that the iterative step consists in performing 
 times the operation S then one time the operation G.

Example 9

Let us consider again the word in Example 7: The word w is obtained starting from the word  by first performing S giving , then G giving , then S giving: and eventually G giving w. Since operation G is used twice the track vector has length 3 and the values of 
 are 
 so that the track vector of w is .

Hence, the word w is obtained by the algorithm taking 
 and 
. Indeed we have:
 Finally, 
.

5.1. Smooth fixed points of γ
A subfamily of 
 known as smooth words was studied in [1].

Definition 9

A smooth word is a word of 
 which does not have aba or bab as factors.

Now we prove that the smooth fixed points of γ determine a very large subfamily, as they can be generated by applying the algorithm from a track vector t, provided 
.

Proposition 7

Let 
 with track vector 
, with 
. Then, w is smooth if and only if 
.

Proof

 Proceed by contrapositive. If 
, then 
 and 
. Therefore 
 
. Now, if 
, then 
 
 
, while if 
, 
 contains at least a factor aba (hence also 
). If i is the breadth of w, then 
 is recursively obtained from 
; therefore 
 contains a factor aba and then 
 is not smooth.

 We now show by induction that if 
, then 
 is smooth. The property trivially holds for . Now, we assume that this holds for , and show that it also holds for i. The word 
 can be decomposed as 
 
 
. By inductive hypothesis, 
 does not contain any aba or bab factor. Therefore any aba or bab factor in 
 must necessarily be in 
 (hence also in 
 
). The prefix 
 is obtained as 
 
 and therefore it cannot contain any factor aba or bab since by inductive hypothesis 
 is smooth. We only need to prove that a factor bab or aba cannot be obtained by concatenating 
, 
 
 (for 
 
 an analogous argument holds). First, 
 ends with a and it is followed by another a, by construction, so neither aba nor bab can be obtained. It only remains to check that the 
 
 does not give rise to a aba factor. If this is the case, then 
 
 must start with ba. If so, consider the third element of 
: it cannot be a because it would violate the definition of principal prefix, and it cannot be b because otherwise the word 
 would contain a bab factor contradicting the inductive hypothesis. Therefore in 
, there cannot be any aba or bab factors, so it is smooth. □

5.2. From the track vector to the length
We now find how to determine the number of occurrences of the letter a in w using the values 
 of the track vector of w. This result will help us to obtain some results for the sequence 
. Denote 
 the number of the occurrences of a in the word with track vector 
 and 
 the length of the principal prefix of this word. The following statement readily follows.

Lemma 4

The values of N and P satisfy the recursive equations(8)
(9)
 with initial conditions(10)

Proof

Follows from the recursive factorization of any word in 
 given by the algorithm in the previous section. □

The previous lemma enables to compute the values of 
 and 
 for small i:
 and:

Theorem 3

For , the 
 satisfy the equation(11)

Proof

From the above lemma we have
 Then,
 The result follows from 
. □

We now give an example to illustrate the results of Section 5.2:

Example 10

When 
, 
, 
 and 
, 
, 
. Lemma 4 gives:

Remark 2

 contains a word w of breadth 2 if and only if  is not a power of 2.

Proof

Indeed for such a word we have 
 hence 
 and  must have an odd divisor greater than 1. □

Proposition 8

If  and  is not an odd power of 2, we have 
.

Proof

If  
 contains the two words 
 and 
 they are respectively of breadth 1 and n. If  is not a power of 2 then it may be written 
 where 
 is odd so that 
 with . Let 
 and 
 we have 
 hence the word with track vector 
 is an element of 
, and this set contains also a word of breadth 2.

If  is an even power of 2, writing 
 we have that the track vector 
 determines a word of breadth 3, since 
 this word is in 
. In both cases 
 has at least 3 elements. □

6. Partitions of integers and track vectors
The On-line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences [13] does not contain the sequence 
 of the number elements of 
. However, we find that the first 15 terms of this sequence coincide with the first 15 terms of the sequence A116473, counting the number of partitions of an integer having n subpartitions. Denoting 
 this sequence we have 
 for .

In this Section we explain the equality of the first terms of these sequences. For that aim we define a subset of the set of partitions which we call elementary partitions and a subset of the set of fixed points of γ which we call elementary fixed points. We then build a bijection between the elementary partitions having n subpartitions and the track vectors of elementary elements in 
. Showing then that all partitions having strictly not more than 16 subpartitions are elementary and all elements in 
 with  are elementary gives 
 for .

In order to define elementary partitions we recall some basic definitions and results concerning partitions (see also [14] Section 7.2 for instance). A partition of an integer n is a sequence 
 of positive integers such that 
 for  and 
. In that definition p is called the length of the partition. By convention the partition denoted ∅ is the unique partition of 0. A partition 
 is a subpartition of λ if  and 
 for all . Any partition λ different from ∅ has at least two subpartitions namely λ itself and ∅.

Remark 3

For any , the number of subpartitions of  (resp.  
 
 
 ) is .

The 30 first terms of the sequence of the number of partitions having exactly n (for ) subpartitions is For example there are 3 partitions having 5 subpartitions, precisely:  and . Notice that there is an equality between this first terms of this sequence and the first terms of 
: Indeed there are as many partitions with n subpartitions as the number of elements of 
 from  to . With  we have: 
 which is less than 
 which is 6. On the contrary there are 
 which is greater than 
.

We denote by  the number of subpartitions of the partition 
. In order to determine this value we use the two following lemmas.

Lemma 5

If the 
's are all equal then the number of subpartitions of λ is equal to  
 .

Proof

Consider the set of words on a two letters alphabet containing 
 occurrences of the letter a and p occurrences of the letter b. We show that there is a bijection between this set and the subpartitions of λ. Indeed to any such word w we associate the partition μ such that 
 is the number of occurrences of the letter a contained in the prefix 
 of w ending with the letter b and such that 
. □

One can build a bijection between fixed points of γ with breadth 2 and partitions having  subpartitions and satisfying a simple condition.

Lemma 6

Let 
 be a partition of length p such that the first k values of 
's are all equal, and . Consider the partition μ of length p such that 
 for all  and 
 and the partition ν of length  such that 
 for . Then the number of subpartitions of λ is given by:(12) 
  where 
.

Proof

We decompose the set of subpartitions of λ into two disjoint subsets, those which are a subpartitions of μ and those which are not. The first subset has  elements. Now we have to count the number of elements of the second subset. We observe that if 
 is a subpartition of λ which is not one of μ, then its length q is not less than k and is such that 
. Hence we can decompose the sequence 
 into two subsequences 
 and 
. The sequence 
 is a (possibly empty) partition which is a subpartition of ν.

Each such subpartition of ν obtained from some 
 has the same number of possible corresponding 
s. These 
s are all the weakly decreasing sequences of length k such that 
 for  and 
. We prove that the number of these sequences is equal to  
 . Consider the sequences obtained from 
 by subtracting 
 to all the terms. One obtains all weakly decreasing sequences of positive integers having length k where the first term is not greater than 
. These sequences are in bijection with words of length  on the letters alphabet  having k occurrences of the letter a. □

From the previous statement we obtain simple equations for the number of subpartitions of partitions of lengths 2 and 3 as follows:

Proposition 9

(13)
 
(14)
 
 

Proof

Equation (13) is a direct consequence of Lemma 5, Lemma 6 and Remark 3.

Applying Lemma 6 to 
 when 
, we get:

Using Lemma 6 again we have:
 
 Applying Lemma 6 again yields:
 
 hence: 
 
 

By Lemma 5 and Remark 3 we obtain Equation (14). □

6.1. Conjugate of a partition
We recall that, given a partition 
 of length p, its conjugate is the partition 
 of length 
 such that the number of parts equal to i in 
 is 
 with the convention that 
.

A classical representation of a partition is given by its Young diagram, where each part 
 is represented by a row containing 
 unit squares. The conjugation is equivalent to the transpose of the Young diagram exchanging rows and columns (see Fig. 14).

Fig. 14
Download : Download high-res image (41KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 14. The diagram of partition [7,7,3,1,1] and its conjugate [5,3,3,2,2,2,2].

Remark 4

Using the representation of a partition by its Young diagram it is easy to prove that a partition and its conjugate have the same number of subpartitions.

6.2. Elementary partitions and track vectors
We define two families of partitions and of track vectors which will be shown to be in bijection. In what follows the notation 
 will stand for a sequence of length p with all elements equal to j.

Definition 10

A partition 
 is elementary if one of the three conditions below is satisfied:

•
λ has length 1 or 2.

•
It has only one part greater than 2 that is 
.

•
It has only 2 parts greater than 1, that is 
.

Examples of elementary partitions are: 
, 
, 
, and 
.
Definition 11

A track vector 
 is an elementary track vector if one of the three conditions below is satisfied:

•
t has length 1 or 2.

•
There exists at most one j such that 
.

•
For  one has 

A word w in 
 will be called elementary if its track vector is.

Examples of elementary track vectors are 
, 
, 
, and 
. Observe that the smallest partition which is not elementary is , while the smallest track vectors which are not elementary are  and . Notice that  has 19 subpartitions while .

6.3. The bijection
The following states a bijection between elementary partitions and elementary track vectors:

Theorem 4

For integers , and 
 and 
, let ϕ be the mapping from elementary partitions to the elementary track vectors defined as:
 The mapping ϕ is a bijection between elementary partitions and elementary track vectors of the same lengths. Moreover, for any elementary partition λ we have:(15)

To prove this theorem we need the two following lemmas:
Lemma 7

For integers , and 
,(16)
 
(17)
 

Proof

Using Equation (12) we have:(18)
 A proof by recursion gives:
 and applying again Equation (12) we get:
 
 
 Using this identity in Equation (18) we obtain Equation (16).

To prove Equation (17) we use Remark 3 stating that a partition has the same number of subpartitions as its conjugate. The conjugate of the partition 
 has 
 parts equal to 1, 0 parts equal to i for , 1 part equal to , 0 part equal to j for  and one part equal to . Hence we may write it 
, giving:
 From Equation (16) we have:
 
 Expanding we obtain Equation (17). □

Lemma 8

For any integer , we have:(19)
(20)

Proof

We start computing:
 Using Equation (11) in Theorem 3, we can prove by induction that:
 We then prove Equation (19) by induction on p and q, using the fact that it holds when  or if , and Equation (11).

Then, to prove Equation (20), we use Equation (11), and obtain:
 Hence:
 □

6.4. Proof of Theorem 4
It is easy to show that any elementary partition is equal to one among the four possibilities stated in the definition of ϕ. For each such partition λ, the vector  is an elementary track vector. For each elementary track vector t, one can obtain a unique elementary partition λ such that . □

Remark 5

Theorem 4 explains the equality of the first 15 values of the sequences enumerating 
 and the number of partitions having n subpartitions. Indeed all the elements of 
 for  have elementary track vectors, and all the partitions with less than 16 subpartitions are elementary partitions.

7. Further work
In this paper we have introduced a simple recursive method to build fixed points of γ. This method enables to generate the first terms of the sequence enumerating 
, but does not provide a formula for these numbers. Useful information about the behavior of this sequence could be retrieved by studying the generating function of γ fixed points according to the paths semi-length, namely 
. Experimental data suggest that this function is likely to have an infinite number of singularities, which lead us to conjecture that it is non-holonomic. We plan to use the algorithm that we introduced in Section 4 to study the nature of  and possibly prove its non-holonomicity.

A further possible direction for further research is to use such algorithm to obtain a Constant Amortized Time (CAT) algorithm for the generation of the fixed points of γ.

Another line of research concerns the characterization and the study of subfamilies of 
 defined in a recursive way, as we have done for smooth fixed points.