Abstract
We study the following problem: for given integers d,k and graph G, can we obtain a graph with diameter d via at most k edge deletions? We determine the computational complexity of this and related problems for different values of d.

Keywords
Graph diameter
Blocker problem
Polynomial algorithm
NP-complete

1. Introduction
A typical graph modification problem aims to modify a graph parameter π via a small number of operations. The operations involved may be vertex deletion, edge deletion, edge addition, edge contraction, etc. That is, for a fixed graph operation, we ask, given a graph G and two integers k and d, whether G can be transformed into a graph  by using at most k operations so that  or . Typically,  is defined as the optimal value of an instance of an optimization problem on graphs. Thus, such problems are called blocker problems, as the set of vertices or edges involved in the operations “block” the optimal value of the problem. Identifying the part of the graph responsible for a significant change of the parameter under consideration gives crucial information on the graph.

Blocker problems have been given much attention over the last few years [4], [5], [10], [32]. Graph parameters considered were the matching number [29], [35], the -shortest path, the maximum flow and minimum -cut values [10], the chromatic number [2], [12], the independence number [2], [3], [12], the clique number [12], [27], the domination number [14], [28], and the vertex cover number [3], [23], [28], for instance. Concerning the operations involved to the minimal modification of a graph parameter or a graph property the reader can see [12], [21] for node deletion, [28], [33] for edge deletion, [12], [14], [17], [23], [33] for edge contraction.

Here, we aim to determine the number of edges to delete from a given graph to increase the diameter of the graph by a fixed amount. Our goal is to determine the computational complexity, that is, to either find polynomial-time algorithms or prove NP-completeness, for several related problems.

We consider the following decision problems:



Download : Download high-res image (35KB)
Download : Download full-size image


Download : Download high-res image (37KB)
Download : Download full-size image


Download : Download high-res image (44KB)
Download : Download full-size image


Download : Download high-res image (45KB)
Download : Download full-size image
In all the above problems we consider d to be a fixed constant independent of the input graph. If d is part of input, then all four problems are NP-complete as they generalize the Hamiltonian Path problem (which is obtained by taking  and, when necessary, ), see [30].

Our results and organization of the paper. In Section 2 we give the main definitions and notations we use throughout the paper together with some preliminary observations about the decisions problems defined above. In Sections 3 and 4 we give polynomial-time algorithms for the 3-mda, 3-meda, and 3-eda problems. Section 5 is devoted to NP-completeness results for k-meda and k-mda problems for . We show that 5-meda is NP-complete for graphs of diameter , and show the NP-completeness of k-meda for all , for some different values of the diameter of the input graph. The same results also hold for the k-mda problems. In Section 6 we give a conclusion and propose some future research problems.

Related work. There is a large literature studying extremal questions related to diameter (see, e.g., [7]). Among the questions most relevant to our study, let us mention the effect on the diameter of deleting t edges from a -edge-connected graph [9], the maximum number of edges in an n-vertex diameter-d-critical graph (that is, a graph with diameter d such that the diameter increases upon deletion of any edge; see [24]) and the minimum number of edges in an n-vertex graph such that deleting any edge results in a graph with diameter d (see [8]). A connection between the 3-meda problem and Moore graphs will be established in Section 4. From the algorithmic point of view, related problems extensively studied in the literature include the complementary problem of adding a minimum number of edges to achieve diameter d (see, e.g., [13], [15], [18], [22], [30]) and the length-bounded max flow and min cut problems (see [1], [25]).

2. Notations and preliminaries
We only consider finite, simple, and undirected graphs. We refer to [34] for undefined terminology.

Let  be a graph. For a subset , we let  denote the subgraph of G with vertex set V and edge set . The subgraph of G induced by a set  is denoted by  and defined as  where . The length of a path is its number of edges. Given two vertices u and v,  denotes the minimum length of a path between u and v (note that since G is assumed to be connected  is finite). A -path of minimum length is called a shortest -path. The diameter of G is the maximum length of a shortest path, that is, . A diametral path in a graph G is any shortest path between vertices u and v such that . A cut-vertex in a connected graph G is a vertex  such that  is not connected. A graph is biconnected if it is connected and has no cut-vertices. A cut-edge in a connected graph G is an edge  such that  is not connected. A vertex in a graph is universal if it is adjacent to all other vertices. The girth of a graph G, denoted , is the shortest length of a cycle in G (or ∞ if G is acyclic). A triangle in a graph G is a cycle of length three. Given two graphs G and H, we say that G is H-free if no induced subgraph of G is isomorphic to H. The -free graphs where  is a finite set of graphs are defined analogously.

2.1. (Non)monotonicity
It follows directly from the definitions that the d-da and d-mda problems satisfy a certain monotonicity, in the sense that for every , every graph G that is a yes instance to the -da problem is also a yes instance to the d-da problem, and similarly, every pair  that is a yes instance to the -mda problem is also a yes instance to the d-mda problem. Unsurprisingly, the analogous monotonicity fails to hold for the d-eda and d-meda problems. It is not difficult to construct graphs G and pairs of positive integers d, , and k, with  such that G is a yes instance to d-eda as well as to -eda, while  is a yes instance to -meda but not to d-meda. In other words, there is a set of at most k edges such that deleting them from G results in a graph with diameter  but there is no set of at most k edges whose deletion would produce a graph with diameter d.

Example 2.1

The graph shown in Fig. 1 has diameter 3, deleting any of the edges , , ,  results in a graph with diameter 5, while deleting any other edge does not change the diameter. However, a graph with diameter 4 can be obtained by deleting, for example, the two edges  and .

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (12KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. A graph in which the diameter can be increased by two by deleting a single edge, while two edges need to be deleted to increase the diameter by one.

2.2. The d-da problem
We show how the d-da problem is related to the problem of searching for a path of length d. Then we deduce that it is polynomial-time solvable.

Proposition 2.2

For a connected graph G and a positive integer d, the following are equivalent.

1.
G is a yes instance to the d-da problem.

2.
G has a connected spanning subgraph of diameter at least d.

3.
G has a spanning tree of diameter at least d.

4.
G contains a path of length at least d.

Proof

The equivalence between statements 1 and 2 is immediate from the definition of the d-da problem. Clearly, statement 3 implies statement 2. Moreover, statement 2 implies statement 4, as if  is a connected spanning subgraph of G of diameter at least d, then any diametral path in  is a path in G of length at least d. Finally, we argue that statement 4 implies statement 3. Let P be a path in G of length at least d. Then, G has a depth-first traversal starting with the edges of P along the path. The corresponding DFS tree is a spanning tree of G of diameter at least d, implying statement 3. □

Since for each fixed d, the presence of a path of length at least d can be tested in polynomial time, Proposition 2.2 implies the following.

Corollary 2.3

For every positive integer d, the d-da problem is solvable in polynomial time.

One may wonder whether there are similar characterizations of yes instances for the d-eda problem as those given in Proposition 2.2, in particular, whether the existence of a connected spanning subgraph of diameter d implies the existence of a spanning tree of diameter d. While this implication clearly fails if d is allowed to be the diameter of G (take for instance any cycle of length at least 4), examples can also be constructed showing that the implication fails if .

Example 2.4

Let G be the graph obtained from the 5-cycle by adding to it a new vertex v and connecting it by an edge to exactly two non-adjacent vertices of the 5-cycle. Graph G is of diameter two, it has a connected spanning subgraph of diameter three (for example, the subgraph obtained by deleting one of the two edges incident with v) but it is not difficult to verify that G has no spanning tree of diameter three.

2.3. Complete graphs
In the case when the input graph G is complete, the d-da, d-eda, d-mda, and d-meda problems are either trivial or related to a known and solved question in extremal graph theory.

First, since the maximum diameter of an n-vertex connected graph is , the complete graph  is a yes instance to the d-da (or to the d-eda) problem if and only if .

Second, the d-meda and the d-mda problems on  are equivalent to the problems of deleting the smallest number of edges from  so that the resulting graph is of diameter exactly d (resp., at least d). Both of these questions are equivalent to a well-known problem in extremal graph theory asking for the maximum number of edges in an n-vertex graph of diameter d. O. Ore proved that the maximum number of edges in a graph with n vertices and diameter d is upper bounded by 
 
 and this bound is tight [26]. Thus, the answer to either d-meda or d-mda problem given  and a positive integer k is yes if and only if  
 
 
.

For later use, we make note of the above observations.

Theorem 2.5

For all , the d-eda, d-mda, and d-meda problems are solvable in linear time for complete graphs.

2.4. The d-eda, d-mda, and d-meda problems for 
We give some observations solving the cases . First, note that for each of the d-eda, d-mda, and d-meda problems, we may assume that  since otherwise the answer is trivial:

•
If , then G is a no instance to the d-eda problem (since no spanning subgraph of G has diameter exactly d). Similarly, any  with  is a yes instance to the d-mda problem and a no instance to the d-meda problem.

•
If , then G is a yes instance to the d-eda problems (take ) and any  with  is a yes instance to the d-mda and d-meda problems.

Since complete graphs are the only graphs with diameter strictly less than 2, the above observation implies that all three problems are polynomially solvable for .

3. A polynomial-time algorithm for the 3-mda problem
We prove the following.

Theorem 3.1

The 3-mda problem is solvable in polynomial time.

The algorithm is based on a polynomial-time algorithm for the following problem for the case  (see [25]).



Download : Download high-res image (48KB)
Download : Download full-size image
We note that the inapproximability of two optimization problems related to d-mdisa when d is not constant was established in [20]. Beier et al. showed that for all , the optimization version of the d-mdisa problem is NP-hard to approximate within a factor of 1.1377 [1]. On the other hand, Mahjoub and McCormick showed that even a weighted version of the 3-mdisa problem is solvable in polynomial time, by reducing it to a max flow problem [25]. Hence, taking a weight  for each edge  in their construction, we obtain the following.

Theorem 3.2 Mahjoub and McCormick

The 3-mdisa problem is solvable in polynomial time.

Proof of Theorem 3.1.

Let  be an instance of the 3-mda problem. Note that  is a yes instance if and only if G has a pair of distinct vertices  and a set  such that ,  is connected and . This last condition is equivalent to the existence of a pair  of distinct vertices such that  is a yes instance to 3-mdisa, which can be solved in polynomial time by Theorem 3.2. □

4. Polynomial-time algorithms for the 3-eda and 3-meda problems
In this section we show how to solve the 3-eda and 3-meda problems in polynomial time.

The following weight function on the edges of a graph G will be useful. For each edge , we denote by  the minimum length of a cycle in G containing e (or ∞ if no such cycle exists). The weight function  is well-defined and can be computed in polynomial time; in fact, for every edge , the value of  equals the length of a shortest -path in  (or ∞ if no such path exists).

Lemma 4.1

Let G be a graph with . Then, for every edge e of G, we have . Furthermore, the following holds.
 

Proof

To see the first statement, suppose that e is an edge with  and let  with  be a shortest cycle containing e. Since  and  are non-adjacent and G is of diameter two,  and  have a common neighbor in G, say z. Observe that  induce a cycle containing e shorter than C, a contradiction. Hence, we have  for every edge e of G.

We prove the second statement. The case when  is trivial as the distance of any vertex pair increases by at most one by the deletion of e.

If , let  be a cycle of length four with . We claim that . Since , vertices  and  have no common neighbor in G and hence . Consequently . Suppose for a contradiction that . Then there exists a pair of vertices  such that , and observe that all shortest -paths in G must use the deleted edge . Since x and y are at distance two in G, this is only possible if , say  and . Since , we infer that no shortest -path in G (which are of length at most two) uses the edge , which implies . But then , a contradiction.

If  for , then we know that . Consequently, . Lastly, an edge with  is a cut-edge, and thus  is disconnected. By definition,  in this case. □

Lemma 4.2

Let G be a graph with at least four vertices with  and girth at most four. Then there exists a set  such that . Furthermore, such a set D of minimum size can be found in polynomial time.

Proof

If there exists an edge e whose deletion results in a graph of diameter three, then  is an optimal solution. We can thus make the following.

Assumption 1

For every edge , we have .

Assumption 1 and Lemma 4.1 imply the following.

Claim 1

The girth of G is three and for every edge  such that , .

Furthermore, Assumption 1 has strong implications on the structure of G.

Claim 2

G is biconnected.

Proof of Claim 2

Suppose that v is a cut-vertex and observe that v is adjacent with every other vertex of G. Since the girth of G is three, there exists an edge xy such that . Then  has a vertex pair at distance three, namely x and an arbitrary vertex from a connected component of  that does not contain x, a contradiction with Assumption 1. □

Claim 3

For every edge e of G, we have .

Proof of Claim 3

By Claim 2, all edge weights are finite. By Assumption 1 and Lemma 4.1, all edge weights are either 3 or 5. Since the graph has girth three, there is an edge with weight 3. Suppose for a contradiction that there exists an edge with weight 5. Then, since G is connected, there exists a pair of edges with different weights sharing a vertex, say  and  where  and . The definition of weight function w implies that  and  is the unique shortest -path in G. It follows that the distance in  between u and z is at least three. It is also at most three, since the edge uv is contained in a triangle in G. It follows that  has diameter three, contradicting Assumption 1. □

Claim 1, Claim 3 imply the following.

Claim 4

For every edge e of G, we have .

The following notation will be useful in the rest of the proof. Given a four-vertex path  in G, we denote by  the graph .

Claim 5

For every four-vertex path  in G, we have .

Proof of Claim 5

Suppose for a contradiction that  for some four-vertex path . Since the graph  is connected, it has finite diameter and thus contains a pair  of vertices at distance at least 4. Let . Using Claim 4, we infer that , which implies that vertices x and y have a common neighbor z in . On the other hand, since , at least one of the edges xz and yz is not present in , that is, at least one of the edges xz and yz belongs to . However, since , no two edges in  have an endpoint in common; in particular, not both of the edges xz and yz can belong to . By symmetry, we may assume that  (and thus ). Since  and  or vice versa, b is a common neighbor of x and z in . Thus,  is an -path of length 3 in , a contradiction with . □

A four-vertex path  in G is said to be irrelevant if there exists a vertex  such that  and , and relevant otherwise. The importance of relevant paths is given by the following.

Claim 6

Suppose that  for some  and let P be a diametral path in . Then P is relevant in G.

Proof of Claim 6

Let . Suppose for a contradiction that there exists a vertex  such that  and . Since vertices a and d are at distance 3 in , at least one of the edges va and vd belongs to D. By symmetry, we may assume that . But now, the fact that  implies that , yielding , a contradiction. □

By Claim 6, it suffices to consider relevant paths. However, we do not yet know if G contains an edge set D whose deletion results in a graph with diameter three. We show that this is indeed the case in the next two claims, by first establishing the existence of a relevant path and then showing that, given any relevant path P, it is possible to delete some edges incident to the vertices of P to increase the diameter of G by exactly one.

Claim 7

G has a relevant path.

Proof of Claim 7

First, note that G has a four-vertex path. Indeed, by Claim 1 G has a cycle C of length three. Since G has at least four vertices and it is biconnected by Claim 2, at least one vertex of C has a neighbor outside C, and a four-vertex path in G can be easily found.

Suppose for a contradiction that all four-vertex paths in G are irrelevant. Let  be an arbitrary four-vertex path in G. Since P is irrelevant, there exists a vertex  such that  and . Note that , since otherwise the existence of a 4-cycle  in  would contradict . A symmetric argument shows that . Furthermore, since  but , we infer that vertices a and d are adjacent in G. Since the above arguments hold for an arbitrary four-vertex path in G, it follows that G does not contain any induced four-vertex path. In particular, since the path  is not induced but  and , we must have .

The above arguments hold for an arbitrary four-vertex path in G, and thus we showed that for an arbitrary four-vertex path  in G, we have . But now, applying this argument to the path , we obtain that , a contradiction. □

Claim 8

Let  be a relevant path in G, let  for some , and let . Then, there exists an edge set  with  for each  such that . Furthermore, such an edge set can be computed in polynomial time.

Proof of Claim 8

By Claim 5, we have . If , then we are done (by taking ). So we assume that . Note that this implies that . Consider the case when . Since P is relevant, the weights  and  cannot both be equal to 5. Suppose that both are at least 5. Then , since  is a cycle of length 5 in  containing the edges  and , a contradiction. We thus have , and we choose  as an edge of minimum weight among . Then  and it follows that  by Lemma 4.1.

Now we consider the case . Notice that  for every edge e of the form  or . If there exists an edge  with , then  is a desired edge set by Lemma 4.1. Therefore, we may assume that  for every edge .

Consider an arbitrary edge set  such that  for each i and  (for example, ). Obviously, there exists a vertex  such that D contains neither  nor . We claim that there exists an edge  such that . Recall that  and a must have a common neighbor in  by the above assumption. If  and a have a common neighbor in  in the graph , then clearly . Otherwise  has at least one neighbor  in . From , at least one of  and  forms a triangle in , thus ensuring the existence of  such that .

We now define a sequence of sets  such that for all  we have ,  for each i,  for all , and . We set  and for each , we set  where  is a vertex such that  contains neither  nor  and  is an edge in  such that . Note that such an edge exists by the claim proved in the previous paragraph. Clearly, the final set  can be computed in polynomial time and satisfies  for each i and . Thus,  is a desired set. This proves Claim 8. □

For a relevant path , let us denote by  the quantity given by the following expression: By Claim 8, for every relevant path  one can compute an edge set D of size at most  such that  has diameter three.

By Claim 7, Claim 8, we conclude that there exists an edge set D such that . On the other hand, for every relevant path Q, any solution D which makes Q a diametral path contains at least  edges. Furthermore, by Claim 6 any path ⁎ achieving diameter three after removing an optimal solution ⁎ is relevant, and an output solution of size at most ⁎ provided by Claim 8 meets the lower bound and thus is an optimal solution (even though it need not be necessarily identical with ⁎). These observations bring forth the following algorithm: we iterate over all four-vertex paths  in G and compute a solution of size at most  whenever Q is relevant. By keeping track of a thus-far best solution, we can compute an optimal solution. Clearly, the algorithm runs in polynomial time. □

Theorem 4.3

Let G be a graph. Then, G has a spanning subgraph of diameter three if and only if one of the following conditions holds.

(i)
 (that is, G is a complete graph) and G has at least four vertices.

(ii)
 and G has girth at most four.

(iii)
.

Proof

Suppose first that G has a spanning subgraph  such that . Since , we infer that G has diameter at most three. Furthermore, since  contains a pair of vertices at distance three,  (and therefore G) has at least four vertices. If G has diameter one or three, then one of conditions (i) and (iii) holds.

Let us assume now that . It remains to show that G has girth at most four. Suppose that the girth of G is at least five. By Lemma 4.1, we have  for every edge e of G. Then Lemma 4.1 implies that G does not contain any spanning subgraph of diameter three, a contradiction. This establishes the forward implication.

We now prove that the conditions are also sufficient. Let G be a graph satisfying one of conditions (i)–(iii). We will show that in each case, G contains a spanning subgraph  with diameter three. If condition (i) holds, observe that for every edge , the graph  has diameter two and girth three, which reduces to the case of (ii). If condition (ii) holds, that is, G has diameter two and girth at most four, then a desired subgraph  exists by Lemma 4.2. If condition (iii) holds, then we can take . This completes the proof. □

Theorem 4.3 implies the following.

Corollary 4.4

The 3-eda problem is solvable in polynomial time.

In case of a yes instance, a smallest set of edges whose deletion results in a graph of diameter 3 can also be computed efficiently.

Theorem 4.5

The 3-meda problem is solvable in polynomial time.

Proof

If G has diameter three, the solution is trivial (delete nothing). If G has at most three vertices or has diameter at least four, then it is a trivial no instance. We may also assume that G is not complete. Indeed, if G is complete, then we can delete any edge to transform G into an equivalent graph  of diameter two and girth three. Solving the resulting instance  optimally will yield an optimal solution for G. Clearly, whether G satisfies one of the above conditions (and if so, which one) can be checked in polynomial time. Therefore, we may assume that G has at least four vertices and diameter two. Moreover, we may assume that G has girth at most four, since otherwise G is trivially a no instance by Lemma 4.1. Now, applying Lemma 4.2 we can compute an optimal solution. □

The result of Theorem 4.3 connects our study to a well-known concept in extremal and algebraic graph theory, the Moore graphs. A connected graph with diameter d is either acyclic or has girth at most . A connected graph G with diameter d and girth exactly  is said to be a Moore graph (see [31]). A Moore graph is necessarily regular (that is, all vertices have the same degree), and, apart from odd cycles and complete graphs, all Moore graphs have diameter two. Furthermore, it is known that every Moore graph G with diameter two is k-regular with  for some . For each , there is a unique k-regular Moore graph with diameter two, namely the 5-cycle (for ), the (10-vertex) Petersen graph (for ), and the (50-vertex) Hoffman-Singleton graph (for ); see, e.g., [6]. The existence of a (3250-vertex) 57-regular Moore graph is a famous open problem in graph theory (see [11] for a recent survey). Theorem 4.3 implies the following characterization of graphs with diameter two that are yes / no instances to the 3-eda problem.

Corollary 4.6

For every graph G with diameter two, the following holds.

1.
If G has girth at most four, then G has a spanning subgraph of diameter three.

2.
If G has girth at least five, then G is either a Moore graph or G is acyclic (in which case G is isomorphic to a star  for some ); in either case, G does not have any spanning subgraph of diameter three.

5. NP-completeness results for d-meda and d-mda for 
We prove that 5-meda is NP-complete for graphs with diameter three and four. Then we generalize this result to d-meda for all . Our approach also proves NP-completeness of d-mda for all .

Theorem 5.1

The 5-meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter 3.

Proof

Since computing the diameter of a graph can be done in polynomial time, 5-meda is in NP.

Our reduction is from the NP-complete Vertex Cover problem (see [16]). A vertex cover in a graph G is a set of vertices intersecting every edge.



Download : Download high-res image (26KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Given an instance  of Vertex Cover we create an instance  of the 5-meda problem such that  is of diameter 3 as follows.

We set .

For each vertex  we create a path .

For each edge  we create two paths  and .

There is a vertex s with the edges  and  for every .

There is a vertex t with the edges  and  for every .

Finally, there are  and , two complete graphs each with  vertices. For every vertex  and each  there are the edges  ad , and there is an edge  for every . For every vertex  and each  there are the edges  and , and there is an edge  for every . There is an edge between any pair of vertices of .

There are no other vertices or edges in G.

Clearly  can be computed from  in polynomial time. Furthermore, it can be verified that G has diameter 3.

Suppose that  is a yes instance of Vertex Cover. Let  be a vertex cover in Γ of size . We build  as follows: for each  we put the edges  and  in F; for each  we put edge  in F. Thus . We show that . First,  where ,  and , is a path of length 5 in . Now let P be a shortest -path in . Since  the length of P is at least 3. If P has length less than 5 it cannot contain a vertex of . Assume that the length of P is 3. Then  for some . If  then  and P cannot be a path in . If  then  and P cannot be a path in . So P has length at least 4. Assume that the length of P is 4. Suppose that the second vertex in P is  for some . Then , which is impossible since either  and  or  and . So the second vertex of P is  for some . Therefore , which implies that , and thus . Thus  for some  and some . Since  and S is a vertex cover of Γ, we have . But , a contradiction. We conclude that the length of P is 5. Now, for any pair of vertices  we have  (passing through the vertices of ). Thus any shortest path that is not an -path has a length no more than 4. Hence the diameter of  is 5 and  is a yes instance of 5-meda.

Suppose that  is a yes instance of 5-meda. So there exists a set , , such that the diameter of  is 5. It can be verified that for any two distinct vertices  such that , there are at least  edge-disjoint -paths of length at most four in G (using vertices of ). Therefore, . This implies that a shortest path of length 5 in  is an -path. Note that each -path in G with a vertex in  has length at least five. We may thus assume that F does not contain any edge incident to a vertex of .

The only -paths of length 3 in G are of the form  for . They are pairwise edge-disjoint, so at least  of their edges are in F, at least one per path. The -paths of length 4 in G are paths  or  for , and paths  for  and . All the other -paths of G have length more than 4.

Suppose that F contains an edge of the form . This edge cannot be in an -path of length 3. Since the path  is a unique -path of length 4 that contains this edge, we can remove  from F and add instead the edge  (if  is not already in F). So from now, by symmetry, we may assume that for every , the edges  and  are not in F.

Suppose that F contains an edge of the form . Since there is exactly one -path of length 4 that contains this edge, the path , and the edge  cannot be in an -path of length 3, we can remove  from F and add instead the edge  (if  is not already in F). The same argument can be used with the edge . So from now, by symmetry, we may assume that each edge in F is of the form , , or  for some .

Since for every , set F contains at least one of the edges of the path , we infer that F contains at least one of the edges  and , for every . By symmetry, F also contains at least one of the edges  and  for every . Thus, if for some  we have , then  and .

Furthermore, if for some  we have  and , then we may assume that . Indeed, if  for some , then we can replace F with : adding the edge  to the graph  cannot create an -path of length 4 or less since  and .

From the above we infer that F has the following structure. For each  either  or . Since , at most c pairs  are in F. From F we build a set  as follows. We take  if and only if . So . For each edge  we have  or  else  for some  would be an -path in  of length 4. Thus S is a vertex cover of Γ and  is a yes instance. □

Theorem 5.2

The 5-meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter 4.

Proof

The proof is the same as the proof of Theorem 5.1 except for the following. Instead of two complete subgraphs , here there are four pairwise disjoint complete subgraphs  with  vertices each. All the vertices of  are adjacent to all the vertices of . All the vertices of  are adjacent to all the vertices of . The vertices of  and  are linked to the rest of G as previously. The so obtained graph now has diameter 4 (the diametral paths are from  to t and from  to s). □

Lemma 5.3

For any fixed  the -meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter d.

Proof

Given an instance  of the 5-meda problem such that  is of diameter 4 we create an instance  of -meda problem such that  is of diameter d as follows. We take . Let  be a diametral pair of G. Let . We add to G a path with (new) vertices  and an edge . Let  be a yes instance of 5-meda. Let  be such that  has diameter 5. Then  has diameter . Now, let  be a yes instance of -meda and  be such that  has diameter . Since  is connected,  and  is connected. It follows from the proof of Theorem 5.1 (which is the basis for the proof of Theorem 5.2) that for every two vertices  in G such that , we have . This implies that vertices s and  form the only diametral pair of  and thus  has diameter . □

Clearly, Theorem 5.2 and Lemma 5.3 have the following consequence.

Corollary 5.4

For every , the d-meda problem is NP-complete.

We now show how to further adapt the above constructions to prove that for any fixed  and , -meda is NP-complete for graphs of diameter d. The possible values of q for which we obtain NP-completeness depend on the diameter d of the target graph (or, equivalently, on the diameter of the input graph); see Theorem 5.8 for the precise statement.

Lemma 5.5

For any fixed  and , the following restriction of the -meda problem is NP-complete:

Input: A connected graph G with diameter d and a positive integer p such that there is no set  with fewer than p edges such that  has diameter  and there is no set  such that  and  has diameter at least .

Question: Is there a set  such that  and  is a connected graph of diameter ?

Proof

We showed in the proof of Theorem 5.1 that the 5-meda problem remains NP-complete for instances  such that . The proof was based on a reduction transforming an instance  of Vertex Cover to an instance  of the 5-meda problem such that . Without loss of generality, we may assume that the instance  of Vertex Cover is an instance obtained from Karp's reduction from 3-SAT to Vertex Cover [19], in which case c vertices are necessary to cover all the edges. This in turn implies that there is no set  with fewer than k edges such that  has diameter 5 (since otherwise one could use the arguments from the proof Theorem 5.1 to infer that Γ has a vertex cover of size less than c). Hence through the proof of Theorem 5.2 the same holds for an instance  of 5-meda when G has diameter 4. From such an instance  we build , another instance of 5-meda where  has diameter 4. We take . We take  copies of the subgraph of G induced by the all vertices  and . Here the four cliques  have size  times the size they have in the proof of Theorem 5.2. The copies of the vertices  are connected in the same manner as above to the four cliques . There are two vertices  connected to the copies of the vertices  as before. Hence the  copies of G are pairwise independent in . Note that  has diameter 4. As noted in the proof of Theorem 5.1, only the edges between the vertices  can be put inside an edge set F whose removal increases the diameter of the graph by one unit. Thus there is no set  with fewer than  edges such that  has diameter 5. Furthermore, there is no set  with at most  edges such that  has diameter more than 5, since the  copies of G are pairwise independent. With the same construction as in the proof of Lemma 5.3 the same conclusion can be derived for instances  of -meda such that  has diameter d. □

Lemma 5.6

For every fixed d and q, , the -meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter .

Proof

Given an instance  of the -meda problem such that  is of diameter d and satisfies the condition of Lemma 5.5 with , we create an instance  of -meda problem such that  is of diameter  as follows. Let . Let  be a diametral pair of G. We add to G a path with (new) vertices  and an edge . We denote . For each  we add a new vertex  with the two edges , . Let us denote by  the edge set of the triangle containing . Clearly  has diameter . Let  be a yes instance of -meda. Let  be such that  has diameter . Let . Then  and  has diameter . Now, let ( be a yes instance of -meda and  be such that  has diameter . Since  satisfies the condition of Lemma 5.5, the diameter d of G cannot be increased to  where , by deleting only  edges. The graph  is connected, so  whenever . This implies that  for all  and . Thus  is such that  has diameter . □

Lemma 5.7

For every fixed d and q, , with  the -meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter .

Proof

From Theorem 5.1 we know that the 5-meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter 3. Using similar arguments as in the proof of Lemma 5.3 the -meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter d. Now with similar arguments as those used in the proofs of Lemma 5.5, Lemma 5.6 the proof is complete. □

Using Lemma 5.3, Lemma 5.6, Lemma 5.7 we now derive the following general result.

Theorem 5.8

For every fixed  and q such that , the -meda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter d.

Proof

If , then we use Lemma 5.3.

For , let  and . Then  and applying Lemma 5.6 with  and  in place of d and q, respectively, we have that -meda is NP-complete for graphs of diameter . Since  and  the result follows.

For , let  and . Since , we have . Since  and , we also have  and . From Lemma 5.7 we have that -meda is NP-complete for graphs of diameter . Since  and , the result follows. □

Our approach used in the proofs of Theorem 5.1, Theorem 5.8 (including Lemma 5.5 and its proof) actually shows that analogous results hold also for the Minimum Diameter- Augmentation problems.

Theorem 5.9

The 5-mda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter 3.

Theorem 5.10

For every fixed  and q such that , the -mda problem is NP-complete for graphs of diameter d.

6. Conclusion and future works
We determined the computational complexity of several problems related to the blocker problem for the diameter of a graph. In particular, we summarize in Table 1 the complexity results for the -meda and -mda problems when restricted to graphs of diameter d for various values of  and .


Table 1. Complexity of the Minimum Exact Diameter-(d + q) Augmentation problem when restricted to graphs of diameter d, for various values of d ≥ 1 and q ≥ 1. Rows are indexed by the value d of the diameter of the input graph. Columns are indexed by the desired value q of the diameter increase. P denotes that the problem is solvable in polynomial time, NP-c that it is NP-complete, and a question mark that the complexity is open. Next to each entry, we give a reference for the corresponding statement (T stands for Theorem). The same results and open questions hold also for the Minimum Diameter-(d + q) Augmentation problem when restricted to graphs of diameter d, for various values of d ≥ 1 and q ≥ 1 (see Theorem 2.5, Theorem 3.1, Theorem 5.9, Theorem 5.10).

d ﹨ q	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
1	P (T 2.5)	P (T 2.5)	P (T 2.5)	P (T 2.5)	P (T 2.5)	P (T 2.5)	P (T 2.5)
2	P (T 4.5)	?	?	?	?	?	?
3	?	NP-c (T 5.1)	?	?	?	?	?
4	NP-c (T 5.2)	?	?	?	?	?	?
5	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	?	?	?
6	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	?	?
7	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	?
8	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)	NP-c (T 5.8)
In conclusion, we list some related open problems and research directions that seem interesting for future consideration. The d-meda and d-mda problems are polynomial for  and NP-complete for all . Thus, to obtain a dichotomy, two open problems remain, the complexity of 4-meda and 4-mda. It would be natural to also investigate the d-eda problem for . In the cases of NP-complete constant diameter augmentation problems, it would be interesting to understand restrictions on the input graphs under which the problems become tractable, and perform a more detailed complexity analysis of the problems, for example with respect to parameterized complexity, existence of polynomial kernels, and approximability properties of the corresponding optimization problems.

From the structural point of view, an interesting question related to the Exact Diameter-d Augmentation problems is the following. What are the graphs G such that the set of diameter values of the spanning connected subgraphs of G forms an interval of consecutive integers? This class of graphs generalizes trees and complete graphs. Examples of graphs not in the class include Moore graphs of diameter two (for example, the Petersen graph).