We propose a cuttable wireless power transfer sheet which allows users to modify its size and shape. This intuitive manipulation
allows users to easily add wireless power transmission capabilities to everyday objects. The properties of the sheet such
as thinness, flexibility, and lightness make our sheet highly compatible with various configurations. We contribute a set of
technical principles for the design of circuitry, which integrates H-tree wiring and time division power supply techniques.
H-tree wiring allows the sheet to remain functional even when cut from the outside of the sheet, whereas time division
power supply avoids the reduction in power transfer efficiency caused by the magnetic interference between adjacent
transmitter coils. Through the evaluations, we found that our time division power supply scheme mitigates the degradation of
power transfer efficiency and successfully improves the average efficiency. Furthermore, we present four applications which
integrates our sheet into daily objects: wireless charging furniture, bag, jacket, and craft; these applications confirmed the
feasibility of our prototype.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile computing;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Wireless power transfer sheet, cuttable electronics, thin film coil array
1 INTRODUCTION
Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) using designated charging cradles has reached the stage of commercialization
in the past few decades [1, 2]. Although this provides some advantages over wired power supply such as being
waterproof and having no mechanical contacts, it still requires a dedicated transmitter (TX) and perfectly aligned
placement of a receiver (RX). To achieve hassle-free integration of charging functions into daily objects, it is
necessary to offer a “novice-friendly” design procedure for integrating WPT capabilities with users’ convenience.
A straightforward approach toward this concept is to form WPT surfaces by arranging TX coils according to the
shape of target surfaces [1, 17, 25, 26, 38]. However, the limitation of this approach is that this design procedure Fig. 1. Our cuttable WPT sheet allows the fabrication of WPT surfaces through a simple physical “cut-and-paste” process.
We introduce three application examples: wireless charging shelf, bag, and jacket.
necessitates tremendous effort, knowledge, and time. This is not just a problem of designing the coil array
topology so that it fits in the intended shape, but also involves a complex wiring process; this process brings about
stricter topological constraints as well as compensation of the non-ideal effects that occur due to high-frequency
operation [38]. Furthermore, when TX coils form a dense array, the magnetic interference between adjacent TX
coils is non-negligible; this causes a reduction in power transfer efficiency, which is another challenge that must
be addressed [6, 24].
To push the boundaries of ubiquitous WPT surfaces (i.e., power delivery to devices placed on everyday surfaces),
we propose a cuttable WPT sheet that allows the fabrication of WPT surfaces through a simple physical “cutand-paste” process. Our idea began by observing our surroundings — we noticed that the customizability and
simplicity of traditional cuttable resources such as wood, cloth, and paper have accelerated the fabrication of
custom objects. Carpenters cut out standardized wooden boards to build furniture such as desks, chairs, and
shelves, whereas tailors cut ready-made textiles to make clothes fit different sizes of the customer. Cardboard
and plywood are frequently cut by designers to make physical prototypes and wrapping materials are cut to
cover objects. Thus, we believe that by using our analogy concept — “cuttable WPT sheet” —, anyone (e.g.,
researchers, hobbyists, craft-men, and end users) should be able to quickly transform various daily surfaces into
ubiquitous WPT surfaces; some example applications are shown in Fig. 1. Some example scenarios we envision
are: (a) manufacturers offer wooden boards with our WPT sheet embedded, and carpenters and DIYers cut these
WPT boards to build wireless charging enabled furniture, and (b) the fashion industry embeds our WPT sheet in
clothing/bags and enable devices to be charged as they are simply placed in pockets.
To provide a proof of concept, we present the first prototype of a cuttable WPT sheet. Our design combines
H-tree wiring and time division power supply; H-tree wiring makes our sheet capable of being cut, whereas time
division power supply prevents magnetic interference between adjacent TX coils. We implemented a functional
prototype of the proposed sheet using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components and a flexible PCB; the
size and weight of our prototype are 400 mm × 400 mm and 512 g/m2
, respectively. Furthermore, we present a
wide range of applications and conduct a series of technical evaluations, to show typical use-cases, capabilities,
limitations of our design. The application scenarios we consider are 1) wireless charging furniture, 2) wireless
charging bag, 3) wireless charging jacket, and 4) wireless charging craft.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
1. Introduction and design guidelines for a cuttable WPT sheet
2. Implementation and evaluation of our prototype
3. Exploration of a range of applications
In the following sections, we will present the related works, functions of our sheet, implementation details,
potential applications, technical evaluations, limitations, and future works.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:3
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
Our work is strongly related to the following research areas: cuttable electronics and 2-D power supply sheets. In
this section, we first introduce cuttable electronics which our work is inspired by. Then, we review potential
technologies for enabling our vision of ubiquitous WPT surfaces, which include ad-hoc contact DC power supply
sheets and WPT sheets.
2.1 Cuttable Electronics
Our work is heavily inspired by prior research on cuttable electronics, which can be categorized into two groups:
1) modular and programmable 1-D sensor arrays [9, 11, 15, 49] and 2) cuttable 2-D sensor sheets [33]. The former
can be separated and rejoined to make various shapes. In contrast, the latter can be customized into various
shapes by cutting; our work aims to boost the latter trend of cuttable electronics by adding “power supply”
capability, which is one of the most highly desired and fundamental primitives of electronics.
Wiring topology is a key factor in cuttable sensor sheets since they achieve ad-hoc customization by cutting.
Olberding et al. proposed to connect touch sensors through the combination of tree and star topologies so that
the remaining sensors do not lose connection to the central unit upon cutting [33]. These topologies are known
to exist in biological system and computer network studies; since they draw wires from the center to the edges,
they are robust against outer edge faults.
2.2 Power Supply Sheets
Power supply sheets are functional 2-D surfaces that provide power to the RXs placed on them. We categorize
these researches into two groups: 1) ad-hoc contact DC power supply sheets [13, 37, 39, 42, 44, 46] and 2) WPT
sheets [17, 25, 26, 30, 35, 38, 45]. Ad-hoc contact DC power supply sheets transmit power to RXs via electrodes
which establish conductive contact. In contrast, WPT sheets transfer power via electromagnetic fields in a contactless manner [5]. Given that typical surfaces are coated or painted (e.g., wallpaper, desk, shelf, etc.), contact-less is
a mandatory factor. Therefore, our study focuses on advancing the field of WPT sheets.
Various approaches towards WPT sheets have been introduced, ranging from inductive power transfer (IPT) [38,
43], magnetically coupling resonant wireless power transfer (MCR-WPT) [14, 17, 25, 26], capacitive power transfer
(CPT) [8, 41], 2-D waveguide power transmission [30, 31], quasi-wireless power transfer (Quasi-WPT) [35, 45],
and so on. In the following, we review previous WPT sheets in terms of wiring topology and system architectures.
IPT transfers energy via the magnetic coupling between TX/RX coils and can achieve high-efficiency power
transfer over a short distance [12]. Qi standard can be extended to 2-D surfaces by composing a switchable TX
coil array, in which each TX coil is connected to the power source and the central control unit activates the TXs
closest to RXs [4]. While this connection can be easily applied to a few TX coils, assuring the space for wiring of
tens of TX coils in this architecture is a challenge. In contrast, the TX coil array by Sekitani et al. employs matrix
topology for selecting TX coils close to RXs [38, 43]. The elegance of this approach is that the number of wires
can be minimized [33], but the disconnection of a single line results in the irreversible dysfunction of many TX
coils. Hence, this is not suitable for shape adaptation by cutting.
MCR-WPT is a variant of IPT which employs high-Q magnetically coupled TX/RX resonators instead of
TX/RX coils and has the promise of high-efficiency power delivery even under loosely coupled conditions;
consequently, misalignment tolerance can be improved [20]. Furthermore, it is known that by placing resonant
coils next to the TX, the magnetic field can be “relayed” and as a result, the power transfer distance can be
extended [40]. Two major types of MCR-WPT sheets have been presented in literature: 1) switchable TX coil
array sheets [17, 25] and 2) relay coil array sheets [14, 26]. Mori et al. [25] and Jolani et al. [17] apply MCR-WPT
to switchable TX coil arrays, but they are based on matrix topology similar to Sekitani et al. [38] and thus, are
not suitable for shape adaptation by cutting, as described above. On the other hand, relay coil array sheets
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:4 • R. Takahashi et al.
are good in that the relay coils do not have to be connected to each other; however, the relay coils have to be
precisely controlled to direct energy as intended, and therefore a powerful central unit as well as a protocol are
necessary [14, 26].
CPT is an approach that employs capacitive coupling and achieves high-efficiency over a short distance. The
TX/RX of traditional CPT system consist of two pairs of metal plates [21]. While CPT systems are easy to fabricate,
there is a typical problem in that the power transfer efficiency is easily degraded by 1) the misalignment of
TX/RX plates and 2) the dielectric materials around the plates such as wood, cardboard, plastic, or plywood; this
is critical since there are many everyday materials that work as dielectrics and they exist all over the real world.
Although methods to improve misalignment tolerance are currently being investigated and have succeeded in
specific configurations [8], detouring the effect of dielectrics still requires complex control mechanisms such as
adaptive impedance tuning [41].
2-D waveguide power transmission transfers energy via non-radiative electromagnetic standing waves
generated within a custom designed 2-D waveguide sheet. The TX stimulates the resonant modes of the sheet
via an incident signal and generates the standing waves, whereas the RX couples with the standing waves and
receives energy [30, 31]. While this system enables large-area 2D waveguide power transmission at low cost
due to its simple waveguide structure, the relatively low efficiency and the null points of power delivery are its
non-negligible disadvantages [31]. Noda et al. showed that it is possible to avoid the generation of null points by
selecting an appropriate standing wave pattern according to a single RX position [31]. Another critical drawback
is that the characteristic of the modes (i.e., field pattern, frequency, etc.) are fully determined by sheet geometry;
the modification of the shape requires the design of an entirely new driving system and thus, modification is not
suitable.
Quasi-WPT is a recently presented method based on single-wire no-return power transmission [35, 45]. This
method powers electronic devices over conductive surfaces using standing wave modes excited within a helical
receiver [35, 45]. The TX in this system can be fabricated by cutting a sheet of aluminum foil into a desired size
and shape, and thus it may be suitable for shape adaptation by cutting. However, Quasi-WPT has a fundamental
challenge: the return pass may be unstable since it is constructed by the stray capacitance between the RX and
the source, which is highly affected by the external dielectric materials and the state of the TX sheet.
Based on the above review, we chose to design our system based on MCR-WPT due to two advantages of 1)
robustness for misalignment between RX/TX, and 2) small interference from surrounding dielectric materials.
Furthermore, we regard the simplicity of the system architecture as important since complicated architecture
increases cost and requires a rich control system; this leads to difficulty in extension to larger WPT sheets, which
is another reason we decided to use this method.
3 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
Given the above discussions, the core design criteria for our cuttable WPT sheet should be as follows:
1. The sheet should remain functional even after cutting manipulation.
2. The power supply area should be dense (i.e., power should be available from anywhere within the surface).
3. The system architecture should be applicable to large surfaces.
This goal brings about three main challenges, each related to one criterion. The first challenge is that typical
circuits are not compatible with cutting. Thus, both the wiring topology and circuit design should be designed so
that the remaining partition of the coil array works even after the sheet is partially cut. However, simple star or
tree topology [33] is not suitable for TX coil arrays, as described in §3.2. Our solution is to use H-tree wiring
which enables cutting TX coil arrays. Secondly, the dense power supply area requires the dense arrangement
of the TX coils, although this leads to the performance degradation stemming from the inductive interference
between adjacent TX coils, as illustrated in §3.3. Our solution is to employ time division power supply which
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:5
MCU
Central Control Unit for the Timing
Adjustment of Time Division Power Sources
Group 1
local sensing/switching
mechanism + TX coil
Group2
Group3
Group4
send the value of
DC current
adjust the time frame
reserved for each group
Signal Line
Power Line
Group1 to local sensing/switching
mechanism
to TX coil array
Group2
Group3
Group4
local sensing/switching
mechanism + TX coil
AC Power
DC Power
Central Connectors
Flexible PCB
turn relay ON
when time division control is ON
and either hall effect sensor detects RX
relay for switching
hall effect sensor
for proximity sensing
magnet
TX coil
RX coil
X
y
z
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. System overview of cuttable WPT sheet. (a) Our system consists of three components: 1) a central control unit for the
timing adjustment of time division, 2) a flexible PCB (TX coil array on the front side and local sensing/switching mechanism
attached to each TX coil on the back side), and 3) AC and DC power sources. The flexible PCB is driven by AC/DC power
sources and control signals for time division power supply through central connectors. (b) Each TX coil is activated when a
proximity sensor attached to the TX detects RX and the time division signal for the TX is ON.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:6 • R. Takahashi et al.
avoids the simultaneous activation of adjacent TX coils. Lastly, it is difficult to guarantee scalability if we use the
naive idea of central control; this tends to be complicated as the number of TX coils increases. Our solution is to
partially offload the sensing/control procedure into local hardware embedded in each TX (detailed in §3.4) and
minimize the role of central control unit (i.e, the central unit only provides power and sends out time division
control signals).
In the remainder of this section, we first provide an overview of our system design, which combines the
aforementioned three technologies. Then, we discuss the design of each core technology in detail. Lastly, we
illustrate the implementation of our prototype.
3.1 System Overview
We show an overview of our system in Fig. 2. As shown in Fig. 2(a), our system consists of three main units: 1)
a central control unit for the timing adjustment of time division operation, 2) a flexible PCB compatible with
cutting (a TX coil array is on the front side, whereas the local sensing/switching mechanism is attached to each
TX coil on the back side) and 3) AC and DC power sources; an AC power source (6.78 MHz) is used for WPT,
whereas a DC power source supplies energy to the local sensing/switching mechanism. The power sources and
control lines for driving both TX coil arrays and local sensing/switching module are connected via two input
connectors, which are placed at the center of the flexible PCB; the only procedure necessary to make the system
functional is to cut and paste the flexible sheet and plug the cables into these two connectors.
Next, we explain the procedure of power supply in this architecture. The objective of this procedure is to
enhance energy efficiency and power capability by (i) avoiding the simultaneous activation of adjacent TX coils
and (ii) selectively activating the TX coil closest to the RX coil. The brief description of this procedure begins with
the role of the central unit. To avoid the simultaneous activation of adjacent TX coils, the central unit divides the
TX coils into N groups (N = 4 in the case of square TX coil arrays), each of which consists of non-adjacent TX
coils connected in parallel, and transmits an activation signal to each group in turn. After the central unit, the
next part is the local hardware module offloaded to each TX coil, which mainly consists of proximity sensing
and switching mechanism. To activate the TX coil closest to the RX coil, the parallel connected TX coils are
normally-OFF and the turning ON of the TX coil is triggered by the time division signal and proximity sensing
unit; when a RX coil supplied with magnets approaches a TX unit, the hall effect sensors embedded in the TX
detect the RX and turn the mechanical relay ON while the time division signal for the TX coil is ON, as shown in
Fig. 2(b). Through this procedure, energy is only transmitted from TX coils with nearby RX coils, while avoiding
the simultaneous activation of adjacent TX coils.
Finally, we note that the power transfer efficiency using a functional TX coil is nearly the same before/after
cutting the sheet. Even after cut out into a random shape, the central time division control still avoids powering
adjacent TX coils simultaneously and local proximity-sensing/switching mechanism activates TX coils closest to
the RX coils and turns off the other TX coils. Thus, as long as the two aforementioned systems work correctly,
the power transfer efficiency using the remaining TX coils doesn’t get affected.
3.2 H-Tree Wiring
Employing H-tree wiring is our core idea to keep as many remaining TX coils to be functional as possible when
the outer edge of the sheet is cut. This wiring is a fractal topology and is widely used in the field of LSI to equalize
the distance from the center to each unit; this is beneficial for synchronizing the clock signal delivered to each
endpoint [10]. In terms of our application, H-tree wiring has three benefits: 1) the length of each feeder line
becomes equal; this is important for suppressing the variation of electromagnetic properties between each feeder
line, 2) the patterns extend from the center to the edges, which consequently enables the wire patterns on the
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:7
Lline
Gline
Rline
L
coil
Rcoil
Feeder Line
V
s
Reactance
Compensation Coil
Crc
Cline
Power Source
Lline Rline
Fig. 3. The equivalent circuit of a TX coil seen from the central power source. This model consists of four parts; power
source (Vs ), feeder line (Lline, Cline, Rline, Gline), reactance compensation element (Crc), and coil (Lcoil, Rcoil). Rcoil is the
parasitic resistance of coil. The value of Lline,Cline, Rline, andGline depends on the geometry of feeder line. Consequently, when
the lengths of the feeder lines differ between each TX coil, the input impedance of each TX coil seen from the central power
source varies intensely due to the effect of transmission line. Furthermore, we place a capacitor for reactance compensation
before each TX coil. This element is necessary for taking a resonance in a TX coil at the operating frequency.
Functional Coil
Dysfunctional Coil
C Central Connectors
C
Power Line
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 4. (a) H-tree wiring (red) for a square TX coil array. This can support shapes such as (b) convex shapes (rectangle, ellipse,
heart, and star) and (c) concave shapes (L, T, H, and +), (d) but cannot support shape-modification such as cutting off the
input connectors or cutting the most fundamental branches.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:8 • R. Takahashi et al.
Fig. 5. To communicate the wiring layout with users, the front side features fine printed lines. Black bold lines express H-tree
wiring and four colored lines (red, green, yellow, and blue) mean the most fundamental wiring of H-tree wiring. Gray dotted
grid lines represent the arrangement of TX coil arrays.
edges to become minor branches, 3) the fractal property makes it possible to expand the wiring pattern according
to the number of elements in a straightforward manner.
Other candidates of wiring topology are simple star or tree wiring topology, each of which is used in the
cuttable multi-touch sensor sheet [33]. Although these topologies have the benefits (2) and (3) of the H-tree,
neither topology has the benefit (1). Therefore, the length of the feeder lines differs between each TX coil in the
case of these wiring topologies. Consequently, the input impedance of each TX coil seen from the central power
source varies intensely due to the effect of transmission line, as illustrated in Fig. 3; considering that resonant
WPT systems require the precise adjustment of reactance (i.e., reactance compensation that cancels the imaginary
part of input impedance at the operating frequency), this is cumbersome.
Due to benefit (2), the square TX coil arrays connected through H-tree wiring shown in Fig. 4(a) support a wide
variety of shape adaptation. Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 4(c) show a set of supported cut-out shapes: convex shapes (rectangle,
circle, heart, and star) and concave shapes (L, T, H, and +), respectively, can be made without losing the function
of the sheet. However, as illustrated in Fig. 4(d), we must mention that there are some limitations for cutting
square TX coil arrays connected to H-tree topology. First, a partially cut TX coil loses its function. This limitation
becomes more apparent when the intended shape of the surface is convex shape except rectangle. Second, there
are non-available cutting manipulations such as cutting off the input connectors (donut) or cutting the most
fundamental branches (rotated 90 degree T and H). The first limitation degrades the WPT coverage at the edge
of cut-out shapes. The second limitation requires us to pay attention to both the placement of connectors and
the pattern of H-tree wiring. To alleviate these limitations, we introduce the guide paper pasted on the cuttable
WPT sheet, as shown in Fig. 5. The guide paper mainly includes the layout of TX coil arrays (gray dotted grid
line), H-tree wiring (black bold line), and most fundamental lines (red, green, yellow, and blue lines). As a rule of
thumb, the cut-out shape will work as long as the fundamental lines and the central connectors remain on the
guide paper.
Finally, we discuss the scalability (benefit (3)). Theoretically, H-tree topology supports to draw wiring of
2
N × 2
N (N ≧ 1) square TX coil arrays without the shortage of the space of wiring due to the nature of fractal
figure. However, there is a trade-off between the length of wiring from central connectors to each TX coil and
the efficiency of the entire system; the longer wiring causes the larger energy loss. The in-depth investigation of
the trade-off here requires us to improve the fabrication process of flexible substrates and optimize the size of TX
coil, as described in §6.1.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:9
TX1
TX2
kTX
kRX1
fdrive
RX
RX
kRX2
the effect of kTX
TX1 and TX2 ON only TX1 ON
Frequency
Power Transfer Efficiency
(a) (b) (c)
Load
TX1
TX2
Fig. 6. A reduction in power transfer efficiency due to the magnetic coupling between adjacent TX coils. (a) Power transfer
from multiple TX coils to a single RX coil (red). (b) The RX couples with each TX with a coupling coefficient of kRX1 and kRX2.
TXs also couple with each other with a coupling coefficient of kTX. The two TXs are simultaneously driven in phase by the
same voltage source. (c) Power transfer efficiency decreases because peak efficiency frequency is shifted due to the magnetic
coupling of adjacent TXs (kTX > 0) [6].
3.3 Time Division Power Supply
In our time division scheme, the TX coils are grouped into several groups; each group consists of non-adjacent
TX coils and the time division unit selects the group which power is delivered to. This way, as long as power is
transmitted to each group in turn, adjacent TX coils never get simultaneously activated.
To help understand the necessity of time division power supply, we first explain the problem that occurs when
adjacent TX coils operate simultaneously. Fig. 6(a) shows a primitive case; the RX coil is placed between two TX
coils (TX1, TX2). Such situations occur frequently when multiple TX coils are densely arranged. In this case that
both TX1 and TX2 are activated (i.e., no time division case), the equivalent circuit becomes as depicted in Fig. 6(b).
In this circuit, the couplings between the coils are expressed by magnetic coupling coefficients, kTX, kRX1, and
kRX2; this condition is called “cross-coupling”. Some may think that in this situation, the RX receives more power
compared to a single TX case since there are two TXs. However, in reality, it is known that the existence of kTX
detunes the resonant frequency of the system as shown in Fig. 6(c). Thus, the power transfer capability at the
driving frequency fdrive gets degraded [6, 24].
A power supply mechanism should either avoid or compensate for the inductive interference between adjacent
TX coils since this causes a shift in the system’s optimal operating frequency and input impedance. There
are two approaches to solve this: (a) dynamic compensation for the interference by using adaptive impedance
tuning networks [34, 47] and (b) designing the system architecture so that adjacent TX coils do not get activated
simultaneously [4, 38]. The former pattern (a) requires much more rich hardware at each TX coil for the detection
of interference and the compensating mechanism; this is not suitable for our intension, so we extend on the (b)
case. As an example of the (b) case, Qi’s TX array selectively activates only the closest TX coil to the RX coil;
since it can select non-adjacent TX coils, it is obvious that significant interference does not occur. The key of this
system is the position detection of the RX, where the central unit exhaustively searches for the TX which the
RX is placed on [4]. The TX coils are activated in turn based on time division multiplexing [29, 52]. While this
operation can avoid the magnetic interference between adjacent TX coils, this lacks scalability since the time for
scanning all TX coils and the computational load for TX selection increase as the number of TX coils increases.
In contrast, our time division power supply scales well independent of the number of square TX coils and also
avoids the cross-coupling of adjacent TX coils. Since the role of the central control unit is only to select the group
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:10 • R. Takahashi et al.
Time Division Control Signal
AC/DC Power Source
Cable
Central Connectors
H-tree Wiring
t
Group1
Group2
Group3
Group4
ON
ON
ON
ON
(a)
(b) Group1 Group2 Group3 Group4
C
Fig. 7. The overview of time division power supply. (a) A square coil array is divided into four groups and connected with
H-tree topology. (b) We transmit power to each group in turn.
= 70%:10%:10%:10%
: : : : : : : : : : : :
RX
= 40%:40%:10%:10% = 30%:30%:30%:10% = 25%:25%:25%:25%
C C C C
Fig. 8. Some examples of dynamic adjustment of the time frame reserved each group. The proportion of time frame is tuned
by the number of the activating group. We can detect whether each group has RXs by monitoring the current consumption
of the local proximity sensing and switching mechanisms.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:11
to which power is delivered, the number of necessary control channels is always N (the number of groups), no
matter what the number of the TX coils is.
The next question should be how many groups (N) to compose. Since the amount of power that can be
transferred to a TX coil becomes 1/N of the total power capability in naive implementations, the number of
groups should be minimized. Although we explained that the inductive interference between TX coils placed in
proximity leads to negative impact on system performance, this negative impact is negligible when the distance
between the TX coils is more than approximately a diameter of the coil. Fig. 7 shows time division power supply
applied to square coil arrays. Based on the above observation, we divide the TX coils into four groups, which is
the minimum number of division in square arrays, and connect them with H-tree wiring in a straightforward
manner.
Consideration should also be given to the control signals for time division power supply. To enhance the
maximum power that can be supplied, we introduce dynamic adjustment of the time frames reserved for each
group; in this way, the time reserved for the groups where no RX is placed is minimized. By monitoring the
current consumption of the local proximity sensing and switching mechanisms, as described in §3.4, we can
detect whether RXs are placed on the group or not; based on this information, we can adjust the time frame
reserved for each group.
Fig. 8 shows some examples of time frame adjustment. In the case where no RX is placed on the array (i.e.,
inactive state) or an RX is placed on every group, the proportion of the assigned power supply time is 25% : 25% :
25% : 25%. In the conditions that some groups have RXs placed on them and the other groups do not, the ratio
of reserved power supply time is adjusted to 70% : 10% : 10% : 10% (only one group has one or more RXs on
it), 40% : 40% : 10% : 10% (each of two groups has one or more RXs on it), or 30% : 30% : 30% : 10% (each of
three groups has one or more RXs on it). While the time frame reserved for groups which no RXs are placed on
should be zero, dynamic adjustment requires non-zero time period in such groups since the signal transmission
of our system is one-way channel from the central control unit to the local sensing/switching module. Thus,
we note that the change of consumption current in sensing/switching module (i.e, the power consumption for
driving a switching element) of each group is only a cue for detecting whether RXs are placed on the group or
not. While wireless communication module (e.g., bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and so on) can compensate for return channel,
this necessitates a cumbersome setup, the construction of the reliable network, and MCU. These complexity is
not compatible with our concept that system architecture should be simple. Thus, we avoid the use of wireless
communication modules in our study. Furthermore, the optimization of time frame adjustment for groups where
no RXs are placed may be considered (e.g., assigning less than 10% or assigning the time frame once at several
times), but this is out of the scope in our work and we will consider this in the future work.
3.4 Proximity Sensing and Switching Mechanism
As described above, we connect the TX coils in parallel and activate each group in turn based on time division
control. However, this leads to a problem specific to our scheme; a large proportion of energy gets consumed at
the unloaded TX coil when loaded and non-loaded TX coils co-exist in the activated group. This causes critical
energy loss in the system. To address this challenge, we present a hardware-based local proximity sensing and
switching mechanism and install it into each TX coil. By introducing this key mechanism, we can selectively
transfer power only when RX coils are in proximity, without employing any extra central control procedure.
As a result, we can control the energy flow and achieve high-efficiency. The next question should be how we
practically implement this conceptual mechanism.
As for the candidates for proximity sensors, representative examples are wireless communication modules (e.g.,
RFID [23], bluetooth, and Wi-Fi), hall effect sensors, detection coils [4], and optical (infrared) sensors. While
each proximity sensor has different pros and cons, the proximity sensor in our system should be simple since
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:12 • R. Takahashi et al.
VCC (3.3 V)
Relay
Transistor
Time Division
 Control Signal
Hall Effect Senor
Magnetic Detection Circuit Relay Driving Circuit Power Supply
ON/OFF Circuit
Hall Effect Senor
Hall Effect Senor
Hall Effect Senor
ON/OFF
Diode
TX Coil
Either detects RX ?
Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of local proximity sensing and switching mechanism. The relay in a TX is turned on only when
the hall effect sensor detects an RX and a time division control signal for the TX is ON.
our proximity sensing and switching mechanism needs to conclude in each TX coil. Based on this consideration,
the requirements of the proximity sensor are that 1) it is relatively simple, cheap, and does not require MCUs
and 2) its detection threshold can be easily adjusted. The candidates for this are the proximity sensors other
than wireless communication modules. Here, we chose hall effect sensors since the detection threshold can be
easily adjusted by either circuitry or the geometry of the magnet. We noticed that the main disadvantage of hall
effect sensor is that the external magnetic fields may interfere with the output value. Thus, we assume that our
sheet cannot be applied to magnetized materials, although it should not be a problem for typical non-magnetic
materials used in everyday items (e.g., wooden or plastic furniture, clothing, and bag).
Next, for switching components in high-frequency power circuits, the candidates are practically guaranteed to
be mechanical relays and solid-state relays. The desirable characteristics in selecting the switching element are
high OFF impedance, low ON impedance, and high-voltage/current tolerance. The former two are necessary to
achieve high system efficiency, although these are not easy requirements to fulfill since 1) parasitic capacitance
decreases impedance in high-frequencies (i.e., the current can not be stopped in OFF states) and 2) High-Q coils
with low parasitic resistance are premised in resonant WPT systems and a few hundred mΩ order losses can
easily degrade system efficiency. The last one is necessary since resonant WPT systems easily induce highvoltage/current depending on the operation. Under these considerations, we decide that mechanical relays are
appropriate since solid state devices suffer from the trade-off of voltage tolerance, high ON resistance, and
junction capacitance, which makes it difficult to maintain the above-mentioned requirements.
3.5 Implementation of Prototype
To demonstrate the validity of our design, we implemented a functional prototype, as shown in Fig. 10. The
size of the prototype is 400 mm × 400 mm, the weight is 82 g, and the sheet thickness is approximately 100 µm
without components, whereas, 5.7 mm considering the components. On the front side, a 4 × 4 TX coil array wired
by H-tree topology is implemented. This coil array is connected to the AC power source through the central
connector. The TX coils are 90 mm × 90 mm 2-turn square coils with line width and spacing of 5 mm and 1 mm.
The thickness of the copper layer is 35 µm. On the back side, the proximity sensing and switching mechanism
is installed into each TX coil. Both the control line for time division control and the DC power line are drawn
according to H-tree topology.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:13
Fig. 10. Our prototype of cuttable wireless power transfer sheet for 6.78 MHz band.
Fig. 11. Our prototype of control circuit for time division power supply. (a) This is implemented mainly by Arduino Uno and
MOSFET. (b) Arduino Uno drives the control circuit for time division power supply.
The proximity sensing and switching mechanism consists of four hall effect sensors (BUS52025G-TR), a NAND
circuit (TC74HC20AF(F)), an AND circuit (TC74RX08F(F)), a MOSFET (DTC123JETL), a diode (1SS355TE-17), and
a mechanical relay (TQ2SA-3V-Z), which are connected as shown in Fig. 9. The reason for using TQ2SA-3V-Z as
mechanical relays is that it has an ON impedance of 61 mΩ and an OFF impedance of 42 kΩ at 6.78 MHz, and the
maximum AC voltage/current tolerance of 125 V/0.5 A. These values fully meet three requirements as switching
element described in §3.4. Also, the reason for using NAND circuits instead of OR circuits is that the hall effect
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:14 • R. Takahashi et al.
sensor (BUS 52025G-TR) outputs 0 V when it detects magnetic flux and 3.3 V when there is no ambient magnetic
field; the outputs of the hall effect sensors needs to be inverted. At the center of the sheet, two input connectors
are mounted: an SMA connector for AC power supply and a 6-pin connector for DC power supply and time
division control signals. As for the AC power source, we use off-the-shelf 6.78 MHz class-D amplifiers (EPC 9065),
which typically operate in voltage mode (i.e., the source impedance is low). The DC power is supplied by a 3.3 V
voltage source.
As for driving frequency, we use 6.78 MHz which is higher than the frequency used in Qi (i.e., around a hundred
kHz). The reason why we employ the higher frequency is that a TX coil with high Q-factor can be made thin
and lightweight since the high inductance is not required and the skin depth is small [22, 28]. To explain this
claim, we need to note that the figure of merit of WPT efficiency is the product of coupling factor k and Q-factor
Q = ω0L/R [32]; this means that if Q-factor is large, the WPT efficiency remains high even if coupling k is
small (i.e., it achieves high-efficiency in misaligned conditions). Since the frequency used in Qi is approximately
100 kHz and the frequency we use is 6.78 MHz, coils with magnitudes of higher inductance are required to achieve
high Q-factor with Qi specifications; the problem here is that high-inductance coils require more turns which
makes coils bulky. Moreover, since the skin depth of conductors is inverse proportional to the square root of
frequency, high-frequency coils an be designed on thin conductors without a significant increase in loss; in the
low-efficiency case such as Qi, the performance significantly degrades when deployed with thin conductors.
The control circuit for time division power supply is implemented by using MOSFETs and Arduino Uno, as
shown in Fig. 11. This circuit also provides the 3.3 V voltage and therefore has 6 outputs: four time division control
signals lines, a DC power line, and a GND line. The minimum period of time division scheme in our prototype is
40 ms (= 10 ms × 4) considering the opening and closing time of the relay (4 ms and 4 ms, respectively) and thus,
we set up the period of time division power supply as 400 ms, taking a 10-fold safety factor.
4 APPLICATIONS
Here, we present some potential applications for our cuttable wireless power transfer sheet. The thin and flat
properties of the sheet enable seamless integration with board and paper; the nature of flexibility and lightness
as well as the above-mentioned properties also bring about good compatibility with cloth. Furthermore, due to
its subtractive fabrication process, our cuttable wireless power transfer sheet enables the users to quickly explore
the combinations of shape and fabricate a charger that works on surfaces of everyday objects. To provide a proof
of concept for this, we made four applications; wireless charging furniture, bag, jacket, and craft.
4.1 Wireless Charging Furniture
Wireless charging pads for mobile electronic devices are commercially available in recent years [1, 2]. Some
companies like IKEA provide built-in wireless charger kits that can be integrated with wooden or plastic furniture
such as side tables and shelves. In contrast, we present wireless charging furniture based on subtractive fabrication.
Fig. 12 shows an example of a cut-and-pasting wireless charger built into furniture to blend in the surroundings
more naturally. At the back side of the wooden tray, our cuttable WPT sheet is attached. The sheet successfully
detected a smartphone and a reading lamp on the tray and provided enough power (2.5 W) for both of the devices.
Different from the prototypes of the existing 2-D wireless power charger research [30, 38], our proposed sheet is
highly customizable and naturally integrated with users’ favorite furniture.
4.2 Wireless Charging Bag and Jacket
Many people carry smartphones and other electric devices in the bags or pockets on the clothes. This is most
likely the most appropriate moment to charge mobile devices because they are not in use at this time. Fig. 13 and
Fig. 14 show use case examples of making a wireless in-bag or in-jacket charger. A mobile lithium-ion battery
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:15
Fig. 12. Wireless charging furniture.
Fig. 13. Wireless charging bag.
Fig. 14. Wireless charging jacket.
Fig. 15. Wireless charging craft.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:16 • R. Takahashi et al.
pack is used to feed power to the cuttable sheet. Different from a Qi-based wireless charger [3], the elasticity of
the sheet does not ruin the flexibility of the bag or jacket and the sheet covers a large wireless charging area.
4.3 Wireless Charging Craft
As our sheet is a prototyping tool, it enables non-experts to transform hand-made crafts into a wireless charger.
For example, children can easily learn to build WPT surfaces through prototyping. Artists also may quickly
prototype story-telling artworks. Fig. 15 shows two examples of wireless charging craft: a hand-crafted cat-shaped
wireless charging mat and a leather-crafted wireless charging box. It took only a few minutes to make the mat
and box compatible with wireless charging. The mat and box support wireless charging of multiple devices while
the flexibility is unimpaired. By using the mat, we lit up two wirelessly powered LEDs to express the flashing eye
of the cat. The mobile box can be used to charge a smartphone in the box and light up the wirelessly powered
LEDs. Compared to simply arranging wireless charger units [1, 2], our design process requires neither a bulky
apparatus [34, 47] nor an additional control unit for controlling the current flow of the entire TX coil array [38]
to solve the magnetic interference between each unit.
5 EVALUATIONS
Here, we conducted a series of evaluations to confirm the requirements of the cuttable WPT sheet. First, we
evaluated its cuttability (i.e., the area of the WPT sheet which remains functional after it is partially cut) through
simulation. Then, we confirmed that the proximity sensing mechanism can detect receivers placed at any position
on the WPT sheet. Finally, we investigated the power transfer efficiency through measurements in practical
configurations (e.g., co-located with external objects, RX misaligned, etc.).
5.1 Cuttability Simulation
First, we evaluated the cuttability of our cuttable WPT sheet in a similar way as cuttable multi-touch sensor [33].
We implemented a simulation framework, which takes a set of 2-D shapes as input. Then, we simulated an
800 mm × 800 mm cuttable WPT sheet covered with a square array of 8 × 8 TX coils. The geometry of TX coil is
the same as the coil of our prototype and the space between the coils is 10 mm. We selected the following cut-out
shapes for simulation of cuttability: rectangle and ellipse. Rectangle and ellipse are basic shapes commonly used in
a wide variety of objects. In [33], the parameters of cut-out shapes is the position, scale, and rotation. In contrast,
we fixed the rotation of cut-out shapes since H-tree is not robust for the rotation of cut-out shapes; rotation, other
than at 0 degree, causes the more intersection with the wiring. We set up the minimum size of a bounding box
of the cut-out shapes as 594 mm × 594 mm. For each cut-out shape, 15 patterns of non-uniform scales and 100
patterns of random locations (a minimum step size of 10 mm) are randomly generated. The simulation calculates
the performance index as similar to [33] for each combination of scale × location of the cut-out shape . We note
that the cut-out shapes that cover out of the sheet or do not contain the central connectors are not considered.
The cuttability of rectangle and ellipse in our cuttable WPT sheet is 58.9% ± 11.3% and 45.9% ± 7.0%, respectively.
While these value lower for cuttable multi-touch sensor, which also considers the rotation of cut-out shapes (96%),
this is reasonable since partially cut coils lose function, whereas electrodes do not.
To enhance the cuttability, overlaying (i.e., stacking) of two or more different topologies such as X-tree
topology [7] will be a solution since it is likely that at least one wiring remains functional with more redundancy.
In addition to adding a different topology, overlaying two same layouts rotated by 90 degrees will also enhance
the tolerance to the rotation of cut-out shapes. In the future, we will perform the above-mentioned methods and
increase redundancy by stacking multiple wiring topologies using a multi-layer flexible PCB.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:17
Fig. 16. Detection area of four hall effect sensors on a TX coil. (b) We estimated the detection area and (c)(d)(e) checked its
estimation against measurement roughly. We measured by watching the ON/OFF of the LED which reflects the output of
the nearby hall effect sensor.
5.2 Detection Area of Hall Effect Sensor
Next, we evaluated the coverage area of the hall effect sensors to make sure that our prototype can detect
RXs placed anywhere on the sheet. To meet this requirements, we installed four hall effect sensors per one
TX coil on 2 × 2 grid points with an interval of 25 mm, as shown in Fig. 2(b). On the RX coil, we installed four
10 mm×10 mm neodymium magnets on 2×2 grid points with an interval of 20 mm; this is also shown in Fig. 2(b).
This configuration is based on the maximum distance that a hall effect sensor can detect; a case where the TX
coil and RX coil are separated with a distance of 2 mm (in the direction of z-axis) was considered. This distance
assumes the thickness of everyday cover cloth or plywood. Under this condition, the maximum detection distance
is about 7 mm (this represents distance on the x −y plane). Based on this consideration, we placed four neodymium
magnets on 2 × 2 at 20 mm interval, as shown in Fig. 16(b). Next, we estimated the coverage area over which each
hall effect sensor can detect a RX, as depicted in Fig. 16(a). Then, we checked if the proximity sensing mechanism
works as intended by performing simple tests employing indicator LEDs; the RX was placed on several lattice
points and the LED turned off when the associated hall effect sensor detected the RX in proximity (See Fig. 16(a)
and Fig. 16(b)). Based on this setup, we checked the output of hall effect sensor, as illustrated in Fig. 16(c)(d)(e).
Fig. 16 shows that at least one of the four hall effect sensors of each TX coil can detect a RX coil as long as it is
placed on top of a TX coil. Considering the TX coil array is a periodic, this means that our proximity sensing
mechanism fully covers our prototype.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:18 • R. Takahashi et al.
5.3 Evaluation of Power Transfer Efficiency
Here, we evaluated the power transfer efficiency of our system through measurements in the following configurations: (a) time division control activated (proposed method) and deactivated (baseline method), (b) interfering
materials existing in proximity, (c) the distance between the TX/RX coil varied, and (d) the TX coils bent to a
various degrees.
To calculate the power transfer efficiency from §5.3.1 to §5.3.4, we used the formulation of Zargham et al. that
derives the upper limit of power transfer efficiency (i.e., the efficiency with perfect impedance matching) from the
scattering parameters (S-parameters) [51], considering that various maximum efficiency point tracking methods
are studied in the literature [27]. Lastly, we investigated the total DC-to-DC power transfer efficiency that our
system can achieve in § 5.3.5; note that the optimization of the AC-DC/DC-AC conversion is not the intention
of this study and this is just to give a reference for future system design. This total power transfer efficiency is
calculated as the proportion of DC power delivered to the load within the output power of the DC power source.
In the measurements, we used custom-designed RX boards which consists of a coil, a full-bridge rectifier, and a
5 V output buck-converter. The coil is a 80 mm×80 mm, 6 turn square coil; the width of the coil pattern is 1.25 mm
and the spacing is 0.5 mm.
5.3.1 Activating/Deactivating Time Division Control. To confirm the concept of time division power supply,
we compared the power transfer efficiency with the time division schema activated (proposed method) and
deactivated (baseline). We measured the scattering parameters (S-parameters) from the central connector (SMA)
to the RX coil using a vector network analyzer (VNA), as shown in Fig. 17(a). We performed this measurement
at the extracted lattice points on the TX coil array illustrated in Fig. 17(b) and calculated the efficiency using
the obtained S-parameters. Considering the symmetry of the TX coil, we selected the six positions, as shown in
Fig. 17(b), to fully cover the area of the TX coil. For this measurement, the control circuit for time division control
outputs are configured as following: (i) activating one group and deactivating the others, which corresponds
to our proposed schema, and (ii) activating all groups, which corresponds to the situation which time division
control is not applied. Fig. 17(c) and (d) show the plots of power transfer efficiency when time division is activated
and deactivated. It can be seen that by activating the time division control, the average efficiency on the grid
points improves from 35% to 65% and the minimum efficiency increases from 2% to 24%.
5.3.2 External Materials in Proximity. Next, we consider the situations in which external materials exist in
proximity to our WPT sheet; there are two questions we address here: (i) do the substances which cover or are
embedded into this WPT sheet affect system performance? and (ii) how do foreign substances placed between
the TX and RX affect system performance? To examine this issue, we measured the power transfer efficiency
with materials placed on the back of the WPT sheet and between the WPT sheet and RX, as shown in Fig. 18;
the external substances we considered here are wood, cloth, acrylic, and metal. We fixed the thickness of each
external material to 2 mm. Fig. 19(a) shows the measured power transfer efficiency with external substances
placed between the WPT sheet and RX, whereas Fig. 19(b) presents the measured power transfer efficiency
with external substances placed on the back of the WPT sheet. From these results, we can see that only metal
significantly affects the power transfer efficiency and the others have almost no effect on the system. It can be
assumed that this degradation in the metal case occurs since magnetic flux causes eddy current and consequently,
cannot penetrate metal. Therefore, we considered that for the case that the metal is placed on the back of the
WPT sheet, this degradation can be mitigated by placing three pieces of ferrite sheet (TDK IFL04-200NB300X200)
between the external metal and WPT sheet; ferrite sheets can form a path for the magnetic flux to flow along,
which mitigates the metallic substance to some degree [50]. From these evaluations, we confirmed that our sheet
is compatible with non-metal materials; we also showed that even in the metal case, the interference can be
mitigated in some cases using ferrite sheets.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:19
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
Ave. : 65%, Min : 24%, Max : 91%
Ave. : 35%, Min : 2%, Max : 91%
(c)
(d)
(a) power transfer efficiency
with time division power supply
power transfer efficiency
without time division power supply
(b)
VNA
0 25 50 75 100
25
50
75
100
x [mm]
y [mm]
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
25 50 75 100
25
50
75
100
x [mm]
y [mm]
0
24% 60% 71%
79% 87%
91%
2% 5% 20%
79% 87%
91%
RX Port2
Port1
Coaxial Cable
25 mm
x [mm]
y [mm]
0
0
Fig. 17. Power transfer efficiency with and without time division control. (a) We measured the S-parameters between the
central connector (Port1) and the load port on the RX coil (Port2) using a VNA. (b) We calculated the maximum available AC
to AC power transfer efficiency at each lattice point (o) based on the obtained S-parameters. (c) The plot of power transfer
efficiency with time division power supply. (d) The plot of power transfer efficiency without time division power supply.
5.3.3 Variation of Distance. The power transfer efficiency with the TX to RX distance is frequently used as a figure
of merit in MCR-WPT studies. Generally, MCR-WPT can realize high-efficiency over mid-range (i.e., approximately
the diameter of the coil) [16]. To test power transfer efficiency with distance variance, we used the same
experimental setup as shown in Fig. 17(a) and placed an RX coil at the center of a TX coil. Then, we measured
power transfer efficiency with the distance between the coils swept from 0 mm to 70 mm with a step of 10 mm.
Fig. 20 shows the experiment results. These results show that we can obtain high efficiency (over 70%) as long as
the distance is smaller than 40 mm (i.e., approximately half of the diameter of the TX coil). It is noted that the
main usage scenario of this system is to charge RXs placed close to the WPT sheet and therefore, optimization
for extending range is not our main interest; this efficiency is likely to be enhanced by further optimization of
coil patterns and advanced flexible coil design methods [22, 28].
5.3.4 Transmitter Coils Being Bent. Our prototype sheet is flexible and consequently, it can be applied to
curved and flexible surfaces. However, it can be assumed that the curvature of the TX coil changes the system
characteristics; this section addresses this concern by measuring the WPT link under the situations that the TX
coil is bent. In the measurements, we configured the TX coil and the RX coil as shown in Fig. 21(a). We conducted
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:20 • R. Takahashi et al.
C
C
C
(a) (b) (c)
external material
metal
ferrite sheet
1 mm
2 mm
1 mm
2 mm
Fig. 18. The measurement setup. We placed external materials (wood, cloth, acrylic, and metal) (a) between RX and our WPT
sheet and (b) on the back of our WPT sheet. When the material is metal, we also covered ferrite sheet between metal and
WPT sheet.
0
20
40
60
80
100
wood cloth acrylic metal
0
20
40
60
80
100
wood cloth metal
power transfer efficiency [%]
power transfer efficiency [%]
(a) (b)
metal
with ferrite sheet
89.9 90.2 89.6 90.1
0.4
acrylic
90.8 90.7 91.1 91.1
71.7
90.1
vacuum vacuum
Fig. 19. Power transfer efficiency with materials (wood, cloth, acrylic, and metal) placed (a) between the WPT sheet and RX
and (a) on the back of the WPT sheet. Metal degrades power transfer efficiency, but for the case that the metal is placed on the
back of the WPT sheet, this degradation can be mitigated by placing three pieces of ferrite sheet (TDK IFL04-200NB300X200)
between the external metal and WPT sheet.
0 10 20 30 5040 60 70
distance [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
power transfer efficiency [%]
Fig. 20. Power transfer efficiency for distance. We changed the distance between an RX coil and an TX coil in our prototype
with a step of 10 mm and calculated maximum power transfer efficiency at each distance.
measurements with seven bending radii which range from 40 mm to 140 mm and evaluated the obtainable power
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:21 power transfer efficiency [%]
(c)
(b)
bending radius [mm]
flat 140 120 100 80 60 40
resonant frequency [MHz]
6.75
6.80
6.85
6.95
6.90
7.05
7.00
7.10
(a)
TX Coil RX Coil
Coaxial Cable (connected with VNA)
flat
140 mm
120 mm
100 mm
80 mm
60 mm
40 mm
bending radius of TX coil
distance [mm]
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0
20
40
80
60
100
TX Coil RX Coil
distance
(top view)
Fig. 21. (a) Experimental setup for calculating resonant frequency and power transfer efficiency. (b) Resonant frequency for
bending radius. (c) Power transfer efficiency as a function of distance for TX coil bending.
transfer efficiency and the resonant frequency of the TX; we also compared these results with the “flat” case
where there is no bending.
Fig. 21(b) shows the variation of the resonant frequency of the TX as bending radius is varied. The resonant
frequency increases with curvature; this result can be interpreted that the inductance of the coil decreases as
the coil gets bent further since the resonant frequency can be formulated as f0 = 1/2π
√
LC. Fig. 21(c) is the plot
of power transfer efficiency as a function of distance, each line of which represents the radius of the TX coil
bending. It can be seen that the efficiency drops as the curve becomes sharper. This efficiency drop is attributed
to the drop of inductance as well as the reduction of the coupling coefficient between the TX and RX coil; the
drop of coupling coefficient occurs since the flux that interlinks with the TX/RX coil decreases.
5.3.5 DC-to-DC Efficiency. Finally, we investigated the total power transfer efficiency from the DC power source
to the load (i.e. smartphone); the DC power source here refers to the power source that feeds the AC power
source. Despite our cuttable wireless power transfer sheet is a proof-of-concept system and the optimization of
the AC-to-DC, DC-to-AC, and power conditioning stages are out of scope for this study, we show its end-to-end
efficiency for future reference. We used a smartphone as the destination of power delivery since smartphones
are frequently used in our daily life among mobile devices. We connected the charging port of the smartphone
to the custom designed RX board, which receives power from the TX and provides a voltage regulated output.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
190:22 • R. Takahashi et al.
As a representative point, we placed the RX at the center of a TX coil used in our prototype. The RX board
was configured so that it supplies 5 V, 1 A to the smartphone via charging port. The measured power transfer
efficiency under this setup was 60% when a smartphone was charged. At this time, the measured power supplied
to the smartphone was 4.2 W ( = 4.7 V × 0.9 A), whereas the measured output power of the DC power source
was 7.0 W ( = 14 V × 0.5 A). This result shows the efficiency dropped from 91% (AC-to-AC efficiency) to 60% (DCto-DC efficiency). The causes of this drop are not just the neglected loss of the AC power source, rectifier, and
buck-converter, but also due to the non-optimized operation point of the buck-converter; this occurs since the
input-impedance of a buck-converter is a function of the input voltage. Therefore, additional control mechanisms
to dynamically track the optimal operation point are necessary; fortunately, countermeasures to this problem is
presented in former literature such as [27] and these methods can be applied to our system in the future.
6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
Besides the limitation described above, there are other technical limitations to the cuttability and usability of our
system.
6.1 Cuttability
One main limitation is the existence of non-cuttable components on the proposed sheet. In our prototype, we used
rigid COTS components, which form non-cuttable areas. Users can easily avoid these components when cutting;
therefore, this does not significantly degrade the delivered experience and is not an urgent issue; although, for
further optimization, the use of flexible organic components is a promising option to fabricate a fully cuttable
sheet [18, 19, 48].
Our implementation requires the connector for the power sources to be located at the center of a sheet.
Consequently, only one functional WPT surface can be cut out of a sheet. This is not a big problem when the
size of the original sheet and the cut out sheet are similar, although as the original sheet gets larger, the cut off
portion of the sheet gets inevitable; this cut off portion is wasted and degrades cost-efficiency. To alleviate this
problem, we are investigating the idea of multiple spatially distributed power supply points on a single sheet;
this enables several WPT surfaces to be cut out from one sheet.
The size of TX coil is also an important factor. While the bigger coil can transfer energy over a larger distance,
this decreases resolution and therefore, cutting even a small portion of the coil results in a larger non-functional
area. Consequently, there is a trade-off when selecting the coil size; smaller coil leads to the less damaged area
but power transfer distance becomes smaller. Considering this trade-off, we plan to optimize coil size through
electromagnetic field simulations.
As for this study, we assumed that the largest sheet size is 400 mm×400 mm, which was the maximum size of
flexible PCB available from the PCB manufacturing service we used. Thus, there is only 4 × 4 array about the
configuration of square TX coil arrays considering the proper size of TX coil to charge smartphones. Assuming
that we can access to B-to-B large-scale PCB fabrication services, which are based on roll-to-roll process [11],
this restriction would not exist; some manufacturers can fabricate the PCBs as large as 1 m times a few hundred
meters. Furthermore, printing technologies for functional electronic components are rapidly advancing; this is a
promising technology for integrating the wiring and flexible organic components so that the fabrication process
concludes in a single printing procedure [38].
6.2 Usability
Near the boundary of each TX coil, there are areas where significant drops in power transfer efficiency are
observed; this occurs due to the magnetic flux canceling out, as shown in Fig. 17. Avoiding these efficiency drops
is outside the scope of this study; therefore, we simply placed mobile devices so they avoid such areas in the
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 4, Article 190. Publication date: December 2018.
A Cuttable Wireless Power Transfer Sheet • 190:23
WPT furniture demonstration and also needed alignment of coil position in the WPT bag/jacket demonstration.
To address this issue, we will integrate RX arrays which are designed based on genetic algorithm to enhance the
bottom of power transfer efficiency [36].
In our work, we only focused on square coil geometry. However, regular hexagonal or triangle coil are also
suitable as the unit of a dense coil array. In our future works, we will investigate these shapes including the
proper wiring topology, which has three features of H-tree.
Although the detection range is limited to 7 mm due to the limitation of the magnetic proximity sensor,
it successfully detects devices that are placed directly onto the power transfer sheet. In the case that some
applications require detection of loads placed at larger distances, other detection mechanisms may be used [4, 23].
Finally, we plan to conduct user studies to further understand the usability of our system. The participants
would compare two fabrication processes for custom-designed wireless powered surfaces: 1) cutting and pasting
our WPT sheet based on the interaction that our prototype enables and 2) manually arranging and interconnecting
WPT units as in a conventional procedure such as Qi. For this user study, we will also further develop the minor
details of our WPT sheet such as adding redundancy and optimizing TX coil size.
7 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a cuttable wireless power transfer sheet along with its critical technical principles:
H-tree wiring for cutting a sheet from the outside and time division power supply for avoiding magnetic coupling
between TX coils. We provided concrete applications showing how we envision this sheet being used in everyday
objects. To study the possibilities of our system, we presented the current implementing prototype and evaluated
cuttability and power transfer efficiency in various configurations. In the future, we will enhance the cuttability
and usability. Finally, we hope that this article will pave the way for WPT sheets and spur more research in
ubiquitous WPT surfaces.