Abstract
We study rainbow-free colourings of k-uniform hypergraphs; that is, colourings that use k colours but with the property that no hyperedge attains all colours. We show that p⁎=(k−1)(ln⁡n)/n is the threshold function for the existence of a rainbow-free colouring in a random k-uniform hypergraph.

Keywords
Random hypergraphs
Rainbow-free colourings
No-rainbow colourings

1. Introduction
A k-uniform hypergraph H consists of a set of vertices  and a collection  of k-element subsets of , called hyperedges. For a k-uniform hypergraph H, a map  is called a k-colouring of H, where . The colouring c is called rainbow-free if for every hyperedge 
 we have 
 and for every  there is  with .

The k-rainbow-free problem is to determine whether a given k-uniform hypergraph is rainbow-free colourable with k colours.2

Contributions. We initiate the study of k-rainbow-free colourings on random hypergraphs. We consider a natural generalisation of Erdős-Rényi random graphs to random (k-uniform) hypergraphs: each possible hyperedge is present with a fixed probability, independently of the other hyperedges. In Section 3, we find a threshold function for the event that a random hypergraph of the first kind is rainbow-free colourable (Theorem 7). The proof uses a second moment argument for the lowerbound and a first moment argument with an analysis of possible types of rainbow-free colourings for the upperbound.

Related work. The k-rainbow-free problem is a special case of colouring mixed hypergraphs, introduced by Voloshin [11] and further extended by Král', Kratochvíl, Proskurowski, and Voss [10]. A mixed hypergraph is a triple  where V is the vertex set and C and D are collections of subsets of V. A colouring of the vertices of a mixed hypergraph  is called proper if each hyperedge in C contains two vertices of the same colour and each hyperedge in D contains two vertices of different colours. The strict k-colouring problem is to determine whether a given mixed hypergraph is properly colourable with exactly k colours. The strict k-colouring problem restricted to k-uniform mixed hypergraphs with , so-called co-hypergraphs, is precisely the k-rainbow-free problem. The strict k-colouring of co-hypergraphs was later identified, under the name of k-no-rainbow-colouring, in the survey by Bodirsky, Kára, and Martin [2] as an interesting case of unknown complexity of surjective constraint satisfaction problems on a three-element domain.

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) are generalisations of graph homomorphisms [9]. A graph homomorphism from G to H is a map from the vertex set of G to the vertex set of H that preserves all edges (but not necessarily non-edges). For a fixed graph H, the H-colouring problems are to determine whether a given graph G admits a homomorphism to H. For instance, taking 
 to be the complete graph on 3 vertices, H-colouring is the well known 3-colouring problem. Hell and Nešetřil established that, unless H contains a loop or is a bipartite graph, the H-colouring problem is NP-complete [8].

In an influential paper, Feder and Vardi conjectured that a similar dichotomy holds for every digraph H, or equivalently, for every finite relational structure (such as hypergraphs) [7]. This conjecture, known as the CSP dichotomy conjecture, was confirmed by two independent papers by Bulatov [4] and Zhuk [12], respectively. While the recent progress on the CSP dichotomy conjecture (and various CSP variants) relied heavily on the so-called algebraic approach [5], this method does not seem directly amenable to surjective CSPs, in which we require the homomorphism be surjective. A dichotomy theorem is known to hold for surjective CSPs on two-element domains by the work of Creignou and Hébrard [6]. The k-rainbow-free problem is equivalent to a surjective CSP on a k-element domain  with a single k-ary relation 
. Very recently, Zhuk has announced NP-hardness of the k-rainbow-free problem for  [13].

2. Preliminaries
If k is clear from the context, we will call a k-colouring simply a colouring. For a colouring c of a k-uniform hypergraph, we denote the colour classes by 
, .

We state now same basic properties of rainbow-free colourings.

Definition 1

Given a k-uniform hypergraph H and a subset of vertices , we define the induced subhypergraph 
 as the -uniform hypergraph with vertices 
 and hyperedges 
.

For up to k disjoint sets 
 we write 
 for the repeated induced subhypergraph.

For  in Definition 1, 
 will be a graph. Furthermore, note that the order of the subscripts in the definition of the repeated induced subhypergraph does not matter.

This notion of induced subhypergraphs is useful because of the following proposition.

Proposition 2

Let  be an integer. A k-uniform hypergraph H is rainbow-free k-colourable if and only if there exists a non-empty subset of vertices  such that the -uniform hypergraph 
 is rainbow-free -colourable. In particular, this implies the existence of a colouring c of H with 
.

Proof

First suppose that H has a rainbow-free k-colouring c. Let S be 
 and consider 
. Write 
 for the colouring c restricted to 
. We will show that 
 is indeed a rainbow-free -colouring of 
. First note that 
, and hence every vertex of 
 has a well-defined colour in . Now consider a hyperedge 
. By definition we have 
 for some . We will use a proof by contradiction to show that 
, so assume that 
. This implies 
. Furthermore we know that 
, and hence . This implies that , which is a contradiction. We conclude that 
 and hence 
 is a rainbow-free colouring of 
, as required.

For the other direction assume that  is such that 
 has a rainbow-free -colouring 
. Now extend 
 to a k-colouring c of H by setting  for all . Thus, we have 
. Let e be a hyperedge in H. We wish to show that , so that c is a rainbow-free colouring indeed. If  we have . In the  case we have 
. Since 
 is a rainbow-free -colouring of 
 we know that 
. Adding in the one vertex v of e that is in 
, we get 
, as required. If  there are at most  vertices that have a colour in . Since  we know that 
 can not attain all colours in . Hence, this case also implies . □

By induction, it follows that we can apply multiple steps of Proposition 2 at once.

Corollary 3

Let  be integers. A k-uniform hypergraph H is rainbow-free k-colourable if and only if there exist disjoint non-empty subsets 
 of  such that 
 is rainbow-free -colourable.

Remark 4

We remark that Proposition 2 also applies to the corner case of . In particular, a graph H is rainbow-free 2-colourable if and only if there is a subset  with no outgoing edges; in other words, H is disconnected.

If all possible rainbow-free hyperedges are given, not only do we know that the rainbow-free colouring is unique, but we can also easily find it.

Proposition 5

Suppose that H is a k-uniform hypergraph with a surjective colouring . Furthermore assume that 
 consists of all rainbow-free hyperedges. Write 
 
 for the set of rainbow hyperedges with . The colour classes of c are determined by 
 
.

Proof

If  for some 
 
, we have that , since e would be a rainbow-free hyperedge otherwise.

For the other direction assume that . By surjectivity of c, all colour classes are non-empty and hence there exists a vertex 
 for every colour j in . Using these vertices 
 together with u and v yields a rainbow hyperedge, which is an element of 
 
. Hence there exists a rainbow hyperedge 
 
 containing both u and v. This implies that the condition from the statement of the proposition is both sufficient and necessary. □

3. Random hypergraphs
The following definition of random hypergraphs is a direct generalisation of the Erdős-Rényi random graph model: every possible hyperedge is added with a given probability.

Definition 6

Let  be a given probability function. A random k-uniform hypergraph 
 is a k-uniform hypergraph created by the following process:

•
Start with a set of vertices 
 with .

•
For each hyperedge 
, add e to 
 with probability .

Let A be a hypergraph property (in our case being rainbow-free colourable). We write 
 for the probability that 
 satisfies A. A function  is called a threshold function for a hypergraph property A if (i) when , 
, (ii) when , 
, or vice versa.

Our main result is the following theorem.

Theorem 7

The function 
⁎
 is a threshold function for the event that a random k-uniform hypergraph 
 is rainbow-free colourable.

The two parts of the proof, one for small p and one for large p, are covered by the following two lemmas. The result is well known for  [3, Theorem VII.9] and corresponds to disconnectedness (cf. Remark 4). Hence we will assume .

Lemma 8

For , the random hypergraph 
 is rainbow-free colourable with high probability if 
 
 for some .

Lemma 9

If  with  and , the random hypergraph 
 is not rainbow-free colourable with high probability.

In order to prove Lemma 8, we use the second moment method; i.e., use the second moment of random variables to bound the probability that the variable is far from its mean.

Let X be a nonnegative integer-valued random variable such that 
, where 
 is the indicator variable for event 
. For indices  write  if  and the events 
 and 
 are not independent. We set (the sum is over ordered pairs) 
 

Proposition 10

[1, Corollary 4.3.4]
If  and 
 then .

Proof of Lemma 8

Let 
 be a random hypergraph and let X be the number of rainbow-free colourings of 
 with only one colour class of size larger than one. Our goal is to show that  with high probability, and thus 
 is rainbow-free colourable with high probability. We will do so by invoking Proposition 10.

We first show that  goes to infinity.

Let c be a colouring of 
 that uses all k colours and has only one colour class of size greater than 1. We assume that 
 for  and 
. This colouring c is rainbow-free if and only if there are no hyperedges covering all k colour classes. There are  hyperedges with this property, and hence
 Since 
 for small x, we have 
 and thus
 The number of colourings c with one large colour class of size  is  
 
. The expected number of such colourings that are rainbow-free is now given by 
 
 Since , this implies that  when .

Enumerate all possible colourings c (up to permutations of colours) satisfying 
 by 
 up to 
. We write  if  and 
. To every colouring 
 we associate the event 
 that 
 is rainbow-free.

Consider the quantity(1) 
 

We will prove that 
 and thus finish the proof by Proposition 10. In order for Proposition 10 to be applicable, we need that (for )  if the events 
 and 
 are not independent.

By the definition of ∼, we have 
  
 
 

We claim that the event 
 is independent from 
 if  and . In this case, the overlap between 
 and 
 is at most , since an overlap of  implies  and an overlap of  implies equality. Write 
, 
, and 
, as is illustrated in Fig. 1. The colouring 
 is rainbow-free if all hyperedges of the form 
 for 
 are not present. On the other hand, the colouring 
 is rainbow-free if all hyperedges 
 for 
 are not present. We have that 
. Similarly we have . Since A is disjoint from B, we now know that the hyperedges 
 and 
 can not be equal. Hence, the colourings 
 and 
 depend on different hyperedges being present, and thus these events are independent indeed.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (49KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. This Venn diagram shows the sets 
 (the upper circle) and 
 (the lower circle) from the proof of Lemma 8, along with the definitions of A, B, and R. We have 
 and 
 for all 1 ≤ ℓ < k.

Let i and j be such that ; i.e.,  and 
. In this case, we have . The hyperedges that the events 
 and 
 depend on are of the form  for 
 and  for 
 respectively. We count  hyperedges in total, but the hyperedge  is counted twice. Hence, the probability that 
 and 
 are both rainbow-free colourings is
 Given 
 with 
, the number of colourings 
 such that the large colour classes overlap in  positions is . Putting this back in Δ gives 
 
 
 Since  we have  and hence . We conclude that
 and thus 
. □

We will now prove the bound in the other direction, Lemma 9.

Proof of Lemma 9

We use the first moment method to show that the expected number of rainbow-free colourings of 
 goes to 0. We identify a colouring by the sequence 
 where 
 and 
. We divide the set of all possible sequences into five types:

1.
. There is one such sequence.

2.
. There is one such sequence.

3.
 with . This case contains  sequences.

4.
 and 
. This case contains  sequences, since k is a constant.

5.
 and 
. This case contains 
 sequences.

In each case we will show that the expected number of rainbow-free colourings of the relevant type is , from which it follows that the probability that 
 is rainbow-free colourable is .
Before starting calculations, we introduce some notation. We write 
 so that 
, and we write 
.

A colouring is rainbow-free if none of the 
 hyperedges that span all colour classes are present. This happens with probability
 Since the number of colourings with a given sequence 
 is upper-bounded by 
, the expected number of rainbow-free colourings with a given sequence 
 is bounded by(2)
 In each of the cases below we will bound the exponent of n in (2).

Write  for some .

Case 1: We have  and . Putting this into (2) gives an exponent of This is less than  if n is large enough. Hence, this case is .

Case 2: Here we have  and . The exponent of n in (2) becomes(3) Since this converges to a negative number, it will be less than  for all large enough n. Hence, this case is  as well.

Case 3: There are  sequences in this case, so each of them must give an expected value that is 
. The variables are  and . The exponent in (2) is a quadratic function of x:(4) Since the leading coefficient is positive, and we want to prove an upper bound, it suffices to check the boundaries  and . (The maximal possible value of x is actually even smaller, but overestimating doesn't hurt.) For  we get(5) Since this converges to something less than −1, we know that the expected value for  is 
 for n large enough.

Since the value of (4) goes to −∞ if  and , the upper bound (5) on the exponent in (2) works for the  case as well.

Case 4: We are given that . Furthermore we have 
. The minimal value of Π is attained if 
 and 
. Thus, we have . Since Σ is a sum of  terms, of which the last two are at least 2, we also have . The step where we take the limit is allowed because Σ is bounded, and hence the term divided by n goes to 0 indeed. We continue(6)
 As before this converges to something negative, and hence it will be .

Case 5: We are now ready for the only remaining case. Here we have  and as before this implies . Using that 
 and doing some rewriting gives
 
 
 We are now at the point where we can use . Because  we get(7) This last value is strictly less than , which is just what we needed. We conclude that the total expected number of rainbow-free colourings in this case is  as well, and hence the random hypergraph 
 is not rainbow-free colourable with high probability. □

Lemma 9 can be made a bit stronger with respect to the colourings of type .

Proposition 11

If a random hypergraph 
, with , , and  is rainbow-free colourable then with high probability it has a colouring of type .

Proof

The proof depends heavily on the claims established in the proofs of Lemma 8, Lemma 9.

Let 
 be the number of rainbow-free colourings in Case i of the proof of Lemma 9. Since 
, we know that the convergence of exponents in (2) in the proof of Lemma 9 implies that n raised to the limit of the exponent is off by at most a constant factor. Hence,
 where . In Cases 2 to 5 of the proof of Lemma 9, Equations (3), (5), (6), and (7) imply that the expected number of rainbow-free colourings in each case is bounded by
 Since , each of these terms is 
. Hence for  we have 
. To show that almost all random rainbow-free colourable hypergraphs are rainbow-free colourable with a colouring of the first type indeed, all we have to show is that 
.

As in the proof of Lemma 8 enumerate all colourings by 
 to 
 and suppose that 
 is a rainbow-free colouring. The probability that there is another rainbow-free colouring 
 is bounded by 
 
 
 Hence, the probability that the number of rainbow-free colourings is exactly 1 is at least 
 
 
 This implies that the probability that 
 is rainbow-free colourable is at least 
. □

Proposition 11 implies that checking colourings of the type  are sufficient to find a colouring in 
 with high probability if we know that the hypergraph is rainbow-free colourable.

4. Conclusions
We showed that a threshold function of the event that a random k-uniform hypergraph is rainbow-free colourable is . Our results do not say anything about the case when the hyperedge probability p is close to the threshold. As far as we know, the behaviour of the rainbow-free colourings of a random hypergraph in this case is open.