Abstract
The kangaroo problem requires two groups of kangaroos to pass each other on a narrow bridge. The question is whether there exist solutions for this task, how they look like and how they can be constructed. This depends on the number of kangaroos on each side – the puzzle has originally been posed for two groups of 3 kangaroos each. It is shown that for every number of kangaroos on each side and the agreement among the two groups which one takes the first step the problem has a unique solution. Our analysis provides an explicit construction of the solution strategy.

Keywords
Single-player game
Transition system

1. Introduction
The kangaroo problem has been presented by Brett Stephenson at the CMSC conference in 2018 [5].

Two groups of kangaroos moving in opposite directions meet on a bridge. The bridge is too narrow for passing by. A kangaroo can only move forward either a single step if the space in front of it is empty, or by jumping over the kangaroo directly in front of it if the space behind that kangaroo is empty. Is it possible for all kangaroos to reach the other side of the bridge and how?

For small groups of kangaroos solutions can be found by trial and error, but already for 3 kangaroos on each side constructing a solution is nontrivial. For larger groups of kangaroos it is unclear whether there exists a solution at all. This problem has been investigated in a thesis by Christopher Hoffmann where he could solve it for groups of kangaroos of equal size by a complicated case analysis [2]. Here we give a direct proof for the general case using the inherent symmetry and duality of the problem.

This puzzle should be considered as a single-player game although two different sets of players – the kangaroos on each side – are involved. But both groups have to cooperate to reach their common final goal, and there is no real competition as we will see later. Each configuration of the  kangaroos on the bridge can be described by a string of length . Furthermore, since a kangaroo can only move forward it is guaranteed that the game can take at most a polynomial number of steps with respect to the total number of animals. Thus, deciding whether the kangaroos can get from an arbitrary configuration C to another configuration  can easily be solved in nondeterministic polynomial time with respect to . For an introduction to puzzles and games see [3], [1].

Here we consider a restricted question, namely whether it is possible to get from the unique initial configuration with each group being on one side of the bridge to the unique goal configuration, where the sides have been exchanged. Now a problem instance can simply be described by the numbers , thus the input length is only , which means that the number of moves of this puzzle is exponential in the length of its description.

Instead of looking for solutions of such a puzzle one may ask the simpler question whether there exists a solution at all. If there is one may further ask for alternative solutions, the ASP-problem [7], [6]. We will show that the answer is trivial for the kangaroo puzzle although the construction of a solution seems far from obvious. For every pair  there are exactly 2 solutions – one in which the left group starts and another one with the right group taking the first step – except for one special case. These 2 solutions are dual in a well defined sense to be made precise later. For two groups of equal size the problem is completely symmetric and thus a duality property is obvious. Our analysis uses techniques of formal languages theory to exploit the topological structure of this problem (compare [4]).

In the next section the problem will be formalized as a transition system. Its complexity is then reduced in a way that facilitates the analysis. Next we deduce properties a solution must fulfill. This allows us to construct solutions inductively and prove uniqueness.

2. Modeling the -kangaroo problem
We start by defining configurations of n left kangaroos and m right kangaroos for arbitrary  and an empty space that at the start separates the two groups.

2.1. A transition system for the kangaroos
Definition 2.1

Let  and  two sets of kangaroos, one for the left and the other one for the right side, and ⊥ a symbol for the empty space. A configuration Γ is a permutation  of  with . Let  denote the set of all configurations. The start configuration  for the kangaroo problem is given by and the goal configuration by In  one might even allow any reordering among the  and also any reordering among the , but we will see later that this does not matter.

For moves of the kangaroos we use the alphabet  denoting a move to the right, resp. left of distance 1 called a step, and a jump with distance 2 to the right, resp. left. A symbol  transforms a configuration A into a configuration B, denoted by . This is possible according to the following rules where λ denotes a kangaroo in Λ and ρ a kangaroo in P. Here and later we highlight certain sections of a configuration in red that will be important for further analysis (for interpretation of the colors in the text, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).(1)(2)(3)(4) Note that λ-kangaroos can only perform moves to the right, while ρ-kangaroos only left-moves. We further forbid jumps of a kangaroo over another kangaroo of its own group that would change the order of the two kangaroos. Such a jump can be replaced by 2 steps of the kangaroos without changing the order.

For  let  denote the inverse transition. For example,  is a step to the left of a λ-kangaroo, which is not a legal move. An inverse transition denoted by  from a configuration B to a configuration A can only be performed if the original transition from A to B could be applied, in other words(5)

The transition relation is extended to its transitive closure using words 
⁎
, that means  holds if for  there exists ,  and  in  such that  for all i. We then say that w is applicable to A.

For 
⁎
 let  denote the string  and  the reverse of w. The length s of w will be denoted by . A sequence  with  is called a substring of w.

The following property will be helpful in our analysis.

Lemma 2.1

For every pair of configurations  and 
⁎
 holds:(6)

Proof

The first equivalence is fairly obvious, the second based on the observation that reversing a configuration means changing left and right. Then a move has to change direction, too, which makes an inverse transition  into a legal move τ. For example, it holds □

Definition 2.2

A string w solves the -kangaroo problem if 
. A configuration A is reachable if there exists a string 
⁎
 such that 
. A deadlock is a configuration B such that there is no string w with 
.

Thus the problem has a solution iff 
 is not a deadlock iff 
 is reachable. We will investigate these properties next and then explain how to construct solutions.

2.2. Simplifying the configuration space
The set of possible moves implies the following property:

Fact 2.1

In every reachable configuration the subsequence of left kangaroos 
 is ordered by increasing indices, whereas the subsequence of right kangaroos by decreasing indices.

Thus, we can simplify the specification of a configuration by ignoring the indices. A block of k kangaroos of the same group will be denoted by 
, resp. 
. Then the start and goal configuration reduce to
 Note that 
.

Since a move can only be made into the single empty space the possible transitions in a given configuration Γ only depend on the neighborhood of ⊥ in Γ. Transition r can only be applied to λ⊥, transition R only to , and similarly l only to ⊥ρ and L to . Thus in each configuration at most 2 moves are possible that in addition are of opposite direction, for example in  these are transitions r or L. On the other hand a configuration 
 that has  as a substring is a deadlock since no move is possible.

Lemma 2.2

Every solution w of the -kangaroo problem consists of exactly  jumps and  steps.

Proof

Each of the n λ-kangaroos has to move a distance  to the right, and each of the m ρ-kangaroos a distance  to the left. This adds up to a total distance  that has to be traversed. For every pair of a λ and a ρ-kangaroo exactly one must jump over the other to get to the other side. This accounts to exactly nm jumps that cover the distance . The remaining distance  must be traversed by steps. □

3. Solving the -kangaroo problem
We may assume without loss of generality that . In the start configuration 
 with  in the middle there are 2 different steps possible, either r of the λ-kangaroo or l of the ρ-kangaroo. This leads to configuration An essential ingredient of our proof is a special set of configurations for which we will show that only specific transitions between these configurations are possible.

3.1. Unique transitions and essential configurations
Definition 3.1

For configurations  and 
⁎
 let 
 
 denote the following situation:

• 
 
 and

• every transition 
 from A of length at most  that is not a prefix of w leads to a deadlock.

This means that being in A for the next  many steps w is the only applicable transition sequence that might lead to the goal, any deviation from w will definitely give a deadlock. Note that this relation is transitive in the following sense.

Fact 3.1

If 
 
 and 
 then 
 
.

Definition 3.2

A partial configuration Δ is a substring of a configuration 
. For  define 4 types of essential partial configurations by
 A configuration that has an essential partial configuration as a substring is called an essential configuration. It is of type  or D depending on the type of the essential partial configuration.

Observe that(7)
(8)
 First we will show that transitions between essential configurations are unique. For this purpose we use certain partial configurations Δ that are sufficient for a configuration being a deadlock.

Lemma 3.1

If a configuration Γ contains the partial configurations(9) where 
⁎
 can be arbitrary, then Γ is a deadlock.

Proof

For 
 observe that the right kangaroo ρ cannot jump over the two red left kangaroos directly in front of it – even if x is the empty word, nor can these left kangaroos jump over ρ since there is no empty space right of ρ.

 depicts just the dual situation exchanging the role of the two types of kangaroos.

In 
 one can apply only transition R or L which yields a string either of the form 
 or 
. □

From this we can deduce that the 4 types of essential configurations basically exclude each other. It is obvious that there is no overlap between the A and C types nor between the B and D types.

If a configuration Γ has type A and B simultaneously it means that 
 is a substring, thus such configurations are deadlocks.

Now consider the case that Γ is of type C and D, thus 
 with

Image 8
and 
⁎
. 
 can be transformed in two different ways:
 hence has to get to 
 in any case. If v contains at least one λ-kangaroo or u at least one ρ-kangaroo then 
 contains the substring 
 or 
 and Γ is a deadlock. Otherwise 
 for some . We want to show that such configurations cannot be reached from the start configuration 
 where  and . Observe that 
 is the reverse of 
.
Assume there exists a word w such that 
.

Then Lemma 2.1 implies
 
 This gives the contradiction that a deadlock configuration containing 
 can reach the goal. Thus we have shown:

Lemma 3.2

Let Γ be an essential configuration that can be reached from the start configuration and is not a deadlock. Then the type of Γ is uniquely determined with two exceptions: the A and D types may occur together and the B and C types may occur simultaneously.

If a configuration has both type A and D it can be written as

Image 9
for some 
 and 
⁎
. In this case we say that Γ has type
 If transition r is applied one gets 
 as a subconfiguration. Thus only L may prevent a deadlock yielding
Image 10
, a configuration of type 
. We extend the notation to the case 
. A configuration of type 
, for example, is a configuration that has type A, but not type D.
In the dual situation of simultaneous type B and C,

Image 11
has type
 for some 
. Now applying transition l leads to a deadlock 
. Thus one can only apply R giving
Image 12
of type 
.
These observations imply the following properties.

Lemma 3.3

For all  and 
 and 
⁎
 holds:(10)

Proof

That L, resp. R is the only applicable transition has already been argued above in case 
. If v ends with ρ or is empty then in 
 only transition L can be applied.

If 
 ends with λ then one could apply the transition r as an alternative, but this yields 
, which contains the substring 
, thus is a deadlock caused by 
.

In the same way one can prove the dual claim for 
 with the help of 
. □

3.2. Transitions between essential configurations
Now let us investigate how the kangaroos can continue when they have reached an essential configuration. This may depend on the strings to the left and right of the partial configuration Δ that makes the configuration essential. For 
 and 
, however, it is completely determined. Starting with a configuration of type 
 and applying Lemma 3.3 k-many times, resp. starting with type 
 we get

Lemma 3.4

For all  and 
⁎
 it holds:(11)
 
 

Thus a configuration of type A or B can and has to be transformed by jumps into a configuration of type C or D. In particular, for the start 
 the system gets to 
 or 
 and from there to 
, resp. 
. The transitions from 
 and 
 require a more detailed analysis.

Lemma 3.5

For arbitrary  and  it holds:(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)

Note that we only consider the cases where a C or D subconfiguration is preceded by a block of kangaroos of the same type and the same holds for the kangaroos to the right. This suffices since all non-deadlock transitions keep this block structure (which can be seen by induction) although the length of blocks changes. We omit the case where the partial configuration is surrounded on both sides by a block of ρ-kangaroos. This is not necessary since we have assumed that there are at least as many λ than ρ-kangaroos.

Before proving the lemma let us give some intuition. A solution to the kangaroo problem can be divided into 3 phases. In a configuration with 
 or 
 in the center, in the first phase the block of remaining λ-kangaroos on the left side and the block of remaining ρ-kangaroos on the right each are iteratively decreased by 1 and a mixed pair of a λ and a ρ-kangaroo is added to the center until the (smaller) ρ-block becomes empty. This is done by the first two transitions (12) and (13) together with the transitions of Lemma 3.4 to get back to 
. We call this the mixing phase.

Then the order of the pairs λρ is switched to ρλ by a large sequence of m jumps that transforms an A or B type into a C or D type. If there are more λ-kangaroos the remaining  on the left are shifted one by one from left to right by the transitions (14) and (15) combined with the transitions in (11). This is the switching phase.

Finally, the last two transitions decrease the number of mixed pairs one by one and add a ρ-kangaroo to the left and a λ-kangaroo to the right until the center has shrunk to 
 or 
 – the unmixing phase.

Proof

In configuration 
 the following transitions can be applied: In the second case 
 is a subword and hence this is a deadlock.

Thus the claim (12) 
 holds.

The dual property (13) can be proved in the same way.

To prove property (14) note that only the λ-kangaroo left to the empty space can move right: In property (15), for 
 there are two options leading to Again the l-transition leads to a deadlock configuration with substring 
 if .

For property (16) observe that only a move to the right of the λ-kangaroo at the empty space is possible. Finally, in configuration

Image 17
in (17) only the ρ-kangaroo right to the empty space can make a l-transition into □
3.3. The special case 
Let us first handle the missing case in property (15) with . This means a configuration

Image 19
, which is a configuration of the -problem with . This is a special situation since in addition to
 also the transition is possible. Thus, whenever the partial configuration 
 is reached there is a choice to get to either 
 or 
 as the next essential partial configuration. For larger n, this means that there are more than 2 alternatives to get from 
 to 
.
3.4. The transitions in case 
For , however, the situation is unique. Recall that from the start configuration 
 one can get to either 
 or 
. In the following we will investigate only the first case, the other is completely dual. Lemma 3.3, Lemma 3.4, Lemma 3.5 imply the following unique transition:
 
 
 
 where the notation 
 means that the partial configuration is either 
 or 
 depending on whether m is even or odd, and similarly for 
 and 
 
. The next transition has to be
 
 Now if  one has to continue
 
 
 
 depending on whether  is even or odd. The final steps are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thus, the solution 
 starting with the r-step of a λ-kangaroo has the prefix depending on whether m is even or odd, the infix of length  and depending on whether  is even or odd, and the suffix If a ρ-kangaroo starts the solution 
 has the prefix 
.

Hence in the special case  the solution and its dual are(18)(19) if m is even. Note that these strings are palindromes – the center is marked in red and furthermore 
. For m odd the solutions are(20)(21)

If  and  is even the first solution 
 can be derived from 
 or 
 by extending a red infix 
 by and the second one by extending a red infix 
 by If  is odd the exponent  is not an integer and should be interpreted as taking the bracket  times plus an additional first half of it. In addition the suffixes have to be switched: 
 takes the suffix of 
 and 
 the suffix of 
. The following table gives examples for some values of .



Download : Download high-res image (89KB)
Download : Download full-size image
In summary we obtain the following result:

Theorem 3.1

For every  the -kangaroo problem has exactly 2 solutions. If  they are dual in the sense that they can be derived from each other by changing the direction of movement in each step. The same holds for the case  except in the middle part (the infix). Solutions are palindromes except in the case  odd.

4. Conclusion
The kangaroo problem has turned out to be an interesting transition system. Its symmetries could be used to show the uniqueness of its solution. What happens if we consider configurations  as start and goal, where left and right kangaroos can be mixed arbitrarily? How difficult is it now to determine the set of solutions? The answer is easy if A can be reached from the start configuration 
 and from B one can reach the goal 
. Can one deal efficiently with the other cases? One could also consider configurations where there is more than a single empty space. Does this make the problem more difficult? Now there are cases where the uniqueness property no longer holds.

As a generalization of this 1-dimensional problem one could consider a rectangle with 4 types of kangaroos, where each kangaroo can move only in exactly one direction: north, south, east or west. Can all kangaroos move forward such that each type forms a single cluster at its goal side? Finally, is there a version of this game that makes the problem -hard?