Abstract
In [1] we construct aperiodic tile sets on the Baumslag-Solitar groups . Aperiodicity plays a central role in the undecidability of the classical domino problem on , and analogously to this we state as a corollary of the main construction that the Domino problem is undecidable on all Baumslag-Solitar groups. In the present work we elaborate on the claim and provide a full proof of this fact. We also provide details of another result reported in [1]: there are tiles that tile the Baumslag-Solitar group  but none of the valid tilings is recursive. The proofs are based on simulating piecewise affine functions by tiles on .

Keywords
Domino problem
Tiling
Undecidability
Baumslag-Solitar group

1. Introduction
Classical Wang tilings are colorings of the two-dimensional Euclidean grid 
 that respect some local constraints, usually given in terms of matching edge colorings of unit square tiles, known as Wang tiles. The domino problem (DP) is the decision problem to determine if given local constraints admit any valid colorings, i.e., whether a valid tiling of the infinite grid exists. Wang tiles and the domino problem were introduced by Hao Wang in order to study decision problems for formulas in the predicate calculus with a quantifier prefix  [2].

The domino problem was proved undecidable by R. Berger [3]. To prove undecidability, one draws computation steps by Turing machines on tilings. With this idea, Wang tiles also provide computationally universal models for bio-computation and self-assembly. Winfree et al. [4] demonstrated a way to build DNA tiles that work as Wang tiles. Jonoska et al. [5] introduced a flexible tile model in three dimensions that can more readily self-assemble into non-planar structures. See also [6] for details and comparisons of the models.

In the present work we consider tilings on other regular structures. The concept of Wang tilings immediately generalizes to grids that are finitely gen- erated groups. In this setting, the domino problem is known to be decidable on virtually free groups, and it is even conjectured that virtually free groups are the only ones with decidable DP [7]. The problem enjoys nice inheritance properties: having a subgroup H, a quotient  with a finitely generated  or a translation-like action of H on G, all with undecidable DP for H, is enough for DP to be also undecidable on G. The decidabilty of DP is thus a commensurability invariant, and also a quasi-isometry invariant for finitely presented groups [8], hence a geometric property of the group. The conjecture mentioned above is true for polycyclic groups [9], groups 
 with 
 and 
 infinite [10] and fundamental groups of oriented surfaces [11]. We refer to [12] for a recent survey.

In the conference paper [1] we study tilings of Baumslag-Solitar groups and exhibit examples of weakly aperiodic tile sets. Aperiodicity plays a central role in the undecidability of the domino problem on 
, and analogously to this we state as a corollary of the main construction that the Domino problem is undecidable on all Baumslag-Solitar groups . In the present work we elaborate on the claim and provide a full proof of this fact. Note that for  and  the result also follows directly from the fact that the group  has 
 as a subgroup [13] (see also Remark 1 below); it is namely easy to see that if a group has a decidable domino problem then also its finitely generated subgroups must have a decidable domino problem [12, Proposition 9.3.30]. However, the interesting cases  are not covered by this reasoning and our method provides a unified proof that works for all parameter values. We believe this deserves a full explanation with the details that were not published in [1] due to page limit restrictions. We also provide details of another result reported in [1]: there are tiles that tile the Baumslag-Solitar group  but none of the valid tilings is recursive.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we define central notions and notations that we use, including subshifts on groups and the domino problem on groups. We also define and discuss the Baumslag-Solitar groups . Section 3 is the main body of the paper containing the details of our construction for the cases . In Section 4 we observe that the main proof actually provides a slightly stronger inseparability result that we can use to cover also the remaining cases of negative parameter values, as well as to prove the undecidability of the domino problem on a natural linear homomorphic image of . The homomorphism erases the grid structure 
 from  so that the homomorphic image no longer has 
 inside it. In Section 5 we show how the main construction also yields a tile set that admits a tiling of  but does not admit any recursive tiling.

2. Background
2.1. Subshifts and aperiodicity
In the sequel A is a finite alphabet and  is a finitely generated group. Endowed with the product topology, the set 
 is compact and metrizable. Elements of 
 are called configurations that can be thought of as colorings of the group  with symbols from A. If 
 is a configuration, we may simplify the notation  into 
. The group  acts to the left on the set of configurations 
 through the shift action: 
  where 
 is the configuration defined by 
 for every . The dynamical system 
 is called the full shift. A set of configurations 
 is a subshift if it is closed and shift invariant.

Let 
 be a configuration. Its orbit is 
 and its stabilizer is 
. Note that the stabilizer is always a subgroup of .

A configuration 
 is periodic if it has finite orbit 
. A subshift 
 is weakly aperiodic if every configuration  has infinite orbit 
. A subshift 
 is strongly aperiodic if every configuration  has trivial stabilizer 
.

2.2. Subshifts of finite type and the domino problem
A finite pattern is a coloring 
 of a finite set . A configuration 
 avoids pattern p if 
 for all . For a set F of finite patterns we denote by 
 the set of configurations that avoid all . The set 
 is a subshift and, in fact, every subshift is equal to 
 for some F. We call elements in F forbidden patterns that define 
. If F is a finite set of patterns then 
 is called a subshift of finite type (SFT). Note that the same SFT may be defined by different sets of forbidden patterns, some of which may be infinite. But the subshift is of finite type as long as some finite F defines it.

The domino problem is the algorithmic question that asks whether for a given finite set F of finite patterns the subshift 
 is empty or not. The input instance F can be encoded using generators of the group: Since the group  is finitely generated, each group element has a representation as a word of generators and their inverses. A finite pattern is then represented as a finite set of assignments  for  and . Note that such an assignment can be inconsistent, i.e., two different words that represent the same group element may be assigned different symbols. This is allowed: no configuration contains such an inconsistent “pattern” so that having them in F does not affect the defined SFT. Now each finite set F of finite patterns has a finite representation that can be used as a coding of the input to the domino problem.

Typically we are interested to know whether the domino problem is decidable or undecidable. The decidability status of the domino problem depends on the group , but it does not depend on the choice of the finite generator set. It is a property of the group. The classical domino problem concerns the free commutative group 
, and the problem is undecidable in this group [3]. In contrast, the domino problem is decidable on the infinite cyclic group  and, more generally, on all finitely generated free groups. We recommend [12] for more details on the topic. In this work we consider the domino problem on the Baumslag-Solitar groups.

2.3. Baumslag-Solitar groups
Given two non-zero integers m and n, the Baumslag-Solitar group of order  is the two-generator and one-relator group with the presentation
 Since  is isomorphic to , it is enough to consider groups with . For simplicity, we first also assume . The case  is covered in Corollary 19. Geometrically, the Cayley graph of  with generating set  is made of sheets that branch off each other along cosets of  with n-fold and m-fold branches up and down, respectively, so that the global structure of the sheets looks like a tree in which all nodes have degree . Each of these sheets is quasi-isometric to the hyperbolic plane 
. See Fig. 1 for an illustration.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (169KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. A portion of the Cayley graph of the group BS(2,3) with generating set {a,t}. Three sheets from the top merge and separate into two sheets to the bottom.

There is a homomorphism Φ from  to the general linear group of invertible  matrices that maps the generators as follows:(1) 
  
 
  For any  we have(2) 
 		 
 
 		 
 
 
  It is now easy to verify that 
 so that Φ is indeed well-defined on . We also see that for any  there are numbers  and  such that(3) 
 
  Clearly  is uniquely determined by g, and so is  if . In this case we can deduce from (2) that for any (4)
 
  Also when  we can choose  in (3) such that (4) remains valid and  for the identity element ε of the group. The value  is the sum of the exponents of t in any word over the alphabet 
 that represents g. We call  the level of g.

Remark 1

If  and  then the homomorphism Φ is not injective. For example, 
 is not the identity element of  but it is in the kernel of Φ. In fact, b has infinite order so that  is isomorphic to . Noting that 
 and that the matrix 
 has infinite order, we see that the subgroup of  generated by b and 
 is isomorphic to 
.

To reduce clutter we introduce the following function  that merges α and β into a single useful quantity as follows:
 
 
 The function satisfies the equalities(5) 
 
 
  that we can easily deduce from (4).

Remark 2

If  then  uniquely determines  and . But  uniquely determines  in all cases, including .

3. Domino problem on Baumslag-Solitar groups
In this section we fix  and prove that the domino problem is undecidable on the group . The proof idea is similar to the proof of the analogous result on the discrete hyperbolic plane in [14], [15], which in turn is an adaptation of a former construction of a strongly aperiodic SFT on 
 [16]. Modifications of these proofs are needed, for example, due to the overlapping sheets in the Cayley graphs of Baumslag-Solitar groups.

In the following subsections we introduce basic ingredients of the proof. First we define what is meant by tiles that compute affine functions and discuss horizontal rows of such tiles. In the next Subsection 3.2 we explicitly construct tiles to compute a given affine function f on a given input 
 at a given group element , and show how to associate to any two-way infinite sequence of applications of affine maps a tiling of  with the corresponding tiles. In the Subsection 3.3 we review the immortality problem of affine maps from [14], [15], and show how the constructions in the previous subsection yield a finite tile set that can be effectively constructed. The proof is finalized by showing that this tile set admits a tiling of  if and only if the corresponding system of affine maps has an immortal point.

3.1. Tiles that compute affine maps on Baumslag-Solitar groups
Our configurations on  are most conveniently represented as colorings of the edges of the Cayley graph of  with generators a and t. In a configuration 
 each  stores the colors of edges  and . The local tiling constraint is given in terms of a set of allowed tiles. A tile is a coloring of the edges 
  i.e., the edges around the shape that is shown in Fig. 2(a) positioned at a group element g. In a valid tiling, for each group element g the pattern of this shape found at position g must be among given allowed tiles. It is then clear that the set of valid tilings is an SFT, defined by forbidding the non-allowed tiles.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (30KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) The shape of a tile at position g ∈ BS(m,n) and (b) the colors on the edges of a tile.

The colors on the edges will be elements of 
. We say that a tile with colors 
 on the top edges, 
 on the bottom edges, and 
 and 
 on the left and on the right, as shown in Fig. 2(b), computes an affine function 
 if(6)
 
 
 Such tile thus computes the image by f of the average of the elements on the top edges, and redistributes this image on the bottom edges. This is performed up to calculation errors, that are propagated to neighbors through the left and right edges of the tile.

Consider a finite horizontal segment of k tiles that all compute the same affine function f, and let 
, 
 and 
 be the colors of the i'th tile, . See Fig. 3 for an illustration. Assuming consecutive tiles match in color we have 
 for all i. Let us sum up the equations (6) for the k tiles, cancel the identical colors 
 and 
 from the two sides of the obtained equation, and divide the final equation by k. Using the fact that affine functions commute with the operation of taking averages we obtain that(7)
 
 
 
 
 showing that the segment – viewed as a single tile with km top edges and kn bottom edges – also computes f with diminishing calculation errors as .

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (34KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. A row of k matching tiles.

Moving to infinite sequences, we say that a two-way infinite sequence 
 of vectors, , codes vector 
 if arbitrarily long segments of the sequence have averages arbitrarily close to 
. More precisely, for  there are segment boundaries 
 such that(8) 
 
  Note that one sequence may code several different vectors. A simple compactness argument, however, shows that if 
 is finite then the sequence codes at least one vector. Indeed, the averages over finite subsegments belong to a bounded subset of 
 and thus any sequence of averages has a converging subsequence.

Consider next an infinite horizontal segment of matching tiles that all compute the same affine function f. Assume that only finitely many different tiles are used. Let 
 and 
, for , be the sequence of labels on the top and the bottom edges in this segment, aligned so that the top and the bottom colors of the i'th tile are 
 and 
, respectively, and let 
 be the color on the right edge of tile i and the left edge of tile . Let 
 be a vector that is coded by the top sequence 
, and let 
 be the corresponding segment boundaries, , that satisfy (8). Note that decreasing 
 and increasing 
 by at most m positions does not change the fact that (8) holds. Thus we may assume that 
 and 
 for some integers 
, meaning that 
 for 
 are the top colors of the tiles 
. By (7) the average of the bottom colors 
 in the corresponding segment 
 approaches 
 as . Note that the vectors 
 are bounded as there are only finitely many different tiles used so that the error terms 
 
 and 
 
 in (7) approach zero as 
.

We have thus shown the following.

Lemma 3

Consider an infinite horizontal sequence of matching tiles that all compute the same affine function f and only contain finitely many different tiles, and let 
 be a vector that is coded by the sequence of top labels. Then 
 is coded by the sequence of bottom labels.

Next we design a concrete implementation of tiles that compute a given affine map.

3.2. Specific tiles to compute the affine map f on input 
 at 
Let 
 be an affine map 
 defined by a  real matrix M and a vector 
. For every 
 and  we define a tile 
 with the following edge colors and show that it computes f, where the names on the left refer to the notations of Fig. 2(b):(9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  where we apply the floor function on vectors coordinate-wise, meaning that 
 for all . We denote these colors also by 
, 
, 
 and 
, respectively, when we want to identify the tile 
 in question.

Remark 4

The group element g is only used in the tile through the function λ so that if 
 then also 
.

Remark 5

The floor function in (9) discretizes the colors, and this is used in the Subsection 3.3 to guarantee that a tile set is finite. Observe that with the floor functions in (9) omitted one would have a tile with colors 
 for all , 
 for all , and 
, i.e., a tile that does not depend on g.

A direct calculation gives the following.

Lemma 6

The tile 
 computes f.

Proof

By replacing every term 
 and 
 by its expression in (9), the two sums 
 and 
 telescope to 
  Using the property 
 of the affine function 
 we obtain
 
 
 
 These calculations, together with the expressions of 
 and 
 in (9), give
 
 
 
 
 verifying (6). □

Consider any two-way infinite sequence of real vectors 
 such that for every  the condition 
 holds for some affine function 
. Let us show that if one puts at each position  the tile 
 with  then one obtains a consistent coloring of the edges of the Cayley graph of .

Lemma 7

The edges of the Cayley graph of  can be labeled so that the tile at each  is 
 where  is the level of g.

Proof

For every  denote 
 where , and label the edges  and  of the Cayley graph by the colors 
 and 
 of the tile . Let us prove that the tile created by this coloring at any  is .

•
For every  the color 
 of the tile  is the same as the color 
 of the tile 
, that is, the color of the edge 
: elements g and 
 have the same level 
 so that 
 and 
 for the same 
 and 
. The claimed result 
 follows directly from (9) using 
.

•
The color 
 of the tile  is the same as the color 
 of the tile 
, that is, the color of the edge 
: again g and 
 have the same level i so that 
 and 
 for the same 
 and 
. The result 
 follows now from 
 because replacing  by  in the formula for 
 in (9) gives the formula of 
 in (9).

•
For every  the color 
 of tile  is the same as the color 
 of the tile 
, that is, the color of the edge 
: Now 
 so that 
 and 
 for . From (5) we can compute 
 so that from (9) we get 
 

We have seen that colors of the edges around the tile shape at position g form the tile 
, as claimed. □
3.3. Reduction from the immortality problem for rational piecewise affine maps to the domino problem on 
Now we have the necessary ingredients in place to proceed to a reduction from the immortality problem for rational piecewise affine maps on the plane. In this problem we are given a finite family, indexed by  for a finite index set I, of disjoint closed unit size squares 
 of integer corners, 
, and associated affine maps 
 with rational coefficients. These define a function 
 where 
 and 
 for 
. The function f can be iterated on an initial point 
 for as long as the image stays inside U. We say that 
 is an immortal point if 
 for all , and it is mortal otherwise. The immortality problem for rational piecewise affine maps is the decision problem that takes the family 
 as its input and outputs Yes if f possesses an immortal point, and No otherwise. This problem is undecidable due to a reduction from the known undecidable immortality problem for Turing machines [17]. We refer to [15] for details of this reduction.

Theorem 8

[14], [15]
The immortality problem for rational piecewise affine maps is undecidable.

Now we proceed with an effective construction of a tile set on the group  that admits a valid configuration if and only if f has an immortal point. For every 
 and associated affine 
 we show how to construct a finite tile set 
 that satisfies the following conditions:

(i)
every tile in 
 computes 
, i.e., it satisfies (6) for 
, and

(ii)
tiles 
 as defined in (9) are in 
 for all 
 and all .

Noting that  for all  and that colors 
 in (9) are integers we see that tiles 
 for 
 have their colors 
 from the four element set 
. Similarly, finite sets can be computed that contain colors 
, 
 and 
 of 
 for all 
 and all . Thus the tile set 
 can be constructed by taking all tiles that compute 
 and have colors in these finite sets. We also
(iii)
assign the additional label  in the two vertical edges of the tiles in 
,

guaranteeing this way that tiles in any positions g and 
 compute the same affine map 
 since they share a vertical edge.
Our tile set T is the union of all 
 over . It is finite and can be effectively constructed for a given family 
 of rational affine maps. We next prove that T admits a tiling if and only if the family 
 has an immortal point. We split the two directions of this statement in two separate lemmas.

Lemma 9

If the family 
 has an immortal point then T admits a tiling of the group .

Proof

Suppose an immortal point exists. A simple compactness argument then provides a two-way infinite orbit 
 of 
, where for each  there is  such that 
 and 
. By Lemma 7 the edges of the Cayley graph of  can be labeled so that the tile at each  is 
 where . By the construction of T, and in particular the property (ii) above, the tile 
 is in 
, and is thus an allowed pattern. Moreover, tiles at g and 
 that share a vertical edge have the same level 
 so that the additional labeling (iii) is consistent. □

Remark 10

The tiling of Lemma 9 has identical tiles in any positions 
 that satisfy 
 and 
. Indeed, from 
 we have that 
 for all f and 
, and from 
 we get that the same f and 
 are used in both positions 
 and 
. This fact is used to deduce a recursive inseparability result in Lemma 15.

Lemma 11

If T admits a tiling of the group  then the family 
 has an immortal point.

Proof

Fix a valid configuration, that is, a coloring of the edges of the Cayley graph such that the tiles at all  belong to the set T of allowed tiles. For any  and any  let 
 be the color of the edge 
. Consider any fixed . The tiles at positions 
 for  form a two-way infinite horizontal matching sequence of tiles, whose top labels read the color sequence 
, , and whose bottom labels read the sequence 
, . Due to condition (iii) all these tiles belong to the same set 
, , so that they all compute the same affine function 
, and 
 for all . By the latter condition, all averages of top labels belong to 
 so that also every 
 that the sequence 
 codes belongs to 
. Moreover, by Lemma 3 the vector 
 is coded by the bottom sequence 
, .

Because  was arbitrary, we have the following property: any vector 
 coded by any horizontal sequence of colors in the Cayley graph belongs to one 
 set and its image 
 is also coded by a horizontal sequence of colors. An easy induction then shows that any such vector 
 is an immortal point of the family 
. As every horizontal sequence codes at least one vector we see that there are immortal points. □

Combining the two lemmas we have our first main result.

Theorem 12

The domino problem on the Baumslag-Solitar group  with  is undecidable.

4. Extensions
Recall that an algorithm to solve the domino problem is inherited from a group to its subgroups:

Proposition 13

[12], Proposition 9.3.30
Let H be a finitely generated subgroup of a finitely generated group G. If the domino problem is decidable on G then it is also decidable on H.

As noted in Remark 1, the Baumslag-Solitar group  contains 
 as a subgroup when  and :

Proposition 14

[13], Proposition 7.11
Group 
 embeds in  if and only if  or .

As the domino problem is undecidable on 
, these two propositions imply its undecidability on  with . However, the case ,  cannot be proved in this manner since 
 does not embed in . Our proof provides a unified way to see the undecidability of the domino problem on all Baumslag-Solitar groups, including the case , . The grid structure inside  with  is not used in the proof, which is also evidenced by the discussion below leading to Corollary 18, Corollary 19.

Let us use the following terminology. Let  be a function from a finitely generated group G to some set S. We say that a configuration 
 is γ-consistent if it factors though γ in the sense that 
 for any 
 such that 
.

Recall the functions α and β from Subsection 2.3. Let us denote  for the function  that maps . From  we can uniquely compute  and . As pointed out in Remark 10, the tiling reported in Lemma 9 is -consistent. This means that Lemma 9, Lemma 11 imply a sharper recursive inseparability result than stated in Theorem 12:

Lemma 15

Let . The following two families of SFTs on  are recursively inseparable:

(a)
empty SFT, and

(b)
SFTs that contain an -consistent configuration.

We make the following general observation.
Lemma 16

Let G and H be finitely generated groups and  a homomorphism. Suppose that in G it is undecidable whether a given SFT contains an γ-consistent configuration. Then the domino problem on H is undecidable.

Proof

By Proposition 13 the undecidability of the domino problem on  implies its undecidability on H. By considering  in place of H we can thus assume in the following that γ is surjective.

Suppose the domino problem is decidable on H. Then we can decide as follows if a given SFT on G contains an γ-consistent configuration. Let F be the given finite set of forbidden patterns on G. First, we can eliminate from F patterns that are not γ-consistent: if  is such that 
 and 
 for some 
 then p cannot appear in any γ-consistent configuration, and therefore removing p from F does not change the set of γ-consistent elements of 
. Note that the condition 
 can be effectively tested since by [12, Theorem 9.3.28] the word problem on group H is decidable.

We can now assume that all patterns in F are γ-consistent. For 
 in F we can effectively construct the pattern 
 where 
 for all . Let 
 be the set of finite patterns 
 obtained in this manner from .

It suffices to prove that 
 contains an γ-consistent configuration if and only if 
 is non-empty:

•
If 
 is γ-consistent then consider the configuration 
 where for all  we have 
. Note how the γ-consistency of c means that 
 is well-defined, and how the surjectivity of γ means that 
 is unique. If 
 contains a pattern 
 in position  then c contains the corresponding pattern  in position . This is not possible so that 
.

•
Conversely, if 
 exists then the configuration 
 is γ-consistent and in 
. □

From Lemma 16 and the inseparability result of Lemma 15 we obtain the following

Proposition 17

Let . Let H be a finitely generated group such that there is a group homomorphism  and that  factors through γ in the sense that
  Then the domino problem is undecidable on H.

Proof

By the inseparability result of Lemma 15 it is undecidable whether a given SFT on  contains an γ-consistent configuration. Indeed, the empty SFT does not contain an γ-consistent configuration but any SFT that contains a -consistent configuration also contains an γ-consistent one. The result thus follows from Lemma 16. □

As a first application of Proposition 17 we take . By Remark 2, the function  factors through Φ in the case .

Corollary 18

Let  and . The domino problem is undecidable on the matrix group  generated by the  matrices  and  in (1).

This is interesting because Φ erases the grid structure so that 
 does not embed in  even when . In other words, our proof of Theorem 12 does not take advantage of the subgroup 
 inside .

As a second corollary we take care of the case of negative parameters n.

Corollary 19

The domino problem is undecidable on  for all .

Proof

Let  and consider 
. (Theorem 12 covers all other cases because  and  are isomorphic.) Define 
. We have 
. Mapping 
 and 
 defines a group homomorphism  because 
.

Let Φ, α and β be the functions of Subsection 2.3 for G, and let 
, 
 and 
 be the analogous functions for H. From the definition of homomorphism γ we get 
, so that β factors through γ.

We also have 
, and 
 because 
 and 
. This means that Φ and 
 are identical on a and t so that 
. Thus Φ, and therefore also α, factors through γ.

We have proved that
  It now follows from Proposition 17 that the domino problem is undecidable on . □

5. A tile set that only admits non-recursive tilings of 
Let  for any fixed . Let us call a configuration 
 recursive if there is an algorithm that returns 
 when given as input a representation of  as a word w over the generating set 
. The following theorem was stated at the end of [1] without a detailed proof.

Theorem 20

There exists a tile set on  that admits a tiling but it admits no recursive tiling of G.

The result was previously known in the case  (that is, for 
) [18]. In this section we prove it for arbitrary .
Our starting point is an analogous result for Turing machines, and its conversion to piecewise affine maps. Recall that a Turing machine uses two finite sets: a tape alphabet A and a state set Q. A tape configuration 
 assigns a tape symbol to each cell of a two-way infinite tape. An instantaneous description (ID) of the Turing machine is a triple 
 consisting of a tape configuration c, current state  of the machine and its position  on the tape. The Turing machine is a partial transformation 
 of the ID, determined by a local transition rule of the machine. If  is undefined then  is called a halting ID. We call ID  immortal if g can be iterated starting with d without ever reaching a halting ID. The orbit of an immortal ID d is the sequence of ID's 
 for  where 
 and 
 for all , and its trace is the sequence 
 of consecutive pairs of the states/tape symbols scanned by the machine. We say that the trace is recursive if there is an algorithm that outputs 
 for any given . Note that a Turing machine has traces if and only if it has immortal IDs.

Theorem 21

[19]
There exists a Turing machine that has traces but none of the traces is recursive.

Recall from Section 3.3 the concept of families 
 of affine maps and the function 
 they define where 
 and 
 for 
. To each immortal point 
 we associate the infinite sequence 
 of indices such that 
 for all . We call σ a trace. Note that there are traces if and only if there are immortal points.

In [15, Theorem 3.1] a detailed conversion is given of any Turing machine g into a family 
 of affine maps. The conversion is such that g has immortal IDs if and only if the family 
 has immortal points. In fact it is easy to see that the conversion preserves recursiveness of traces: from a recursive trace of the family 
 one can also read a recursive trace of the Turing machine g. Thus executing the conversion on the machine of Theorem 21 provides the following corollary.

Corollary 22

There exists a finite family 
 of rational affine maps that has traces but none of the traces is recursive.

Now we can proceed with the proof of Theorem 20.

Proof of Theorem 20

Consider the tile set T on  constructed in Section 3.3 for the family 
 of Corollary 22. Since there is a trace there is an immortal point and thus by Lemma 9 the tile set T admits a tiling of .

Let us then show that the tile set T does not admit a recursive tiling. Suppose the contrary: there is a recursive configuration c that only contains tiles of T. Then there is an algorithm that returns for any given  the color of the edge 
 in the configuration c. Let  be the additional label (iii) of the edge 
 that identifies the index in I such that the tile in position 
 belongs to the tile set 
. The sequence σ is recursive. But σ is a trace of 
, which contradicts the fact that there are no recursive traces. Indeed, the proof of Lemma 11 shows that a vector 
 coded by the top colors on the horizontal line of tiles through 
 is immortal and, moreover, its trace is the sequence σ. □

6. Conclusions and perspectives
Baumslag-Solitar groups are important groups with a marked role in combinatorial and geometric group theory. They are canonial examples of HHN-extensions, a fundamental construction in combinatorial group theory that, for instance, play a key role in Higman embedding theorem (every finitely generated recursively presented group can be embedded as a subgroup of some finitely presented group) and also appear in Stalling's theorem about ends of groups. A natural extension to our results would be to investigate more complicated HNN-extensions, to see how far our proof method can be adapted. There are also other interesting finitely generated groups to consider. For example, it is not known whether the domino problem is decidable on the lamplighter group 
.

The classical domino problem plays a role in proofs of undecidability for various properties of endomorphisms of full shifts on the group 
, that is, two-dimensional cellular automata. Some of these proofs readily extend to the Baumslag-Solitar groups. However, the techniques in [20] to show that both injectivity and surjectivity of endomorphisms are undecidable properties on 
 do not immediately seem to work for full shifts on all Baumslag-Solitar groups. As we have pointed out, if  and  the group  has 
 as a subgroup (see [13] or Remark 1), and in these cases any endomorphism f of 
 can be effectively converted into an endomorphism of the full shift 
 over the group  that executes f on the cosets of 
. As injectivity and surjectivity properties of f are preserved by this conversion, we obtain the desired undecidability of injectivity and surjectivity in these cases. However, the basic cases  are not covered by this reasoning.