Abstract
A group-characterizable (GC) random variable is induced by a finite group, called main group, and a collection of its subgroups. The notion extends directly to secret sharing schemes (SSSs). It is known that linear and abelian SSSs can be equivalently described in terms of GC SSSs. In this paper, we present a necessary and sufficient condition for a SSS to be equivalent to a GC one. Using this result, we show that homomorphic SSSs (HSSSs) are equivalent to GC SSSs whose subgroups are normal in the main group. We also present two applications for this equivalent description of HSSSs. One concerns lower bounding the information ratio of access structures for the class of HSSSs, and the other is about the coincidence between statistical, almost-perfect and perfect security notions for the same class.

Keywords
Homomorphic secret sharing
Access structure
Information theory
Group theory
Group-characterizable random variable

1. Introduction
A secret sharing scheme (SSS) [40], [8], [26] allows a dealer to share a secret among a set of participants. The dealer applies a publicly-known probabilistic method to compute a share for each participant, which is then privately transferred to him/her. In a perfect SSS, it is required that only certain pre-specified subsets of participants, called qualified, be able to recover the secret, and others must gain no information about the secret. The collection of all qualified subsets is called an access structure. The information ratio of an access structure is defined to be the infimum of the information ratios of all SSSs for it, where the information ratio of a SSS is defined to be the ratio between the largest share size and the secret size.

The most common type of SSSs is the class of multi-linear schemes, which we simply call linear in this paper. In these schemes, the secret is composed of some finite field elements and the sharing is done by applying some fixed linear mapping on the secret elements and some randomly chosen elements from the finite field. A more powerful generalization of linear schemes, called abelian, has recently been studied in the literature [20], [29].

The notion of homomorphic SSS (HSSS), introduced by Benaloh [6] in 1986, plays a central role in several applications of secret sharing in cryptography (e.g., secure multi-party computation [5]). A SSS is called homomorphic if multiplication of the corresponding shares of two secrets results in valid shares for the product of the secrets. Every abelian (and consequently linear) scheme is homomorphic. HSSSs are further discussed in Section 1.1.

A group-characterizable (GC) random variable (RV) is induced by a finite group and a collection of its subgroups. The concept of GCRVs was introduced by Chan and Yeung [13] in 2002 and it was shown to have some remarkable properties which will be recalled in Section 1.2. Even though GCRVs have become the focus of interest in several works in the information theory literature (e.g., see [39], [38], [11], [35], [36], [12]), their applications in cryptography, and in particular theory of SSSs, have not received that much attention.

It is known that linear and abelian schemes can be defined in terms of GCRVs (e.g., see [12], [29]). However, the group-characterizability of HSSSs is unknown. In this paper, we present a characterization theorem for GCRVs and show that HSSSs can equivalently be defined in terms of GCRVs. This enables us to provide new results about HSSSs. See Section 1.3 and Section 1.4 for further details.

1.1. Known results about HSSSs
Very little is known about HSSSs. In 1992, Frankel, Desmedt and Burmester [22] proved that in perfect HSSSs, the secret space is an abelian group. In a subsequent work, Frankel and Desmedt [21] showed that when the scheme is ideal (i.e., all share sizes are the same as the secret size), the share spaces are all isomorphic to the secret space, and hence abelian too. Despite several subsequent attempts [17], [37], [42], [14], characterization of ideal perfect HSSSs remained an open problem for a long time. Recently, Jafari and Khazaei [29] have shown that any ideal HSSS can be converted into an ideal linear scheme with the same access structure. This shows that in the case of ideal access structures, homomorphic and linear SSSs have the same power. However, for general access structures, Jafari and Khazaei [29] also showed that HSSSs outperform linear ones [29] (in terms of the best achievable information ratio). In particular, it was shown in [29] that a subclass of abelian schemes, called mixed-linear, which are constructed by combining linear schemes with possibly different underlying finite fields, outperforms linear ones. It remains an open question whether HSSSs can outperform abelian or even mixed-linear schemes.

1.2. Group-characterizable RVs/SSSs and known results
GCRVs. Let G be a finite group, called the main group, and 
 be some of its subgroups. The joint RV 
 where g is a uniformly distributed RV on G is called GC.

Properties of GCRVs. Chan and Yeung [13] proved the following remarkable property about GCRVs. The closure of the set of all entropic points equals the conic closure of the set of all GC entropic points. An entropic point (resp. a GC entropic point) is a point of the form 
, where 
 is a tuple of jointly distributed RVs (resp. GCRVs) and 
 is the Shannon entropy of 
 for . A consequence of this property is that an information inequality (i.e., an inequality of the form 
, where 
 is a RV and 
's are real coefficients) is valid if and only if it is satisfied by all GCRVs. Information inequalities are useful to derive lower bounds on the information ratio of the access structures.

GC SSSs. The GCRV induced by a main finite group G and a collection 
 of its subgroups can be considered as a SSS. The secret space is the quotient set 
 and the share space of the i-th participant is the quotient set 
. To share a secret 
, the dealer chooses a random  such that 
 (there are 
 such elements). The shares are then computed as 
; i.e., the i-th participant's share is the coset 
.

GC SSSs and quasi-perfect security. GC SSSs cover a large class of non-linear schemes. It is large enough to be “complete” for a non-perfect security notion called quasi-perfect. More precisely, the information ratio of an access structure with respect to quasi-perfect security can be computed by only considering the GC SSSs. This observation, made by Kaced in [32, Chapter 5], is a straightforward consequence of the properties of GCRVs mentioned above.

1.3. An equivalent definition for HSSSs
As it was mentioned above, classification of HSSSs has remained a long-standing open problem. In this paper, we present an equivalent definition in terms of group-characterizable (GC) SSSs along with two applications.

Equivalent definition. As we mentioned earlier, the class of HSSSs includes the linear and abelian schemes, which are both GC (we will return to this fact at the end of this subsection). On the other hand, a GC SSS induced by a main group G and normal subgroups 
 in G can easily be shown to be homomorphic. It is not directly obvious whether HSSSs are GC, and if so, it is not clear if there are HSSSs that do not have a group characterization with normal subgroups. We will show that the two classes are equal; that is, every HSSS is GC with normal subgroups in the main group. In fact, we strengthen the Chan and Yeung's result specially for HSSSs by showing that the entropic point of HSSSs is necessarily GC.

Our approach. Our main contribution in this paper is a key theorem which essentially provides a necessary and sufficient condition for a RV to be inherently GC. We call two vectors of jointly distributed RVs equivalent if they differ up to relabeling of the elements of the supports of their marginal distributions. We refer to RVs which are equivalent to some GCRV as inherently GC. The key theorem is as follows.

Key Theorem

A vector of jointly distributed RVs is inherently GC if and only if the automorphism group of its matrix representation acts transitively on the set of its rows.

As an application of the sufficiency condition of the key theorem, we then show that HSSSs satisfy the mentioned condition. If a RV is inherently GC, the proof of our key theorem also constructively provides a group-characterization for it (which might be different from the original one). Some extra effort is required to show that HSSSs are IGC with normal subgroups (see Section 4.2 for further details).

We remark that our key theorem provides a characterization of GC SSSs. Characterization of access structures that are realized by optimal GC SSSs is an interesting research problem which is not the focus of this paper.

Technicality comparison with linear and abelian RVs. As we mentioned earlier, linear and abelian SSSs (or equivalently RVs) are GC too. The group-characterizability of linear RVs was shown by Chan in [12], based on an equivalent definition of linear RVs by Hammer et al. [25] (Definition 2.1–ii.). In fact, it can be shown that linear RVs are equivalent to GCRVs whose main groups are vector spaces. The proof is fairly easy considering the notion of duality for vector spaces. The abelian RVs were first defined by Chan in [12] in terms of GCRVs (Definition 2.2–iii.). Later, Jafari and Khazaei [29] presented a definition as a generalization of Hammer et al.'s definition of linear RVs (Definition 2.2–ii.). The generalization relies on the notion of Pontryagin dual for abelian groups. We will show that abelian RVs are equivalent to GCRVs whose main groups are abelian. The proof uses the properties of Pontryagin duality and is very similar to the linear case, without any particular complexity. The complexity for the homomorphic case is essentially due to lack of proper notions of duality for general (i.e., non-abelian) groups.

1.4. Applications of our equivalent definition
Unlike linear SSSs, which have been very well studied in the literature, our understanding of HSSSs is very limited, as we discussed earlier. Here, we mention some further motivations for studying HSSSs, which turn out easy to answer thanks to our equivalent definition for HSSSs in terms of GC ones.

•
Lower-bounds. A notable approach for finding a lower bound on the information ratio of access structures is to use the so-called Shannon-type or non-Shannon-type information inequalities (e.g., see [15], [3], [9]). Recently, Farràs et al. [20] have proposed an improved method using the common information property of random variables. In [20], it was mentioned that the obtained lower bound applies not only to linear SSSs but also to abelian ones because both classes are known to satisfy the common information property. It is a natural question to ask if their method also applies to any larger class. We will show that the common information property is satisfied for a subclass of GC SSSs whose subgroups have some specific property, which we show to be satisfied by normal subgroups. Consequently, the obtained lower bound using the common information method also applies to HSSSs (and even a larger class).

•
Non-perfect SSS. The most common security notion for SSSs is perfect security. The following relaxations, in increasing level of security, have been presented in the literature: partial [30], quasi-perfect [32, Chapter 5], almost-perfect [33], [16] and statistical (a well-known and standard relaxation, probably first mentioned in [7]). Recently, these security notions were extensively studied in [30] and two main results were presented. First, the information ratio of an access structure with respect to all non-perfect security notions coincides with perfect security for the class of linear schemes. Second, for the general class of SSSs (i.e., non-linear), information ratio is invariant with respect to all non-perfect security notions, but it remained open whether it also coincides with perfect security.

For the class of linear SSSs, it is easy to argue that almost-perfect (and consequently statistical) security coincides with perfect security. This observation has already been made for statistical security by Beimel and Ishai [2, right after Definition 2.3]. We will show that the notion of almost-perfect (and consequently statistical) security also coincides with perfect security for a subclass of GC SSSs whose secret subgroups are normal in their main groups, which clearly includes homomorphic ones.

1.5. Paper organization
The paper is organized as follows. The required concepts about RVs and SSSs are presented in Section 2. In Section 3, we introduce the notion of inherent group-characterizability of RVs. In Section 4, our key theorem (i.e., the necessary and sufficient condition for inherent group-characterizability of RVs) is presented and proved; some applications of the necessary condition are also discussed. Our equivalent definition for HSSSs in terms of GC SSSs is introduced in Section 5. Applications of our equivalent definition are given in Section 6. The paper is concluded in Section 7.

2. Random variables and secret sharing
In this section, we introduce our notation and some basic concepts. For the reader who is less familiar with basics of abstract algebra, we refer to the standard textbooks in this area (e.g. see [23]).

Notation. For a positive integer n,  stands for the set . All random variables (RVs) considered in this paper are discrete with finite support and we use boldface letters for their representation. The support and Shannon entropy of a RV x are denoted by  and , respectively. The mutual information of RVs  is denoted by .

2.1. Linear, abelian, group-characterizable and homomorphic RVs
The notion of linear RVs is widely used in the literature and several equivalent definitions exist for them. Here, we present three such definitions. The equivalence of these definitions is well-known, but for completeness, we present a proof in Appendix A.

Definition 2.1 Linear RV

Let  be a finite field. A linear RV can be defined in any of the following equivalent ways.

i.
(Linear maps) For every , let 
 be a linear map, where S and 
's are all finite-dimensional -vector spaces. We refer to the joint RV 
 as a linear RV, where s is a uniform RV on S.

ii.
(Dual space [25]) Let T be a finite-dimensional -vector space and 
 be a collection of subspaces of T. Let α be a uniform RV on
⁎
 i.e., the dual space of T. We refer to 
 as a linear RV. Here, 
 is the same mapping as α but its domain has been restricted to 
.

iii.
(Affine subspaces) Let U be a finite-dimensional -vector space, 
 be a collection of subspaces of U and u be a uniform RV on U. We refer to 
 as a linear RV. Here, the support of RV 
 is the set of all affine subspaces parallel to 
 (i.e., 
 where 
 is the translation of 
 by the vector u).

The first definition is usually used in the secret sharing literature for defining linear SSSs (similar to the definition given in the third paragraph of the introduction). The second definition was introduced by Hammer et al. [25] and has been widely used in the information theory literature, specifically in the search for the so-called linear rank inequalities (e.g., see [18]). Interestingly, this definition is closely related to definition of SSSs in terms of the so-called (multi-target) monotone span programs [34], [1]. We refer to [30, Section 2.5] for an explanation of this connection. Also, this definition has been a source of motivation in [29] for defining abelian RVs. As we will see, the third definition is useful to view the linear RVs as a subclass of group-characterizable RVs, introduced by Chan and Yeung in [13].

Abelian RVs in the context of secret sharing have recently emerged in [20], [29]. Similar to the linear case, here we provide three definitions. The proof of equivalence is very similar to that of the linear case (see Appendix A).

Definition 2.2 Abelian RVs

Abelian RVs can be defined in the following equivalent ways.

i.
(Abelian homomorphisms) For every , let 
 be a group homomorphism, where S and 
's are all finite abelian groups. We refer to the joint RV 
 as an abelian RV, where s is a uniform RV on S.

ii.
(Pontryagin dual [29]) Let  be a finite abelian group and 
 be a collection of its subgroups. Let α be a uniform RV on
⁎
 called the Pontryagin dual of H, where 
⁎
 is the multiplicative group of non-zero complex numbers. We refer to 
 as an abelian RV. Again, 
 is the same mapping as α, but with domain restricted to 
.

iii.
(Cosets) Let  be a finite abelian group and 
 be a collection of its subgroups. We refer to the RV 
 as an abelian RV, where g is a uniform RV on G. Here, the support of RV 
 is the set of all cosets of 
 in G (i.e., 
, where 
).

Group-characterizable random variables (GCRVs) can be considered a generalization of the third definition for both linear and abelian RVs.

Definition 2.3

Group-characterizable RV [13]
Let ⁎ be a finite group, 
 be a collection of its subgroups and g be a uniform RV on G. We refer to the RV 
 as a group-characterizable random variable (GCRV), induced by 
. Here, 
 is a RV whose support is the left cosets of 
 in G. We call G the main group and say that π is a group-characterization for x.

Let 
 be a GCRV induced by 
 and fix a subset . The support of the RV 
 is 
, which is a subset of the Cartesian product 
. Equivalently, it can be viewed as the induced random variable , where 
 is defined by 
. Let 
. Since 
 if and only if 
, it follows that 
.

Homomorphic RV can be considered another generalization of the first definition for both linear and abelian RVs.

Definition 2.4 Homomorphic RV

For every , let 
 be a group homomorphism, where S and 
's are all finite groups. We refer to the joint RV 
 as a homomorphic RV, where s is a uniform RV on S.

The following proposition shows that GCRVs in which all the subgroups are normal in the main group are homomorphic. In Subsection 5.2 we will show that the converse is also true and, hence, GCRVs are generalization of homomorphic RVs too.

Proposition 2.5

Every GCRV with normal subgroups in the main group is homomorphic.

Proof

Let x be a GCRV induced by 
 and the uniform RV g on G, where each subgroup 
 is normal in the main group G. Since the subgroups are normal in the main group, each quotient 
 is a group and the mapping 
 defined by 
 is a group homomorphism. Also, 
. Therefore, x is a homomorphic RV. □

2.2. Secret sharing schemes
A SSS is a method by which a distinguished participant, called the dealer, shares a secret among a set of n participants. Given a secret 
, the dealer first samples a randomness r according to some pre-specified distribution. He then employs a fixed and publicly-known mapping μ that takes the secret and randomness and computes the shares as 
, where 
 is the share of ith participant. This definition does not assume a priori a distribution on the secret space. By considering a probability distribution on the secret space, a SSS can equivalently be defined as follows.

Definition 2.6 Secret sharing scheme

A secret sharing scheme (SSS) on participants set  is a joint distribution 
, where 
 is the secret RV with 
 and 
 is the share RV of participant .

Given a SSS 
, the dealer can share a secret 
 as follows. He samples a tuple 
 according to the distribution x, conditioned on the event 
. The shares are then determined by the sampled tuple.

A SSS by itself does not convey any notion of security. The most well-known security notion is that of perfect security, in which the goal of the dealer is to allow some pre-specified subsets of participants to recover the secret. The secret must remain information-theoretically hidden from all other subsets of participants. To formalize this intuition we present the notion of access structure first.

Definition 2.7 Access structure

Let  be a set of participants. We refer to a non-empty subset 
, with , as an access structure if it is monotone; i.e., if  and  then . The elements of Γ are called qualified and those of 
 are called unqualified.

Definition 2.8 Perfect realization

We say that a secret sharing scheme 
 is a perfect scheme for an access structure Γ if the following two conditions hold:

•
(Correctness) 
, for every qualified subset  and,

•
(Privacy) 
, for every unqualified subset ,

where 
 for every .
Information ratio. There is a well-known parameter, called information ratio, for quantifying the efficiency of SSSs. The information ratio of participant i in the SSS 
 is defined to be 
. The information ratio of a SSS is the maximum (or sometimes the average) of all participants' information ratios. The information ratio of an access structure is defined as the infimum of the information ratios of all SSSs that perfectly realize it. Computing the information ratio of access structures is a challenging problem.

Linear, abelian, GC and homomorphic SSSs. Every class of RVs gives rise to a class of SSS. A SSS 
 on n participants is called linear (resp. abelian, GC, or homomorphic) if the RV x is linear (resp. abelian, GC, or homomorphic).

3. Inherently group-characterizable random variables
In this section, we introduce the notion of inherently group-characterizable (IGC) RVs. We use matrix representation of RVs and introduce the concept of relabeling for defining inherent group-characterizability of RVs.

Matrix representation of RVs. A RV with finite support can be represented by a matrix by considering the elements in the support of the RV as the rows of the matrix. We are not concerned about the order of rows but it is important that there is no duplicate row. A non-zero probability must also be assigned to each row, based on the distribution of the RV. For homomorphic and GCRVs, which by definition are uniformly distributed on their supports, we can safely ignore the distribution on the rows and focus on the matrix itself.

Example 3.1

Consider a GCRV induced by 
. Clearly, its matrix representation is of the form
 
 where all the rows are distinct and 
 is some (possibly proper) subset of G, where 
. Because, as we mentioned earlier, a tuple 
 is equal to 
 if and only if 
.

From a secret sharing point of view, we do not distinguish between two jointly distributed RVs whose all marginal distributions are identical up to a relabeling of the elements of their supports. To capture this notion, we propose the following definition.

Definition 3.2 Relabeling

Let 
 be a matrix and denote its j-th column by 
. A relabeling for M is a tuple 
 such that 
, , is an injection from the set of distinct elements in 
, to an arbitrary set. The action  is defined by
 where 
 acts on the j-th column as 
.

Example 3.3

The following matrices are relabelings of each other:
 
⁎	
⁎		
⁎	⁎	
 

In order to work with RVs or SSSs that are essentially GC but do not have a built-in group-characterization, we present the following definition.

Definition 3.4 Inherent group-characterizability

A matrix M is called inherently group-characterizable (IGC) if there exists a relabeling f such that  is the matrix representation of a GCRV.

The above definition was given for matrices, but it clearly can be extended to RVs and SSSs, which are uniformly distributed on their supports. Therefore, we can refer to RVs or SSSs as being IGC.

Remark 3.5 On uniformity

We would like to highlight the following points concerning the “uniform distribution assumption” that we need on the support of RVs and SSSs to call them IGC.

•
RVs which are not uniformly distributed on their supports cannot be GC. One can extend the notion of GCRVs by allowing the RV g in Definition 2.3 to have an arbitrary distribution on G but with full support. Equivalently, the new definition calls a RV GC if its matrix representation is GC (even if the probabilities that are assigned to each row are not all the same).

•
To the best of our knowledge, all known optimal perfect SSSs are uniform (and even strongly-uniform which is a more demanding property, see Section 4.3). Here, a SSS for an access structure is called optimal if there is no other SSS for the same access structure which decreases the information ratio of some participant without increasing it for the others. In particular, all well-known classes of SSSs (e.g., linear, abelian and homomorphic), are usually defined to be uniform by default. It is an open problem if non-uniform SSSs can outperform the uniform ones with respect to information ratio.

4. A necessary and sufficient condition for group-characterizability
In this section, we present a key theorem which provides a necessary and sufficient condition for a matrix to be IGC. First, we introduce the required tools and definitions in Section 4.1. Then, we present our key theorem and its proof in Section 4.2. Some applications of the key theorem are discussed in Section 4.3.

4.1. Automorphisms group of a matrix and its properties
Our main tool for determining the inherent group-characterizability of a given matrix is the notion of group automorphism of a matrix. To define this notion, we first recall the definition of group action and then define two actions on matrices.

Definition 4.1 Group action

(Left) action of the group G on the set X is a function  with the following properties

(1)
For all  and for the identity element , we have .

(2)
For all  and 
, we have 
.

An action of group G on X is transitive if for all  there exists some  for which .
Notice that if a group G acts on a set X, then each subgroup of G acts on X naturally.

Definition 4.2 Permutation action

Let M be a matrix with m rows and 
, where 
 is the symmetric group of order m. The action  is defined to be a matrix with m rows whose i-th row is the -th row of M.

Definition 4.3 Reordering action

A relabeling 
 of a matrix M is called a reordering if each 
 is a permutation on the set of distinct elements of 
, the j-th column of M.

Notice that a reordering of a matrix does not introduce new entries and only exchanges entries of each column. Sometimes, reordering of a matrix behaves the same way as permuting the rows. This is a motivation for the following definition.

Definition 4.4 Automorphisms group of a matrix

Let M be a matrix with m rows. The set of all automorphisms of M is defined as follows,
 Each element of  is called an automorphism.

By Proposition 4.6,  is a subgroup of 
. It is also easy to verify that the reordering that corresponds to an automorphism σ is unique, which we denote by 
. Conversely, the automorphism that corresponds to a reordering is unique if the matrix does not have duplicate rows, which we assume to be the case throughout the paper.

Example 4.5

Below we present a matrix M along with all its automorphisms and their corresponding reorderings (e is the identity permutation): 
 
  
  
 

Some properties of automorphisms and relabelings are given in the following proposition, which will be used later.
Proposition 4.6

The following statements are true for a matrix M:

i)
For every permutation σ and relabeling f, we have .

ii)
If , then we have . Additionally, 
.

iii)
If , then 
. Additionally, 
.

iv)
 is a subgroup of 
.

v)
For every relabeling f, we have .

vi)
For every 
, we have 
.

vii)
For every , we have 
, where 
 is the sub-matrix with columns indexed by elements in A.

Proof

All statements are easy to prove. For example we prove part (vi).
 □

4.2. The key theorem
We now present and prove our key theorem which provides a necessary and sufficient condition for a matrix to be IGC. The reader may recall the notion of transitivity of a group action, given in Definition 4.1.

Theorem 4.7 Key theorem

A matrix M is IGC if and only if the group  acts transitively on the set , where m is the number of rows of M.

Proof

(Only-if part) First assume that the matrix 
 is itself GC and induced by 
. We show that for every , there exists a  such that .

Observe that for a given , the (left) multiplication of g by entries of M, i.e., 
, is a row-permutation of M. Denote its corresponding permutation by 
. Therefore, 
. On the other hand, 
 is a relabeling of M for 
, where 
 sends 
 to 
. Therefore, 
 and hence 
.

Let 
 and 
 be the i-th and j-th rows of M, respectively. Let 
 and 
. Since 
, the i-th row of  is the j-th row of M. That is, .

Now let M be an IGC matrix. Thus, there exists a GC matrix 
 and a relabeling f such that 
. By Proposition 4.6 (part v)), 
, from which the claim follows.

(If part) Let 
 and  act transitively on the set . For every , let
 where 
 is the corresponding reordering of σ. Let 
 be the matrix representation of 
. It is enough to show that M is a relabeling of 
 and, therefore, M is IGC. For every , define 
 from the set of elements of 
 to the set of elements of 
 by 
. We claim that 
 is a relabeling. First notice that 
, , is well-defined and one-to-one; because:
 It remains to show that 
 is onto. Let 
 be an arbitrary element of 
. Since the action of H on  is transitive, for all , there is a  such that . Therefore, 
. □

Some remarks are in order. First, we remark that the above theorem provides a characterization of GC SSSs. Characterization of access structures that are realized by optimal GC SSSs is an interesting research problem which is not captured by this theorem. Second, the above proof provides a systematic way of finding a group characterization for an IGC matrix M. We notice that if M itself is GC, the constructed group characterization might differ from the original one.

For completeness and ease of reference, below we present a proposition which was essentially proved in the “if part”.

Proposition 4.8

Let 
 be a matrix and H be a subgroup of  that acts transitively on the set . Then, 
 is a group-characterization of M, where
 and 
 is the (unique) reordering that corresponds to σ.

Corollary 4.9

For an inherently group-characterizable matrix M with m rows, it holds that m divides .

Proof

Let  and 
 be as in Proposition 4.8. Since M is IGC, the matrix representation of 
, which we denote by 
, is a relabeling of M. We know that 
 has 
 rows. On the other hand, M is a relabeling of 
 and, hence, they have the same number of rows. Therefore, m divides . Since H is a subgroup of , m divides  too. □

4.3. Applications of the key theorem
Recall that our key theorem provides a necessary and sufficient condition for a matrix to be IGC. The sufficiency condition is useful for constructing a main group and some subgroups for an IGC matrix (see Proposition 4.8). In the next section, we present an application of this result to homomorphic SSSs.

The necessary condition, on the other hand, helps us to give examples of RVs which are not IGC. In a follow-up work [31], we have used this part of the theorem to show the existence of ideal perfect SSS which are not IGC (refer to [31] for motivations of this result). Below, we mention another application to what we call strongly-uniform RVs.

On strongly-uniform RVs. We say that a jointly distributed RV 
 is strongly-uniform if, for all , the marginal distribution 
 is uniformly distributed on its support. Such random variables have been studied in [10].1 GCRVs are clearly strongly-uniform. We show that the converse is not necessarily true. Consider the following matrix with six rows and uniform distribution on each row. The corresponding RV is clearly quasi-uniform. However, since , by Corollary 4.9, it is not IGC (because ).
 

Strongly-uniform RVs are interesting in the context of SSSs because it is an open problem if there are optimal perfect SSSs which are not strongly-uniform. See the second part of Remark 3.5.

5. An equivalent definition for homomorphic RVs
In this section, we use our key theorem (Theorem 4.7) to present an equivalent definition for homomorphic RVs in terms of GC ones.

5.1. Homomorphic matrices
We define homomorphic matrices to prove the main result of this section. Let 
 be a homomorphic RV according to Definition 2.4 and M be its matrix representation (i.e., the rows of M are the distinct elements in the support of x). Properties of this matrix lead to a definition for homomorphic matrices as follows.

Definition 5.1 Homomorphic matrix

Let M be a matrix such that the set of elements in each column has a group structure. We call M homomorphic if the product of every pair of rows 
 and 
, defined by 
, is also a row of the matrix.

Recall that homomorphic RVs are uniformly distributed on their supports. Therefore, a RV is homomorphic if and only if its matrix representation is homomorphic and the probabilities assigned to all rows are identical.

5.2. Homomorphic RVs are IGC with normal subgroups
At the end of Subsection 2.1 we showed that GCRVs with normal subgroups in the main group are homomorphic. Here we prove that the converse is also true.

Theorem 5.2

Every homomorphic RV is IGC with normal subgroups in the main group.

Using the sufficient condition of our key theorem (Theorem 4.7), we first show that a homomorphic matrix is IGC. However, the theorem does not guarantee the existence of a group-characterization with normal subgroups. To handle this issue, we introduce the notion of inner automorphisms group for homomorphic matrices which helps us to find a group-characterization with normal subgroups.

Existence of a group-characterization. Let 
 be a homomorphic matrix and β be a row of M. It is easy to see that the mapping , on the set of rows of M, is a permutation. Let 
 denote the corresponding permutation. We show that 
 is an automorphism of M. That is, there exists a reordering f such that 
. Let 
. Since 
 and 
 are elements of the same group, their product is well-defined. Let(1)
 which is obviously a permutation. Therefore, 
 is a reordering that satisfies 
. Thus, 
.

Now, let 
 and 
 be the i-th and j-th rows of M, respectively, and 
. Since the rows of the matrix constitute a finite group, we conclude that β is also a row. It is clear that 
. Hence,  acts transitively on the set . Therefore, by Theorem 4.7, M is IGC.

Inner automorphisms group. In order to show the existence of a group-characterization with normal subgroups, we introduce the notion of inner automorphisms group of a homomorphic matrix. Let M be a homomorphic matrix with m rows and β be a row of M. Let 
 correspond to the permutation , on the set of rows of M. We call 
 an inner automorphism of M and define the set of inner automorphisms of M as

Finding a normal characterization. Clearly,  is a subgroup of . Also, based on our previous discussion,  acts transitively on the set , because 
's belong to . By Proposition 4.8, 
 is a group-characterization for M, where  and
 where 
 is the reordering that corresponds to the permutation  and 
 is the first row of M.

We show that 
 is a normal characterization; that is, for all , the subgroup 
 is normal in . By Equation (1), we have:
 where 
.

For proof of normality, we need to show that for every 
 and 
, we have 
. It is clear that 
. The claim then follows because 
 is a row of M and its j-th element is identity (since 
).

6. Applications of our equivalent definition
Except a few results about homomorphic SSSs (HSSSs), which was reviewed in the introduction (Section 1.1), our knowledge about these schemes is very limited. In this subsection, we will provide two applications of our equivalent definition for homomorphic RVs to achieve some new results about HSSSs. We need some preliminaries for this section that will be introduced in Section 6.1. Applications will be mentioned in Sections 6.2 and 6.3

6.1. Preliminaries
Let us recall the definition of product of two subgroups. For subgroups  of a group ⁎, their product is defined to be ⁎⁎. Trivially, ⁎ contains both K and H. The set ⁎ is not necessarily a subgroup and its size is given by the product formula: ⁎
 
. The product of two subgroups  is a group if and only if they are commuting; that is, ⁎⁎.

Let 
 be a GCRV induced by a tuple 
. As we mentioned at the end of Section 2.1, for every subset , the marginal RV 
 is uniformly distributed on its support 
 which has 
 elements, where 
. Therefore, 
 
.

By definitions of conditional entropy and mutual entropy, the following relations then easily follow:(2)
 
(3)
⁎
 
 where the latter is obtained by using the product formula 
⁎
 
.

6.2. Lower bound on the information ratio of HSSS
Determining the information ratio of access structures is a challenging open problem in theory of SSS, even for restricted classes of interest. A notable approach for finding a lower bound on the information ratio is to use the so-called Shannon-type or non-Shannon-type information inequalities (e.g., see [15], [3], [9]). Recently, Farràs et al. [20] have used the common information (CI) property of random variables to derive lower bounds on the information ratio of access structures. The derived lower bounds apply to any class of SSSs that satisfies the CI property. In particular, it applies to the class of linear and abelian SSSs, which are known to satisfy the CI property, as it was explicitly mentioned in [20]. In the following we show that the CI property is satisfied by a subclass of GC SSSs whose subgroups have some particular property. Then, we show that normal subgroups satisfy that property, and consequently, HSSSs are included in this subclass (because by our equivalent definition HSSSs are GC with normal subgroups). We conclude that every lower bound achieved using the CI method applies to the class of HSSSs too. In particular, this observation has the following negative consequence.

A negative consequence. The information ratios of several small access structures, including some on five participants and several graph-access structures on six participants are still open for general SSSs. But the exact value of their information ratios has been determined for the class of linear schemes. This project was initiated in [28], [41]; see [20], [24] for the latest status and references therein for the history of progress. Our result shows that one cannot hope to improve the upper-bounds by constructing HSSSs for them; because the lower-bounds achieved by the CI method are already met by optimal linear schemes for all the mentioned access structures.

The remaining part of this subsection is devoted to show that homomorphic RVs satisfy the CI property. Let us start by a formal definition of CI.

Definition 6.1 Common information

We say that a pair of jointly distributed RVs  satisfies the common information (CI) property if there exists a RV z such that  and . We say that a vector 
 of jointly distributed RVs satisfies the CI property if for every pair of (not necessarily disjoint) subsets , the joint distribution 
 satisfies the CI property.

The following proposition introduces a subclass of GCRVs that satisfies the CI property.

Proposition 6.2 GCRVs with CI

Let 
 be a GCRV induced by 
 such that for every pair of subsets , the subgroups 
 and 
 are commuting. Then, the RV x satisfies the CI property.

Proof

Fix some . We show that there exists a RV z that captures the common information of 
 and 
. Since 
 and 
 are commuting subgroups, their product is a subgroup too, say 
. Let z be the marginal RV induced by the subgroup 
. Since 
 contains both 
 and 
, we have 
. Furthermore, 
⁎
. □

The following corollary then follows easily.
Corollary 6.3

Homomorphic RVs satisfy the CI property.

Proof

Since homomorphic RVs are equivalent to GCRVs with normal subgroups, it is sufficient to show that GCRVs with normal subgroups satisfy the property mentioned in Proposition 6.2. That is, for every pair of subsets , the subgroups 
 and 
 are commuting. But this is clear because the intersection of normal subgroups is also normal, and any normal subgroup commutes with any other subgroup. □

6.3. On statistical and almost-perfect HSSSs
Several well-known non-perfect security notions for SSSs have been introduced in the literature. We refer to [30] for an extensive study of such notions. Two notable examples are statistical and almost-perfect security notions. In this subsection, we will show that perfect, almost-perfect, and statistical security notions all coincide for a subclass of GC SSSs whose secret subgroup (
) is normal in the main group (G). By our equivalent definition for HSSSs, this class trivially contains the homomorphic ones.

Security definitions. The statistical security is a well-known and standard relaxation of perfect security, probably first mentioned in [7]. Here, we recall a definition from [30] (a similar definition can be found in [2]). A function  is called negligible if 
.

Definition 6.4 Statistical security

Let 
 be a family of SSSs, where 
, and Γ be an access structure on n participants. We say that 
 is a statistical family for Γ (or 
 statistically realizes Γ) if:

(1)
The secret length grows at most polynomially in k; that is, 
 for some .

(2)
For every qualified set , there exists a reconstruction function

Image 1
such that for every secret s in the support of 
, the error probability
Image 2
is negligible in k;
(3)
For every unqualified set , for every pair of secrets 
 in the support of 
, the statistical distance 
 
 is negligible in k.

The almost-perfect SSSs have recently been studied by Csirmaz [16] in the context of duality. Csirmaz defines almost-perfect security in terms of the so-called almost entropic polymatroids. Here, we present an equivalent definition in terms of a family of SSSs.

Definition 6.5 Almost-perfect security

Let 
 be a family of SSSs, where 
, and Γ be an access structure on n participants. We say that 
 is an almost-perfect family for Γ if:

(1)
 
 for every qualified set ;

(2)
 
 for every unqualified set .

Why are non-perfect SSSs important? Here, we mention one motivation for studying non-perfect security notions. We refer to [30] for further motivations. There is a natural notion for dual of an access structure and it is a long-standing open problem whether the information ratios of dual access structures are the same with respect to perfect security [27]. Building on a result by Kaced [33], Csirmaz showed that the answer is negative for the almost-perfect security notion. Therefore, it is important to understand if the information ratio of an access structure is invariant with respect to different security notions. It is a challenging open problem whether the best achievable information ratio for an access structure is the same for non-perfect and perfect SSSs. If this turns out to be the case for almost-perfect security, the original open problem for dual access structures is resolved too.

What we know. For a specific class of SSSs, the almost-perfect security notion is weaker than the statistical security. Recently, it has been proved in [30] that for the general class of SSSs (i.e., non-linear), information ratios of an access structure with respect to almost-perfect and statistical security are equal (but it is an open problem whether it remains invariant for perfect security too). For the class of linear SSSs, it is easy to argue that almost-perfect (and consequently statistical) security coincides with perfect security. This observation has already been noticed for statistical security by Beimel and Ishai [2, right after Definition 2.3]. Extending this observation to the class of abelian schemes is fairly easy.2 But proving coincidence for any class beyond abelian SSSs (particularly, the homomorphic class using the traditional definition) is not that straightforward.

Main result. The following proposition states that almost-perfect, statistical and perfect security notions all coincide for a subclass of GC SSSs whose secret subgroup is normal in the main group. At the end of this subsection, we provide some technical discussion on the proof and also on the size of the discovered class.

Proposition 6.6

Let Γ be an access structure and 
 be a family of GC SSSs that almost-perfectly or statistically realizes Γ, such that the secret subgroup of every scheme 
 is normal in its main group. Then, for every sufficiently large k, the scheme 
 perfectly realizes Γ.

Proof

The proof follows by the following observation. Let 
 be an arbitrary group-characterizable secret sharing scheme induced by groups 
. Let . By (2), if 
, then the quantity must be at least one; because 
 is a (proper) subgroup of 
 and, hence, its order divides 
; i.e., the ratio 
 
 is at least two. However, in general, the analogous statement is not true for the mutual information since 
⁎
 is not necessarily a subgroup of G to ensure that its size divides . Nevertheless, if one of these subgroups is a normal subgroup in G, then 
⁎
 is a subgroup of 
 and, therefore, 
 must be at least one if it is positive. This argument shows that if 
 almost-perfectly realizes an access structure, then for every sufficiently large k, 
 must be a perfect scheme for it. □

By our equivalent definition for HSSS, not only the secret subgroup, but also all share subgroups are normal in the main group. The following corollary then follows.

Corollary 6.7

Let Γ be an access structure and 
 be a family of homomorphic SSSs that almost-perfectly or statistically realizes Γ. Then, for every sufficiently large k, the scheme 
 perfectly realizes Γ.

Some technical discussion on the proof of Proposition 6.6. The proof of Proposition 6.6 relied on the following observation. For given subgroups 
 of a finite group G, if 
 is a normal subgroup in G, then 
⁎
 is a subgroup of G and, therefore, 
⁎
 must be one if it is arbitrarily close to one. This argument does not go through for the (general) class of GC schemes (i.e., when 
 is not necessarily a normal subgroup in G). In general, one can construct an example where the ratio 
⁎
 is arbitrarily close to one. Let G be the group of order  generated by two elements a of order p and b of order  where p is a given prime number. The only relation between a and b is 
. Then it is easy to check that if we take 
 and 
 to be the subgroups of order p generated by a and 
, respectively, then 
⁎
 will be a subset of order 
 and hence the ratio is  which can be made arbitrarily close to one. Nevertheless, this argument does not show that almost-perfect and perfect security notions do not coincide for the class of group-characterizable schemes (it just shows that the above proof does not work). More importantly, even if the two notions do not coincide for this class of schemes, their corresponding information ratios might still coincide.

How large is the discovered class. GC SSSs cover a large class of non-linear schemes. It is large enough to be “complete” for a non-perfect security notion called quasi-perfect [32, Chapter 5]. That is, the information ratio of an access structure with respect to quasi-perfect security can be computed by only considering the group-characterizable SSSs. This is quite non-trivial and follows by a surprising property of GCRVs [13, Theorem 4.1], which was discussed in Subsection 1.2. Quasi-perfect security is weaker than almost-perfect security for a specific class of schemes. However, for the general class of SSSs as well as the linear class, the quasi-perfect and almost-perfect information ratios are equal [30]. It is an open problem if GC SSSs are complete for almost-perfect, statistical or perfect security notions. It is an interesting open problem how much the normality condition of the secret subgroups shrinks the class of GC schemes.

7. Conclusion and discussion
We believe that GCRVs provide a rich tool that may deepen our understating of SSSs. This concept was introduced in information theory literature in 2002. However, to the best of our knowledge, it has not grabbed the attention of cryptographers, particularly those with interests in theory of SSS. Well-known classes of SSSs (i.e., linear, multi-linear, abelian and homomorphic) are now known to be special cases of GC SSSs. But the technicality of the proof for the homomorphic case, which was shown in this paper, is incomparable with the others.

In particular, we presented an equivalent definition for homomorphic SSSs in terms of GC schemes with normal subgroups in the main group. We also demonstrated the potential of our equivalent definition in enhancing our understanding of homomorphic SSSs, by considering two concrete examples. We remark that our equivalent definition for homomorphic SSSs was based on the proof of our key theorem (a necessary and sufficient condition for a RV to be GC). It is interesting to see if our key theorem finds other applications. In the paper, we used it to show the existence of quasi-uniform random variables which are not inherently GC. In a follow-up work [31], as another application, we have shown the existence of ideal perfect SSSs which are not inherently GC.

On duality for non-abelian groups. Our proof for equivalence of two different definitions for homomorphic SSSs, compared to the linear and abelian schemes, is rather more complex. What makes the proof more involved is the lack of a proper notion for the dual of general (i.e., non-abelian) groups. The notion of dual of a vector space and Pontryagin dual of an abelian group leads to a useful definition for linear RVs (Definition 2.1–ii.) and abelian RVs (Definition 2.2–ii.) which makes the proof for these two classes of RVs fairly easy. A similar situation also arises with dual SSSs, which we will discuss next. It is an interesting problem to see if advanced concepts from abstract algebra, such as unitary group representation [4], can be used to achieve new results, which we leave for the future.

SSSs and duality. There is a well-known notion for the dual of an access structure defined by Jackson and Martin in [27]. It is a long-standing open problem if the information ratios of dual access structures are the same with respect to perfect security. The equality is known to hold for linear SSSs [27], [19] and has recently been extended to abelian schemes by Jafari and Khazaei in [29], and also to ideal homomorphic schemes in the same paper. However, it is an open problem if the result can be extended to all homomorphic SSSs. The difficulty stems from the issue that we discussed earlier; i.e., lack of a proper notion of duality for general non-abelian groups.