Abstract
We study the 1-planar, quasi-planar, and fan-planar crossing number in comparison to the (unrestricted) crossing number of graphs. We prove that there are n-vertex 1-planar (quasi-planar, fan-planar) graphs such that any 1-planar (quasi-planar, fan-planar) drawing has Ω(n) crossings, while O(1) crossings suffice in a crossing-minimal drawing without restrictions on local edge crossing patterns.

Keywords
Crossing numbers
Beyond planarity
1-planar graphs

1. Introduction
The crossing number of a graph G, denoted by , is the smallest number of edge crossings over all possible drawings of G. Many papers are devoted to the study of this parameter, refer to [21], [24] for surveys. In particular, minimizing the number of crossings is one of the seminal problems in graph drawing (see, e.g., [3], [4], [22]), whose importance has been further witnessed by user studies showing how edge crossings may deteriorate the readability of a diagram [19], [20], [25]. On the other hand, determining the crossing number of a graph is NP-hard [6] and can be solved exactly only on small/medium instances [7]. On the positive side, the crossing number is fixed-parameter tractable in the number of crossings [14] and can be approximated by a constant factor for graphs of bounded degree and genus [10].

A recent research stream studies graph drawings where, rather than minimizing the number of crossings, some edge crossing patterns are forbidden; refer to [5], [9], [11] for surveys and reports. A key motivation for the study of so-called beyond-planar graphs are recent cognitive experiments showing that already the absence of specific kinds of edge crossing configurations has a positive impact on the human understanding of a graph drawing [12], [17]. Of particular interest for us are three families of beyond-planar graphs that have been extensively studied, namely the k-planar, fan-planar, and k-quasi-planar graphs; refer to [9] for additional families. A k-planar drawing is such that each edge is crossed at most  times [18] (see also [15] for a survey on 1-planarity). A k-quasi planar drawing does not have  mutually crossing edges [1]. A fan-planar drawing does not contain two independent edges that cross a third one or two adjacent edges that cross another edge from different “sides” [13]. A graph is k-planar (k-quasi-planar, fan-planar) if it admits a k-planar (k-quasi-planar, fan-planar) drawing; a 3-quasi-planar graph is simply called quasi-planar.

In this context, an intriguing question is to what extent edge crossings can be minimized while forbidding such local crossing patterns. In particular, we ask whether avoiding local crossing patterns in a drawing of a graph may enforce an overall large number of crossings, whereas only a few crossings would suffice in a crossing-minimal drawing of the graph. We investigate simple drawings (i.e., any two edges intersect in at most one point) and answer this question in the affirmative for the above-mentioned three families of beyond-planar graphs. Our contribution is summarized in Table 1. (1) In Section 2, we prove that there exist n-vertex 1-planar graphs such that the ratio between the minimum number of crossings in a 1-planar drawing of one such graph and its crossing number is . This result can be easily extended to k-planar graphs if we allow parallel edges. (2) In Section 3, we prove that there exist n-vertex quasi-planar graphs such that the ratio between the minimum number of crossings in a quasi-planar drawing of one such graph and its crossing number is . Similarly, a  bound can be proved for k-quasi-planar graphs. (3) In Section 4, we prove that there exist n-vertex fan-planar graphs such that the ratio between the minimum number of crossings in a fan-planar drawing of one such graph and its crossing number is . The lower bound in Result (1) is tight. Since fan-planar and quasi-planar graphs have  edges, the lower bounds in Results (2) and (3) are a linear factor from the trivial upper bound , and it remains open whether such an upper bound can be achieved (see Section 5).


Table 1. Lower and upper bounds on the crossing ratio of beyond-planar graphs.

Graph class	lower bound	upper bound
1-planar	n/2 − 1	n/2 − 1
quasi-planar	Ω(n)	O(n2)
k-quasi-planar	Ω(n/k3)	
fan-planar	Ω(n)	O(n2)
Notation and Definitions. We assume familiarity with standard definitions about graph drawings and embeddings of planar and nonplanar graphs (see, e.g., [8], [9]). In a drawing of a graph, we assume that an edge does not contain a vertex other than its endpoints, no two edges meet tangentially, and no three edges share a crossing point. We only consider simple drawings where any two edges intersect in at most one point, which is either a common endpoint or an interior point where the two edges properly cross. Thus, in a simple drawing, any two adjacent edges do not cross and any two non-adjacent edges cross at most once. Observe that this is not a restriction for 1-planar drawings. We define the k-planar crossing number of a k-planar graph G, denoted by , as the minimum number of crossings over all k-planar drawings of G. The k-planar crossing ratio  is the supremum of  over all k-planar graphs G. Analogously, we define the quasi-planar and the fan-planar crossing number of a graph G, denoted by  and , as well as the quasi-planar and the fan-planar crossing ratio, denoted by  and .

2. The 1-planar crossing ratio
An n-vertex 1-planar graph (with ) has at most  edges and a 1-planar drawing has at most  crossings, that is  [18]. Observe that for  it has to hold that . It follows that the 1-planar crossing ratio is . We show that this bound can be achieved.

Theorem 1

For every , there exists a 1-planar graph  with  vertices such that  and , which yields the largest possible 1-planar crossing ratio.

The construction of  consists of three parts: a rigid graph P that has to be drawn planar in any 1-planar drawing; its dual ⁎; a set of binding edges and one special edge that force P and ⁎ to be intertwined in any 1-planar drawing.

To obtain P, we utilize a construction introduced by Korzhik and Mohar [16]. A plane graph M is a medial extension of a graph G if M is obtained from G in the following way. Graph M has a vertex  for each edge e of G. For every vertex v of G with degree 3, the vertices of M corresponding to the three edges incident to v are pairwise adjacent. For every vertex w of G with degree 4, if  is the cyclic order of edges incident to w, then M contains the 4-cycle , and contains either the edge  or the edge . The graphs  are the medial extension of the Cartesian product of the path of length 2 and the cycle of length ℓ; see Fig. 1a. They prove that  has exactly one 1-planar embedding on the sphere, and that embedding is crossing-free. We choose  as our rigid graph and fix its (1-)planar embedding (when we will refer to P, we will usually mean this embedding).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (473KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Construction of the graph Gℓ in the proof of Theorem 1. Blue circles and edges are P; red squares and bold edges are P⁎; green dashed edges are the binding edges; and the orange very bold edge is the special edge. (For interpretation of the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Let ⁎ be the dual of P, obtained by placing a dual vertex ⁎ into each face h of P and connecting two dual vertices if their corresponding faces share an edge; see Fig. 1b. Since P has 5ℓ vertices and 11ℓ edges, by Euler's polyhedra formula it has  faces; thus, ⁎ has  vertices and 11ℓ edges.

Obviously, ⁎ can be drawn planar, as both P and ⁎ are planar and disjoint. All faces of P have size 3 or 4, except two large (called polar) faces f and g of size ℓ. We create a graph  by adding ℓ binding edges to ⁎ between ⁎ (the vertex of ⁎ corresponding to the face f) and the vertices of P that are incident to f. This forces ⁎ to be drawn in the face f in any 1-planar drawing.

Lemma 1

 has only two types of 1-planar embeddings (up to the choice of the outer face): a planar one where ⁎ lies completely inside the face f of P; and a 1-planar embedding where ⁎ lies inside f, ⁎ lies inside g, and each edge of P crosses an edge of ⁎ and vice versa.

Proof

Let  be the subgraph of  that consists of ⁎, and the binding edges. In any 1-planar drawing of , ⁎ has to lie in the face f of P: if we place it in face g, then all binding edges have more than one crossing. If we place it in any other face h, then there are at least  binding edges that have to leave h, but there are at most  edges on its boundary, so one of them has to be crossed more than once. Hence,  has a unique 1-planar embedding on the sphere. We now argue that there are only two ways to place the vertices of ⁎⁎ into the faces of P to obtain a 1-planar embedding of . To this end, observe that there are ℓ disjoint paths (i.e., not sharing any interior vertex) between ⁎ and ⁎ in ⁎. We already know that ⁎ has to lie in the face f. If we place ⁎ in any face h of P that has fewer than ℓ edges on its boundary, then each of these disjoint paths has to leave h, so one of the edges on the boundary of h is crossed more than once. This leaves only two possibilities for the placement of ⁎: either in f (as depicted in Fig. 1d), or in the other polar face g (as depicted in Fig. 1c).

Case 1: ⁎ lies in g. Then, any path from ⁎ to ⁎ must have at least 7 crossings. Further, every edge of ⁎ lies on a path of length 7 from ⁎ to ⁎, so every edge of ⁎ has to be crossed. Since the number of edges in P and ⁎ are equal, also every edge of P has to be crossed.

Case 2: ⁎ lies in f. Then we argue that there cannot be a crossing between any edge of P and an edge of ⁎. Assume to the contrary that there is one. Since ⁎ and ⁎ lie in the face f, there has to be a crossing involving an edge on the boundary of f. Let  be edge of ⁎ involved in this crossing such that u lies in f and v does not. Then v lies in a face h of size 3. It is easy to see that there are k disjoint paths between ⁎ and any vertex of ⁎ of degree k. Hence, with the same argument as above, v must have degree 3. Assume w.l.o.g. that v is closer to ⁎ than to ⁎ in ⁎ (the other case is symmetric). We have to distinguish three cases.

Case 2.A: v is adjacent to ⁎. If ⁎, then the edge ⁎ cannot be drawn with one crossing, as the edge between f and h is already crossed; see Fig. 2a. So ⁎. Let  be the other two neighbors of v; see Fig. 2b. There are two disjoint paths of length 3 in ⁎ whose endpoints are v and ⁎ and that go through  and , respectively; there is exactly one way to draw these two paths in a 1-planar way without crossing the edge between f and h. There is a common neighbor w of  and , so w has to be placed in a face adjacent to the faces of  and . However, now there is no way to draw the path from w to ⁎ that consists of 4 edges without multiple crossings.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (319KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Proof that P and P⁎ do not cross when g⁎ lies in f. (Left) situation in P⁎ and (Right) proof that the drawing cannot be 1-planar.

Case 2.B: v is not adjacent to ⁎ and u has degree 4; see Fig. 2c. Let  be the other neighbor of v of degree 4, and let w be the common neighbor of  and u. Note that edge ⁎ exists in this case, since v is closer to ⁎ than to ⁎. The path ⁎ has length 3, so it has to be drawn as in Fig. 2c (up to symmetry). However, then there is no way to add the edge  in a 1-planar way.

Case 2.C: v is not adjacent to ⁎ and u has degree 3; see Fig. 2d. Let  be the other two neighbors of v and let w be their common neighbor. The path ⁎ has length 3, so it has to be drawn exactly as in the previous case. Then there is no way to draw  such that both  and  are crossed only once.

Thus, if ⁎ lies in f, then there cannot be any crossing between P and ⁎, so ⁎ completely lies inside f. □

Let z be a vertex of P on the boundary of f. Let y be the face of size 4 that has z on its boundary. Let x be the degree-6 vertex on the boundary of y. We obtain  from  by adding the special edge ⁎. In the planar embedding of Lemma 1, ⁎ and thus ⁎ lies inside the face f of P, so ⁎ has to cross at least two edges of P; see Fig. 1d. Choosing the face that corresponds to z as the outer face of ⁎ gives a non-1-planar drawing of  with 2 crossings.

Hence,  has to be drawn in the second way of Lemma 1; see Fig. 1c. Here, the edge ⁎ can be added without further crossings. Graph  consists of  vertices in total. Both P and ⁎ have 11ℓ edges, and each of them is crossed, so there are  crossings in total, which is the maximum possible in a 1-planar drawing. Hence,  and , so .

The construction used in the proof of Theorem 1 can be generalized to k-planar multigraphs. It suffices to replace each edge of , except the special edge, by a bundle of k parallel edges:

Corollary 1

For every , there exists a k-planar multigraph  with  vertices and maximum edge multiplicity k such that  and , thus .

3. The quasi-planar crossing ratio
An n-vertex quasi-planar graph G has at most  edges, thus  [2]. For  it must be , and hence . We show that the quasi-planar crossing ratio is unbounded, even for . The proof begins with a technical lemma, namely Lemma 2.

Theorem 2

For every , there exists a quasi-planar graph  with  vertices such that  and , thus .

Lemma 2

Let G be a graph containing two independent edges  and . Suppose that u and v (w and z, resp.) are connected by a set  (, resp.) of  paths of length two. Let Γ be a drawing of G. If  and  cross in Γ, then Γ contains at least ℓ crossings.

Proof

Suppose that  and  cross. If each of the  paths in  crosses , then the claim follows. Assume otherwise that at least one of these paths does not cross . This path forms a 3-cycle t with ; the  paths of  all cross at least one edge of t, which proves the claim. □

Proof of Theorem 2

Let  be the graph constructed as follows; cf. Fig. 3a. Start with a 6-cycle , and a vertex x connected to each of C, yielding graph . Extend each edge of  by adding  disjoint paths of length two between its endpoints. Finally, add special edges , .

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (242KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Illustration for the proof of Theorem 2.

The resulting graph  has  vertices and admits a drawing with 3 crossings, so ; see Fig. 3a. Note that  admits a quasi-planar drawing with  crossings as shown in Fig. 3b. We prove that . Let Γ be a quasi-planar drawing of . If there are two edges of  that cross each other, then the claim follows by Lemma 2.

If no special edge would cross , they would all be drawn within the unique face of size 6 in . They would mutually cross, contradicting quasi-planarity.

Thus, at least one special edge, say , crosses an edge  of . Consider the closed (possibly self-intersecting) curve  composed of s plus the subpath of C connecting  to  and containing none of the vertices a and b. Since the drawing is simple, this curve partitions the plane into two or more regions, and a and b lie in different regions; see Fig. 3c–Fig. 3d for an illustration. Thus  and the  paths connecting a and b cross , yielding ℓ crossings in Γ, as desired. □

The above proof can be straight-forwardly extended to k-quasi-planar graphs by using exactly the same construction in which the cycle C has length 2k. Note that any k-quasi-planar graph has at most  edges, where  depends only on k [23], so .

Corollary 2

For every  and , there exists a k-quasi-planar graph  with  vertices such that  and , thus .

4. The fan-planar crossing ratio
An n-vertex fan-planar graph G has at most  edges, thus  [9]. For  it must be , and hence . We show that the fan-planar crossing ratio is unbounded, even for .

Theorem 3

For every , there exists a fan-planar graph  with  vertices such that  and , thus .

Proof

Let  be the graph constructed as follows; cf. Fig. 4a. Start with a . Extend each edge by adding  disjoint paths of length two between its endpoints, except for two independent edges  and . Add vertices  and , edges 
 and 
, ℓ disjoint paths of length two connecting  and z, and ℓ disjoint paths of length two connecting  and w.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (128KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Illustration for the proof of Theorem 3.

Graph  has  vertices and admits a drawing with three crossings, see Fig. 4a. Recall that we obtain a subdivision of a graph G by subdividing (even multiple times) any subset of its edges.  contains three subdivisions of  sharing only edge , and thus each subdivision requires at least one distinct crossing in any drawing. It follows that . Note that  admits a fan-planar drawing with ℓ crossings, cf. Fig. 4b. We prove . Let Γ be a fan-planar drawing of . If any two extended edges cross each other, then the claim follows by Lemma 2. Assume they do not:

 contains ℓ subdivisions of  that share only  and 
. Since each  subdivision requires at least one crossing, there are either ℓ crossings in Γ (proving the claim), or  crosses 
. Similarly,  contains ℓ  subdivisions that share only  and 
, and we can assume that  crosses 
. But fan-planarity forbids  to cross both 
 and 
. □

5. Open problems
Our research leaves open interesting questions. Among them: (i) Are there fan-planar and quasi-planar graphs whose crossing ratio is ? In fact, we conjecture that this bound can be reached, but proving our suspected constructions turns out to be elusive. (ii) Is it possible to extend our results to further families of beyond-planar graphs, such as k-gap planar graphs or fan-crossing-free graphs? (iii) Do similar lower bounds hold in the geometric setting (i.e., when the edges are drawn as straight-line segments)?