Abstract
Cops and Robber is a two-player pursuit-evasion game in which a set of cops, controlled by Player 1, try to capture the robber, controlled by Player 2. We study three models of this game on oriented graphs which differ based on the kind of moves the players can make. These models are (i) the normal cop model, where both cops and robber can only move along the direction of the arcs; (ii) the strong cop model, where the cops can move along or against the direction of the arcs while the robber can only move along them; and (iii) the weak cop model, where the robber can move along or against the direction of the arcs while the cops can only move along them. The cop number is the minimum number of cops required to capture the robber in a graph, and a graph is cop-win if its cop number is 1.

We begin our study by comparing the cop number in these three models for oriented graphs. For the normal cop model, we show that there exist strongly connected oriented graphs having high girth, high minimum degree, and high cop number. We also characterize the cop-win graphs in various graph classes like transitive-triangle-free, outerplanar, and subcubic graphs. For the strong cop model, we construct graphs with unbounded cop number, and also study the cop number of grids, outerplanar, and planar graphs. For the weak cop model, we characterize the cop-win graphs.

Keywords
Cops and robber game
Oriented graphs
Planar graphs

1. Introduction
Cops and Robber is a popular two-player game introduced by Nowakowski and Winkler [25] in 1983. It has several applications in areas such as artificial intelligence, graph search, and game development [2], [28], [19], as well as significant implications in theory [26]. The game is extensively studied, since its introduction, giving rise to deep theory (see [6] for details) and its numerous variations contributed to its extent.

Recently, in the open problem session of GRASTA 20141 [12], Nicolas Nisse introduced one of the variants (the strong cop model) in directed graphs (digraphs) and asked to characterize the “cop-win” graphs in two variants (the normal cop model and the strong cop model). In a seminar (summer 2018) at Simon Fraser University, another natural variant (the weak cop model) was discussed where the first author was present. In this article, we study all three variants starting by presenting their precise definitions.

We start with an oriented graph2 
 and Player 1 places k cops on its vertices (multiple cops can be on the same vertex). After that, Player 2 places the robber on one vertex of the graph. After the setup, Player 1 and 2 take turns to move the cops and robber, respectively, with Player 1 taking the first turn. Player 1 wins if after finitely many turns the robber and a cop are on the same vertex. In this case, we say that the cop captures the robber. Player 2 wins if Player 1 does not win in a finite number of moves.

Since 
 is an oriented graph, one can define two types of moves. In a normal move the cop or the robber can move along the arc, whereas in a strong move the cop or the robber can also move against the arc.

In the normal cop model, in each round, Player 1 can perform at most one normal move on each of its cops, whereas Player 2 can perform at most one normal move on the robber. In the strong cop model, in each round, Player 1 can perform at most one strong move on each of its cops, whereas Player 2 can perform at most one normal move on the robber. In the weak cop model, in each round, Player 1 can perform at most one normal move on each of its cops, whereas Player 2 can perform at most one strong move on the robber.

Next, we define a few necessary parameters. The normal (respectively, strong, weak) cop number 
 (respectively, 
, 
) of an oriented graph 
 is the minimum number of cops needed by Player 1 to have a winning strategy in the normal (respectively, strong, weak) cop model. Furthermore, for a family  of oriented graphs
 where . Given a fixed model, an oriented graph is cop-win if Player 1 has a winning strategy playing with a single cop.

Among the three models, the normal cop model is most studied. We give a brief survey of its relevant literature, followed by a summary of our results on all the models.

Hamidoune [16] considered the game on Cayley digraphs. Frieze et al. [13] studied the game on digraphs and gave an upper bound of 
 
 for cop number in digraphs. Along these lines, Loh and Oh [24] constructively proved the existence of a strongly connected planar digraph with cop number greater than three. They also prove that every n-vertex strongly connected planar digraph has cop number at most .

Goldstein and Reingold [14] proved that deciding whether k cops can capture a robber is EXPTIME-complete if k is not fixed, and either the initial positions are given or the graph is directed. Later Kinnersley [22] proved that determining the cop number of a graph or digraph is EXPTIME-complete. Kinnersley [23] also showed that n-vertex strongly connected cop-win digraphs can have capture time .

Hahn and MacGillivray [15] gave an algorithmic characterization of the cop-win finite reflexive digraphs. They also showed that any k-cop game can be reduced to 1-cop game resulting in an algorithmic characterization for k-cop-win finite reflexive digraphs. However, these results do not give a structural characterization of such graphs. Later Darlington et al. [9] tried to structurally characterize cop-win oriented graphs and gave a conjecture that was later disproved by Khatri et al. [21], who also studied the game in oriented outerplanar graphs and line digraphs.

Recently, the cop number of planar Eulerian digraphs and related families was studied in several articles [11], [17], [18]. In particular, Hosseini and Mohar [18] considered the orientations of integer grid that are vertex-transitive and showed that at most four cops can capture the robber on arbitrary finite quotients of these directed grids. De la Maza et al. [11] considered the straight-ahead orientations of 4-regular quadrangulations of the torus and the Klein bottle, and proved that their cop number is bounded by a constant. They also showed that the cop number of every k-regularly oriented toroidal grid is at most 13. Furthermore, Bonato and Mohar [5] explored some future directions of research.

Bradshaw et al. [7] proved that the cop number of directed and undirected Cayley graphs on abelian groups has an upper bound of the form of . Modifying this construction they obtained families of graphs and digraphs with cop number . The family of digraphs thus obtained has the largest cop number in terms of n of any known digraph construction.

We end this section with an outline of our results. In Section 2, we compare the parameters , and . The normal, strong, and weak cop models are studied in Sections 3, 4 and 5, respectively.

In particular, in the normal cop model, we prove a Mycielski-type result by constructing oriented graphs with high normal cop number, minimum degree, and girth. We also characterize the cop-win oriented triangle-free graphs, subcubic graphs, and outerplanar graphs. In the strong cop model, we find the strong cop number of oriented planar graphs, outerplanar graphs, and series-parallel graphs. We also prove that a specific class of oriented outerplanar graphs (that is, whose weak dual is a collection of paths) and oriented grids are strong cop-win. In the weak cop model, we characterize the cop-win oriented graphs.

Now we look into some relations between the parameters , and , and some definitions.

2. Basic results and preliminaries
The first result follows directly from the definitions.

Proposition 1

For any oriented graph 
 we have 
.

There are plenty of oriented graphs, the transitive tournament for instance, where equality holds in each of the cases. However, it is interesting to study the gap between these parameters. First, we will introduce some notations and terminologies. Let uv be an arc of an oriented graph 
. We say that u is an in-neighbor of v and v is an out-neighbor of u. Let  and  denote the set of in-neighbors and out-neighbors of u, respectively. A vertex without any in-neighbor is a source and a vertex without any out-neighbor is a sink.

Proposition 2

Given any , there exists an oriented graph 
 such that 
 and 
.

Proof

The oriented graph 
 is composed of two oriented graphs 
 and 
. The oriented graph 
 is an orientation of the star graph such that its central vertex v is a sink having  in-neighbors .

We know that there exist graphs with arbitrarily high cop number in the undirected case [1]. Let  be a connected undirected graph with cop number at least . Let 
 be an orientation of , such that it is a directed acyclic graph having a single source u. Such an orientation can be obtained by performing a breadth first search (BFS) rooted at u and orienting each edge from the lower indexed vertex to the higher indexed vertex with respect to the BFS ordering. Note that 
 as the cop can start from u and keep following the robber who can move only a finite number of times (in the directed acyclic graph).

Note that 
 as Player 1 can place one cop on v and capture the robber in one move if it is in 
 or capture the robber in a finite number of moves if it is in 
 as observed before.

Next let us prove that 
. Indeed, we have 
, as Player 1 must keep a cop on each of the  sources . Since 
 is a directed acyclic graph, the cop at  can capture the robber if it is placed in 
.

Now we will show that 
. Observe that Player 1 needs to place  cops on each of the  sources. This will ensure that if the robber is placed on any vertex of 
 
, then it will be captured. However, if the robber is placed on a vertex of 
, then the only cop in 
 
 that may enter 
 is the cop placed on , as this is the weak cop model. Hence, we need to place at least m more cops on the vertices of 
 as the cop number of the undirected graph  is . □

We end this section with some general notations and terminologies. The out-degree of v is  and its in-degree is . Let  denote the closed out-neighborhood of v.

In the rest of this article, we refer to the robber as ; and to the cop, only while studying cop-win graphs, as . If a cop moves to an in-neighbor of the robber , then we say that the cop attacks the robber. The robber is on a safe vertex from a cop if it cannot be captured by that cop in the next turn of Player 1. The robber evades capture if every time the cop attacks it,  can move to a safe vertex.

3. Normal cop model
It is known [13] that, in the normal cop model, if we can compute the cop number for strongly connected digraphs, then we can compute the cop number for weakly connected digraphs. Taking a cue from the above, we start by constructing strongly connected oriented graphs with arbitrarily high normal cop number, minimum degree, and girth (length of a smallest cycle of the underlying graph).

Theorem 1

Given any  and , there exists a regular strongly connected oriented graph 
 with girth at least g and outdegree c having 
.

Proof

For this proof, we borrow a construction to form regular expander graphs with high girth from an unpublished note of J. Kilbane on graphs of large girth (currently this note is not available on the internet). We present their complete construction which uses the concept of L-lifts introduced by Amit and Linial [3].

Given a set L and a simple graph G, let  be a graph on set of vertices . Moreover, let the edges of  satisfy the following property: for each edge , there is a perfect matching between the vertex subsets  and . Furthermore, other than the above-mentioned perfect matchings, there are no other edges in . Such a  is an L-lift of G. Observe that there can be different L-lifts of a graph.

Given a path  of G, its L-lift  will have many corresponding paths of the form  , where . The path  is called the projection of .

Further, consider a graph G with m edges . Let , that is, the set of all binary vectors of length m. Let us now construct a graph  and then show that it is an L-lift of G. The vertex set of  is given by . Let  be an edge of G. Then, whenever we have two binary vectors  which only differs at the  coordinate, we add the edges  and  in . Observe that this ensures a perfect matching between the sets  and . Moreover, these are the only edges of . Hence,  is indeed an L-lift of G.

Next, let us pick a shortest cycle  in . Its projection in G is also a cycle C. We claim that for every edge , there are at least two edges in  between  and . To prove this claim, note that if we start at a vertex  of , then the next vertex, say, , is such that the two binary vectors l and  differ only at their  coordinates. Now to reach  again, for completing the cycle, we need to flip the  coordinate of the binary vector once more. This can only happen if we traverse uv once again. Thus, . Hence the girth of  is at least twice the girth of G.

To construct the oriented graph with arbitrarily high cop number and girth, we take a  and go on applying the above-mentioned L-lift construction repeatedly until the girth is at least g. Denote the so-obtained graph as . As L-lifts of a k-regular graph is also k-regular, the graph  is 2c-regular; and hence Eulerian. Now obtain the oriented graph 
 by making an Eulerian circuit of  a directed circuit by assigning orientations to its edges. This results in a strongly connected oriented graph with girth at least g and the out-degree of each vertex is c. Thus its normal cop number is at least  as we know that a strongly connected oriented graph with girth at least five has normal cop number 
, where 
 is the minimum out-degree of 
 [24]. □

Darlington et al. [9] characterized cop-win oriented paths and trees in the normal cop model. We are also going to do so for some other families of oriented graphs.

A transitive-triangle-free oriented graph is an oriented graph with no transitive triangles. The following theorem characterizes cop-win transitive-triangle-free oriented graphs, a superclass of triangle-free oriented graphs.

Proposition 3

Let 
 be transitive-triangle-free oriented graph. Then 
 is cop-win if and only if 
 is a directed acyclic graph with one source.

Proof

Observe that any directed acyclic graph with one source is cop-win, and every cop-win oriented graph has exactly one source. Thus it suffices to prove that if a transitive triangle-free oriented graph 
 is cop-win, then it is a directed acyclic graph.

Suppose 
 has a directed cycle 
 on at least 3 vertices. We will now give a strategy for the robber  to escape. Note that the cop  must be placed at the source initially, as otherwise Player 2 places  on the source and wins. The robber  initially places himself at some safe vertex of 
. Such a vertex exists, as any vertex in 
 cannot dominate two consecutive vertices in 
, else a transitive triangle is created. Now  moves to the next vertex in 
 whenever  lies in the out-neighbor of . Whenever  attacks , the robber moves to the next vertex in 
 and evades the attack. Since 
 is a directed cycle,  cannot capture . This contradicts that 
 is a cop-win graph, hence the result. □

As bipartite graphs are triangle-free, we have the following corollary.

Corollary 1

Let 
 be an oriented bipartite graph. Then 
 is cop-win if and only if 
 is a directed acyclic graph with one source.

Next, we characterize the cop-win oriented outerplanar graphs.

Proposition 4

Let 
 be an oriented outerplanar graph. Then 
 is cop-win if and only if 
 is a directed acyclic graph with one source.

Proof

The ‘if’ part is obvious.

For proving the ‘only if’ part, first note that a graph cannot be cop-win if it has no source or at least two sources. Thus suppose that there exists an oriented outerplanar cop-win graph 
 containing a directed cycle 
 with exactly one source v. The cop  must be initially placed on the source v.

Note that at most two vertices of 
 can have a path made up of vertices from outside 
 connecting v in order to avoid a -minor. Thus there is at least one safe vertex u in 
 such that any directed path connecting v to u must go through some vertex of 
 other than u. Hence if the robber  places itself on u and does not move until  comes on a vertex of 
, it cannot be captured.

If  is on a vertex of 
 and starts moving towards  following the direction of the arcs of 
, then  also moves forward and evades .

Thus  must go out of 
 in order to try and capture . The moment  goes out to some vertex w outside 
, then  is either on a safe vertex or it can move to a safe vertex on 
 in its next move as w can be adjacent to at most two vertices of 
 in order to avoid a -minor.

This brings us to a situation similar to the initial situation. Thus the robber will always evade the cop, a contradiction. □

Proposition 5

Let 
 be an oriented subcubic graph other than . Then 
 is cop-win if and only if 
 is a directed acyclic graph with one source.

Proof

The ‘if’ part is obvious.

For proving the ‘only if’ part, first note that a graph cannot be cop-win if it has no source or at least two sources. Thus suppose that there exists an oriented subcubic cop-win graph 
, other than , containing a directed cycle 
 with exactly one source v. The cop  must be initially placed on the source v.

Consider a shortest directed cycle 
 =  of 
. Since 
 is a subcubic graph and 
 is a smallest directed cycle; each  
 can have at most one more neighbor not belonging to 
. Also since the graph is subcubic, any vertex  can have at most two out-neighbors in 
.

On the other hand, the source vertex v can have at most three out-neighbors in 
. As we know that the underlying graph of our graph is not , there exists a vertex of 
 which is not an out-neighbor of v.

Consider the possibility that there exists a vertex 
 (and ) containing both  and  as its out-neighbors for some . Here the  operations on the indices of the vertices of 
 are considered modulo . If a vertex such as u does not exist, then  will evade  by moving along the cycle 
, whenever under attack.

Therefore, such a u, which has both  and  as its out-neighbors, exists. Here we call  a special vertex. There may be more than one special vertex in 
. The strategy of  is to initially start on a special vertex of 
 and move towards the next special vertex of 
 when under attack. We will now show that this strategy works.

The robber  starts at a special vertex  and does not move until  attacks (either from  or u). When  attacks,  moves to . At this point  is two vertices ahead of , and  keeps moving towards the next special vertex in 
, irrespective of 's moves. If there are no more special vertices, then  traverses 
 completely and reaches  (the vertex  itself is the next special vertex, in this case). In any case  maintains a distance of at least two from  (just before 's move), since 
 is a shortest directed cycle. Thus  can forever evade capture. This contradicts our initial assumption that 
 is a cop-win graph. □

4. Strong cop model
For convenience and completeness, recall that the cop number  of an undirected graph G is the minimum number of cops needed to capture the robber in G. In the classical version, each of the cops or the robber may move to its neighbors in G in their respective turn.

The strong cop number of an oriented graph is upper bounded by the cop number in the classical version of the game on the underlying undirected graph. The following observation is trivially true.

Observation 1

For any oriented graph 
, we have 
.

Given a simple graph G, we are going to describe a specific construction of an oriented graph 
 
 and study the relation between  and 
 
. Later we proceed to find the strong cop number of oriented planar graphs, outerplanar graphs, and series-parallel graphs.

Construction: Given an undirected graph G, first replace each of its edges with a directed 2-cycle. After that subdivide each arc to obtain an oriented graph. That is, each edge  of G is replaced by a directed 4-cycle  to obtain the oriented graph 
 
.

We have the following lemma that relates the strong cop number of 
 
 with the cop number of G.

Lemma 1

For any simple graph G, 
 
.

Proof

We know that 
 
 cops have a strategy to capture the robber  in 
 
. We will show that 
 
 cops have a winning strategy in G as well. To be more specific, we will use the winning strategy of 
 
 cops in 
 
 to obtain a winning strategy in G.

As the game is played in G, we also play it simultaneously in 
 
. The moves of the cops in 
 
, following the winning strategy, are translated to a winning strategy in G. We will describe the procedure to do so below. Before that, we will present the notion of image.

Note that the sets , for , partition 
 
. That means, for any 
 
, there exists a unique  such that  in 
 
. Now define the image of x as .

Initially place 
 
 cops in 
 
 according to the winning strategy. Correspondingly place 
 
 cops in G on the images of the vertices of 
 
 where we had placed the cops. Secondly, place  in G. In 
 
 also place  on the exact same vertex.

For each move of the robber in G, make two moves of the robber in 
 
. To be precise, if the robber moves from  to  in G, then the robber will move from  to  and then to  in 
 
.

The cops will move according to the winning strategy in 
 
. Correspondingly, we will move the cops in G. To be precise, if a cop moves from x to y in 
 
 in two consecutive turns, chasing the robber, then correspondingly we move the cop from  to  in G. This is possible as  and  are either adjacent in G or the same vertex in G.

Notice that, when  is captured in 
 
, it is also captured in G. □

Remark 1

Berarducci and Intrigila [4], and Joret, Kaminski and Theis [20] showed that subdividing every edge of an undirected graph a fixed number of times does not decrease the cop number. Lemma 1 is a weak analogue of their result. Our proof is similar to that in [4] and can be generalized to prove that subdividing every arc of an oriented graph a fixed number of times does not decrease its strong cop number.

As a result of Lemma 1, we find the strong cop number of oriented planar graphs and then form oriented graphs with arbitrarily high strong cop number.

Corollary 2

The strong cop number of the family of oriented planar graphs is three.

Proof

We know that the cop number of planar graphs is three [1]. Thus, by Observation 1, the strong cop number of oriented planar graphs is at most 3. On the other hand, if H is a planar graph with cop number 3 (for example, dodecahedron), then, by Lemma 1, the strong cop number of 
 
 is at least 3. Thus we are done by observing that 
 
 is planar. □

It is known that the cop number of bipartite graphs is unbounded [6]. We have a similar result for the strong cop model also.

Corollary 3

For every , there exists an oriented bipartite graph 
 
 such that 
 
.

Proof

We know that there exists a graph  with cop number at least k [1]. Now take 
 
 
. Note that 
 
 is bipartite. Thus, the proof follows from Lemma 1. □

Next, we find the strong cop numbers of the family of oriented outerplanar and series-parallel graphs.

Theorem 2

The strong cop number of the family of oriented outerplanar graphs is two.

Proof

The cop number of outerplanar graphs in the classical game on undirected graphs is two [8]. Hence, by Observation 1, it suffices to construct an oriented graph that is not strong cop-win.

Construction: Consider the cycle 
, depicted in Fig. 2, on vertices  vertices having cycle arcs  and chord arcs . The + and − operations on the indices of 
 are taken modulo 24. Consider another copy 
 of 
. In 
 rename each vertex  as . Now merge the vertex  of 
 with the vertex  of 
 to obtain the graph 
.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (42KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The biconnected outerplanar graph 
.

We give a robber-win strategy for 
 when there is just one strong cop in this oriented graph.

Initial setup If the cop  is placed at , then robber  enters at ; else  starts at  or  depending on whether  starts at  or , respectively. In the latter case,  passes its moves until  is at  (in order to catch ,  has to go through ). Once  reaches ,  passes its move once more; reducing this case to the former case. Hence, without loss of generality, assume that  and  start at  and , respectively.

In the rest of this proof, we show that if  tries to capture , then  reaches the initial configuration ( at  and  at ) or its equivalent configuration ( at  and  at ) without being captured. Precisely, we show that if  pursues , then  reaches  two turns before  (or the game continues indefinitely); thereby evading capture indefinitely.

To simplify our presentation, we use the following notations. Read ⁎ as “X moves from U to V in ⁎ sense”. Read ⁎ as “X moves in ⁎ sense to an adjacent vertex”, where ⁎⥀⥁, that is, counter-clockwise and clockwise, respectively. Let  denote the distance between  and  at the given instant in the underlying undirected graph.

Rules for the Robber: All operations are performed under modulo 24.

R0:
At any turn, if  passes its move then  passes its move; else  moves according to the following rules (R1 – R4).

R1:
For  to 7, ⥀ only if ⥀ or ⥀; else it passes its move.

R2:
For  to 11, ⥀ irrespective of 's move.

R3:
If  is at , for , and ⥁, then

–
if  increases to at least 4, then ⥁.

–
if  increases but remains less than 4, then  passes its move.

–
if  decreases, then ⥁.

R4:
If  is at , for , then ⥁ irrespective of 's move.

The scenarios that are not addressed by the above rules do not occur.

Analysis We claim that  satisfies its objective, that is,  reaches  at least two turns before . Once  is at  and ⥀, then  keeps on moving counter-clockwise and reaches  at least two turns before  (irrespective of 's moves). However if ⥁ and if  increases to at least 4, then ⥁; else if , then  passes its move. The restriction  ensures that if  moves counter-clockwise, then  can safely move clockwise to the next vertex with an even index. For subsequent steps, if ⥁ and  is on , for  to 7, then ⥁, provided the restrictions in R3 are met. In any intermediate step if ⥀, then ⥁ if it is at a vertex with odd index; else ⥀ or  passes its move depending on whether  attacks it or not. In such a case  always stays at least two moves away from  and hence evades capture.

The only way left for  to capture  is if  continues moving counter-clockwise along the chord arcs and then tries to capture  which now moves counter-clockwise along the cycle arcs. However, in such a case also, one can check that  reaches  at least two moves before . Hence the constructed graph is not strong cop-win. □

Remark 2

The analysis for the above non-strong cop-win graph (a graph that is not cop-win in the strong cop model) can be extended to a family of non-strong cop-win graphs built on the same idea. In the construction of the above graph take  and  as the cycles with an even length of at least 24.

It is known that the cop number of series-parallel graphs in the classical game on undirected graphs is two [27]. Since outerplanar graphs are also series-parallel graphs, by Observation 1, we have the following corollary.

Corollary 4

The strong cop number of oriented series-parallel graphs is two.

As mentioned earlier all the oriented graphs whose underlying graphs are cop-win graphs in the classical (undirected graph) version are strong cop-win. Next, we find some families of oriented graphs which are strong cop-win but whose underlying undirected graphs are not cop-win in the classical version. We begin with a specific class of outerplanar graphs. First, we need the following definition.

The weak dual of a plane graph G is a graph that has a vertex for each bounded face of G and two vertices are adjacent if the corresponding faces share an edge.

Theorem 3

Oriented outerplanar graphs whose weak dual is a collection of paths are strong cop-win.

Proof

Let 
 be an oriented outerplanar graph on n vertices such that the weak dual of its underlying graph G is a collection of paths. We call the edges in the outer face of G as cycle edges and the other edges as chord edges. Every edge in the weak dual of G corresponds to a chord edge in G, so there are two bounded faces incident to a chord edge, one on each side of it. Every bounded face in G has at most two chord edges, or else a claw3 will be induced in the weak dual of G.

Let F be a bounded face in G, also, let us assume that the robber  is on the vertex v (say) at the moment. Let the length of the shortest directed path from v to a vertex of F be l. The image ) of the robber , is the set of vertices in F such that there is a directed path of length l from v to them. The image ) may possibly be empty if there are no directed paths from v to F. Note that, if v is not in F, then the vertices of ) are incident to a chord edge. This also implies that , as the weak dual of G is a collection of paths. Also if , then the vertices from ) are incident to the same chord edge.

If , then after 's move, ) may remain the same, or reduce to one vertex, or become empty. If , then after 's move, ) may remain the same, or become empty, or get changed to a set containing an adjacent vertex of x, where x is the vertex in ) earlier. If , then it remains the same irrespective of 's move.

As mentioned above, if  is not in F, then each vertex in ) is an end vertex of a chord edge in F. Thus even if  moves, ) might change to an adjacent vertex only (from one end vertex of a chord edge to the other end vertex if  is not in F or follows  if it is in F).

Now we give a strong cop-win strategy in 
. Select a face  in 
 and place the cop  in some vertex of . After  is placed in 
, we find ). If , or becomes ∅ at any point, then  moves to the other face adjacent to  that is closer to .

If , then capture a vertex in ). This is always possible as a vertex in ) changes at most to an adjacent vertex. Now  is at an end vertex of a chord edge, say pq. Let  be the other face incident at the chord edge. The cop  follows the same strategy as it did in , but with the following exception (in order to forbid  from entering ).

If  and there are two dipaths from x to p and q, then  tries to capture ) by going against the orientation on the shortest dipath. But if  enters  and takes the other directed path, then  reverses back to pq and then takes the other dipath to x. This way  captures .

If  and there are two dipaths from say x to p and y to q, then  tries to capture one of ) by going against the orientation on the shortest dipath. But if  enters  and takes the other directed path, then  reverses back to pq and then takes the other dipath. This way  captures . Following this strategy,  is forbidden to enter the explored faces by the cop.

At each iteration, we go on removing one face of the graph to which  cannot enter. Eventually both  and  end up in the same cycle, where  gets captured. □

Our next class of strong cop-win graphs are oriented grids.

Theorem 4

Oriented grids are strong cop-win.

Proof

Fix a  grid 
 with vertices at  in the usual coordinate system. The cop  starts at . We say that  is restricted to , if  cannot move to a vertex of rows from 0 to  of 
. Let  be the position of , then we define image of  in row r as . When  is at image of  in row r, we say that  is guarding row r. Observe that if  is guarding row r and  is in a row , then  is restricted to .

Cop  begins by guarding row 0. Next we show that if  is guarding row  (and so  is restricted to ), then after a finite number of moves  can guard row  restricting  to . Let  be at a vertex  and  is guarding row . Now, if  moves up or down, then  moves up and guards row . If  moves left or right, then  also moves left or right, respectively, and retains the guard of row r. Since the grid is oriented and  can make only weak moves, if  moves from a vertex u to v, then it cannot move from v to u. Hence,  can make at most m left and right moves and then has to either make an up or down move or skip a move. In both cases,  moves up and guards row . Also, note that until  guards row , it is guarding row r and hence  is always restricted to  during this process.

This way  finally guards row  with  restricted to  (that is, row ). Again, since  can only move a finite number of times in row  and also  cannot move to row , there will be no more moves for  and  will capture . □

5. Weak cop model
A vertex u in a directed graph is said to be a corner vertex, if there exists a vertex v such that , where ⁎⁎ for each ⁎. We also say that v dominates u.

Now we characterize all cop-win directed graphs in this model, which is adapted from the cop-win characterization of undirected graphs [25].

Theorem 5

A directed graph is cop-win in the weak cop model if and only if by successively removing corner vertices, it can be reduced to a single vertex.

In order to prove Theorem 5, we need the following two lemmas.

Lemma 2

If a directed graph has no corner vertex, then it is not weak cop-win.

Proof

Let 
 have no corner vertex. The robber  starts from a vertex that is not an out-neighbor of the cop . The robber does not move unless  attacks it. Whenever  is under attack, it can move to a vertex that is not an out-neighbor of  (as there are no corner vertices in 
). Hence  never gets caught. □

Lemma 3

A directed graph 
 with a corner u is weak cop-win if and only if 
 is weak cop-win.

Proof

Let vertex v dominate u in G. Suppose 
 is cop-win. Define the image  of the robber  as follows:  and  for all 
. So  is restricted to 
 and it can be captured by the cop . If  is not on u, then it is captured. If  is on u, then  is on v and will capture  in its next move.

Suppose, on the other hand, 
 is not weak cop-win. Define the image  of the cop  as follows:  and  for all 
. So  is restricted to 
 and  has a winning strategy against . If  is not on u, then  follows its winning strategy and does not get captured in 's next move. If  is on u, then  follows its winning strategy assuming  is on . Since  has a winning strategy against  if  were at v instead,  does not get captured in 's next move (as v dominates u). So  evades capture; hence 
 is not weak cop-win. □

Finally, we are ready to prove Theorem 5.

Proof of Theorem 5. Lemma 3 implies that upon removing the corner vertices, the weak cop-win property of the graph remains the same. Now remove all possible corner vertices successively in the directed graph. If we end up with a single vertex, then it is weak cop-win. Otherwise, we end up with some other graph that has no corner vertices, Lemma 2 implies that it is not weak cop-win.  □

6. Conclusion
In this article, we focus on three variants of the Cops and Robber game on oriented graphs. We are able to characterize the weak cop-win graphs. For the normal model, we find some cop-win graphs. For the strong model, we also find some cop-win graphs; and then find the strong cop numbers of some families of oriented graphs, namely, the outerplanar, the series-parallel, and the planar.

In the strong cop model, it will be interesting to study graph classes that have cop number two in the classical undirected game, such as, interval filament graphs, circular-arc graphs, function graphs. Also, the characterization of strong cop-win graphs remains open. Another interesting question is to construct oriented graphs that can have arbitrarily high strong cop number, minimum degree, and girth.