Abstract
This paper investigates a novel RSA-like cryptosystem proposed by Murru-Saettone. This cryptosystem is constructed from a cubic field connected to the cubic Pell equation and Redei rational functions. The scheme is claimed to be secure against the Wiener-type attack. However, in this paper, we show a Wiener-type attack that can recover the secret key from the continued fraction constructed from public information.
Keywords
RSA
Continued fractions
Wiener technique
Small secret exponent
Cubic Pell equation

1. Introduction
In 1978, Rivest, Shamir and Adleman [1] proposed the RSA cryptosystem, the first and widely used public key cryptosystem. The security of RSA is mainly based on the hardness of factoring large composite integers. The key setup involves picking two large prime numbers p and q of the same bit size to form a product  and selecting two integers  such that . Messages can be encrypted using the public key , whereas ciphertexts can be decrypted using the secret key . It is well known [2], [3], [4] that RSA is not secure if the secret key d is relatively small. Wiener [2], [5] showed that using continued fractions, one can efficiently recover the secret key d from the public information  when 
 
 
. Susilo et al. later showed that Wiener's continued fraction method actually works for a longer bound 
 
 
. Boneh and Durfee [6] showed the first significant improvement over the Wiener's result. Based on the Coppersmith technique, Boneh-Durfee method can break the RSA when 
. Using a somewhat more optimized lattice, Herrmann and May [7] also derived the same bound 
. This bound 
 remains as the best bound to date.

In order to improve the implementation of the RSA cryptosystem, many schemes have been proposed giving rise to RSA-type cryptosystems [8], [9], [10]. These RSA-type cryptosystems are based on Lucas sequences, Gaussian integers and elliptic curves. However, they are all suffered from Wiener-type attack [11], [12], [13].

In [14], Murru and Saettone proposed a novel RSA-like scheme based on a cubic field related to cubic Pell equations. This new scheme is based on a particular group equipped with a non-standard product. This group appears to have many interesting properties. This new scheme is claimed to be secure against the Wiener-type attack. Indeed, Murru-Saettone argued that the secret key in their scheme cannot be derived from the continued fraction of 
 
.

In this paper, we show that unfortunately the Murru-Saettone scheme is not secure against the Wiener-type attack. Instead of looking at the continued fraction of 
 
, we will use the continued fraction of 
 
. We show that it is possible to recover the secret key of the Murru-Saettone scheme by calculating the continued fraction of 
 
 if the secret key 
 
 
.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the Murru-Saettone scheme and in Section 3, we review some preliminary results on continued fractions. Section 4 presents our main result which says that the Murru-Saettone scheme is not secure if 
 
 
. In Section 5, we show our experiment result with a 1024-bit modulus and a 255-bit secret key.

2. The Murru-Saettone cryptosystem
Let  be a field and 
 an irreducible polynomial in . Consider the quotient field 
. Each element of  is of the form 
 where 
.

Consider the quotient group 
⁎
⁎
. An element of  belongs to the following three types: 
⁎
, 
⁎
 and 
⁎
. We will denote these three types of elements by the notations 
, 
 and , respectively, where  is a formal symbol.

Using these notations, we can write the multiplication ⊙ on  as follows:

•

•


 
 
 
 

•


 
 
 
 

We can see that  is a commutative group and  is the identity.

When  is chosen as , where p is a prime, then  is a Galois field with 
 elements and  is a commutative group with order 
. We will use the symbol . For any , we have 
. If we choose two primes p and q and let  and 
 then we have an analogous of Euler's theorem

The Murru-Saettone cryptosystem is as follows.

Keys generation:

•
choose two prime numbers p and q;

•
compute  and 
;

•
choose an integer e such that ;

•
choose a non-cube integer r in 
, 
 and 
;

•
compute 
;

•
the public encryption key is  and the secret decryption key is .

Encryption: given a message 
, the ciphertext is
 Decryption: the ciphertext 
 can be decrypted as
3. Continued fractions
In this section, we list several well-known results about continued fractions which can be found in [15], [16].

A continued fraction expansion of a rational number 
 
 is an expression of the form
 
 
 
 
 where the coefficient 
 is an integer and all the other coefficients 
 for  are positive integers. The coefficients 
 are called the partial quotients of the continued fraction. By truncating the coefficients, we obtain  approximations of 
 
:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The number 
 is called the 
 convergent of the continued fraction and these convergents provide good approximations for 
 
. To write the continued fraction expansion for a number 
 
, we use the Euclidean division algorithm, which terminates in  steps. As a result, there are  number of convergents of 
 
.

The convergents 
 of the continued fraction of 
 
 give the best approximations to 
 
, however, an approximation to 
 
 is not always a convergent. The following classical theorem due to Legendre gives a sufficient condition for a rational number 
 
 to be a convergent for the continued fraction of 
 
.

Theorem 1

The Legendre Theorem [17]
Let  and 
 such that
 
 
 
 Then 
 
 is equal to a convergent of the continued fraction of 
 
.

The following Euler-Wallis Theorem gives us the recursive formulas to calculate the convergent sequence 
 of a continued fraction 
.

Theorem 2

The Euler-Wallis Theorem [15]
For any , the 
 convergent can be determined as 
 
, where the numerator and the denominator sequences 
 and 
 are calculated as follows:

If 
 
 then  as there are  number of steps in the Euclidean algorithm with input . Therefore, in Theorem 2, to calculate all convergents 
 
 for  we need polynomial time complexity in .

Based on the Euler-Wallis Theorem, the following identity involving the numerator 
 and the denominator 
 of the convergent 
 can be easily obtained by mathematical induction.

Theorem 3

[15] The numerator 
 and the denominator 
 of the convergent 
 satisfy the following identity(1)

4. A Wiener-type attack against the Murru-Saettone cryptosystem
In this section, we show that the Murru-Saettone cryptosystem is not secure against the Wiener-type attack. Given a real number parameter , by using the Legendre Theorem on continued fractions, we show that if  are the private RSA primes,  and the decryption key 
 
 
, then it is possible to recover the secret key  from the continued fraction constructed from public information. In particular, if p and q are primes of the same bit length (i.e. ), then the Murru-Saettone cryptosystem is not secure when 
 
 
.

Theorem 4

Let  be the private RSA primes,  and
 If the following conditions are satisfied

(i)

(ii)

(iii)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

then 
 
 is equal to a convergent of the continued fraction of 
 
. Thus, the secret information  can be recovered from public information  with polynomial time complexity in .
Proof

Since the function 
 
 is increasing on  and 
 
, we have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thus,(2)
 
 
 and(3)
 
 

We have
 
 
 
 
 
 

Since  and , it follows that  and thus,
 
 
 
 

Using (2) and (3), we have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

For 
 
 to be equal to a convergent of the continued fraction of 
 
, the Legendre Theorem requires that 
 
 
 
. Thus, it suffices to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 which is equivalent to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 □

Factorisation Algorithm Based on Continued Fraction.
Since , we have . By the identity (1) in Theorem 3, we also have 
. Therefore, if 
 
 is equal to a convergent of the continued fraction of 
 
,
 
 
 then we must have 
 and 
. In that case, using the equation , we have 
, and 
 
.

Since
 we can determine  by solving the quadratic equation

Once  is determined, with , we can solve for p and q from the quadratic equation

By the Euclidean division algorithm, we obtain  number of convergents of the continued fraction of 
 
. Since we are running through the convergents of the continued fraction of 
 
 our algorithm will run in  polynomial time complexity.

When the decryption key 
 
 
, Theorem 4 guarantees that 
 
 is equal to a convergent of the continued fraction of 
 
, and therefore, our algorithm can factor N and output secret information  with 100% of success.

5. Experiment result
In this section, we show an experiment where we use a 1024-bit modulus N. We choose  and a decryption key 
 
 
 based on Theorem 4. The chosen decryption key d is 255-bit and the encryption key e is 2044-bit. Note that the encryption key  and  is 2047-bit.

Here are the public information:

N=                                

e=         5810734c                      8624624a                                 

Our algorithm stops at the 142th convergent 
 
 of the continued fraction of 
 
 with the following output:

       

       

               

               

and successfully finds the factorization of N together with the secret decryption key d.