Abstract
A vertex x of a connected graph G resolves two distinct vertices u and v in V(G) if the distance between u and x differs from the distance between v and x. A subset X of V(G) resolves two distinct vertices u and v in G if there exists a vertex x in X that resolves u and v; X is a metric generator of G if, for every pair of distinct vertices u and v of G, X resolves u and v and is a metric basis of G if X is a metric generator of G with minimum cardinality. The metric dimension of G is the cardinality of a metric basis of G. The problem of finding the metric dimension of an arbitrary graph is NP-hard. In this paper we show that the problem is solvable in linear time for the class of bipartite distance-hereditary graphs.

Keywords
Metric generator
Metric basis
Bipartite graph
Distance-hereditary graph

1. Introduction
A subset of vertices X of a connected graph G is a metric generator of G if for every pair of distinct vertices u and v there exists a vertex  that resolves u and v, i.e., such that u and v have different distances from x. A metric basis of G is a metric generator of G with minimum cardinality and the metric dimension of G is the cardinality of a metric basis of G.

The problem of determining the metric dimension of a graph was defined in [22] and [10], and was proved to be NP-hard for general graphs in [12]; successively, it was proved that the problem remains NP-hard for split graph, bipartite graphs, co-bipartite graphs, and line graphs of bipartite graphs [8], for permutation graphs and interval graphs [11], for planar graphs [7], and for graphs of treewidth at most 24 [18]. On the other hand, the problem is polynomially solvable for paths and trees [16], for cartesian products of graphs [3], for cographs and (not necessarily complete) wheels [8], for chain graphs [9], for cactus block graphs [14], for outerplanar graphs [7], for two-dimensional extended meshes [1] and for 2-connected bipartite distance-hereditary graph [20]. Furthermore, it was proved that the metric dimension is bounded for particular families of graphs (see [2], [15], [17], [21]).

Whilst the problem of determining a metric basis is solvable in polynomial time for three subclasses of the class of distance-hereditary graphs (trees, cographs and 2-connected bipartite distance-hereditary graph) no result about its complexity on distance-hereditary graphs appears in literature; however in [19] a polynomial algorithm is provided that solves on a distance-hereditary graph the problem (which is NP-hard in the general case) of determining the “strong dimension” of a graph. The strong dimension of a graph G is defined analogously to the metric dimension: a vertex set X is a strongly resolving set of G if, for every two distinct vertices u and v of G, there exists a vertex  that strongly resolves u and v, i.e., such that u is on a shortest path from v to x or v is on a shortest path from u to x.

In this paper we improve and extend the result in [20] by showing that it is possible to compute a metric basis of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph in linear time. We reach such result by applying the Courcelle's optimization theorem for bounded clique-width graphs [5].

2. Basic definitions and preliminary results
Throughout this paper with the term “graph” we will refer to a finite, undirected, loopless, simple, and connected graph.

Let G be a graph;  and  denote the vertex set and the edge set of G, respectively. As usual we use the notation uv for an edge . G is bipartite if there exists a bipartition  of  such that, for every , if  then , .

Let X be a subset of  and v a vertex of G. The subgraph of G induced by X is the graph  such that  and . By  we denote the subgraph of G induced by . We denote by  the neighbourhood of v in G, i.e., the set of vertices in  that are adjacent to v.

A sequence , , of vertices of G is a path (- path) if the vertices are distinct from one another and, for every i, , . The length of p is k. A chord of p is an edge , where  and  are not consecutive in p. A path is induced if it has no chords. Given two paths  and  such that , the concatenation of p and , denoted by , is the path .

Let u and v be two vertices of G. A u-v geodesic is a u-v path of minimum length. The distance, , of two vertices u and v of G is the length of a u-v geodesic. Furthermore, we denote by , , the set of vertices of G having distance i from u (observe that ).

A graph G is distance-hereditary if, for every connected induced subgraph  of G, every two vertices of  have in  the same distance as in G. Many equivalent characterizations of distance-hereditary graphs exist; the following will be used in this paper.

Theorem 1

[6]
Let G be a graph. The following statements are equivalent.

1.
G is distance hereditary.

2.
Every induced path of G is a geodesic.

3.
For every vertex  and for every pair of distinct vertices v and w in , , that are connected in , .

Let x be a vertex in . We say that x resolves two distinct vertices u and v in G if . A subset X of  resolves two distinct vertices u and v in G if there exists a vertex x in X that resolves u and v in G. A subset  is a metric generator of G if it resolves every pair of distinct vertices of G. A metric basis of G is a metric generator of G with minimum cardinality.

3. Computing a metric basis in linear time
In this section we show that, by exploiting the Courcelle's optimization theorem for bounded clique-width graphs, it is possible to prove that

Theorem 2

A metric basis of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph G can be computed in  time.

The clique-width of a graph G was first introduced by Courcelle et al. in [4] and it is defined as the minimum number of labels needed to construct G, using the four graph operations: creation of a new vertex v with label i, disjoint union, connecting vertices with specified labels, and renaming labels. The construction of a graph G using the above four operations is represented by an algebraic expression called a k-expression, where k is the number of labels used in the expression. In [5] it is proved that every optimization problem in the class  (i.e., every optimization problem that search for sets of vertices which are expressible by monadic second-order logic formulas, using quantifiers on vertices but not on edges, and are optimal with respect to some linear evaluation function) can be solved in linear time on any class of graphs having bounded clique-width (i.e., clique-width at most k, for some fixed k) assuming that the k-expression defining the input graph is given; therefore, any such optimization problem on a class Γ of graphs of clique-with at most k is sovable in  time if there is a parsing algorithm that for each graph in Γ computes a k-expression in  time. A corresponding algorithm can be effectively constructed from the logical formula describing the problem and the parsing algorithm for the class Γ [5].

In [13] the authors show that every distance–hereditary graph, has clique–width at most 3, and a 3–expression defining it can be obtained in  time.

By the above results, in order to prove Theorem 2, it is sufficient to prove that the problem of computing a metric basis of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph is a  problem. To this aim we will show (see Theorem 5) that a subset L of vertices of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph G is a metric generator of G if and only if it strongly resolves every pair of vertices having distance 2 from each other. Since this property is expressible by a monadic second-order logic formula, using quantifiers on vertices but not on edges (see  in Appendix A) and a metric basis is an optimal metric generator with respect to the evaluation function assigning value 1 to every vertex of G, the problem of computing a metric basis of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph is a  problem and, hence, Theorem 2 holds.

In order to prove Theorem 5 we will make use of the following two technical lemmas.

Lemma 3

(Lemma 15 in [20]) Let G be a bipartite graph and u and v two distinct vertices of G such that . A vertex x resolves u and v if and only if it strongly resolves u and v.

Lemma 4

Let G be a bipartite distance-hereditary graph. If , , and , , are two geodesics of G, then  is a geodesic of G.

Proof

Observe that, since  and  are geodesic,

(a)
for every i, ,  and for every j, , .

Firstly, let us show that
(b)
for every i,  and for every j, , .

Proof of (b). Suppose, by contradiction, that there exist i, , and j, , such that . By (a), one has that  (see Fig. 1). If , then  and hence,  is not a path (contradiction). If , then  is adjacent to  and, hence,  is not an induced path (contradiction). If , then  and  are two vertices connected in  by the path  and, hence, by 3 in Theorem 1,  is adjacent to  and, hence,  is not an induced path (contradiction).
Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (41KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The figure illustrates the proof of Lemma 4.

End of proof of (b).

By (b), p is a path. Since G is distance-hereditary, by 2 in Theorem 1, it is sufficient to show that p is an induced path of G. Suppose, by contradiction, that p has a chord . By (a) and since G is bipartite, either  or . Assume, without loss of generality, that . One has that  (otherwise  would be adjacent to w and, hence,  would not be an induced path) and, hence, . Therefore,  and  are two vertices in  that are connected in  by the path  and, hence, by 3 in Theorem 1,  is adjacent to , which contradicts the fact that  is an induced path. □

Theorem 5

Let G be a bipartite distance-hereditary graph and L a subset of . L is a metric generator of G if and only if, for every pair of vertices  such that , L resolves .

Proof

Only if part. Trivial.

If part. Suppose, by contradiction, that, for every pair of vertices  such that , L resolves  and there exists a pair of vertices  such that  is not resolved by L. Let v be a vertex in L; then there exists an integer k, , such that  (see Fig. 2). Let h, , be the maximum index i such that  contains a vertex that lies both on an u-v geodesic and on a w-v geodesic and let  be such a vertex. Let , , be a -u geodesic and  be a -w geodesic. Firstly, let us show that

(a)
 is an u- geodesic and  is an w- geodesic.

Proof of (a). We will show that  is an u- geodesic; analogously, it is possible to prove that  is an w- geodesic. Since G is distance-hereditary, by 2 in Theorem 1, it is sufficient to show that p is an induced path. Suppose, by contradiction, that  is adjacent to a vertex in . Since, for every i, ,  and  are in ,  is the unique vertex in  that can be adjacent to . Then  is a u- geodesic. Let  be a -v geodesic. Then the path  is a u-v geodesic and the path  is a w-v geodesic; since  and , this contradicts the choice of h.
Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (36KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The figure illustrates the proof of Theorem 5.

End of proof of (a).

Since , by Lemma 3, there exists a vertex  such that either  lies on a z- geodesic or  lies on a z- geodesic. Assume, without loss of generality, that  lies on a z- geodesic , . By (a) and Lemma 4,  is an u-z geodesic. Therefore, one has that ; on the other hand ; it follows that  so that u and v are resolved by z and, hence, by L (contradiction). □

Observe that the fact that L strongly resolves every pair of vertices having distance 2 from each other does not imply that L is a strongly resolving set of G (the set of black vertices in Fig. 3 is a metric generator, but is not a strongly resolving set since it does not strongly resolve u and v).

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (18KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. A metric generator that is not a strongly resolving set.

4. Concluding remarks and open problems
In this paper we proved that the problem of computing a metric basis of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph can be solved in linear time; it remains to investigate its complexity on distance-hereditary graphs. We will conclude with two observations that could be useful to this aim.

(1) A distance-hereditary graph can be easily decomposed into a cograph and a bipartite distance-hereditary graph sharing no edge [6]. Furthermore, computing a metric basis can be done in linear time both on cographs [8] and on bipartite distance-hereditary graphs. Is it possible to combine these results in order to find a polynomial algorithm for distance-hereditary graphs?

(2) In the first version of this paper the problem of computing a metric basis of a bipartite distance-hereditary graph was reduced to the problem of computing a metric basis of a 2-connected bipartite distance-hereditary graph (in this way, by exploiting the result in [20], it is possible to obtain an algorithm requiring  time). Is it possible to use a similar approach in the case of distance-hereditary graphs?