Increased visual attention, such as during computer use leads to less blinking, which can cause dry eyes—the leading cause of
computer vision syndrome. As people spend more time looking at screens on mobile and desktop devices, computer vision
syndrome is becoming epidemic in today’s population, leading to blurry vision, fatigue, and a reduced quality of life.
One way to alleviate dry eyes is increased blinking. In this paper, we present a series of glasses-mounted devices that
track the wearer’s blink rate and, upon absent blinks, trigger blinks through actuation: light ashes, physical taps, and small
pus of air near the eye. We conducted a user study to evaluate the eectiveness of our devices and found that air pu
and physical tap actuations result in a 36% increase in participants’ average blink rate. Air pu thereby struck the best
compromise between eective blink actuations and low distraction ratings from participants. In a follow-up study, we found
that high intensity, short pus near the eye were most eective in triggering blinks while receiving only low-rated distraction
and invasiveness ratings from participants. We conclude this paper with two miniaturized and self-contained DualBlink
prototypes, one integrated into the frame of a pair of glasses and the other one as a clip-on for existing glasses. We believe
that DualBlink can serve as an always-available and viable option to treat computer vision syndrome in the future.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing → Consumer health; • Human-centered computing → Mobile devices;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Dry eyes, Computer vision syndrome, CVS, well-being
1 INTRODUCTION
Due to advances in computer technology more of the population nds themselves in front of TVs, computer
screens, and mobile phones. Performing tasks that require visual concentration, such as looking at a screen or
reading, reduces blink rates signicantly [11, 35]. For example, the average blink rate drops from 15 blinks/min
during a conversation to only 5 blinks/min during monitor use [35]. This is particularly alarming considering
that users now look at screens longer than they sleep [30].
A reduced rate of blinking has frequently been linked to dry eyes [16, 32, 33]. The underlying cause is the
evaporation of the eye’s tear lm, a viscous lipid layer that covers the eye. The tear lm helps with vision by
lubricating the eye and removing debris. Since the tear lm on the eye evaporates quickly, it needs constant
Fig. 1. Prototype with electronics integrated into the frame. This prototype is worn on the right image.
replenishing through blinking. With decreasing blink rates, the tear lm thus does not fully replenish, which
over time can result in dry eyes [12, 20].
A lack of blinks and thus lower overall blink rates are the leading contributor to computer vision syndrome
and closely associated with dry eye syndrome [1]. Computer vision syndrome manifests itself in a multitude of
symptoms, such as a headache, blurry vision, and fatigue. All these symptoms can result in problems performing
everyday tasks, such as reading, driving, and computer use, which lowers the person’s quality of life [27]. While
computer vision syndrome has been largely overlooked [27], it is epidemic and aects up to 70% of all computer
users [40].
A number of ways to alleviate dry eyes exist. Users can practice prevention habits, such as lowering the
monitor, taking regular breaks, and performing eye exercises [15]. Often, however, people do not follow these
practices throughout the day, as they require constant awareness. Alternatively, eye drops with articial tears are
common in helping with dry eyes. In the most severe cases of dry eyes, tear ducts can be blocked using plugs. All
these treatments are suboptimal, as they can be invasive or require constant awareness.
In contrast, advances in technology can create new treatments using a feedback loop: By sensing blinks and
automatically intervening when the blink rate falls below a certain threshold. For example, using a web camera
as a blink detector and special screen pattern to induce blinking [6]. Existing approaches are limited to stationary
computers, making them dicult to implement to continuously aid the user. To accompany the user throughout
the day, sensing and intervention need to be integrated into a wearable form factor.
In this paper, we introduce a wearable approach to combating computer vision syndrome. We present and
study the eectiveness of three wearable devices that track the wearer’s blink rate and trigger blinks through
actuation.
1.1 DualBlink: Always-available tracking and treatment for low blink rates
DualBlink is a wearable prototype device that detects blinks optically and triggers blinks with air pu actuations
as shown in Figures 1 and 2. We designed DualBlink around the duality of behavioral treatment for dry eyes:
tracking blinks and triggering blinks through actuation upon a lack of naturally-occurring blinks. We built
DualBlink using the results of the two user studies we conducted to evaluate the eectiveness of a series of
actuation modalities.
We believe that devices that alleviate dry eyes are more eective when constantly worn on the body. First,
wearable devices can be located near the user’s eyes, providing accurate sensing and eective blink triggers.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:3
Fig. 2. Prototype that clips on the existing frame. Le image: prototype is shown next to the removable box that houses the
electronics. Middle: a close-up of the IR sensor. Right: The prototype screws into the frame using an adapter on the back.
Second, wearable devices are not limited to specic settings, such as around stationary computers or laptops.
This supports users even when not performing visual concentration tasks in front of desktop computers, for
example when reading a book, looking through a microscope, or during the now-ubiquitous smartphone use.
In our exploration of devices, we focus on glasses; Glasses are worn by a large amount of population and
their proximity to the wearer’s face predestines them to comprise eye-related sensors and actuators. For the
use throughout the day, a device that integrates with glasses frames must be unobtrusive, ideally small and
lightweight in form factor. Furthermore, with the current trends in technology, head-mounted displays will
become more prevalent and comfortable to wear [10]. Our technology could be integrated into such devices.
Since our prototype glasses are capable of tracking blinks, they can assess the eectiveness of their actuations
and dynamically adjust actuation intensities. Such adjustments are useful in changing situations and environments,
such as inside/outside, resting or in motion etc. Importantly, the tracking capability also allows our prototype
devices to be virtually completely unobtrusive; if users’ blink rates are high enough, no actuations will be
performed by the device.
1.2 Contributions
We make the following contributions in this paper:
(1) The design and implementation of three methods to trigger blinks: light ashes, physical taps, and air
pus. All trigger modalities are integrated into tethered wearable prototypes.
(2) A controlled user study and analysis of these three trigger modalities. The results of this study indicate
that air pu actuations are most eective in triggering blinks (62.4% of blinks occurred within 2 sec after
the pu) while still ranked little distracting by participants (median 3 out of 10).
(3) A follow-up in-depth study to examine the eectiveness and acceptability of air pu actuations at dierent
locations and intensities around the wearer’s eye. We nd that the location next to the user’s eye with a
high-intensity air pu (24 Volts for 75ms) yields the best blink results (60% of all triggers). We additionally
evaluate the accuracy of our infrared blink detector for naturally-occurring blinks (85% accurate).
(4) Two fully integrated and miniaturized DualBlink prototypes based on the insights from our user studies.
The rst prototype clips onto existing glasses frames. The second is integrated into the frame itself. Both
detect eye blinks with an infrared sensor, process blink rates on an embedded processor and trigger blinks
with air pu actuations.
2 RELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, we present the rst academic investigation of wearable devices to alleviate computer
vision syndrome and dry eyes using behavioral responses.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:4 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
2.1 Computer systems for computer vision syndrome treatment
Previous work has addressed detecting and prompting blinks from the user during computer monitor use. For
example, an array of bright LEDs on the top of the monitor was used to unconsciously trigger higher blink
rates [28], which showed promising results. Other projects successfully triggered higher blink rates using eects
on the computer screen, such as blurring and ashing [6] or animations [29]. Both approaches detected the blink
rate using a regular web camera. While both address the problem, the chosen components and setup limits their
use to stationary desktop PCs or laptops. However, they do not extend to now-dominant mobile devices or no
screen activities that may cause reduced blink rates, such as driving or other mobile settings more generally.
As an alternative, WinkGlasses is a commercial product that features a piece of electronically switchable
fogging glass and infrared blink detection [39]. The glass becomes opaque when no blinks are detected for a
period of time and clears up once blinking occurs. While this is an interesting approach, the eectiveness of the
device was not evaluated. The device could also interfere with everyday activities by obstructing the view, such
as during social interactions or driving where clear sight is indispensable.
A few patents [7, 19] showed passive glasses to alleviate computer vision syndrome. Glasses are coated with a
material that reduces glare and reections, thus limiting the amount of light entering the eyes. This is mainly to
limit the light associated with sitting near a window or bright light source.
2.2 Blink detection
A number of related projects have incorporated blink detection into a device. Most of the work has used a camera
and image processing to detect blinks (e.g., [5, 9]). Some projects have implemented blink detection for wearable
setups, such as by using an infrared receiver and transmitter mounted on glasses [4]. Google Glass also used an
infrared proximity sensor to detect blinks [8], but was tailored to detecting deliberate and exaggerated blinks
(winks) as a gesture. Using the raw data from the same sensor, one study achieved 67% accuracy for normal blinks
detection [13].
Blinks have also been detected using wearable infrared eye trackers and biopotential measurements near
the eye, such as electrooculography (EOG) [2] and integrated into unobtrusive production and prescription
glasses [14]. The EOG method showed to be 95.83% accurate using support vector machines (SVM) and wavelet
transforms [31]. Pupil Labs created an infrared eye tracker integrated into an eyeglass frame [17].
2.3 Medical interventions that treat computer vision syndrome
Medical treatments focus on relieving dry eyes. Over the counter eye drops with articial tears can temporarily
relieve dry eyes. Prescription eye drops can be more eective and contain anti-inammatory agents, such as
steroids [15].
More invasive treatment involves putting punctal plugs into patients’ eyes. Punctual plugs are made of silicone
and block tear ducts to reduce tear drainage [37]. In more extreme cases, doctors can close tear ducts entirely
with cauterization; a hot wire is applied to the tear duct to cause scarring, which closes the duct and prevents
tear drainage.
None of these treatments provide an ideal solution. While eye drops need to be used daily, punctal plugs and
cauterization are invasive and can cause inammation and discomfort [25].
3 BACKGROUND: PHYSIOLOGICAL REFLEXES THAT CAUSE BLINKING
In our approach, we attempt to trigger involuntary blinks in response to a stimulus. In this section, we therefore,
review existing physiological triggers that cause blinking, which has been studied extensively in the domain of
medical and physiological research.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
Time (seconds)
Voltage (V)
Blink detected flags
Fig. 3. A sample of raw data from the infrared sensors. The red dots indicate when the algorithm detected blinks
Corneal reex: A protective reex that causes blinking as a response to a mechanical stimulus of the nerves in
the cornea. Air pus to the cornea or eyelids showed to be eective blink triggers in physiological and medical
research [26, 38]. Mechanical stimulation near the cornea has been shown to cause blinking, possibly from
vibrations traveling to the cornea, such as tapping near the eye [21, 34]. While the tapping force was low, even
such light taps on the glabella region between the user’s eyes caused blinking.
Optical reex: Protective blinking is caused by bright lights, ashes, or sudden scene changes. Previous research
used 200µs light ashes to trigger blinking [34, 41]. Light stimulation proved not as eective as mechanical
stimulation and became even less eective over time. Other research triggered blink responses in participants
through sudden hand waving by the experimenter in front of the participant’s face [24].
Acoustic startle reex: A reex to sudden and loud sounds (more than 115dB) that eectively causes blinking as
shown in multiple user studies [3, 34].
Electrical muscle stimulation: Although not a reex, direct electrical stimulation of eye muscles will cause
blinking. Electrical stimulation causes unilateral blinking, so electrodes on both eyes are needed [21, 34, 38].
4 DUALBLINK’S BLINK DETECTION AND TRACKING
To continuously track the wearer’s blinks and monitor their blink rate, all our prototypes sense infrared reections
from the wearer’s cornea or eyelid when blinking, respectively. We implemented our blink tracker using one
infrared reectance sensor (QRE1113, Fairchild) that contains both an infrared LED and a phototransistor to
measure the changes in reectance of illuminated infrared light. We leverage this setup to track blinking by
analyzing infrared light reectance as commonly done, which diers between the user’s eyeball and their eyelid.
Since bright infra-red light can cause irritation to the eye and heating, we kept the illumination LED brightness
low at 20mW . This intensity is within a range of the power used by most wearable eye trackers [23].
The advantage of our infrared sensor for blink tracking is its aordance of non-contact measurements. Our
sensor can be easily miniaturized into the frame of the eyeglasses (e.g., as implemented by Google Glass [36]).
While a pixel-based camera would provide higher-resolution data, it would also require more power and more
physical space inside the prototype. We evaluate our sensor in the second study.
4.1 Processing the infrared reflections to extract blink events
We developed an algorithm for extracting blink events from the stream of infrared reection measurements. Our
primary goal was to create a lightweight and fast algorithm, such that it can run on an embedded system in
real-time. Figure 3 shows the characteristic signal shape of blinks, which is present for most users while wearing
any of our prototypes. A sharp downward slope appears then wearers close their eye and a rising slope for
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:6 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
opening the eye. We use the derivatives of the signal to detect the two slopes and extract lid-down and lid-up
events.
Our overall processing pipeline consists of the following steps:
(1) Infrared reections are sampled at 30 kHz.
(2) A moving average lter of 100 values smooths high-frequency uctuations.
(3) Data is downsampled to 100 Hz for further processing and stored into a 40-sample buer.
(4) Calculating the derivative of the buer then yields the characteristic downward and upward slopes.
(5) When a slope reaches a threshold, our algorithm ags blink event. Since each individual blink is dierent
in magnitude and velocity and each user has a unique face geometry, the slope thresholds might need
tuning in some cases.
5 THREE DUOBLINK ACTUATORS TO TRIGGER BLINKING
We explored the design space of physically triggering blinks. Our initial exploration was based on ndings in
the literature that informs our design of blink actuators as outlined in the related work section. We selected
actuation modalities that meet the following design criteria: First, the actuator needs to be small enough to be
worn comfortably on a pair of glasses and aord further miniaturization in the future. Second, the actuator must
not cause pain or discomfort. Third, the actuator should trigger involuntary blink responses. Fourth, the actuator
must not disturb surrounding users and must have the potential to eventually be socially acceptable for the
wearer.
We arrived at three actuation modalities: ashing light, physical tapping, and air pus as shown in Figures 4, 5,
and 6.
5.1 Flashing a light
To trigger the user’s optical reex, we designed a rst wearable prototype that mounts an RGB LED light (Adafruit
Neopixel) near the eye. When activated, the LED ashes for 15 ms to produce a short but noticeable trigger. Red,
green, and blue were ashed simultaneously to produce perception of white light.
Fig. 4. Glasses with an LED light flash. The whole frame is shown on the le. A close-up of the LED is shown on the right.
5.2 Physical tapping near the eye
To trigger the user’s corneal reect using physical contact near the eye, our second wearable prototype produces
light taps through a small linear servomotor (Spektrum RC H20240T). We picked this actuator due to its small
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:7
size, fast speed, and large linear travel distance. We attached a piano wire to transmit the force and added a round
plastic tip that contacted the skin. The travel distance was controlled by the processor to accommodate dierent
face sizes. Through each user’s feedback, we manually adjusted the actuator travel distance so as to lightly tap
the user’s face.
Fig. 5. Glasses with a linear actuator for tapping. The whole frame is shown on the le. A close-up of the linear servo is
shown on the right.
5.3 Puing a jet of air near the eye
Similar to physical tapping, our third prototype triggers the corneal reex to induce blinking. However, instead
of physically touching the skin, it blows a short and small jet of air towards a location around the wearer’s eye.
An air pu is potentially more pleasant than a physical tap. At the same time, the air pump is less loud and
more power ecient than a linear motor. We used a small piezoelectric microblower (MZB1001T02, Murata),
which provided enough pressure to be noticed by the user. We built a nozzle to concentrate the air, which we
mounted in a socket joint to aord easy adjustment of the target location of all air pus. The target location
needs adjustment to avoid blowing directly into the wearer’s eye, which would be counterproductive as it may
cause irritation and possibly dry the eye even more.
blower nozzle
socket joint
set
screw
Fig. 6. Glasses with the air pu, that were used in the user study. A close up of the nozzle assembly is shown on the right.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:8 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
participant
camera to
record blinking
glasses
prototypes
screen with
trailers
Fig. 7. The setup during the first and second setup. The participant watched trailers on the monitor while wearing each of
the four prototype glasses.
5.4 Actuators that did not satisfy our requirements
In exploring the design space of potential actuators, we built a series of prototypes that could not fulll the
goals stated above. While experimenting with solenoid coils for quick tapping, we found them too bulky to be
eectively mounted on a pair of glasses. We also tried out vibration motors as actuators on the glasses, but learned
that the physical stimulus they produce is uncomfortable rather than eective in producing blinks. Our attempt
to integrate electrical muscle stimulation into our approach revealed that the electrodes are uncomfortable during
continuous wear and invasive in producing blinks directly. Finally, we attempted to produce loud sounds near the
user’s ear, but could not converge on a feasible approach, since the sound levels required would cause bystanders
to also notice the triggers or require users to constantly wear headphones.
6 EVALUATION: EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTUATORS (FLASHING LED, PHYSICAL TAP, AIR PUFF)
The goal of this experiment was to compare the three actuators described above in a controlled lab evaluation. To
compare their eectiveness with a baseline condition, we built a fourth prototype that only tracked blink events,
but featured no actuation.
6.1 Task
The participants’ task was to watch four minutes of new movie trailers and to answer two questions after each
trailer on the contents. While watching the trailers, participants wore each of our prototype devices and were
told that the goal of the evaluation is to measure the distraction of our prototypes caused to watching trailers. We
did not tell participants that the goal of this study was related to tracking or triggering blinking. After each trial,
participants rated how distracting the respective interface was on a Likert scale from 1 (not at all distracting) to
10 (very distracting).
We picked trailers since they are designed to capture the attention of any viewer [18]. Specically, we chose
action trailers for short sequences and frequent cuts. We had found in a previous pilot study that comedy and
horror trailers can cause more emotional responses, such as laughter, which may inadvertently impact blink
rates.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:9
6.2 Actuation Interfaces and Experiment Procedure
We studied four actuation interfaces in this evaluation: ash LED, physical tap, air pu, and no actuation. The
latter was our baseline condition that only tracked blink rates, but performed no type of actuation to trigger
blinks in participants.
Each trial consisted of watching four minutes of movie trailers. The actuator on each prototype triggered at
specic intervals that we hardcoded before the study, each being between 2 and 10 seconds. Each trial contained
a total of 30 triggers and the order of trigger intervals was counterbalanced across trials and participants.
Each participants repeated two blocks of this procedure during the experiment so as to account for sequence
eects of the actuation interfaces described above. Between the two blocks, participants took o the prototype
devices, left the room, and walked around the building to relax their eyes. The order of actuation interfaces was
counterbalanced across blocks and participants.
A high-resolution DSLR video camera recorded participants throughout the study at 60 fps to obtain groundtruth data on actuation triggers and blink events. Overall, each participant completed a total of 4 interfaces ×2
blocks = 8 trials and completed the study in under an hour.
6.3 Participants
We recruited 12 participants (7 female), ages 23–55 from our institution. 9 participants did not normally wear
glasses or contact lenses. 3 participants wore contact lenses during the study. All participants were heavy computer
users and spent around 10 hours on a computer every day. Participants received a small gratuity for their time.
6.4 Results
To obtain accurate results, we manually labeled the timestamps of actuation and blink events in footage recorded
by the DSLR camera. Watching the videos in slow motion at 0.3 speed ensured that all timestamp labels were
accurate within a range of 1 sec.
We examined four metrics for all interfaces. 1) Participants’ mean blink rate while wearing each of the
prototypes reveals how successfully each of our actuation interfaces is capable of producing a regular blinking
behavior. 2) The average actuation-blink interval indicates the eectiveness of each interface to trigger a blink.
3) Closely related, we measure the eectiveness of an interface by the rate of blinks that occurred within two
seconds after an actuation (i.e., a successful actuation). We chose this time span to account for inaccuracies
in labeling the raw footage. 4) The median distraction rating for each interface informs the design of future
prototypes by how annoyed participants were with a particular method of actuation.
In addition to processing these metrics for our three actuation prototypes, we also processed them for our
fourth prototype, which had no means of blink actuation. Similar to the other three interfaces, when wearing
the no actuation prototype the actuation indicator ashed visibly to only the camera at controlled intervals. The
purpose of this behavior was to compare the blinks resulting from our three prototypes’ actuations with naturally
occurring blinks.
6.4.1 Mean blink rate. We ran a two-way ANOVA with factors interface and block on mean blink rate with
the participant as the random variable. We found a signicant main eect of interface (F3,8 = 6.582,p < .015) on
mean blink rate and a signicant interaction between interface and block (F3,8 = 5.105,p < .029), both compared
for signicance at the .05 level. Post-hoc t-tests using Bonferroni correction showed a signicant dierence in
participants’ blink rates when wearing the physical tap prototype and the no actuation prototype (p < 0.026). As
shown in Figure 8, wearing physical tap increased participants’ blink rate by 35.8% on average.
6.4.2 Average actuation-blink interval. We ran another two-way ANOVA on the average delay between
actuations and subsequent blinks and found a signicant main eect of interface (F3,8 = 5.026,p < 0.03). Post-hoc
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:10 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
0
5
10
15
20
25
FLASH	LED PHYSICAL	TAP AIRPUFF NO	ACTUATION
blink	 rate	in	blinks/minute
Fig. 8. Mean blink rate for each of the interfaces.
0
5
10
15
FLASH	LED PHYSICAL	TAP AIRPUFF NO	ACTUATION
average	blink	 delay	 after	actuation
Fig. 9. Mean delay (ms) to blink aer actuation. In "no actuation" case, actuation was led flashes that were only visible
to the camera.
t-tests using Bonferroni correction revealed a signicant 49.5% decrease of average blink delay when participants
switched from no actuation to air pu as shown in Figure 9.
6.4.3 Rate of blinks occurring within the first two seconds aer actuation. For this metric, a two-way ANOVA
on the rate of blinks following actuations within two seconds showed a signicant main eect of interface
(F3,8 = 6.609,p < .015). Post-hoc t-tests using Bonferroni correction revealed statistically signicant dierences
between no actuation and physical tap (p < .006) as well as between no actuation and air pu (p < .014). As
shown in Figure 10, participants successfully blinked for 62.4% of all actuations within two seconds when wearing
air pu, which is almost twice as much as when wearing no actuation. When wearing physical tap, participants
on average blinked in response to 56.2% of all actuations within two seconds (80% increase) compared to no
actuation.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
FLASH	LED PHYSICAL	TAP AIRPUFF NO	ACTUATION
blink	 within	 2s	 of	actuation
Fig. 10. Rate of successful actuations per interface.
1
2
3
4
5
FLASH	LED PHYSICAL	TAP AIRPUFF NO	ACTUATION
median	 distraction
Fig. 11. Median distraction ratings for each interface.
6.4.4 Participants’ median distraction rating. As shown in Figure 11, participants rated all actuation interfaces
within the lower half of the one-to-ten Likert scale. While participants assigned physical tap a median 5 rating,
air pu is slightly lower at 4 and ash LED at 3.
6.5 Discussion
The results of this evaluation show that the actuation in our prototypes impacts the blink rate, most evident by
the physical tap interface. Though ash LED and airpu produced no signicant dierence at the .05 level for
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:11
blink rate, the results of airpu are promising. Our second metric conrms this, showing the lowest average
delay between actuation and blink for airpu overall.
Contrary to what we expected, physical tap was not the most eective in triggering blinks. Instead, airpu
produced the lowest mean actuation-blink interval and highest success rate of producing blinks overall. It is
possible that the eectiveness of physical tap decreased throughout a trial, because the actuator did not always
make skin contact. Even though we adjusted the actuator before a trial to ensure it made light contact with each
participant’s skin based on their feedback, we noticed that some participants reported skin contact while there
was none. Interestingly, we noticed that some participants blinked due to the auditory side eect of physical tap,
most likely in anticipation of the physical impact.
The results indicate that ash LED was not as eective as airpu and physical tap. Flash LED produced a slight
increase in response compared to no actuator. To increase the response, it is likely that the LED needs to be
brighter and positioned in front of the eye. In our experiment, the LED was positioned in the peripheral vision of
the participant. However, even so, participants rated ash LED as quite distracting with a median rating of 3.
Some participants were considerably sensitive to light and found the LED to be the most disturbing actuator. In a
wearable setup, it is thus unlikely that the LED ash can be made noninvasive and still produce a large eect.
As expected, physical tap was the most distracting. Airpu was in the middle and ash LED was the least
distracting. The tapping motor produced a sound that many participants found more distracting than the actual
skin contact, which might have contributed to a higher distraction rating. Although airpu also produced a light
sound, it was barely noticed by participants. Future versions of physical tap could integrate a more silent motor
through insulation and custom transmission, but we have not so far been able to nd suitable motors on the
market.
Overall, We found that airpu struck the best balance between success rates and distraction. Flash LED had less
use overall, as it only produced a slight eect on the blink rate. Physical tap was similarly eective in producing
blinking, but distracted participants more.
On the practical side, these results are promising for fullling our initial objectives. Integrating the air pu
actuator into a wearable device is easier than accommodating the moving parts of the motor. In addition to this
limitation, the parts of the motor are audible, less reliable, and are noticeable in social settings.
Since airpu performed best all things considered, we study it in more detail in a follow-up evaluation.
7 FOLLOW-UP EVALUATION OF AIRPUFF : 3 LOCATIONS, 2 INTENSITIES, 2 DURATIONS
In this evaluation, we examine dierent actuation locations around participants’ eyes and intensities and durations
of air pus to learn more about their eectiveness and participants’ acceptance ratings.
7.1 Task
Participants had the same task in the previous experiment: watching movie trailers while wearing a prototype
device, answering two questions on the trailer, and rating the distracting and invasiveness of each device. To
accommodate more trials during this evaluation, trailers were only two minutes long.
Similar to before, we did not mention to participants that the true focus of the study is sensing each participant’s
blink rate and triggering blinks through actuation.
7.2 Actuation Interfaces and Experiment Procedure
In this study, participants wore the same prototype device that triggered blinks through airpus. We introduced
three factors in this evaluation:
(1) Location. We adjusted the nozzle of the blower to one of the three locations shown in Figure 12: ABOVE
the eye, NEXT to the eye, or BELOW the eye.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:12 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
L3
L2
L1
Fig. 12. Locations evaluated in the air pu study: (L1) above the eye, (L2) next to the eye, and (L3) below the eye.
(2) Intensity. The voltage applied to the piezo blower, which resulted in STRONG (24 V) and WEAK (12 V)
actuations.
(3) Duration. The duration of the air pu was either SHORT (75 ms) or LONG (150 ms).
Each participant completed 3 locations ×2 intensities ×2 durations = 12 trials in total in under an hour. A
DSLR camera again recorded each participant at 60 fps.
7.3 Participants
We recruited fresh 12 participants (6 female), ages 24–47 from our institution. 8 participants did not wear glasses
or contact lenses. 4 participants wore contact lenses during the study. All participants were heavy computer
users and spent around 10 hours on a computer every day. Participants received a small gratuity for their time.
7.4 Results
Repeating the procedure of our analysis from Study 1, we again manually labeled the timestamps of actuation
and blink events in the footage recorded by the DSLR camera during the second evaluation in slow motion.
Since we knew that the air pu prototype can successfully trigger blinking in response to actuation, we
focused this analysis on the success rate (i.e., a blink within 2s, 3r d metric in Study 1) and participants’ ratings
on distraction and invasiveness of our prototypes. We performed the same calculations as described in the rst
study to analyze and compare all conditions.
7.4.1 Rate of blinks occurring within the first two seconds aer actuation. We ran a three-way ANOVA with
factors pu location, pu intensity, and pu duration on the rate of blinks following actuations within two seconds.
We found signicant main eect of location (F2,4 = 7.734,p < .042), intensity (F1,5 = 14.116,p < 0.013), a
signicant interaction between location and duration (F2,4 = 8.657,p < .035), all compared for signicance at the
.05 level. Post-hoc t-tests using Bonferroni correction showed a signicant dierence in successful actuation
rates when air pus were targeted to the location next to the eye compared to above (35.5% increase), resulting
in a success rate of 60% as shown in Figure 13 (left). We also found a signicant dierence between weak and
strong intensities. On average, strong air pus produced blinks for 54% of all actuations as shown in Figure 13
(center), which is a signicant 16% increase over weak air pus.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:13
SHORT LONG S L S L S L S L S L ABOVE
ABOVE
NEXT
NEXT
BELOW
BELOW
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
WEAK
WEAK
STRONG
STRONG WEAK STRONG WEAK STRONG
blinks within 2s of actua�on
Fig. 13. Average rate of successful actuations for each combination of {location, intensity, duration}. The two charts on the
right show aggregated values for the factor location and intensity, both of which showed statistically significant dierences.
7.4.2 Participants’ median distraction rating. As show in Figure 14, participants again rated the air pu
actuations within the lower half of the one-to-ten Likert scale for all locations, intensities and durations. While
the location next to the eye received a median rating of a full point less distractive than below, changes in air pu
intensity and duration resulted in marginal or no changes in median ratings.
Regarding the perceived invasiveness of each of the congurations, Figure 15 shows participants’ ratings. The
results show that all interfaces again received comparable ratings in the 3 out of 10 region.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ABOVE NEXT BELOW WEAK STRONG SHORT LONG
median	 distraction
Fig. 14. Participants’ median distraction ratings (1: not at all
distracting, 10: very distracting) for all locations intensities
and durations.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ABOVE NEXT BELOW WEAK STRONG SHORT LONG
median	 invasiveness
Fig. 15. Participants’ median invasiveness ratings (1: not at
all invasive, 10: very invasive) for all locations intensities and
durations.
7.5 Accuracy of our infrared blink-detection algorithm
We reused the manually-labeled data from this evaluation to test the accuracy of our blink detector. As shown in
Figure 2, the prototype participants wore during the second study also contained an infrared sensor to record eye
blinks during all trials. We did not test the infrared sensors in the rst study, since multiple prototype glasses had
to be removed and put on many times. The position of the glasses would have to be adjusted after such events,
making the study longer than planned 1-hour.
Compared to the labeled ground-truth blink events, our blink detector captured an average of 85.2% of all
blinks (SD = 8.1%) across all participants. The sources of error could be facial movements such as laughter,
talking and yawning can be picked up as blinking. Also, misalignment or shifting of the glasses can cause errors,
as the IR sensor is sensitive to distance and alignment.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:14 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
7.6 Discussion
The results of this experiment show that the location of the air pu actuation is important, as it aected the blink
success rates. Location next to the eye was the most promising: It had the highest (60%) blink success rate and
was rated 3 out of 10 on the distraction and invasiveness ratings. Other locations produced lower blink success
(no statistical signicance), but the location next to the eye makes integration easier. In this conguration, the
blower can be integrated directly into the frame, with air channels routed and hidden inside.
Unsurprisingly, high intensity (24 V) produced more blinks compared to low intensity (12 V). High and low
intensities were similar on the distraction and invasiveness scales, indicating that they were perceived similarly.
Even though higher voltage could potentially be more eective, the pump we chose for our design does not
handle more than 24 V. There was no noticeable dierence between short and long air pu actuations. We thus
conclude that short air pus are preferred since they use less energy, which is critical for battery life of a wearable
device.
To summarize, the conguration settings of air pus that struck the best balance between least distraction,
least invasiveness and highest eectiveness were: next to the eye, high intensity (24 V), and short duration (75 ms).
The 85.2% accuracy of our blink detector shows the viability of our approach for wearable and embedded
purposes. Since even the baseline blink rate we observed in the rst study varied substantially between individuals,
the sensor would have to be calibrated when rst worn. The sensor would then detect changes from the baseline
rate, rather than the absolute blinking rate.
8 TWO FULLY INTEGRATED DUALBLINK PROTOTYPES
Based on the results of our two user studies, we designed two miniaturized and wearable prototypes, as shown
in Figures 1 and 2. Our design goal was to make a small and unobtrusive wearable device, which can be either
mounted onto existing glasses or directly integrated into the frame of a pair of glasses. Both prototypes have
identical electronics and system architecture (Figure 17)and only dier in the attachment mechanisms.
8.1 Electronics Design
We designed a custom circuit board (Figure 16) to miniaturize and integrate all electronics. An ARM Cortex M0
(ATSAMD21G, Atmel) microcontroller is the main processor on our nal device. To provide wireless connectivity
to smartphones or computers, we integrated a Bluetooth Low Energy radio (NRF8001, Nordic). A 250 mAh
lithium-polymer battery power the device, which ran for approximately 6 hours. The piezoelectric blower is
challenging to drive since it requires high voltage (24 V) alternating current. Since this is not readily available on
a battery-powered device, we use a boost switching regulator (MIC2288, Microchip) and a DC to AC converter
that we designed to drive the piezoelectric blower. A 4-Mbit FRAM memory chip (CY15B104Q, Cypress) serves as
storage for log data and additional o-line analysis.
8.2 Mechanical Design
We used o-the-shelf glasses as a base frame (Kayden, Newbee Fashion) and 3D printed a custom adapter for the
piezoelectric pump on a Stratasys Eden260V to accommodate the silicone tube. The tube connects to a nozzle
that is made from a plastic dispensing syringe. We designed a ball and socket to hold the nozzle in place, which
allows the nozzle to swivel through manual adjustments and can be secured with a screw.
We designed two mechanical prototypes. One design clips on the side of the glasses using screws as shown in
Figure 2 and can be attached to any glasses that users may wear already. The second prototype is integrated into
the frame of the glasses as shown in Figure 1. It is smaller and arguably more aesthetic than the rst prototype,
but cannot be removed or attached to another frame. We believe that both prototypes have merits in real-world
usage.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:15
microcontroller microblower
Bluetooth radio memory piezo driver
4.3 cm
2.2 cm
Fig. 16. Pictures of the top and the boom of the custom circuit board.
8.3 Technical Evaluation
Power consumption is an important consideration for the external and continuous use of our prototype devices.
A wearable device should last at least a few hours without a need for recharging.
For our nal DualBlink prototype, the base power consumption (all at 3.3 V) is 22.8 mA. The blower consumes
about 202 mA when operated continuously, but for our purposes it is active only for a fraction of a second in large
intervals. The infrared illumination LED uses 16.5 mA, which is the biggest consumer of energy, since it needs to
be on most of the time. In its current implementation, DualBlink aords a continuous wearable operation for 6.3
hours if the blower triggers blinks once every minute.
Future versions of DualBlink could improve the battery life by reducing the average infrared illumination
power by duty cycling. For example, turning o the infrared LED right after a blink for a brief period is acceptable,
since there is some minimum interval between the blinks. An iteration of our current device design may also
include an additional battery alongside the other frame of the glasses, or hidden behind the wearer’s ear as is the
case for Google Glass or Jins Meme [22].
The total weight of the clip-on prototype is 43 grams, whereas the integrated prototype weighs 40 grams. The
weight of the unmodied glasses frame is 21 grams Both weights are comfortable for everyday wear.
For in-the-wild evaluations, it will become important to store blink and actuation data whenever the prototype
cannot connect to a mobile device. DualBlink can currently store data at 100 Hz for 60 minutes, which should
cover the periods of time when mobile devices are not in range.
DC to AC
converter
boost
converter
piezo
blower
IR
LED
IR receiver
microcontroller
phone BLE radio
FRAM
Fig. 17. System diagram. The components of the wearable system are shown in the red box.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
1:16 • A. Dementyev and C. Holz
8.4 Usage in the wild
We demonstrated and studied dierent components of our DualBlink prototypes in this paper: an actuator and
blink detector as well as electrical and mechanical parts. In this section, we tie them all together and explain the
device’s use in real-life.
First, an individual with eye problems would go to the eyeglasses store. There the individual would be tted
with the special glasses frame that contains our system. This could be either built-in or attached to existing
glasses. The sensors and actuator would be adjusted to suit the individual’s face. This would be done to increase
the accuracy of the infrared sensor and nd a suitable location for the air pu. Alternatively, the tting could be
done at home. The individual would wear this frame throughout the day. At rst, it will monitor the blink rate
only. This will help to establish a baseline for the normal blink rate. Then the air pu will be activated when
the blink rate falls below the established threshold. The device will also connect to the smartphone to store and
visualize the data. This information will be useful to measure the eectiveness of the device and also to provide
information for medical professionals.
9 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
9.1 Long-term medical evaluation
Our evaluation and the results we obtain are valid for the population we recruited: frequent users of computer
screens, none of who had known dry eye syndromes. To learn about the medical accuracy of our approach and
determining the eectiveness of DualBlink for alleviating computer vision syndrome, we have started to prepare
an in-the-wild and longer-term evaluation in collaboration with University of Washington Medicine. We are
planning on running a multi-day study during which patients with diagnosed computer vision syndrome are
wearing our devices throughout the day.
9.2 Infrared blink detection
Our current blink detection is sucient for the operation of the device; at 85% accuracy, missing a blink event
during detection would only cause the actuator to trigger sooner, which could be constrained with a minimum
threshold value. However, to extend beyond user studies in which prototype frames can be manually tted and
adjusted to each participant to a prototype that works out-of-the-box for a much wider audience, the blink
detection needs to be more robust. It should be able to accommodate dierent face and eye shapes as well as be
tested with dierent skin tones. It should also work if the glasses shift on the face, for example, while walking
or sudden motions. Either multiple infrared sensors may deliver a more reliable signal for such scenarios or a
custom-tted frame to accommodate the face anatomy similar to prescription glasses frames. Also, the infrared
detection will need to be tested in direct sunlight, as it might inuence the sensor.
9.3 Integration into exiting augmented glasses and headsets for augmented and virtual reality
Our results also inform the design of future wearable glasses that incorporate displays, which are currently
emerging in the domain of AR and VR. Such devices will cause even more screen use and exposure for users,
potentially increasing the severity of dry eyes and computer vision syndrome in users. In addition, more recent
headsets incorporate eye tracking for foveated rendering, which could be repurposed to implement DualBlink’s
approach.
Since headmounted displays are close to the user’s eyes, alternative approaches to our physical stimulation
could be purely virtual inside an immersive environment. For example, virtual explosions or objects moving
quickly towards the users face will cause blinks by triggering the optical reex. Loud audio output through
speakers or the headphones of the headset could supplement blink actuations by triggering the acoustic startle
reex, potentially in unison with visual stimuli.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2017.
DualBlink: A Wearable Device to Continuously Detect, Track, and Actuate Blinking For Alleviating Dry Eyes
and Computer Vision Syndrome • 1:17
9.4 Earpiece prototype without glasses frames
Finally, one of the current disadvantages of our design is the need to wear glasses in the rst place, because not
everyone may feel comfortable wearing glasses. While our current design aords integration into head-mounted
devices (e.g., Google Glass, Jins Meme, Hololens etc.), an unobtrusive device might be more desirable for users.
To make the device completely unobtrusive, we are experimenting with the integration of all components into a
small earpiece that is worn either in or behind the outer ear. We believe that in the future, users could wear such
a device that is seamlessly integrated into a small earpiece, which would allow universal wear.
We have started to test the feasibility of sensing electric muscle potential (EMG) around the ear to pick up
blinks, but not achieved comparable success rates so far. Similarly, we are intrigued by our observations during
the study that participants started blinking in response to the auditory activation of the physical tap interface
even before the pin made contact with their skin. One avenue of future work is to determine whether the physical
tap can provide a lasting conditioning eect, such that DualBlink may produce future actuations simply by
playing back the actuators sound. We are also planning on experimenting with ultrasound transducers that
produce just enough of a pressure wave to trigger the acoustic startle reex.
10 CONCLUSION
Computer vision syndrome can signicantly reduce the quality of life. As computer and screen use is increasing,
this problem aects more and more of the population. In this paper, we have presented DualBlink, a miniature
wearable device that can potentially alleviate computer vision syndrome and dry eyes. We base the system design
on two user studies of dierent subsystems and variations of blink actuation. In our rst evaluation, we compared
three actuators to trigger blinking and evaluated the most eective one in detail during our second study.
We believe that our work provides a novel always-available way to alleviate computer vision syndrome and
that our results have implications for emerging head-mounted devices and displays. Improving the quality of
life for large part of the population suering from this problem may become a result of our work. We also hope
that our approach in creating always-available wearable treatments can be extended to many other health and
well-being issues.