In recent years, wireless sensing has been exploited as a promising research direction for contactless human activity recognition.
However, one major issue hindering the real deployment of these systems is that the signal variation patterns induced by the
human activities with different devices and environmental settings are neither stable nor consistent, resulting in unstable
system performance. The existing machine learning based methods usually take the “black box” approach and fails to achieve
consistent performance. In this paper, we argue that a deep understanding of radio signal propagation in wireless sensing is
needed, and it may be possible to develop a deterministic sensing model to make the signal variation patterns predictable.
With this intuition, in this paper we investigate: 1) how wireless signals are affected by human activities taking transceiver
location and environment settings into consideration; 2) a new deterministic sensing approach to model the received signal
variation patterns for different human activities; 3) a proof-of-concept prototype to demonstrate our approach and a case
study to detect diverse activities. In particular, we propose a diffraction-based sensing model to quantitatively determine the
signal change with respect to a target’s motions, which eventually links signal variation patterns with motions, and hence
can be used to recognize human activities. Through our case study, we demonstrate that the diffraction-based sensing model
is effective and robust in recognizing exercises and daily activities. In addition, we demonstrate that the proposed model
improves the recognition accuracy of existing machine learning systems by above 10%.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile computing systems and tools.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Wireless sensing; Fresnel diffraction model; Human activity sensing; Wi-Fi
1 INTRODUCTION
With the popularity of wireless devices and the ubiquitous deployment of Wi-Fi infrastructure, wireless sensing
has attracted a lot of attentions in both academia and industry. Wireless sensing provides non-intrusive and
continuous sensing over the air, opening a new direction to track user locations and sense their activities
without attaching any device to a target. Adib et al. [4] and Pu et al. [32] firstly proposed to use Wi-Fi signal
to recognize human activities. Subsequent works proposed to leverage Wi-Fi signal for fall detection [44] [39],
gait recognition [41] and gesture classification [52],[14]. Utilizing Wi-Fi signal to extract motion information for
interactive exergames and human exercise activity have been demonstrated in [31], [48] and [49]. The principle
behind wireless sensing is that human activity affects the RF signal propagation, and different activities may
cause different signal variation patterns. Each signal variation pattern may be associated to a particular activity,
and hence Machine Learning (ML) method is typically applied to train a model for each signal variation pattern
and infer the associated activity.
Although existing wireless sensing systems have achieved a success to some extent, many limitations exist.
One big issue is that sensing performance is not always stable, and may fluctuate with respect to target location
and transceiver position, limiting the real deployment of these systems. From benchmark experiments in our
preliminary studies, we observe that while a target performs the same activity at the same location, the received
radio signals may exhibit completely different variation patterns when the Wi-Fi receiver is placed at different
locations in a room. On the other hand, when the target performs different activities, the received signals can
be very similar with the same transceiver settings. These limitations pose a big challenge for RF-based activity
sensing to be deployed in real world. Recent studies [37][55][47][56] reveal that radio signal propagation follows
the theory of the Fresnel model which better explains the performance fluctuation of wireless sensing systems.
However, there is a lack of quantitative studies to show how signal propagation is related to target location. This
motivates us to investigate a deterministic sensing model, if possible, to quantify signal propagation with respect
to target movement and better guide the system design and deployment.
The Fresnel zones consist of multiple concentric ellipses with two foci points on radio transmitter and receiver.
Since radio propagation in the First Fresnel Zone (FFZ) (i.e., the innermost zone for the transceiver pair) has most
obvious signal variations, we focus our study on the FFZ. Leveraging the Fresnel diffraction model [15][56], in
this paper, we propose a diffraction-based sensing model to quantitatively determine the signal propagation with
respect to a target’s motions in the FFZ. The model eventually links the received signal variation patterns with
motions, and hence can be used to detect human activities. We theoretically analyze our model, and conduct
experimental measurements which prove our theoretical model. With this sensing model, we can thus guide the
deployment of wireless sensing systems to significantly improve signal quality for activity detection. The study
in this paper successfully breaks the sensing limit subjected by the “blindly” generated sensing signals in many
existing sensing systems. Furthermore, the proposed model can be used to improve the performance of existing
machine learning based sensing systems.
We develop a proof-of-concept prototype and apply the proposed sensing model to detect diverse activities
(i.e., containing 7 body workout activities, walking and sitting) in the FFZ with a pair of Wi-Fi transceivers. Our
model is able to accurately detect each activity, count the number of repetitive activities, and even tell the quality
of workouts. Our model is orthogonal to the machine learning techniques and can be combined with them to
further improve the recognition accuracy. The proposed sensing model can be applied to recognize a large variety
of motion activities. The main contributions are summarized as follows.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:3
• This work investigates a diffraction-based sensing model to explain the reason behind the performance
instability which is a major issue for existing sensing system. This work sheds light on a new deterministic
approach for wireless activity sensing.
• We analyze the signal propagations with respect to target location in the FFZ, and develop a mathematical
model to establish the quantitative relationship between the signal variation and target location. We verify
this model through benchmarking experiments and reveal several important properties for target sensing.
• Based on the proposed sensing model, we build a proof-of-concept system for detecting repetitive motion
activities. We employ the unique signal variation induced by each activity to recognize the activity. Our
experiments demonstrate that the system is effective and robust against ambient environmental changes.
In addition, the proposed model improves the recognition accuracy of machine learning systems by above
10%.
2 PRELIMINARY STUDY
In this section, we conduct our empirical studies on wireless sensing based activity recognition using machine
learning methods. We use commodity Wi-Fi devices, and take repetitive motion activities (i.e., body workouts) as
an example. We evaluate five feature-based learning methods and an advanced neural network method with
three manually collected human exercise data sets. Finally, we compare the results of these methods and present
our observations which reveal the issues in existing methods.
2.1 Experimental Setup
We take 3 commonly seen workout activities as examples, i.e., sit-up, push-up and walkout. According to the
existing study of human activity sensing [39], human activities can be performed on Line-of-Sight (LoS) and
Non-Line-of-Sight (NLoS) of the transceiver pair to be sensed. The study in [39] shows that the amplitude
variation caused by human activity becomes much weaker when the target is not located at the LoS. This is
because more than 70% of the energy is transferred via the zone near to LoS [16]. In this experiment, the exercise
mat is thus placed between the transceivers and the target performs activities on the mat. We select three different
placements of the Wi-Fi transceivers in a typical indoor environment and the transceivers are placed at the same
height from 0 to 40 cm at a step size of 20 cm. For each equipment setting, eleven volunteers are asked to perform
3 activities with 5 repetitions. We obtain a total of 495 (3 × 11 × 3 × 5) workout activities. We collect the amplitude
of the Channel State Information (CSI) from the Wi-Fi receiver. The signal amplitude can be seen as a time series
sequence x = (x1, x2, ..., xn). If there is no moving target in the environment, the wireless channel is relatively
stable. When the target performs activity, the scattered signal from the target changes, which results in obvious
signal variations. Human activity can be recognized by mapping different signal variation patterns to corresponding
human activities.
2.2 Activity Recognition with Classical Methods
Following the classical learning based methods [53][39], we normalize the signal, segment each cycle of the
repetitive activity and label the sensing signal with corresponding activity. In order to recognize the activities,
we extract the following features from the CSI amplitude sequences:
1) the mean and standard deviation of CSI, which are given by μ = 1
|x |
|x |
i=1 xi and δ =
|x |
i=1(xi−μ)2
|x | ;
2) the maximum and minimum value of x;
3) the skewness (Skew(x) = E(x−μ)
3
δ 3 );
4) the kurtosis (Kurtosis(x) = E(x−μ)
4
δ 4 );
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.   
33:4 • F. Zhang et al.
Table 1. Activity recognition accuracy
Classification Method Accuracy
(495 activities)
Accuracy
(990 activities)
Accuracy
(1980 activities)
Gaussian Kernel SVM 0.65 0.68 0.66
Decision Tree (DT) 0.66 0.66 0.68
K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) 0.67 0.69 0.67
Random Forest (RF) 0.71 0.72 0.73
Discriminant Analysis (DA) 0.53 0.64 0.63
CNN 0.81 0.82 0.82
5) root sum square θ =
|x |
i=1 x2 and
6) the q-quantiles (q=0.25, 0.5, 0.75).
Based on the above 10 (2+2+1+1+1+3) features extracted from the received signal, we apply 5 different classification
methods including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Trees (DT), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Random
Forest (RF) and Discriminant Analysis (DA) to identify the activities. The recognition accuracies are shown in
Table 1. We observe that Random Forest achieves the highest accuracy of 71%.
Typically, a larger training set may improve recognition accuracy. Thus we collect another two groups of
datasets for 11 targets performing the three workout activities when the transceivers are placed at a height from
0 cm to 50 cm at a step size of 5 cm and 10 cm, respectively. The other two datasets contain 990 (6 × 11 × 3 × 5)
and 1980 (12 × 11 × 3 × 5) activities. As shown in Table 1, some of the classification methods indeed have small
performance improvement. However, we also notice that increasing the size of the dataset does not always
help. Besides, the misclassification rates are quite high, ranging from 27% to 37%, which hinders in building any
practical applications.
Another possible reason for the poor performance is that the extracted features may not be able to fully describe
the uniqueness of the signal change caused by each activity. We thus apply the advanced Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) method which can automatically extract informative features on the same data set. We design a
CNN-based neural network consisting of six layers. The framework of our neural network structure is shown in
Fig. 1. The CSI amplitude values are the input data. During the training process, the input data are resized to a
1 × 64 vector. We use three convolutional layers for extracting features from the Wi-Fi CSI data. For the three
convolutional layers, the sizes of the filters are all set to 5. The number of the filters on each convolutional layer is
set to 60. For the pooling layers, we use the max pooling. The pooling size is set to 2. All the activation functions
are ReLU (ReLU(x)=max(0,x)). After feature extraction in the convolutional layers, we use two fully connected
layers. To make the neural network generalize well in practice, we use dropout to reduce overfitting. The dropout
rate for CNN is set to 0.5. At last, we employ a softmax Loss function [25] as the classifier for the output of the
neural network. We adopt the learning rate decay method and train 500 epochs in total. The proposed learning
model is implemented using Pytorch [3]. As shown in Table. 1, the CNN-based method achieves the highest
recognition accuracy while the improvement with larger dataset is very limited. We finally achieve an average
accuracy of 82%.
Fig. 1. Neural network in the CSI-based activity recognition system
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019. 
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:5
2.3 Result Analysis
We ask the question why the advanced ML method with a large dataset is still not able to achieve a high accuracy1?
Assumption 1: Each activity corresponds to a stable and consistent signal variation pattern.
Counter observation: Take sit-up activity as an example. As shown in Fig. 2, the sensing signal of the same
activity exhibits totally different variations when the transceivers are placed at different locations. Fig. 2a shows
only one valley while Figs. 2b-2d have two or more valleys.
(a) Signal pattern 1 (b) Signal pattern 2 (c) Signal pattern 3 (d) Signal pattern 4
Fig. 2. Observation 1: different signal patterns for the same sit-up activity.
Assumption 2: Different activities correspond to different signal variation patterns.
Counter observation: When the target performs different activities, e.g., sit-up and push-up, we notice that
the sensing signal can be very similar. As shown in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b, with specific equipment deployment, the
sensing signals are almost the same. Fig. 3c and Fig. 3d show another two signal variations which are very similar
but are induced by different activities.
(a) Sit-up: signal pattern 1 (b) Push-up: signal pattern 1 (c) Sit-up: signal pattern 2 (d) Push-up: signal pattern 2
Fig. 3. Observation 2: similar signal patterns resulting from the sit-up and push-up activities.
These two counter observations show that arbitrary sensing setting breaks the assumption of one-to-one
mapping between activity and signal variation pattern. The learning based methods thus have inherent difficulties
to address the ambiguities brought in. Furthermore, the existing sensing techniques have cognitive gaps in
understanding the uncertainty and indistinguishable signal patterns induced by human activities, which also
pose a big challenge to achieve reliable sensing performance. We argue that a method to establish the quantitative
relationship between target’s location, equipment placement and signal variation patterns is needed. We thus
revisit this issue with the Fresnel diffraction model to fundamentally understand how human motions affect
signal prorogation and signal variations at receiver.
1We consider higher than 90% as high accuracy.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:6 • F. Zhang et al.
3 DIFFRACTION-BASED SENSING MODEL
In this section, we first provide the background of the basic Fresnel Zone model. We focus our study on the First
Fresnel Zone (FFZ) where signal propagation follows the diffraction theory. We then propose our diffraction-based
sensing model which quantitatively models signal strength for repetitive motion activities. We analyze this model
theoretically, and prove it through a series of measurement experiments.
3.1 The Basics of Fresnel Model
Consider a free-space scenario, the transmitter Tx transmits RF signals with a wavelength of λ to the receiver Rx.
The Fresnel zones are concentric ellipses with foci of transmitter and receiver as shown in Fig. 4. The boundary
of the nth Fresnel zone is defined as
|TxPn | + |RxPn |−|TxRx | = nλ/2 (1)
where Pn is a point on the nth ellipse [37]. The innermost ellipse (n=1) is defined as the First Fresnel Zone (FFZ).
Let O be a point on LoS between two transceivers, the length of TxO and RxO is d1 and d2, respectively. The
radius of FFZ can be calculated as r1 =
 λd1d2
d1+d2
. When d1 = d2, the r1 is λd
2 (d = d1 = d2).
Tx Rx
hfront
Boundary of the
3rd Fresnel Zone
Boundary of the
2nd Fresnel Zone
Boundary of the
1st Fresnel Zone
First Fresnel
Zone (FFZ)
hback
r1
Target
u=-1
u=1
u=0 d O 1 d2
LoS
Fig. 4. Diffraction effects in the First Fresnel Zone.
Studies [16] show that between a pair of Wi-Fi transceivers more than 70% of RF signal energy is transferred
via the First Fresnel Zone. When a target moves into the First Fresnel Zone, diffraction becomes much stronger
and dominates, which means the target blocks the primary energy pathway and the remaining energy bypass the
target. When applied to activity sensing, this may imply strong signal variations to different activities, potentially
achieving better sensing performance.
3.2 Diffraction-based Sensing Model
We now investigate the scenario when a human target is inside the FFZ. We are interested in finding out how
signal propagation is affected when the target moves back and forth in the FFZ. The size of the FFZ is determined
by an ellipse originated at the middle point of the Line of Sight (LoS). The horizontal axis lies on the LoS of
the transceiver pair, and the vertical radius is defined as r1. We set the vertical axis with an upper boundary
uf ront = −1, and a lower boundary uf ront = 1. We use the full cylinder model to represent the complete human
body. We consider the scenario where a target moves back and forth along the vertical axis. The diffracted signals
propagate from Tx to Rx, bypassing the cylinder, as shown in Fig. 4. To indicate the position of a target, we define
hf ront and hback as the distances from the front and back side of the target to the LoS of the transceivers, as
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:7
shown in Fig. 4. We then normalize these two distances as Fresnel front clearance uf ront = hf ront
r1 and Fresnel
back clearance uback = hback
r1 . When the front edge touches the LoS, hf ront = 0 and uf ront = 0. When the front
edge first touches the upper boundary of the FFZ, we have hf ront = −r1 and uf ront = −1. When the front edge
moves further and reaches the lower boundary, we have hf ront = r1 and uf ront = 1. Then the Fresnel-Kirchhoff
diffraction parameter vf ront can be expressed by Fresnel clearance uf ront as
vf ront = hf ront
2(d1 + d2)
λd1d2
= hf ront
√
2
r1
= √
2uf ront (2)
Thus, the signal amplitude at the receiver due to front side diffraction describes the integral of received signals
diffracted from the front side of the target to infinity, which is given as follows.
F (vf ront ) = 1 + j
2 ·
∫ ∞
vf ront
exp(
−jπz2
2 )dz (3)
Where the exp(
−jπz2
2 ) is the phase shift for a diffraction path z. Integration with respect to z from vf ront to
positive infinity cumulates all the signal path diffracted from the front side of target. Similarly, the back side
diffraction describes the integral of received signals diffracted from negative infinity to the back side of the target.
We integrate over z from negative infinity to vback to cumulate the path diffracted from the back side of target,
which is given as follows.
F (vback ) = 1 + j
2 ·
∫ vback
−∞
exp(
−jπz2
2 )dz (4)
In summary, the total diffraction gain due to the presence of a target inside the FFZ is thus given by adding the
gains of both sides
GainDif f = 20loд|F (vf ront ) + F (vback )| (5)
3.3 Signal Amplitude Variation When Target Moves Inside the FFZ
In this section, we first utilize the Fresnel diffraction model to present the theoretical analysis of the signal
amplitude variation when the target moves into the Fresnel zones. We then verify the theoretical results with our
testbed experiments.
3.3.1 Theoretical Analysis. To understand the effect on the received signal during the process when a target
moves into the FFZ, we model human body as a circular cylinder. We try two different size cylinders with a
diameter of 20 cm and 30 cm, respectively. The distance between the two Wi-Fi transceivers is set to 2 m. With
a 2 m LoS distance, the radius of FFZ is 17 cm. We simulate the process of the cylinder’s move starting from
the position -51 cm (measured from the center of gravity) away from the LoS, corresponding to a Fresnel front
clearance (uf ront ) of -2.4 (-51+10=-41 cm) and -2.12 (-51+15=-36 cm) for the two cylinders, respectively. The
cylinder stops at 3 different positions, shown in Fig. 5 (top): 1) when the front edge of the cylinder touches the LoS
(uf ront =0); 2) when the front edge reaches 34 cm (uf ront =2); and 3) when the front edge reaches 51cm (uf ront =3).
By calculating both the Fresnel front and back diffraction with Eq. 5, the received signal amplitude during the
whole process is plotted in Fig. 5 (bottom). The signal amplitude is symmetric with the center of the cylinder
located at the LoS.
If we consider a repetitive movement in which the target moves to a position, stops and then moves back to the
original position, the amplitude of the signal during the process exhibits symmetry with respect to the stopping
position. Fig. 6 shows the signal amplitude of the repetitive movements with 3 different stopping positions. We
can observe three unique patterns with different stopping positions. When the target stops at uf ront = 0 in
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:8 • F. Zhang et al.
Case 3: Front edge
reaches 51cm
Case 2: Front edge
reaches 34cm
Case 1: Front
edge reaches 0cm
(touches the LoS)
Boundary of the
First Fresnel Zone
Starting point
(a) Cylinder with a diameter of 20 cm
Case 1: Front
edge reaches 0cm
(touches the LoS)
Case 3: Front edge
reaches 51cm
Case 2: Front edge
reaches 34cm
Boundary of the
First Fresnel Zone
Starting point
(b) Cylinder with a diameter of 30 cm
Fig. 5. Signal changes with target moving.
Fig. 6a, we observe a clear single valley. When the target stops at uf ront = 2 and uf ront = 3, we can observe four
valleys in Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c, respectively. The distance between the middle two valleys increases when the target
stops at a further position inside the FFZ after the target crosses over the LoS. In Fig. 7, we show the results
when the diameter of the cylinder becomes 30 cm. We can see that although there are slight changes, the overall
patterns are still very similar to those generated with a 20 cm diameter cylinder. This property guarantees the
robustness against different human target sizes when we apply the signal amplitude patterns for activity sensing.
We summarize the properties which can be utilized for repetitive activity sensing in Section 3.4.
(a) Case 1: stop at uf ront = 0 (b) Case 2: stop at uf ront = 2 (c) Case 3: stop at uf ront = 3
Fig. 6. The cylinder with a diameter of 20cm moves inside the FFZ with repetitive motions.
(a) Case 1: stop at uf ront = 0 (b) Case 2: stop at uf ront = 2 (c) Case 3: stop at uf ront = 3
Fig. 7. The cylinder with a diameter of 30cm moves inside the FFZ with repetitive motions.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:9
3.3.2 Verification with Benchmark Experiments. We verify the Fresnel diffraction model proposed in previous
section with experiments. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 8. The two Wi-Fi transceivers are placed
2 m apart. We employ two different size cylinders as the targets which have a diameter of 20 cm and 30 cm,
respectively. The heights of cylinders are 20 cm. To generalize model verification for human size object, we utilize
a model of human body with chest width 20 cm to simulate the human repetitive activity. The cylinders and
human body model move into the FFZ repetitively with the help of a sliding track. We set the speed of the sliding
track as 13 cm/s. The antennas at the two transceivers are placed at the same height. The sliding track is aligned
to the perpendicular bisector of the transceiver pair. The central carrier frequency is 5.24 GHz and the signal
wavelength is 5.7 cm.
濆濬 濈濬
澼濩濡濕濢澔
濖濣濘濭澔
濡濣濘濙濠澔澔
濈濬
濆濬
激濣濇澱澦濡
激濣濇澱澦濡
濆濙濤濙濨濝濨濝濪濙
濡濣濪濙濡濙濢濨濧澔
濇濠濝濘濝濢濛澔濨濦濕濗濟
Fig. 8. The experimental environment and deployment of transceivers.
(a) Case 1:uf ront =0 (b) Case 2:uf ront =2 (c) Case 3:uf ront =3
Fig. 9. The signal variation due to the movement of a 20cm cylinder with Intel 5300 Wi-Fi card.
(a) Case 1:uf ront =0 (b) Case 2:uf ront =2 (c) Case 3:uf ront =3
Fig. 10. The signal variation due to the movement of the human body model with Intel 5300 Wi-Fi card.
We present the experimental results for the 20 cm cylinder with commodity Wi-Fi devices in Fig. 9. The target
starts at the position -41 cm away from the LoS and stops when the front side crosses over the LoS by 0 cm,
34 cm and 51 cm, respectively. The target then returns back to the starting point and complete a full cycle of
movement. Fig. 9 shows the signal amplitude of one movement cycle for the three stopping positions. The red
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:10 • F. Zhang et al.
lines are the smoothed signals2, while the blue lines are the raw signals. We can see that the real-life experimental
results match the theoretical plots in Fig. 6 very well. For case 1, only one valley appears as we expect. For case
2 and case 3, four valleys are clearly observed. More importantly, the first two valleys are separated from the
second two valleys with a larger distance when the cylinder moves across LoS further inside, exactly matching
the theoretical plots in Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c. The results of the larger 30 cm cylinder also match the theoretical
plots well and we skip them here. Fig. 10 shows the experimental results for human body model performing one
movement cycle inside the FFZ. The experimental results also match the theoretical plots well.
Note that we only use amplitude but not phase because the raw phases provided by commodity WiFi cards are
random, which cannot be directly used. We agree that the accurate phase information can be used for activity
recognition. With software-defined radio platform such as WARP, we can obtain both correct amplitude and
phase information to recognize activities. In the future work, we plan to utilize the amplitude and phase difference
across multiple antennas obtained from the same WiFi card to further improve the recognition accuracy.
3.4 Key Properties Obtained for Repetitive Motion Sensing
With both theoretical analysis and benchmark experiments, we summarize the unique diffraction-related properties in the FFZ which can be utilized for repetitive activity sensing as follows:
(1) When the target enters into the FFZ, the signal amplitude experiences an obvious descent process. This
leads to a unique and non-monotonous signal pattern which forms the basis of activity sensing.
(2) For a complete cycle of a repetitive movement, the signal amplitude exhibits a clear symmetry with respect
to the stopping positions.
(3) For a repetitive movement, when the target stops at different locations inside the FFZ, we observe different
signal patterns. If the stopping positions are before the LoS, one single valley is observed. After the target
crosses over the LoS, we observe multiple valleys. If the target moves further, the spacing between the
valleys increases accordingly.
4 GUIDING SYSTEM DESIGN FOR REPETITIVE ACTIVITIES
Tx
Rx
T
Data Acquisition and Pre-processing
CSI Streams
Signal Denoising
Activity Segmentation
Activity Recognition & Statistics Collection
Activity Counting
Number of Repetitions
Time Interval Derivation
Activity Duration
Activity Classification
Activity Type
Activity Evaluation
Activity quality
Fig. 11. System overview.
In this section, we design a sensing system
for repetitive activity recognition leveraging on
our proposed model in Section 3. Based on the
diffraction-related properties, our model is able to
guide the system to obtain an optimized equipment deployment, which generates the differentiable signal patterns for different activities on purpose. Without loss of generality, we use workout
activities (i.e., sit-up and push-up) as examples to
illustrate the principle.
4.1 System Overview
Our sensing system can assist users to understand
their repetitive activity status, including activity
types, activity duration, number of repetitions and
whether the activities are in proper forms. The
users can utilize the detailed statistics to achieve
more effective workouts.
2We present the denoising method in Section 4.2.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:11
As illustrated in Fig. 11, our system works in two stages: (1) data acquisition and pre-processing; (2) activity
recognition and statistics collection. In data acquisition and pre-processing stage, raw Channel State Information
(CSI) readings from commodity Wi-Fi receivers are taken as input. The raw signals are usually noisy. So we apply
carefully designed filters to smooth out the random noise. Activity recognition and statistics collection are the
core parts of our system, which contains four modules: activity classification, repetition time interval derivation,
activity counting and activity quality evaluation. Activity classification module identifies the individual exercise
activity. Repetition time interval derivation module determines the starting time and ending time of each single
activity cycle and calculates the interval accordingly. Activity counting module counts the number of repetitions.
The evaluation module assesses if the activities are performed in proper forms.
4.2 Data Acquisition and Pre-processing
To identify a repetitive activity, we start the process by collecting raw CSI readings from the commodity Wi-Fi
devices. The raw signals induced by 3 cycles of sit-up activities are noisy as shown in Fig. 12. To obtain accurate
amplitude variations for segmenting each activity, it is necessary to denoise the raw signal. We remove the
small random variations and still reserve the large signal variation caused by activity movement. We adopt the
Savitzky-Golay filter to process the raw signal. Savitzky-Golay filter (also known as least-square smoothing
filter) fits successive subset of adjacent data points with a low degree polynomial by the method of linear least
square [36]. After the filter is applied, the raw signal gets smoothed as red lines in Fig. 13. We originally have
four valleys within one cycle in the raw signal. As each two of them has a fixed small spacing, they are merged
into two valleys after filtering. Hence, we can observe two obvious valleys in each activity cycle after filtering.
Fig. 12. The raw CSI amplitudes collected from Wi-Fi
devices.
Fig. 13. The denoised CSI amplitudes with SavitzkyGolay filter.
4.3 Model Guides System Deployment and Activity Classification
In this section, we investigate how to guide the system deployment by Fresnel diffraction model. We use sit-up
and push-up as examples to demonstrate how we generate easily distinguishable signal patterns for each activity.
The intuition is that sit-up has a larger movement distance than push-up3. Based on the sensing properties, we
know that when the target stops at different positions inside the FFZ, we can obtain different signal amplitude
patterns (i.e., different number of valleys). Inspired by this observation, we can place the transceivers at a chosen
height, which makes the two activities have clear different stopping positions inside the FFZ. Consequently, we
can observe obvious amplitude pattern difference during the process of sit-up and push-up. Besides, our system
can also accurately identify other workout activities as shown in Section 5.
3The movement distance of push-up is around 20cm while sit-up is around 60cm.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:12 • F. Zhang et al.
FFZ
Tx Rx
Human
body
60cm
30cm
(a) Sit-ups
FFZ
24cm Tx Rx
30cm
Human
body
(b) Push-ups
Fig. 14. Experimental setup.
(a) Sit-ups (b) Push-ups
Fig. 15. Theoretical plots of signal amplitude variations for sit-up and push-up activities.
We employ the deployment shown in Fig. 14 as an example. The height of the antennas is set as 30cm.
The body thickness of the exerciser is 24cm. When performing sit-ups, the exerciser starts from a height of
60cm (measured from the exerciser’s shoulder) and moves until the back touches the ground. From the Fresnel
diffraction model perspective, the moving range is from [uf ront,uback ]=[-1.76, -3.17] to [uf ront,uback ]=[1.76,
0.35]. While performing push-ups, the movement distance of the exerciser is 24cm. Thus, the sit-up movement
crosses the entire FFZ, which leads to a total of four valleys. Note that the two valleys close to each other may
get merged when there is noise. To remove possible ambiguities, we deliberately apply a filter to merge the two
close-by valleys into one. We calculate the received signal variation pattern using diffraction model in Section. 3.1,
and plot the theoretical result in Fig. 15a. On the other hand, for push-up, the target only enters half of the FFZ.
Thus only two valleys can be observed as shown as in Fig. 15b. We also deliberately apply a filter to merge the
two close-by valleys into one to remove the ambiguities caused by noise. The unique signal patterns make it
possible for us to distinguish the two activities. With these signal patterns, we are able to apply the CNN-based
learning network to easily differentiate different human activities. The real-life experimental results with human
target are presented in Section 5.2.
4.4 Repetition Time Interval Derivation
Our system can derive the time interval of one complete cycle of an activity which indicates the speed of each
activity. For sit-up, the exerciser starts from sitting and moves to lying down (stops) and then gets up back to
sitting again.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:13
To acquire the starting and ending points of an activity, we find the variance of CSI amplitude is very sensitive
to target’s movements. It is observed that when there are no movements, the signal variation is quite small. The
average variance is below 0.2. On the other hand, when there are human activities inside the FFZ, we observe
much larger CSI amplitude fluctuations and the average variance increases to 2, which is 10 times larger. So the
state transition of the CSI amplitude variance is utilized as the parameter to identify the starting and ending
points of the activity. We utilize a 0.2s sliding window (40 samples) with a 50% overlay to estimate the amplitude
variance. The maximum variance when there are no activity movements is chosen as the threshold to detect
movements. Fig.16 (up) shows the raw signal amplitudes and Fig.16 (bottom) shows the calculated signal variance
for three activity cycles. The horizontal solid red line is the variance threshold. The starting and ending points
of an activity can be clearly identified. With this information, we can extract the repetition time interval and
number of activities as shown in Fig. 16.
Starting
Point
Ending
Point
Fig. 16. Obtaining the starting and ending time points for the time interval of each activity.
4.5 Assess if the Activities are Performed in Proper Forms
In this section, we show that our system can further assess the quality of the activity (whether the activity is
performed properly). Our system can check if the chest is lowered down enough for push-up and if the back is
placed to the ground before moving back to the origin for sit-up.
Taking sit-up as the example for illustration. With the same deployment setup in Section 4.3, the exerciser
performs some non-standard sit-ups. The start position of the activity is the same, but the exerciser does not
move his back to touch the ground. As shown in Fig. 17, we consider three cases: i) the body moves slightly by 25
degrees (i.e., the back touches the boundary of the FFZ, uf ront = −1, uback = −2.41); ii) the body moves by 60
degrees (i.e., the back touches the LoS, uf ront = 0, uback = −1.41) and iii) the body moves close to the ground by
75 degrees (i.e., the back touches the other side of the FFZ boundary, uf ront = 0.8, uback = −0.61). Fig. 17 shows
the theoretical signal patterns during the process of the three “non-standard” sit-ups. They are quite different
from the signal pattern obtained in a “standard sit-up”. As shown in Fig.17 (d-f), for the former two cases, the
signal patterns are significantly different from the pattern obtained from a standard sit-up. For case 3, we observe
the same number of valleys but with a much smaller spacing. This spacing between the two valleys can be used
as a metric to assess if a sit-up is performed properly. For push-up, we assess if the activity is in a proper form by
checking the amplitude change range during the process. The experimental results are presented in Section 5.4.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:14 • F. Zhang et al.
25°
(a) Case1: body moves to 25◦
60°
(b) Case2: body moves to 60◦
75°
(c) Case3: body moves to 75◦
(d) Case 1: 25◦ (e) Case 2: 60◦
Much
Smaller
Spacing
(f ) Case 3: 75◦
Fig. 17. The experimental setup and the theoretical results for three different improper sit-ups.
4.6 Recognizing Daily Activities with Fresnel Diffraction and Reflection Models
Besides recognizing repetitive activities in the FFZ, the Fresnel diffraction model can be combined with Fresnel
reflection model [37][47] to recognize daily activities accurately in a much larger sensing range. While the target
subject performs activities in the FFZ, the Fresnel diffraction model is employed to understand the received signal
variation patterns and guide the system design, while the subject performs activities outside the FFZ, the Fresnel
reflection model can be applied. In this way, either repetitive activities in the FFZ or other daily activities outside
the FFZ can be well recognized with the Fresnel models.
5 EVALUATION
To evaluate the performance of the proposed diffraction-based sensing model, we implement a proof-of-concept
prototype to detect repetitive activities using commodity Wi-Fi devices in the FFZ. We conduct comprehensive
experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed sensing model. With the model guidance, we
present the activity classification accuracy, the counting accuracy, the repetition time interval derivation, and
access if the activities are in proper form. Then we show the system performance when more human daily
activities are performed in three living environments with much larger sensing range. Finally, we evaluate the
effect of interference movement from surrounding people.
5.1 Experimental Setup
Setup 1: Our prototype system consists of one Wi-Fi transceiver pair. Each transceiver is a Gigabyte mini-PC
equipped with a cheap Intel 5300 Wi-Fi card. The receiver is equipped with three antennas running on the
5.24 GHz channel. We collect the CSI readings from the Wi-Fi card with the CSI-tool [12]. Taking the CSI readings
as input, we process the raw readings using Savitzky-Golay filter. The packet transmission rate is 200 packets
per second. We choose and place the equipments as the Fresnel diffraction model guided previously. We build a
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:15
web-based user interface to show the activities detected in real-time in Fig. 18. The demo video is provided at
link: https://youtu.be/I0BDK53djhg.
Real-time
video
Sensing signal
Control panel Activity counting
Fig. 18. Real-time system user interface.
Setup 2: To support Wi-Fi based sensing in realistic scenarios, we also employ Intel 7265 Wi-Fi card4 to
evaluate the performance of our system in multiple realistic scenarios (e.g., real home and office environment).
The existing Wi-Fi infrastructure such as a TP-link access point shown in Fig. 19a can directly communicate
with a Wi-Fi device equipped with this card and thus allow us to obtain the CSI for sensing. Intel is planning to
support exporting CSI on more Wi-Fi cards in the near future and we believe more and more commodity Wi-Fi
devices can be employed for sensing. We do not require any dedicated Wi-Fi packet transmission for sensing. The
current 802.11 Wi-Fi standard requests the AP to periodically ping the Wi-Fi device connected and these ping
packets sent out every 0.1s are enough for us to perform sensing. This ensures that our sensing task does not
require dedicated packet transmission and thus does not interrupt the ongoing data communication. Considering
a home/office environment with one Wi-Fi access point in the corner (in Fig. 19c), any Wi-Fi link between this
AP and a Wi-Fi-capable device (e.g., phone, tablet, miniPC, or laptop in Fig. 19b) can then be utilized for sensing.
We conduct experiments to recognize activities under three practical scenarios in Sections 5.6-5.8.
(a) Commodity TP-Link router (b) Wireless sensing devices (c) Scenario
Fig. 19. Wi-Fi devices and scenario
4We signed an agreement with Intel Corporate Research Council/ University Research Office (URO) and they provide us full access to Intel
7265 802.11n Wi-Fi card to extract CSI for contactless Wi-Fi sensing.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:16 • F. Zhang et al.
5.2 Overall Performance
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the overall performance of our activity recognition system.
We demonstrate our system can sense and differentiate different repetitive activities, e.g., push-up, sit-up and
walkout. Fig. 20 illustrates the schematic of these exercises.
We ask the volunteers to perform these exercises and Fig. 20 (d-f) show the signal amplitude changes during
the process. We can observe clear differences between these activities. For push-up, the signal has one obvious
valley. Sit-up and walkout have a larger scale of movement and thus cause two valleys and more. These unique
signal patterns guided by our model remove the possible ambiguities and guarantee the stable performance in
identifying each activity.
(a) Push-up (b) Sit-up (c) Walkout
(d) Push-up (e) Sit-up (f ) Walkout
Fig. 20. The signal amplitude patterns for 3 exercise activities.
We recruit eleven volunteers including two female and nine male students to perform exercise activities in
rooms of different sizes for performance evaluation. We ask the volunteers to perform 66 groups of each activity
with 5 repetitions in each group. We classify these activities using the proposed Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) method in Section 2. As shown in Fig. 21, on average, our diffraction model based method can improve
both precision and recall for activity recognition to 95% above, compared with 82% for CNN method without
model guidance.
(a) Precision (b) Recall
Fig. 21. Performance comparison between without the model guidance and with the model guidance.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:17
5.3 Measuring the Time Interval of Each Activity
We can derive the time interval of each repetition during the whole activity process. The system can know
whether the intensity level is proper and suggest the exerciser to adjust the rhythm of the exercise accordingly.
We ask the volunteers to perform sit-ups with different speeds. Fig. 22 shows the signal amplitude when a
volunteer performs sit-ups at a fast and a slow speed, respectively. The duration of each sit-up cycle is annotated
in the figure. The time interval is 1.75 seconds for fast sit-ups and 2.75 seconds for slow sit-ups. We believe this
fine-grained real-time5 information can be used as an instantaneous feedback to the user to adjust the speed and
is also useful in analyzing the whole repetitive activity process later offline.
1.75s 1.75s
(a) Fast
2.75s 2.75s 2.75s
(b) Slow
Fig. 22. Accurate time interval obtained for each exercise repetition.
5.4 Assessing if the Exercise Activities are Performed Properly
In this section, we show that the model can guide to assess quality of the activities. We consider three non-standard
forms for sit-up: i) the body moves slightly; ii) the body moves to 60 degree; and iii) the body moves close to
the ground at 75 degree. Fig. 23 shows the signal patterns of the 3 cases, respectively. The real-life experimental
results match the theoretical plots shown in Fig.17. For case 1, we observe very small signal amplitude variations
as the target hardly gets into the FFZ. When the volunteer moves to 60 degree, his back reaches the LoS and
blocks half of the FFZ. We can observe clear valleys and the single valley indicates it is not performed properly.
If the volunteer moves close to the ground, we observe double valleys, indicating the activity is close to the
standard. However, based on the spacing between the valleys, we can still know it is not in a perfect form.
(a) Case1 (b) Case2 (c) Case3
Fig. 23. The signal amplitude patterns obtained with three different non-standard forms of sit-ups.
5The system latency is below 0.5 second from the time stamp when the CSI readings are collected to the time stamp when monitoring outputs
are obtained.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:18 • F. Zhang et al.
(a) Non-standard (b) Standard
Fig. 24. The amplitude variations are significantly different between non-standard and standard push-ups.
Fig. 24 shows the signal pattern of non-standard push-up compared with the standard one. Here the nonstandard (not in a proper form) push-up is defined as a push-up with less than 10 cm body movement while the
standard one requires around a 20 cm body movement. We can observe that the non-standard push-up has a much
smaller amplitude variation range compared to the standard one. We can accurately identify the non-standard
push-ups by checking if the variation range is smaller than the threshold empirically obtained.
δaεMountain climber δbεPlank hold δcεLunge
δdεLeg lift with hip raise δeεWalking δfεSitting
Fig. 25. The signal amplitude patterns for additional 6 activities.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:19
5.5 Extending to More Activities
Now we increase the number of activities to 9 by considering 4 more exercise activities (i.e., mountain climber,
plank hold, lunge, leg lift with hip raise), and 2 daily activities (walking and sitting) shown in Fig. 25. We evaluate
the system in three different environments, i.e., home, office, and lobby. For each environment, 20 volunteers are
asked to perform the 9 activities with 5 repetitions. We obtain a total of 2700 (3 × 20 × 9 × 5) activity traces. We
employ leave-one-out cross-validation to comprehensively test all the samples in the dataset. To increase the
recognition accuracy, we concatenate the CSI amplitude of three antennas as input data. Then we also apply the
CNN-based learning network to classify the activities. Fig. 26 shows the confusion matrix of differentiating the 9
activities. The achieved average recognition accuracy is 92.1%.
Activities Push
-up
Situp
Walkout
Mountain
climber
Plank
hold
Lunge Leg lift with
hip raise
Walking Sitting
Push-up 濃濁濌濉澳 濃 濃濁濃濄 濃濁濃濄澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濄澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濄
Sit-up 濃 濃濁濌濌澳 濃濁濃濄 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳
Walkout 濃濁濃濄澳 濃 濃濁濋濉 濃濁濃濄澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濌 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濆
Mountain
climber
濃 濃 濃濁濃濇 濃濁濋濇澳 濃濁濃濆 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濈澳 濃濁濃濇
Plank hold 濃 濃 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濌濇 濃澳 濃濁濃濈澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濄
Lunge 濃 濃 濃濁濃濇 濃濁濃濄澳 濃澳 濃濁濋濋 濃澳 濃濁濃濈澳 濃濁濃濅
Leg lift with
hip raise
濃 濃 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濆 濃澳 濃濁濌濉澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濄
Walking 濃 濃 濃濁濃濌 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濌濄澳 濃澳
Sitting 濃 濃濁濃濄澳 濃濁濃濅 濃濁濃濄澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濄 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濌濈
Fig. 26. Confusion matrix of differentiating 9 activities
in FFZ.
Activities Push
-up
Situp
Walkout
Mountain
climber
Plank
hold
Lunge Leg lift with
hip raise
Walking Sitting
Push-up 濃濁濌濅澳 濃濁濃濉澳 濃濁濃濅 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳
Sit-up 濃濁濄濉澳 濃濁濋濃澳 濃濁濃濇 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳
Walkout 濃濁濃濅澳 濃濁濃濈澳 濃濁濋濅 濃澳 濃濁濃濅 濃濁濃濌 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳
Mountain
climber
濃 濃濁濃濅澳 濃澳 濃濁濉濌澳 濃濁濃濊 濃濁濃濊 濃濁濃濅澳 濃澳 濃濁濄濆
Plank hold 濃 濃濁濃濈澳 濃濁濃濌 濃濁濃濌澳 濃濁濉濋 濃濁濃濌 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳
Lunge 濃 濃 濃濁濃濋 濃濁濃濅澳 濃澳 濃濁濌濃 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳
Leg lift with
hip raise
濃 濃 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濌濉澳 濃濁濃濅澳 濃濁濃濅
Walking 濃 濃 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濋濇澳 濃濁濄濉
Sitting 濃 濃 濃澳 濃濁濃濄澳 濃澳 濃澳 濃濁濃濅澳 濃濁濃濌澳 濃濁濋濋
Fig. 27. Confusion matrix of differentiating 9 activities
outside FFZ.
5.6 Increasing the Sensing Range
The FFZ is a relatively small region and in this section, we show how to extend the sensing range so the target has
a larger movement area and can perform activities in a more flexible manner. First, we do not restrict the target
to be within the FFZ. When the target is located outside FFZ, the reflection dominates. The existing work [37]
employs Fresnel reflection model for sensing and we can thus utilize Fresnel reflection for sensing outside of
FFZ while in the FFZ, we employ the model proposed in this work. We conduct experiments when the target
performs activities away from the LoS (outside of FFZ) shown in Fig. 28. We present the confusion matrix of
recognition accuracy in Fig. 27. The average recognition accuracy achieved is 83.2%. This accuracy is slightly
lower than that when the target is inside FFZ which has larger induced signal variations.
Second, we show that we can further enlarge the sensing range by increasing the LoS distance between the
transmitter and receiver. From our experiments, we found that even when the LoS distance is 5 meters, our
system can still recognize the preformed activities at high accuracies. We keep the LoS distance as 5m and move
the target away from one of the transceivers to the other from 1m to 4m at a step size of 0.5m. The experiment
setup is shown in Fig. 29. While the target performs the sit-up activity at different positions, we present the
resulted sensing signals in Fig. 30. We find that the sensing signals exhibit similar pattern for the same activity
even the target is at different positions. We can thus conclude that the similar patterns ensure the flexibility of
target’s position inside FFZ.
5.7 Impact of Interference of Surrounding Environment
We study the effect of interference from other persons in the same environment (e.g., the people walking around).
We ask people to walk near to the exerciser, and even walk across the LoS to see the impact on our system. We
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:20 • F. Zhang et al.
7[
5[
/R6 P
P
Fig. 28. The target performs activities away from
LoS
/R6 P
7[
5[
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 29. The target performs activity at different positions in
FFZ
(a) 1m (b) 1.5m (c) 2m (d) 2.5m (e) 3m (f) 3.5m (g) 4m
Fig. 30. The signals of sit-up activity at 7 positions
observe that other people’s irregular movements around the target cause small scale noise on the signal as shown
in Fig. 31a. These small scale signal variations can be easily filtered out with Savitzky-Golay filter shown in
Fig. 31b. Thus our system is robust against the interference from other people’s movements.
(a) Raw CSI with interference (b) Filtered CSI with interference removed
Fig. 31. The impact of interference from other persons.
6 RELATED WORK
This work is broadly related to literature in three areas: exercise monitoring, commodity Wi-Fi based activity
recognition systems, and Fresnel model based human sensing.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
Towards a Diffraction-based Sensing Approach on Human Activity Recognition • 33:21
6.1 Exercise Monitoring
Existing work on physical exercise monitoring include solutions using wearable sensors [6][27] [11][5][2][1] [9],
smart phones [13][30], RFID[7] and cameras[57][35]. Consolvo et al. [6] propose to infer the body movement
via an on-body sensor to encourage individual’s training. Chang et al. [5] track exercises by incorporating an
accelerometer into a workout glove. Mortazavi et al. [27] investigate the use of an accelerometer and a gyroscope in
smartwatch to count the repetitions of exercises. FitCoach [11] takes one step further by utilizing wearable devices
to provide fine-grained tracking of workout and offers exercise review and guidance to improve fitness experience.
By using the embedded sensors in smartphone, Hao et al. [13] monitor running by measuring breathing and
strides, Pernek et al.[30] manage to detect individual resistance training repetitions. By attaching cheap RFID tags
on the dumbbells, Ding et al. [7] propose to recognize various free-weight activities. While all these systems rely
on dedicated hardware to be attached to the target for exercise monitoring, it is apparently preferable not to wear
anything during exercises. To this end, camera-based systems have long been used to recognize exercises [57],
however severe privacy concerns raised and strict lighting requirements limit their wide adoption in home
environments. Different from the above solutions, this paper proposes the contactless commodity Wi-Fi based
exercise monitoring system, which shows clear advantages in terms of cost and convenience.
6.2 Commodity Wi-Fi Based Activity Recognition Systems
In recent years, with the availability of CSI readings from commodity Wi-Fi devices, significant progresses have
been made for device-free sensing, ranging from coarse-grained human tracking [21][31][20][22], human activity
recognition [43][39][42][19], to fine-grained vital sign monitoring [24][34][54][29]. Most of these work leverage
the signal features and employ machine learning techniques [39][10][17][31][18][8] for classification. RT-Fall [39]
automatically segments the fall-like activities from the daily activity CSI stream and accurately detects the fall
using a set of selected features. CARM [45] extracts speed-related features from CSI readings and employs Hidden
Markov Model(HMM) to recognize several human activities in indoor environment. WiDriver [8] employs BP
neural network algorithm to estimate driving actions with CSI amplitude variation data. E-eyes [43] exploits
subcarriers of CSI to recognize household activities such as washing dishes and taking a shower. WiFinger [18]
further designs a series of signal processing techniques to recognize finger gestures. SEARE [48] proposes to
recognize various exercise activity recognition using commercial Wi-Fi devices. While all the activity recognition
work relies on the training data samples and selected features, they can not explain the relation between the
deployment condition, human activities and the signal patterns. Different from the purely training-based approach,
this paper proposes to leverage the Fresnel diffraction model to clearly understand the principle behind sensing
effects and guide the activity sensing explicitly.
6.3 Fresnel Zone Model Based Wireless Sensing
Fresnel diffraction model was first introduced for Wi-Fi based device-free localization by Rampa et al. [33] [23] in
which they derive a relationship between one’s position and the received signal strength. Wang et al. [40] further
exploit the Fresnel diffraction model to achieve 0.5 meter localization accuracy using Wi-Fi CSI when the subject
is in FFZ. Outside FFZ they employ the path loss model to achieve an average localization accuracy of 1.1 meter.
In addition to the above mentioned localization work, Zhang et al. [56] [28] develops the one-side and two-sides
Fresnel diffraction model and applied for fine-grained human respiration monitoring.
The first work on human activity sensing leveraging Fresnel refection model was proposed by Wu et al. [47]
and Wang et al. [37]. Both works deal with the case when a subject is outside the FFZ. While Wu et al. [47] utilize
the Fresnel reflection model to detect the human walking direction at a median error of less than 10 degrees,
Wang et al. [37] apply the Fresnel reflection model for human respiration sensing and reveal that the detectability
of human respiration not only depends on the selection of subcarrier, but also one’s location and orientation.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 33. Publication date: March 2019.
33:22 • F. Zhang et al.
Zhang et al. [55] further summarize the properties of Fresnel reflection model for human sensing and derive
the sensing limit of Wi-Fi signals. As for the recent work, Wang et. al. [38] study the impact of static multipath
on the Fresnel zone model and employ the phase difference among multiple subcarriers of the Wi-Fi signal to
achieve decimeter-scale indoor localization accuracy, Wu et al. [46] classify the wireless sensing methods into
two categories: machine learning-based and model-based solutions. Yang et. al. [51] apply the Fresnel reflection
model for multiple persons’ respiration detection and Xin et. al. [50] employ it for human presence estimation.
However, all the above human sensing work was only based on the Fresnel reflection model, focusing on the
scenarios where the target is outside the FFZ. They did not investigate the scenarios when the target is within
the FFZ. Furthermore, none of the work have tried to employ Fresnel diffraction model for coarse-grained human
repetitive activity sensing.
Different from all the existing work, we utilize the diffraction effects of RF signals in the FFZ to reveal the
reason of unstable performance behind the ML-based methods. We then apply the Fresnel diffraction model to
accurately quantify the relationship between the target’s movement inside the FFZ and the amplitude change of
the received signal. We further develop the Fresnel diffraction based model to guide the repetitive activity sensing
and combine it with the ML-based method to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed Fresnel model and
the model guided ML-based human activity sensing method.
7 CONCLUSION
This paper first investigates the performance of existing machine learning methods used in wireless sensing,
and discovers that signal pattern inconsistency induced by human activities makes the sensing system unstable.
Motivated by our recent study on Fresnel zone model, we propose a diffraction-based sensing model to establish
a quantitative relationship between signal variation and target’s activity. We analyze the proposed model
theoretically, and apply this model to detect nine diverse activities, including seven body workouts. We build
a proof-of-concept prototype to validate and benchmark our system. The proposed model can be applied into
many other activities, and can be also used to improve the performance of existing machine learning systems.
For our future work, we intend to apply the proposed method to recognize other fine-grained and coarse-grained
daily activities.