We introduce the concept of local spanners for planar point sets with respect to a family of regions, and prove the existence of local spanners of small size for some families. For a geometric graph G on a point set  and a region R belonging to a family , we define  to be the part of the graph G that is inside R (or is induced by R). A local t-spanner w.r.t  is a geometric graph G on  such that for any region , the graph  is a t-spanner for , where  is the complete geometric graph on P. For any set  of n points and any constant , we prove that  admits local -spanners of sizes 
 and  w.r.t axis-parallel squares and vertical slabs, respectively. If adding Steiner points is allowed, then local -spanners with O(n) edges and 
 edges can be obtained for axis-parallel squares and disks using O(n) Steiner points, respectively.

Introduction
Background
A geometric network on a point set  in 
 is an undirected graph  with vertex set P whose edges are straight-line segments connecting pairs of points in . Geometric networks offer a way to model many real-life networks such as water distribution, road networks and telephone services.

When designing a network for a point set , distances play a vital role in many applications. It would be ideal to have a direct connection between every pair of points. The network would then be a complete graph, but in most applications, this is unacceptable due to its high cost. This leads to the concept of spanners introduced by Peleg and Schaffer [10] in the context of distributed computing and by Chew [5] in a geometric context.

Let  be a weighted undirected graph and  be a real number. The subgraph 
 of H is a t-spanner if for any two vertices p, q of H, we have 
 where 
 and 
 denote the length of the shortest path between p and q on G and H, respectively (any path in G from p to q whose length is at most 
 is called a t-path). The dilation or stretch factor s is the minimum t for which G is a t-spanner of H. In this paper, we are interested in spanners in a geometric context. Here, a geometric network  is a geometric t-spanner of , where  is the complete geometric network on . Precisely, for any two vertices p, q of  we have 
 where |pq| denotes the Euclidean distance of p and q. Geometric spanners have received much attention over the past three decades and numerous papers on geometric spanners have been published—see for instance the surveys [8, 11] and the book devoted to geometric spanners [9].

Problem Statement
Suppose one would like to design a road network on a continent that is a -spanner. Locally, each country of the continent would like that the part of the road network inside the country is a -spanner as exiting and entering a country usually is time and money consuming. This can be simply extended to provinces in a country or divisions in a city. This leads us to define local spanners in an abstract way. Let  be a family of regions in the plane. For a region  and a geometric graph G(P, E) on a point set  in the plane, we define  to be the part of G that is inside R, i.e. the induced subgraph of G over the vertices in —see Fig. 1. A -spanner G is local w.r.t. a family  of regions if and only if for any region , the graph  is a -spanner for , where  is the complete geometric network on . Indeed, we want G not only to be a -spanner globally but also to be a -spanner locally when G is cut by an arbitrary region R. Ideally, we would like to have a geometric spanner with such a property w.r.t. any convex or non-convex regions while having few number of edges. Unfortunately, this is not possible for any family of regions (we give some examples later). Therefore, we restrict ourselves to some basic families of regions like disks or squares.

Fig. 1
figure 1
a A geometric network G and a region R, b , c 

Full size image

For some families of regions, G must have 
 edges to be local. The family of axis-parallel rectangles is such a family. As depicted in Fig. 2, there are 
 different rectangles containing just two points. Therefore, these pairs of points must be connected in G—note that this works also for fat rectangles by taking the two lines containing the points further apart; so fatness does not help. In this paper, we focus on some specific families, namely vertical slabs (i.e.  for some a and b), axis-parallel squares and disks, and present local -spanners for them with near-linear sizes.

Fig. 2
figure 2
A configuration of points for which any local -spanner w.r.t. rectangles needs 
 edges

Full size image

We shall also consider the case where we are allowed to add Steiner points to the graph. In other words, instead of constructing a geometric network for , we are allowed to construct a network for  for some set Q of Steiner points. In this case, we only require short connections between the points in . Thus, we say that a graph G on  is a local Steiner t-spanner for  w.r.t.  if, for any  and any two points , the distance between u and v in  is at most t times their distance in .

Previous Work
Abam et al. [1] presented a region-fault tolerant -spanner G of size  for a point set  w.r.t. convex regions, i.e. for any convex region R the graph  (what remains of G after the vertices and edges of G intersecting R have been removed) is a -spanner for . Here, for points p and q the edge  may not exist in , and indeed the length of the shortest path from p to q in  is guaranteed to be at most  times the length of the shortest path from p to q in  . When convex regions are half planes,  is a complete graph on the remaining points. Therefore, this problem is the inverse of the local spanner problem, and we already have -local spanner of size  for the familly of halfplanes.

Our Results
In Sect. 2, we present a general method to convert an s-well-separated pairs decomposition (WSPD) [4] for P and s (depending on t) into a local t-spanner for  w.r.t. the family . In Sect. 3, we construct a local -spanner of size  for vertical slabs, and moreover, we show any local -spanner w.r.t. vertical slabs needs  edges even if we are allowed to use Steiner points. In Sect. 4, we consider axis-parallel square regions and show it is possible to construct a local -spanner of size 
. Moreover, we show that if Steiner points are allowed, we can reduce the number of edges to be O(n). We dedicate Sect. 5 to disk regions and show that by adding O(n) Steiner points, we can construct a local -spanner of size 
.

Constructing Local Spanners Using WSPD
In this section, we show a general method to obtain a local spanner from a well-separated-pair decomposition of a point set  defined below.

Definition 1
[4] Let  be a set of n points in the plane and let  be a real number. Two point sets A and B in the plane are well-separated w.r.t. s, if there are two disjoint disks of the same radius that each of them covers their respective point set and their distance is at least s times of their radius. A well-separated pair decomposition (WSPD) for  w.r.t. s (called s-WSPD) is a collection 
 of pairs of non-empty subsets of  such that

1.
 and 
 are well-separated w.r.t. s, for all .

2.
for any two distinct points p and q of , there is exactly one pair 
, such that (i) 
 and 
, or (ii) 
 and 
.

The number of pairs, m, is called the size of the WSPD. Callahan and Kosaraju show that any set  admits a WSPD of size 
.

The Spanner Construction Based on the WSPD [4]
We first construct an s-WSPD for , and then for each pair 
 of the WSPD, we add an edge to the spanner G from an arbitrary point of 
 to an arbitrary point of 
. It was shown that G is a -spanner. The standard proof is based on induction on the distances of the pairs of points. As the basis step, it was shown that the closest pair always exists in G. In the inductive step, to show that there is a -path from p to q in G assuming |pq| is the kth smallest distance, consider the pair 
 of the WSPD where 
 and 
 or vice versa. Assume 
 ans 
. We know that there is an edge connecting one point of 
 to one point of 
 in G; let 
 be such an edge (
 and 
). Both 
 and 
 are known to be smaller than |pq| due to the properties of the WSPD. Therefore, there is a -path from p (q) to 
 (
) based on the inductive hypothesis. It was shown that these two -paths together with edge 
 provides a -path from p to q in G. Hence, if we guarantee that G contains an edge per pair of an -WSPD, G is indeed a -spanner. As we use this fact in all our spanner constructions, we state it in the following corollary.

Corollary 1
If a graph G(P, E) contains an edge per pair of an -WSPD of a point set P, then G is a -spanner for P.

In the above construction, G might not be local. Indeed, even though for a region , the sets 
 and 
 might not be empty, the selected edge for pair 
 might not exist in R. Therefore, we can not apply the standard proof to show the subgraph of G induced by R is a -spanner.

The General Method
We first construct an s-WSPD for , and then for each pair 
 of the s-WSPD, we do as follows. For each pair (p, q) where 
 and 
, we add  to the spanner G provided that there is a region  that interiorly contains no points of 
 and has p and q on its boundary.

The general method may add several edges per pair 
 of the s-WSPD to the spanner G. So, we can not simply say that the size of G is the number of the pairs of the s-WSPD, and indeed there are examples of region families (like rectangles) such that the size of G becomes 
.

For the families of axis-parallel squares and disks, the number of edges added to the spanner for a pair 
 is 
 under the general position assumption. Indeed, a subset of the edges of the Delaunay graph w.r.t. disks and axis-parallel squares on point set 
 is added to G, which is known to be linear [3]. So, G has 
 edges where sum is over all pairs of the s-WSPD. Therefore, we get the following theorem.

Theorem 1
For a set  of n points in the plane and families of axis-parallel squares and disks, we can construct a local -spanner of size 
 where 
 are the pairs of a -WSPD.

Proof
We explain the proof for disks. The proof for axis-parallel squares is similar. Assume 
 is a -WSPD over point set , and  is a disk. We have already proved that the size of G is 
. It remains to show that G is local. It is easy to see 
 is a -WSPD for . Moreover, our construction (explained above) guarantees that for each pair 
, there is at least one edge between two sets 
 and 
 in G provided that both sets 
 and 
 are not empty. To show this, shrink R (while fixing its center) until one of 
 and 
 has only one point and the other has at least one point (assume
 has only one point and name this point p). Now shrink R by moving its center toward p until 
 contains only one point, say q. In the general method, we add  to the spanner G. Now, based on Corollary 1, the subgraph of G induced by R is a -spanner. □

Local Spanners w.r.t. Vertical Slabs
For arbitrary oriented slabs (not necessarily vertical), there is an example (Fig. 3a) showing that we need 
 edges to have a local spanner—in fact, any set of points in general position could be an example for this claim because any edge of the complete graph can introduce a narrow slab which contains only its two endpoints. Hence, we only focus on vertical slabs (i.e.  for some a and b). We present two methods similar to the general method presented in the previous section.

Fig. 3
figure 3
a For points on convex position, any local t-spanner w.r.t. arbitrary oriented slabs must be complete. b The first local-spanner construction w.r.t. vertical slabs

Full size image

First Construction
Our first construction uses a -WSPD 
 of size 
 which is bounded by  [9]. We apply the general method given in Sect. 2 using such a WSPD. Assume 
 is a pair of -WSPD and 
. Imagine the sorted list of the points in 
 based on their x-coordinate. Each point p of 
 is connected to at most two points of 
: the leftmost point of 
 right to p and the rightmost of 
 left to p in the sorted list—see Fig. 3b. Hence, the number of edges added to the spanner G is at most 
.

Theorem 2
For a set  of n points in the plane and any , there exists a local -spanner of size  w.r.t. vertical slabs.

Proof
The proof is similar to one given for Theorem 1. Assume 
 is a -WSPD over point set , and  is a vertical slab. We have already proved that the size of G is 
. It remains to show that G is local. It is easy to see 
 is a -WSPD for . Moreover, our construction guarantees that for each pair 
, there is at least one edge between two sets 
 and 
 in G provided that both sets 
 and 
 are not empty. To show this, consider the sorted list of points in 
 based on their x-coordinate. Since both sets 
 and 
 are not empty, there must be two consecutive points in the sorted list, say p and q, such that 
 and 
. Since there is a vertical slab just containing p and q among point in 
, there is an edge connecting p to q in G. Now, based on Corollary 1, the subgraph of G induced by R is a -spanner. □

Second Construction
Our other construction uses an x-monotone WSPD defined below.

Definition 2
A WSPD 
 is called x-monotone if for all i, 
, and 
, we have  where x(p) denotes the x-coordinate of p.

Theorem 3
For a set  of n points in the plane and any , there exists an x-monotone s-WSPD of size (the number of pairs) 
.

Proof
We construct a balanced binary search tree over P based on the x-coordinates of points. At each node w of the tree with children u and v, we construct an s-WSPD of size 
 separating P(u) and P(v) where P(w) denotes the set of points lying at the subtree rooted at w. Indeed at node w we can construct a compressed quad-tree [7] on P(w) such that at the root of the quad-tree, the vertical spiliting line  passes through the x-median of P(w). From all produced pairs, we keep only pairs (A, B) such that A and B are at different sides of . In total, we construct O(n) compreseed quad-tree (one for each node w of the balanced binary search tree and produce 
 pairs). Therefore, the number of pairs in total becomes 
 by a simple recursive formula.□

When an x-monotone -WSPD of size  is available (no matter how it is constructed), we can easily construct a local -spanner as follows. For any pair (A, B) of the WSPD, we add an edge between the rightmost point (based on x-coordinates) of A and the leftmost point of B. Since the number of pairs is , the number of edges added to the spanner is . Moreover, for each slab R, if  and  are not be empty, the edge added to the spanner (coming from the pair (A, B)) exists in R. Therefore, based on Corollary 1 our spanner is a local -spanner. Also, it is easy to show that there is an x-monotone -path between any two points as we use an x-monotone WSPD in our construction.

Theorem 4
For a set  of n points in the plane and any , there exists a local -spanner of size  w.r.t. vertical slabs in which there exists an x-monotone -path between any two points.

Next, we show that any local -spanner w.r.t. vertical slabs needs  edges even if we are allowed to use Steiner points. To this end, we define a set  of n points recursively as follows. Consider two disks 
 and 
 of radius r (for some positive number r) whose centers have the same x-coordinate and 
 (their distance) is more than —see Fig. 4. Let points in 
 be indexed in the sorted order of their x-coordinates. We put all 
 into 
 and all 
 into 
. Consider a horizontal line  of distance  from 
 and 
. We will show there should be at least  edges in the spanner that intersect  and they can not be a part of a -path for any two points inside 
 or any two points inside 
. Consider a slab 
 whose left and right sides are passing through 
 and 
, respectively (). 
 contains just points 
 and 
 from P, but it may contain some Steiner points. There should be a path from 
 to 
 inside 
. This path definitely intersects  at some point inside 
. Let the edge of the path intersecting  be called 
. As 
s are disjoint for even i (even they do not have a common boundary), 
s are distinct. Hence, we have  distinct edges that are only used in -paths whose endpoints are at different sides of . These  edges can not be used on -paths whose endpoints are on the same side of . Otherwise, the length of the path is more than  (note that the distance of  to 
 and 
 is ), which is more than  times their Euclidean distance, which is at most 2r. If we recursively organize points in 
 and 
, by a simple recursive function, we can conclude that the number of edges is .

Fig. 4
figure 4
A lower-bound example for local spanners w.r.t. vertical slabs

Full size image

Theorem 5
For any , there is a set  of n points in the plane such that any local -spanner w.r.t. vertical slabs needs  edges even if Steiner points are allowed to be used.

We recall that if an x-monotone WSPD of size m is available (no matter how it is constructed), we can construct a local -spanner of size m for vertical slabs. This together Theorem 5 gives us the following corollary.

Corollary 2
In the worst case, any x-monotone WSPD has  pairs.

Local Spanners w.r.t. Squares
For arbitrary squares (not necessarily axis-parallel), there is an example showing that we may need 
 edges to have a local spanner—see Fig. 5. Hence, we only focus on axis-parallel squares.

Fig. 5
figure 5
If points are the vertices of a regular polygon, any local -spanner w.r.t. arbitrary square must contain 
 edges

Full size image

We start with the case where we are allowed to use Steiner points. We use the general method given in Sect. 2, and add a set Q of Steiner points to  such that  for any pair (A, B) in the WSPD where E(A, B) is the set of edges added to the spanner for pair (A, B).

We exploit the idea used in [1] to design region-fault tolerant spanners with Steiner points. We construct a compressed quadtree  for  [7]. For each internal node v of , let 
 and  be the associated square with v and the subset of points from  inside 
, respectively. The set Q of Steiner points is the corner points of 
 for all internal nodes of . Since the compressed quadtree has at most  nodes, the set Q has size at most .

Now consider 
 
 as a compressed quadtree for 
 
 and let v be an internal node of 
 
. It was shown [1] that if the convex hull of 
 
 (denoted by 
 
) contains more than one member, it is either a square or a kite, both depicted in Fig. 6a. We call the vertices of 
 
, the representative points of v. The representative point of a leaf node v is the single point inside 
.

Fisher and Har-Peled [7] show that one can obtain an s-WSPD of size 
 for 
 
 that consists of pairs 
 where 
 and 
 are nodes in 
 
. We set  and construct the WSPD. Then, we add all edges  to the spanner G where p and q are the representative point of 
 and 
, respectively. We only need the following lemma to show the dilation of the spanner is .

Lemma 1
Suppose R is an axis-parallel square region and (A, B) is a pair of the WSPD for 
 
. If  and  are not empty, there must be an edge of G inside R connecting a point of A to a point of B.

Proof
Assume 
 and 
 for some nodes 
 and 
 of the 
 
. We only need to show that at least one representative point of 
 (
) is in R. If the square 
 contains one point from 
 
, then that member is a representative point. Otherwise, representative points of 
 are the vertices of a square or a kite, denoted by xyzw. Since R intersects 
 and 
, and , it is clear that R is larger than 
 and 
. We distinguish two cases:

xyzw is a square: since xyzw is smaller than R and intersects R, then at least one of x, y, z or w must be inside R.

xyzw is a kite: let x be the vertex whose incident angle is smaller than . It was shown in [1] that 
 is a square; denoted by tyzw. As R is larger than 
 (and therefore is larger than the square tyzw) and its sides are parallel to the axes, it is easy to see that it can not happen that t is inside R and x, y, z and w are outside R.

□

Fig. 6
figure 6
a  show Steiner points and  show member of P, b the closest point to p is outside the square R

Full size image

Putting all this together, we get the following theorem.

Theorem 6
For any set  of n points in the plane, and any , one can construct a local Steiner -spanner of size O(n) w.r.t. axis-parallel squares by adding at most  Steiner points.

Next, we focus our attention to constructing local spanners without Steiner points. Our spanner construction is based on the -graph approach [6], sketched below. Let  be a suitably small (depending on ) constant. Now let  be a collection of  interior-disjoint cones, each with their apex at the origin and angle  (we can select  such that  is integer), that together cover 
. For a cone  and a point 
, let  denote the translated copy of  whose apex coincides with p. The -graph G for  is now constructed by adding at most  edges for each point  to G. Namely, for each cone , p is connected to the point  whose projection to the bisector of  is closest to p. The -graph G may not be local. Imagine a square R whose intersection with  contains several points but the closest point to p is outside R—see Fig. 6b. Therefore, it is not possible to apply the standard proof for -graph to show  is a -spanner. To resolve this problem, we need to add extra edges to G.

We first define the set  more carefully. Consider the x and y axes and the lines  and . They divide the plane into eight cones of angle . We divide each cone of angle  above the x-axis into cones of angle  (we can select  such that  is integer). We reflect each cone  of angle  about the origin to get 
 
.  is the set of all these cones  and 
 
 of angle  that altogether cover the plane. We put all cones of  incident to the lines  or  into set 
. Clearly, 
. We treat the cones in 
 in a different way to the cones in 
.

We use the 
 distance to determine the closest point in the -graph construction. To prove that the -graph produced in this manner is a -spanner, we can use the following lemma.

Lemma 2
Let  be the collection of -cones defined above, where  is an angle satisfying both  and . Let  be a cone, and let q and r be two points in  such that 
 (see Fig. 7). Then


 

Fig. 7
figure 7
Illustration for Lemma 2

Full size image

Proof
We distinguish two cases:

(i)
: Because |pq| is the longest edge in the triangle pqr, we have


 

Hence,


 

because,

(ii)
: Since , then . On the other hand, since 
, we have . Moreover, since the segments pq and pr are inside , we have . Finally, from  and  it follows that


 

Therefore,


 

Then to prove the lemma, we just need to show that . This inequality is equivalent to  which proves our claim. □

Lemma 2 implies that concatenating the edge pr to a -path from r to q yields a -path from p to q. This can be used to show, by induction, that if we connect every point p to the closest point (in the 
 norm) in each of its cones, we get indeed a -spanner.

Let p and q be two arbitrary points of  and let R be a square containing p and q. We can simply shrink R to get a square R(p, q) such that p and q lie in opposite sides of R(p, q). It is sufficient to show that there is a -path from p to q inside R(p, q). From now on, without loss of generality, we assume p and q are on the horizontal sides of R(p, q), and , and .

Let  be a cone of  such that . If  is a triangle, we can apply the standard induction proof using Lemma 2 as the closest point inside  to p is definitely inside R(p, q). This is valid as well when 
 
 is a triangle. The following lemma shows when one of  and 
 
 is a triangle.

Lemma 3
If 
, then one of  and 
 
 is a triangle.

Proof
If  is a triangle, we are done. Otherwise,  contains a corner of R(p, q). We translate R(p, q) to get a square 
 such that one of its corners is p. Let’s denote 
 and 
 by 
 and 
, respectively—see Fig. 8 for this and the other notations. To prove the lemma, we just need to show that 
 where  is the side length of R(p, q) and 
 is the right-bottom corner of R(p, q). We know 
 as 
 is parallel to 
. Let 
. Since 
 and p is the corner of 
, the triangle 
 is inside 
. Moreover, it is clear that 
. We bound 
 as follows


 

Hence, 
 lies in R(p, q) and thus the intersection of R(p, q) and 
 
 is a triangle. □

Fig. 8
figure 8
The illustration for the proof of Lemma 3 (
 is shown by dashed lines)

Full size image

This lemma shows the standard induction proof may not work only when p and q are close to the corners of R(p, q) or precisely 
—see Fig. 9a. This forces us to add extra edges to the -graph G to keep it local. Let 
 be a member of 
 and let r be the closest point to p inside 
. For points inside the gray region depicted in Fig. 9b (denoted by 
), we can not apply the standard induction proof. Indeed, if 
, it is possible r being outside R(p, q). Note that 
 is a right triangle whose hypotenuse lies on the side of 
 not being parallel to the lines  or , and whose legs are parallel to the x and y axes and coincide at r. For two points p, q in P with  and , we call (p, q) a bad pair if 
 and 
 
. Next, we show that we can decompose bad pairs using separated-pair decomposition technique with almost linear total weight.

Fig. 9
figure 9
a If p and q are close to the corners of R(p, q),  and 
 may not be a triangle. b 
 and 

Full size image

Definition 3
Let  be a set of points in the plane and 
. A pair decomposition of bad pairs of  with respect to 
 is a collection 
 of pairs of subsets P such that

For every two points  such that 
 and 
 
, there is a unique pair 
 such that 
 and 
.

For any pair 
 and every two points 
 and 
, we have 
 and 
 

The following lemma shows there is a 
 whose total weight (i.e. 
) is almost linear.

Lemma 4
For any set  of n points in the plane, 
, and any constant , there is a pair decomposition of bad pairs 
 such that 
. Moreover, if we set  such that , we have 
 where d(A, B) denotes the distance of two sets A and B, and  is the radius of the smallest enclosing disk of set A.

Proof
We can obtain a pair decomposition of bad pairs in a fairly standard manner, using range-searching techniques. Next, we explain this.

We construct a three-level range tree 
 over points  where levels correspond to the x-axis, the y-axis and the direction perpendicular to the side of 
 not being parallel to the lines  or . For any , points inside  can be reported as the union of 
 disjoint canonical subsets P(v) where v is a node at the third level of 
, and P(v) is the subset of  stored at the subtree rooted at v. Moreover, any point of  appears in 
 canonical subsets P(v). Now, fix a node v at the third level of 
 and assume . We put a point  into set A provided that B is one of the canonical subsets when reporting .

Consider all such a pair (A, B). It is clear that 
 as each point appears in 
 canonical subsets and points inside 
 can be seen as 
 canonical subsets. Now, fix such a pair (A, B). For any two points  and , we know that 
 but p is not necessarily in 
 
.

Therefore, we use the same technique, using a three-level range tree 
 
 over set A, and produce pairs 
 with 
 such that for any two points 
 and 
, we have 
 and 
 
. Since 
, the total weight becomes 
.

To prove the second claim, let (p, q) be the closest pair such that 
 and 
 where 
 is a member of a pair decomposition of bad pairs. Based on the definition of the pair decomposition of bad pairs, 
 and 
 are placed on 
 and 
 
, respectively. So, the maximum radius of the circumscribed circle of these triangles is a upper bound for 
. W.l.o.g. we assume 
. We name the corners of 
 by a, q, and b as illustrated in Fig. 10. From  we can conclude that 
. It follows that

Fig. 10
figure 10
Illustration for the proof of Lemma 4

Full size image


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Then to prove the lemma, we need to show that


 
 
 
 

This inequality is equivalent to  which proves our claim. □

The second claim in Lemma 4 implies for each pair 
, d(A, B) is much greater than the radius of the smallest enclosing disks of A and B. So, we can act like the general method. That is, for  and , we add the edge  to our spanner G if it is an edge of the Delaunay graph of . Since 
, the total number of extra edges added to the spanner G is 
. It remains to show that the resulting spanner G is a -spanner.

Lemma 5
If  is set to have all inequalities ,  and , the graph G is a local -spanner w.r.t. axis-parallel squares.

Proof
We sort all pairs of points (p, q) for all distinct  based on their distance on the 
 metric. Using induction on distances, we prove for any two distinct points p and q, there is a -path inside any square R(p, q). W.l.o.g. assume  and .

Basis Step The closest pair (p, q) is directly connected to each other as q is the closest point to p inside  for some .

Inductive Step Let (p, q) have rank k among all pair distances and assume for any pair 
 of rank , we know there is a -path inside any 
 (inductive assumption). We distinguish two cases:

(p, q) is not a bad pair: let  be a cone of  such that . Then one of  or 
 
 is a triangle. W.l.o.g assume  is a triangle. Let r be the closest point to p inside . Shrink R(p, q) to reach a R(r, q) which is inside R(p, q). Since 
, then there is a -path from q to r inside R(r, q) (and of course inside R(p, q)). We can apply Lemma 2 to show there is a -path inside the square R(p, q) from p to q.

If (p, q) is a bad pair: we know there is a pair (A, B) of the pair decomposition of bad pairs such that  and , and . By our construction, we know there is a pair 
 such that both 
 and 
 are inside R(p, q), 
, 
 and 
 and 
 are connected in our spanner G. Similar to the above case, there are -paths from p to 
 and from 
 to q both inside R(p, q) as 
. Therefore, we can apply the standard proof for -spanner construction based on -WSPD to show there a -path inside the square R(p, q) from p to q.

□

Putting all this together, we get the main result of this section.

Theorem 7
Suppose  is a set of n points in the plane, and  is a given number. We can construct a local -spanner of size 
 w.r.t. axis-parallel squares.

Local Spanners w.r.t. Disks
Constructing local spanners w.r.t. disks is more challenging. One may guess that the Delaunay triangulation of a point set P is a local t-spanner for some constant t as it is connected inside a disk and it is a constant spanner [12]. Figure 11 shows a counterexample. Consider a disk just containing p, q and o. The length of the only path from p to q inside the disk can be very larger than |pq|. Next, we explain how to construct a local spanner using Steiner points. We start with some definitions and a lemma given in [2].

Fig. 11
figure 11
Delaunay triangulation is not a local spanner w.r.t. disks

Full size image

Definition 4
Let  be the set of all points of  whose distance to  is at most r. Also, let 
 be the set of all points of  whose distance to  is at most 
 and at least r.

Lemma 6
([2]) Let  be a set of n points in 
,  be a parameter, and let c be a sufficiently large constant. Then, one can compute in a linear time a ball , such that (i) , (ii)  is empty, and (iii) .

Based on Lemma 6, let 
, 
 and 
—indeed, we partition the point set into three sets 
 and 
 using the ball b(p, r) computed in Lemma 6 and we will use p and r to introduce the Steiner points. We define an angle  depending on the given —note that k is constant depending on . We select k new points on the circle centered at p and radius 3r/2 such that for any two consecutive such points q and 
, the angle 
 is . We look at all these points as Steiner points. Then, we connect each Steiner point to all other original points in our spanner; this in total adds O(n) edges to the spanner. These edges guarantee that there is always a -path from a point in 
 to a point in 
 even we cut the spanner by a disk as proved below.

Lemma 7
Assume an arbitrary disk D contains 
 and 
 and . If we set , there is an Steiner point  such that .

Proof
Let o and 
 be the center and radius of D, respectively. Since D contains a point of 
 and a point of 
, then 
. Let C(p, r) be a circle centered at p and radius r. We will show that the sub-arc of C(p, 3r/2) which is inside D, is at least  degrees. This sub-arc gets smaller if we move D in the direction of  until it is getting tangent to C(p, r). Then, this sub-arc gets smaller if we make D smaller while keeping it tangent to C(p, r) until the radius of D becomes r/2. Let M and N be the intersections of the boundary of C(p, 3r/2) and the boundary of D—see Fig. 12a. The triangle  has side lengths 3r/2, 3r/2 and r/2. Therefore, , then . Our choice of  (we selected  to be smaller than ) ensures that there is an Steiner point in this sub-arc.

Let uv intersect C(p, 3r/2) at point w and let s be an Steiner point inside D such that the arc sw is at most  degrees—see Fig. 12b. There is such a point s as any arc defined by two consecutive Steiner points on C(p, 3r/2) is  degrees. We will show .

We know . Since , , and , then . Moreover, . Now, as  and , we have


 

Then to prove the lemma, we just need to show that 
. This inequality is equivalent to 
. For  we know 
, so our choice of  guarantees this. □

Fig. 12
figure 12
Proof of Lemma 7

Full size image

Next, we explain how to guarantee that there exists a -path from a point in 
 to a point in 
 by adding  edges. If we succeed in doing that, then we can recursively continue our construction over 
, and 
 and get a spanner of size 
. Note that the number of Steiner points is O(n) as we add a constant number of Steiner points at each node of the recursion tree. Our construction uses the following proposition proved in [2].

Proposition 1
([2]) Let  be a set of n points in 
. Let the spread of , denoted by , be 
, and let  be a parameter. Then, one can compute an s-WSPD for  of total weight 
 (i.e. 
 where sum is over all pair of the s-WSPD).

To construct a local spanner over the Cartesian product 
, we use the general method given in Sect. 2. Let 
 and observe that . We want to compute the WSPD for all pairs of points in X. It is clear that the length of these pairs is not smaller than  and the diameter of 
 is . We snap the point set Q to a grid of side length —this choice of the side length ensures that there is no cell of the grid containing a point of 
 and a point of 
 simultaneously as  is empty and separates 
 from 
. The resulting point set 
 has spread O(n). So by Proposition 1, we can compute an s-WSPD on 
 of weight . Then we get back to the original points and have an s-WSPD for X of weight . Now by setting  and applying Theorem 1 (i.e. for each pair (A, B) of the s-WSPD, we add all edges of the Delaunay graph over  to our spanner; the total edge added to the spanner in this step is ), we ensure that there is -path from any point in 
 to any point in 
 even if they are cut by a disk.

Theorem 8
Suppose  is a parameter, and  is an arbitrary point set in the plane. One can construct a local -spanner w.r.t. disks that uses O(n) Steiner point and has 
 edges.

Conclusion
We introduced the concept of local spanners for planar point sets with respect to a family of regions, and prove the existence of local spanners of small size for the families of squares and vertical slabs. If adding Steiner points is allowed, we obtained a better result for the family of squares, and moreover, we obtained a local spanner of small size for the family of disks. We leave the following interesting problems for the future research:

constructing a local spanner of small size for the family of disks without using Steiner points.

constructing a local spanner of small size for the family of rectangles using Steiner points.

studing local spanners for special point sets like points on convex position