Recent advances in wireless systems have demonstrated the possibility of tracking a person’s respiration using the RF signals
that bounce off her body. The resulting breathing signal can be used to infer the person’s sleep quality and stages; it also
allows for monitoring sleep apnea and other sleep disordered breathing (SDB); all without any body contact. Unfortunately
however past work fails when people are close to each other, e.g., a couple sharing the same bed. In this case, the breathing
signals of nearby individuals interfere with each other and super-impose in the received signal.
This paper presents DeepBreath, the first RF-based respiration monitoring system that can recover the breathing signals
of multiple individuals even when they are separated by zero distance. To design DeepBreath, we model interference due
to multiple reflected RF signals and demonstrate that the original breathing can be recovered via independent component
analysis (ICA). We design a full system that eliminates interference and recovers the original breathing signals. We empirically
evaluate DeepBreath using 21 nights of sleep and over 150 hours of data from 13 couples who share the bed. Our results show
that DeepBreath is very accurate. Specifically, the differences between the breathing signals it recovers and the ground truth
are on par with the difference between the same breathing signal measured at the person’s chest and belly.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile computing systems and tools;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Multi-Person Respiration Monitoring, Wireless Sensing, Blind Source Separation, Full-Night
Monitoring
1 INTRODUCTION
Breathing is an important health metric used for tracking diseases in many areas, such as sleep [27, 37], pulmonology [30], and cardiology [7, 47]. It can also provide useful insights about the psychological state of an
individual [19, 20]. Respiration monitoring during sleep is particularly useful. For example, the respiration signal
can be used to infer the person’s sleep stages (light, deep or REM sleep) [22, 40, 49] and diagnose sleep disorders [4, 12]. Monitoring can also be used to track sleep disturbed breathing (SDB) which has been associated with
cardiac arrest in heart failure patients [25, 46]. Furthermore, respiration monitoring is important for diagnosing
and tracking sleep apnea, a condition in which the person stops breathing for short intervals during the night [6].
Traditional approaches for respiration monitoring are relatively cumbersome. They require the person to wear
a breathing belt and/or a nasal probe and sleep with it. However, recent advances in RF-based sensing have
demonstrated the possibility of monitoring breathing without any sensor on the person’s body [2, 14, 31]. Such
systems transmit a low power wireless signal and capture its reflections. The signal bounces off the people in the
environment and gets modulated by their breathing. The receiver uses the reflected signal to track the person’s
breathing without any sensors on the body.
However, past work on RF-based respiration monitoring requires monitored people to be located away from
each other. This requirement precludes respiration monitoring during sleep for people who share the same bed.
Hence, it prevents a large fraction of the population benefiting from such technology including couples that
share the same bed, and new mothers who sleep with their infants.
Tracking respiration when people are next to each other is a difficult problem. RF reflections off two bodies
super-impose (i.e. add up) over the wireless medium and interfere at the receiver. For relatively distant people,
one can use antenna arrays and/or Frequency-Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) radios [23] to zoom in
on the location of a particular individual and receive the signal reflected off his/her body with limited to no
interference. However, as people get closer, interference becomes too high. Hence, even systems that combine
antenna arrays and FMCW still require a minimum separation of 1.5 to 2 meters [2, 14]. Fundamentally, today
there is no solution that can disentangle mixed RF-based breathing signals. Hence, all systems require a minimum
distance between monitored users.
This paper introduces DeepBreath, the first system that disentangles mixed RF-based breathing signals.
DeepBreath can monitor the respiration signals of multiple people even if they have zero distance between them.
It also provides continuous monitoring throughout the night for people who share the same bed.
The design of DeepBreath combines three components as described below.
(a) Breathing Separation: DeepBreath has a breathing separation module that reconstructs the correct breathing
signals of multiple co-located individuals. To design this component, we first model how RF-based breathing
signals mix over the wireless medium. We show that the mixing is complicated by changes in the wireless
channels due to movements. We present an approximation that allows us to formulate the problem as blind source
separation and solve it using independent component analysis (ICA). Given this new formulation, DeepBreath
uses an FMCW radio equipped with an antenna array to zoom in on RF signals from different locations in space. It
calls those RF signals observations. DeepBreath uses its formulation of the mixing process to recover the original
breathing signals from such observations using ICA.
(b) Motion Detection: When people move, their location changes and the contribution of their breathing
to each observation changes. Hence the mapping from observations to original breathing signals has to be
recomputed. Note that even a small motion – such as turning in bed – changes the mapping. Thus, DeepBreath
has to automatically detect such movements and run its breathing separation module on each stable period
separately. To detect motion reliably DeepBreath uses a convolutional neural network that is trained to identify
movements of the monitored people and ignore irrelevant motion, e.g, a fan or the HVAC (Heating, ventilation
and air conditioning).
(c) Identity Matching: For continuous monitoring, a night of sleep has to be segmented into multiple periods
of stable breathing with no motion. Yet, when running ICA on each such period, the recovered breathing signals
can be permuted in the output. For example, say there are 2 people in the environment. During the first period,
the first ICA component may refer to the first person’s breathing and the second component to the second
person’s breathing. However, in the next period, the situation may flip. How do we identify the ICA components
that correspond to the breathing of the same individual in different periods? We formulate this problem as an
optimization problem, where the solution maximizes a similarity metric between the person’s breathing signals
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:3
Loc. 1 Loc. 2
RF Reflections
L
o
c. 1
L
o
c. 2
Ground Truth
L
o
c. 1
L
o
c. 2
Person 1
Person 2
Person 1 Person 2
Device
Fig. 1. A scenario of two people sharing a bed. Loc. 1 and Loc. 2 represent the locations of Person 1 and Person 2’s bodies.
During this moment, both Person 1 and Person 2 are breathing normally, yet the reflected signal from Loc. 2 indicates Person
2 has an apnea event.
across different periods. We solve this optimization using dynamic programming. The final solution provides
a robust system that disentangles the breathing signals of multiple people and delivers continuous respiration
monitoring throughout the night.
We have implemented DeepBreath and evaluated it with 13 couples.1 The couples sleep in the same bed, with
the bed size ranging from twin (1m wide) to king (2m). To obtain ground truth breathing, each subject sleeps
with an FDA-approved respiration monitoring belt [36]. In total, we have collected 21 nights of sleep, and 151
hours of data. To measure the accuracy of the reconstructed breathing signal, we compute its correlation with the
ground truth signal from the respiration belt. Note that the correlation between two breathing belts on the same
subject, one on the chest and one on the belly is around 0.915. Thus a comparable correlation value indicates a
high accuracy of the recovered breathing signals.
Our experiments show that DeepBreath recovers the breathing signals of couples sharing the bed with high
accuracy. Specifically, the recovered breathing signal has an average correlation of 0.914 with the breathing belt
signal measured on the subject’s chest. DeepBreath also recovers the breathing rates of the monitored subjects
with an average error as small as 0.140 breaths per minute.2
Further, DeepBreath scales beyond two people. We conduct experiments with 5 subjects sitting shoulder-toshoulder on one couch. DeepBreath can recover the breathing signals of all 5 subjects with an average correlation
of 0.922 with the ground truth breathing signals.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper that demonstrates a system that recovers the detailed
respiration signals of multiple people sharing the bed or sitting with zero separation. This result renders much
recent research using RF signals to monitor respiration, sleep, and apnea applicable to a significantly larger
segment of the population including couples sharing the same bed and recent mothers sleeping with their babies.
2 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
Consider a scenario in which a couple shares the bed. Let us examine the accuracy of monitoring their breathing
using the state of the art RF techniques. To do so, we use an FMCW radio equipped with an antenna array as
in [2]. Such a radio divides the space into voxels, and separates RF signals received from different spatial voxels.
We deploy the radio in the couple’s bedroom as shown in the first column in Fig. 1. We also ask both subjects to
wear a respiration belt to obtain their ground truth breathing.
1All experiments are approved by our IRB.
2Average breathing rate of all the subjects is 15.68 breaths per minute, with a standard deviation of 2.18 breaths per minute. So our system’s
breathing rate percentage error is 0.89%.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:4 • S. Yue et al.
We measure the exact location of both subjects with respect to the radio using the Bosch GLM50 laser distance
measurement tool [5]. We then make the FMCW radio and antenna array zoom in on the two voxels in space that
are centered on the chest of each subject. This gives us the best estimates of the subjects’ breathing signals based
on past work, under the assumption that past work is able to perfectly localize the subjects. We plot those RF
signals in the middle column in Fig. 1. The figure shows that by looking at RF reflections from the two subjects, it
seems that person 2 has experienced an apnea event – i.e., a period during which he did not breath.
Now let us look at the actual breathing signals from the two belts on the subjects, which we show in the third
column in Fig. 1. The ground truth shows that both subjects have regular breathing and neither of them had an
apnea event, which contradicts the behavior shown in the RF signals reflected off their chests. This can lead to
serious errors in reporting a person’s health condition.
This experiment shows that even if one zooms in on the signal from the exact location of the person’s chest,
one cannot eliminate the effect of the signal reflected off a nearby person. The reason we cannot completely
separate the two signals is that antenna arrays and FMCW are filters over space. However, no filter is perfect. In
particular, both antenna arrays and FMCW filter signals using the Fourier transform [1, 23]. Since the Fourier
transform is applied over a finite window, it will result in a sinc in the frequency domain. This causes nearby
signals to mix with each other due to the sinc tail, as shown in Fig. 2. The closer the two people are, the closer
the frequency response after taking the Fourier Transform, and the more the corresponding sinc functions leak
into each other.
Fourier Transform Window
(a) Two sine waves with different frequency (b) Windowed Fourier Transform result
Fig. 2. A sinc example. Fig. 2a shows two sine waves with slightly different frequency. The black box on top of the signals
indicates the Fourier Transform window. Fig. 2b shows the result of the Fourier Transform. The two signals are sincs in
frequency domain, and when the frequencies of the signals are similar, their sincs are close to each other.
3 RELATED WORK
Our work is related to past work on RF-based sensing and the general literature on blind source separation.
3.1 RF-Based Sensing
Recent years have witnessed much interest in using RF signals to monitor people’s movements and vital signs
without any on-body sensors. Researchers have developed systems that transmit low power RF signal and monitor
its reflections. They used these reflections to infer a person’s location [1, 18], gait [15, 44], breathing [2, 9, 14, 43],
heart rate [2, 9] and even emotions [48].
Our work is closest to past work that uses RF signals to monitor breathing. Studies using Doppler Radio [31],
FMCW [2, 14, 49], millimeter waves [9, 45], and WiFi signals [21, 43] all demonstrate accurate monitoring of
a single person’s breathing. Respiration monitoring using radio signal is also closely related to monitoring
breathing using acoustic signals, which tends to use FMCW techniques and demonstrates good accuracy for a
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:5
single person [26, 41]. Further, some recent papers demonstrate that the breathing signal extracted from RF can
be used to infer additional health metrics [34, 48]. In particular, a larger number of papers use the breathing
extracted from RF to monitor sleep quality, track insomnia, and infer sleep stages [14, 21, 31, 49].
A key challenge in passive wireless monitoring is the interference between different people. RF signals reflect off
all people in the environment. Those reflections super-impose over the wireless medium and add-up in the received
signal. To avoid this problem, much of the past work assumes a single person in the environment [1, 48, 49]. Papers
that show results for multiple users require people to have a minimum separation of 1.5 to 2 meters [2, 14, 45].
Having a minimum separation between subjects reduces the mixing between the RF signals reflected off their
bodies, and allows the receiver to zoom in on each individual using techniques like FMCW and antenna arrays.
The need for such minimum separation prevents past work from monitoring users sitting next to each other
or sleeping in the same bed. The only past studies, that we know of, that report breathing results for users in
the same bed are [43] and Nandakumar et al. [26]. The former requires the users to lie in a specific position and
have significantly different breathing rates. The latter uses audio signals as opposed to RF signals, and hence is
vulnerable to environmental audio sources and is affected by thick comforters and clothes. Furthermore, both
studies only report the breathing rate, which is an average value over a long interval. Recovering the exact details
of the breathing signal is a much more demanding task.
More fundamentally, all past work relies on the existence of good RF/audio signals that do not suffer from
interference and mixing, and no past work can disentangle multiple breathing signals when they are mixed
together. In contrast, by modeling different reflections of FMCW as linear combinations of breathing signals,
and applying independent component analysis, our system can disentangle breathing signals from mixtures of
such signals. Hence, it can accurately monitor multiple users’ respiration signals without a minimum separation
requirement.
3.2 Blind Source Separation and Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
DeepBreath leverages the literature on blind source separation (BSS) [8]. The problem is defined as the recovery
of a set of source signals from a set of mixture signals, without knowing the properties of the original sources
or how they are mixed together. If the sources are independent and have non-Gaussian distributions, and the
mixing is linear, then one can use independent component analysis (ICA) to recover the source signals from the
mixture signals. ICA recovers the original sources by maximizing the statistical independence of the estimated
components in the mixtures [16, 17].
ICA has been used in many domains including speech and image processing, text mining, financial data
processing, communication systems, and EEG processing [11, 24, 28, 33, 38, 39]. In this paper, we extend the
applications of ICA to include the recovery of the breathing signals of collocated individuals.
4 MODELING MIXTURES OF RF-BASED BREATHING SIGNALS
In this section, we discuss how to separate mixtures of RF breathing signals.
4.1 Primer
Breathing signals have a variety of patterns that are unpredictable in advance, and the results of multiple people
breathing in an environment are seen in a combined form in the observed RF signals. Identifying the individual
breathing signals from the combined RF signals falls under the broad framework of Blind Source Separation. A
common example of such blind source separation is the cocktail party problem, where the audio signals from
multiple speakers are combined in the environment, and the goal is to separate the audio signals corresponding
to each individual speakers. In the particular case that the sources are independent, non-Gaussian, and combine
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:6 • S. Yue et al.
linearly, we can perform Blind Source Separation efficiently using a technique called Independent Component
Analysis (ICA).
Traditionally, ICA is defined as follows: Let there be N independent time varying sources, si(t),i = 1 . . . N,
and M different observations, xi(t),i = 1 . . . M. For T time units (t = 1 . . .T ), we can define the source signals as
a N ×T matrix,
SN ×T =







s11 s12 . . .
.
.
.
.
.
.
sN 1 sNT







and the observations as a M ×T matrix,
XM×T =







x11 x12 . . .
.
.
.
.
.
.
xM1 sMT







The observations X are produced by the sources S combining via a mixing matrix WM×N , such that we can
write:
XM×T = WM×N × SN ×T (1)
The goal of ICA is to recover the sources S and the mixing matrix W given only the observations X, provided
the sources are independent and non-Gaussian.
4.2 The Challenge in Applying ICA to RF Breathing
At first blush, it might seem that applying ICA to recover mixed breathing signals is simple. The RF signals
reflected off people’s bodies add up linearly over the wireless medium. Further, the breathing signals of different
subjects are generally independent and not Gaussian.3 The problem, however, is that Eq. 1 assumes that the
mixing matrix W is the same at every time instance. ICA leverages the distribution of the sources during the
period T to impose additional constraints to solve the problem. Unfortunately, this assumption does not hold for
our problem.
In our problem, the sources are the RF signals reflected off each person’s torso. At any point in time, antennas
on the radio receive linear mixtures of these reflections. The mixing coefficients, W , are the wireless channels
from the torso of each person to each antenna. When the person breathes, his/her torso moves. As a result, the
channels change and the mixing coefficients are no longer constant. This means that there is not a single mixing
matrix that can be used independent of time in Eq. 1.
In the remaining parts of this section, we describe the mathematical structure of the RF signal, how the signal
changes with multiple reflectors, and how we can reformulate the mixing problem to allow source identification
using ICA.
4.3 FMCW with a Single Reflector
We will analyze RF reflections assuming a Frequency-Modulated Carrier Waves (FMCW) radio, which is widely
used in the literature [2, 14, 49]. FMCW operates by transmitting a sequence of sweeps. During each sweep, the
frequency of the transmitted signal changes linearly with time, as illustrated by the red lines in Fig. 3. The human
body reflects the signal back. The reflected signal, depicted in blue, is a time-shifted version of the transmitted
sweep, where the shift is equal to the time it takes the signal to travel to the reflector and back to the radio.
Because the duration of each sweep is usually very short (∼ 0.1ms), we assume the reflector does not move
within each sweep. For a single reflector at distance d(t) during the t
th sweep, the signal’s time-in-flight is
3
In the evaluation section, we show the distribution of a person’s breathing signal.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:7
Time
Frequency
F0
Bw
{
1st sweep
{
2nd sweep
{
3rd sweep
{
tth sweep (t + 1)th sweep
{
Ts
Fig. 3. Transmitted and received FMCW signal. The red line is the transmitted signal, and the blue line is the received signal
reflected by a single reflector. FMCW operates by transmitting a sequence of sweeps, and comparing the frequency difference
between the transmitted signal and received signal.
τ (d(t)) = 2d(t)/C, where C is the speed of light. In this case, the received FMCW signal within the t
th sweep can
be written in the time domain as [29]:
m(d(t),u) = Aej2π (F0τ (d(t))+Ks τ (d(t))u−1/2Ks τ
2
(d(t)))
,u ∈ [0,Ts ], (2)
where A is the amplitude of the received signal, F0 is the smallest frequency in the sweep, Ts
is the sweeping period,
and Ks = Bw /Ts
is sweeping rate defined as the swept bandwidth divided by the sweeping time. For convenience,
we also define the following quantities: carrier-to-bandwidth ratio R = F0/Bw , and resolution U = C/2Bw .
In order to compute the frequency response of this time domain signal, we can compute the Fourier Transform
of the signal within each sweep. We leave the details of the derivation to appendix A, and summarize the final
result here. The frequency response at a subcarrier f for a reflector at distance d(t) can be written as:
l(d(t), f ) = h(f ) · sinc(v(d(t), f ))e
2π j(R+1/2)v(d(t),f )
(3)
where h(f ) = ATse
k2πRf and v(d(t), f ) =
d(t)
U
+ f Ts
.
4.4 FMCW with Multiple Reflectors
Now consider the case with multiple reflectors r1,r2, . . . ,rN , at distances d1,d2, . . . ,dN . In such a case, the
total reflected signal for the N reflectors is simply the sum of the corresponding time domain signals, i.e.,
M(t,u) =
ÍN
i=1m(di(t),u).
Since Fourier Transform is linear, the frequency domain representation of M(t) can be obtained simply by
summing the individual frequency distributions, i.e
L(d(t), f ) =
Õ
N
i=1
l(di(t), f ). (4)
As can be seen from Eq. 3, the function L(d(t), f ) can no longer be written as a linear sum of N independent
sources, i.e., one cannot define sources д(d1(t)), . . . ,д(dN (t)) (note that д(.) are not a function of frequency f )
such that we can write the output signal
L(d(t), f ) =
Õ
N
i=1
wi(f )д(di(t)), (5)
for every f , where the wi(f ) are the mixing coefficients and remain constant for all the sweeps. This prevents us
from directly applying ICA to the signal L(d(t), f ), as described in §4.2.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:8 • S. Yue et al.
Full Night Observations
Motion Detector
Stable Period Stable Period Stable Period Stable Period 1. Motion Detection
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction 2. Breathing Separation
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction
#1 Reconstruction
#2 Reconstruction 3. Identity Matching
Fig. 4. The architecture of DeepBreath. DeepBreath has three components: a motion detector to detect motions disruptive
to ICA and generate stable periods, a breathing separation module that adapts ICA to recover breathing signal candidates,
and an identity matching module to stitch all reconstructed breathing signals that belong to the same person.
4.5 Making ICA Work for FMCW with Multiple Reflectors
Our key insight, however, is that we can create such a decomposition by considering only the small linear motions
involved with breathing. Specifically, we can write l(di(t), f ) as l(Di + δi(t), f ) where Di
is the mean position of
the reflector (i.e., the mean position of the chest during breathing), and δi(t) are the small time varying motions
corresponding to breathing. Using the Taylor series expansion till the first order term, this function can be
approximated as: l(di(t), f ) = l(Di
, f ) + δi(t)l
′
(Di
, f ), where l
′
(Di
, f ) is the derivative with respect to distance.
The total frequency response for all the N reflectors can then be written as:
L(d(t), f ) =
Õ
N
i=1
l(Di
, f ) +
Õ
N
i=1
l
′
(Di
, f )δi(t) (6)
In Eq. 6, note that the first term is simply the mean frequency response across all time units, which we can
subtract from the signal without affecting the estimation of the breathing signal. The second term is exactly of
the form in Eq. 5 desired by ICA, where the derivative term corresponds to the desired ICA mixing coefficient,
and the δi(t) corresponds to the time varying source relevant to the breathing motion.
Thus, we can apply ICA algorithms to this modified signal, i.e. after subtracting the mean across time for each
frequency and recover the individual breathing motions of all the sources.
Formally, we define our observations for the ICA as:
O(f ,t) = L(d(t), f ) − Õ
N
i=1
l(Di
, f ) =
Õ
N
i=1
l
′
(Di
, f )δi(t). (7)
As described above, these observations are linear combinations of the source signals. We can therefore use ICA
to separate the source signals.
5 DEEPBREATH
DeepBreath is the first RF-based full night breathing reconstruction system that can accurately monitor multiple
people even when they share the same bed. The breathing signals extracted by DeepBreath can be directly
analyzed to learn the health status of the individuals, or fed to a sleep analysis system like the one described
in [49].
DeepBreath runs on top of an FMCW radio equipped with an antenna array. The radio transmits a low power
wireless signal and captures its reflections from users in the vicinity. Multi-antenna FMCW radios allow us to
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:9
capture the RF signal from a particular location in space [23] – i.e., they allow us to obtain multiple concurrent
RF signals, each corresponding to the signal reflected from a particular voxel in space. We use this property to
focus on RF signals from voxels in and around the bed. Each such RF signal is a mixture of the original breathing
signals. We call such mixtures, "observations". The difference between observations stems from differences in the
contribution of each breathing signal to that particular observation, which depends on the position of the person
and the location that the observation focuses on.
DeepBreath takes as input a set of full-night observations and returns the breathing signals of each person. It
does so by following a three-step process illustrated in Fig. 4 and summarized below:
• Motion Detection: The motion detection component takes as input observations, identifies motion intervals,
and splits the observations into a series of stable periods, as shown in the first row of Fig. 4.
• Breathing Separation: This module processes the observations during each stable period to disentangle the
breathing signals of different people. It outputs the reconstructed breathing signals during that period, as
shown in the second row of Fig. 4.
• Identity Matching: The breathing separation module is not aware whom each reconstructed signal belongs to.
In order to create full-night reconstruction, DeepBreath has a special module that stitches all reconstructed
breathing signals that belong to the same person, as shown in the third row of Fig. 4.
Below we describe these components in detail.
5.1 Robust Human Motion Detector
When there are large motions, ICA will fail for two reasons. First, the frequency response of a large motion can
no longer be approximated by the first order Taylor expansion, therefore its corresponding observations are no
longer linear related to each other. Second, a large motion usually represents a change of posture of the user. He
may move slightly away from his original position, and cause a change in the signal mixing pattern. Therefore,
we should segment the signal when we detect large motions and apply ICA to each stable period separately.
Ideally, we want a motion detector that raises a flag only when one of the people moves but ignores other
sources of motion. This is because only a movement of one of the breathing people disrupts the ICA. Other
sources of motion in the environment (e.g., the HVAC) do not affect the contribution of each breathing signal to
the observations.
To distinguish movements of the monitored individuals from other sources of motion, we rely on the following
intuition. When one of the monitored people moves, the motion affects the breathing signal in every observation.
On the contrary, environmental motions are usually further away from the person and they affect the breathing
signal due to the sinc effect. Thus when an environmental motion occurs, the breathing pattern will be detectable
in some observations.
In order to utilize the above intuition, we define the following terms:
Definition 5.1. Short Observation A short observation is a small period of a observation with a fixed duration.
We assume that the human’s breathing rate is constant during a short period. This means that breathing can
be assumed periodic during a short observation. Therefore, the periodicity of a short observation can represent
its signal quality. Then we have:
Definition 5.2. Short term Breathing-to-Noise Ratio (s-BNR) Bs of a short observation o is defined as the
ratio of breathing energy to the overall energy in observation o.
We computed Bs by first taking an FFT of the short observation signal. We then find the FFT bin with maximal
energy within the human breathing range. We compute the ratio between that bin’s energy and the energy sum
of all FFT bins. In our computation, we use 15 seconds for the default duration of short observations and 10 to
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:10 • S. Yue et al.
Human Motion Human Motion Environmental Motion
Stable Period
Fig. 5. An example of Motion Tableau. More reddish the cell is, higher the s-BNR of that short observation is. During this
period, we can see three typical patterns. When there are no motion, a large part of short observations have high s-BNR.
When there are environmental motions, some observations are affected, but there still exists high s-BNR observations. And
when there are human motions, nearly all observations are destroyed. We call the period between two human motions as a
stable period.
30 breaths/minute for the human breathing range [13, 32]. The larger the s-BNR, the more periodic the short
observation is, then more likely the short observation contains good breathing signal.
Thus, an observation is a time series of short (15-second) observations, each of which has a particular Bs
. Next,
we define "a motion tableau" over all observations as follows:
Definition 5.3. Motion Tableau is a matrix with columns representing discretized time slots and rows representing observations at different locations. Each (i, j) cell represents the short observation at the jth location
during ith time slot. The value of cell (i, j) is the s-BNR of that short observation.
Figure 5 shows an example of motion tableau computed over a full night of sleep of a couple in our dataset.
The figure shows that the motion tableau has the following desirable property: Different kinds of motion have
different patterns. Human motion usually causes all short observations during that period to have low s-BNR,
whereas environmental motion does not affect the s-BNR much.
Then, instead of using hand-crafted features that are hard to tune, we can treat the motion tableau as an
image and train a Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) based classifier to detect human motion. CNNs are wellknown for its good accuracy and robustness on image classification tasks. Here, we adopt a classic VGG16 [35]
architecture with adjustment of the input size and output dimension. The CNN classifies each column in the
motion tableau to identify whether it experiences human motion. To classify the ith column, we feed the CNN a
small image that includes all rows and the columns [i − k,i + k], where k is a small number that allows the CNN
to look at the context around the particular column of interest. The CNN outputs "one" to indicate movements of
the monitored people and "zero" otherwise.
5.2 Breathing Separation
After motion detection, we can divide a single night into a series of stable periods. Ideally, we can apply ICA to
each stable period and obtain the breathing reconstructions. Yet, there are still two practical challenges:
(1) The direct path of the farther person may be completely blocked. Thus, we cannot assume breathing signals
are always located in the bed area.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:11
(2) Noise may completely overwhelm breathing signals in some observations. Such observations no longer
satisfy the linearity property and are harmful to the reconstruction.
Therefore we propose a breathing quality filter to address both challenges.
5.2.1 Dealing with Blockage. To solve the blockage problem, we leverage a well-known phenomenon called
multipath. Wireless signals can be reflected by walls and furniture, and can reach the receiver even though
the direct path is not available. Fig. 6 shows a typical example. Although multipath signals have a different
time-of-flight compared to the direct path signal, they are all linearly related to the origin breathing motion.
Therefore, multipath signals provide the same level of information as direct path signals. So, instead of only
focusing on bed area, we use observations from the larger space around the bed to gather as much information
as possible.
Antenna
First Person Second Person
Wall
Direct path
A path reflected by wall
Fig. 6. A multipath example. The direct path from the device to the second person is blocked by the first person. Yet the
second person can be reached by signals reflected by a wall.
5.2.2 Filtering Noisy Observations. As explained earlier, we need to consider observations in the larger area
around the bed, so that we may recover the breathing of a person whose direct path to the receiver is occluded.
On the other hand, for observations that are located far away from the person, the breathing signals will be
suppressed and noise will become the main component. Feeding such noisy observations to ICA is harmful since
ICA will then try to reconstruct the noise pattern.
To filter out noisy observations and keep the useful ones, we again rely on the periodicity of human breathing.
Specifically, a good observation should have many short observations (sequences of 15 seconds) that exhibit high
s-BNR. Thus, we propose the following definition to measure the signal quality during long observation, i.e. the
observation over a whole stable period:
Definition 5.4. Long term Breathing-to-Noise Ratio (l-BNR) Bl of a long observation o is computed as the
average of the s-BNR of the series of short observations that constitute the long observation.
A low l-BNR indicates a low possibility that the observation contains useful breathing information, and hence
such observations should not excluded in recovering breathing signals. Once we filter out such low l-BNR
observations, we can apply our model introduced in section 4 and reconstruct the breathing signals of the people
in the scene.
5.3 Identity Matching
After we apply the breathing separation algorithm to each stable period, we get several ICA components for each
of them. Assuming, in each stable period, that the ICA components are all successfully reconstructed breathing
signals, the last step to get the full night breathing of every person is to figure out which ICA component
corresponds to which person. We call this problem, identity matching.
Identity matching is non-trivial even in the case of two people. Say we have two people p1 and p2. In each stable
period, we have two ICA components c1, c2. There are two choices when matching these components: c1 is p1’s
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:12 • S. Yue et al.
Table 1. All key notations
Symbol Meaning
N number of people
M number of stable periods
K number of ICA components in each stable periods
pn nth person (n = 1, .., N)
qm mth stable periods (m = 1, .., M)
c
k
m kth ICA component in stable period qm (k = 1, ..,K)
M(c
k
m) mixing vector of ICA components c
k
m
M(c
k
m)i
ith element in mixing vector M(c
k
m)
I(·, ·) identity consistency metric for two ICA components
Iσ (·, ·) identity consistency metric for two ICA assignments
σm : {1, .., N} → {1, ..,K} ICA assignment in stable periods qm
breathing,c2 is p2’s breathing or vice versa. One now needs to make such a choice for each stable period. Because
we have at least two possible matchings in each stable period, the valid solution space grows exponentially with
the number of stable periods. Things can become much more complex when the number of people or the number
of ICA components are larger than two.
To solve the identity matching problem, we start by defining a consistency metric that captures the likelihood
that two ICA components represent the breathing signal of the same person. We then formulate identity matching
as an optimization problem that assigns identities to maximize the consistency metric. We show how to solve the
optimization problem efficiently using dynamic programming. We explain this process in detail below. Table 1
summarizes the notations used this section.
5.3.1 Identity Consistency Metric. We define an identity consistency metric I. Metric I takes two ICA
components c1, c2 (from different stable periods) as input, and gives a consistency score I(c1,c2) as output. The
higher the consistency score, I(c1,c2) is, the more likely the ICA components c1, c2 are the breathing of the same
person during two stable periods.
To compute I we leverage the mixing vector of the ICA components. The mixing vector M(c) is one column
of the mixing matrix (W in section 4) that corresponds to ICA component c. The length of the mixing vector is
the number of original observations we used to generate the ICA components. Each entry of the mixing vector
represents how this ICA component c contributes to its corresponding observation. Two ICA components having
similar mixing vectors means that they contribute similarly to the RF observations. Thus they are more likely to
represent the same source signal.4
Then we mathematically define the ICA component identity consistency metric I as follows:
I(c1,c2) =
Õ
i
min(M(c1)i
,M(c2)i)
max(M(c1)i
,M(c2)i)
(8)
where the index i runs over all the entries of the corresponding mixing vectors.
5.3.2 Consistent Identity Assignments. We introduce the ICA assignment σm for stable periods qm. Each
assignment can be viewed as a permutation of the ICA components. Specifically, σm(n) = k means ICA component
c
k
m is assigned as person pn’s breathing in ICA assignment σm.
4Note that since ICA is not sensitive to scale, mixing vectors of different ICA components may have different scales. Thus before doing
comparison, we have to normalize the mixing vectors.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:13
We compute the consistency score of two assignments for two stable periods by computing the consistency
between the components they assign to the same person, as follows:
Iσ (σm, σm′) ≜
Õ
N
n=1
I(c
σm(n)
m ,c
σm′(n)
m′ ), (9)
where the sum is over all people and I(c
σm(n)
m ,c
σm′(n)
m′ ) is the consistency between a pair of ICA components that
were assigned the same identity by assignments σm and σm′.
The score Iσ (σm, σm′) is used to measure whether ICA assignment σm and σm′ reorder the ICA components in
a consistent way. By saying consistent, we mean that after the reordering, ICA components having the same order
in two stable periods do actually represent the breathing of the same person.
5.3.3 Objective Function and Solution. Our goal is to find ICA assignments σm for each stable periods such that
after reordering, an ICA component having the same order in all stable periods is the same person’s breathing.
Thus, we define the following objective function J.
J (σ1, .., σM ) =
Õ
M
m=1
min(
Õ
M,m+h)
m′=m+1
Iσ (σm, σm′) (10)
The objective J simply sums all the ICA assignment identity consistency scores for all pairs of ICA assignments
in two different and temporally close stable periods. Here, two stable periods qm, qm′ are considered as temporally
close if there are less than h stable periods between these two stable periods .i.e |m −m′
| ≤ h (our default is h=12).
The reason why we limit ourselves to nearby stable periods is that the consistency metric I is valid only over a
short period. Specifically, the consistency metric captures the fact that when a person tosses around in bed, or
moves on a chair or couch, he is still in the same general location and hence the mixing matrix of his breathing
changed by a small amount. However, if the person keeps moving, then eventually the mixing matrix can change
significantly.
The above objective function captures the idea that if each pair of ICA assignments orders ICA components in
a consistent way then all the ICA assignments order the ICA components consistently. Thus, the optimal set of
assignments can be represented as:
σ
∗
1
, .., σ
∗
M = arg max J (σ1, .., σM ) (11)
To solve the optimization in Eq.(11), we design a dynamic programming algorithm which performs two passes,
forward and backward. In the forward pass, we have initial conditions fh and DP-equation fm and дm as follow:
fh(σ1, .., σh) =
Õ
h
i=1
Õ
h
j=i+1
Iσ (σi
, σj) (12)
fm(σm−h+1, .., σm) = max
σm−h
fm−1(σm−h, .., σm−1) + Iσ (σm−h, σm), m = h + 1,h + 2, .., M (13)
дm(σm−h+1, .., σm) = arg max
σm−h
fm−1(σm−h, .., σm−1) + Iσ (σm−h, σm), m = h + 1,h + 2, .., M (14)
In the backward pass, we can get optimal solution σ
∗
1
, .., σ
∗
M
in a reverse order based on the DP-functions
computed in forward pass.
σ
∗
M−h+1
, .., σ
∗
M = arg max fM (σM−h+1, .., σM ) (15)
σ
∗
m = дm+h(σ
∗
m+1
, .., σ
∗
m+h
), m = M − h, M − h − 1, .., 1 (16)
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:14 • S. Yue et al.
(a) Signals captured from chest and diaphragm (b) Correlation CDF between two signals
Fig. 7. Comparison between chest level and diaphragm level breathing signals. Fig. 7a shows a 2 minutes sample of two
breathing signals, and Fig. 7b shows the the correlation CDF between two breathing signals.
6 EVALUATION
In this section, we empirically evaluate our theoretical model and DeepBreath’s performance. All experiments
with human subjects are approved by our IRB and we have obtained informed consent from every subject. For the
hardware, we have implemented a state-of-art FMCW radio that sweeps from 5.7GHz to 7.2GHz and transmits
at sub-milliwatt power in accordance with the FCC regulations. The radio is equipped with an antenna array to
improve spacial resolution.
Ground Truth: To obtain the ground truth breathing of people, we use SleepView[36], an FDA-approved sleep
and apnea monitor. The user sleeps while wearing a special belt that uses respiratory inductance plethysmography
to measure the expansion of the chest, which it translates to breathing signal.
Metrics: To evaluate our breathing reconstruction results, we use the following two metrics:
• Pearson correlation coefficient (correlation): We evaluate the similarity between the reconstructed signal
and the ground truth by computing their correlation. The correlation is computed over stable periods. The
aggregate per-night correlation is computed by taking a weighted average of the correlation over stable
periods where the weight corresponds to the length of each period (normalized by the total duration of
stable periods throughout the night).
The optimal value for the correlation is 1. This would happen if the reconstructed signal is exactly the
same as the ground truth. Of course in practice, the correlation is never 1. Thus, it is natural to ask
what correlation value is good enough. To answer this question we compare the correlation between two
respiration belts on the same person: one is strapped around the chest and the other around the diaphragm
area. Both belts capture the person’s breathing but at slight different locations on the body. Fig. 7a plots an
example that shows the breathing signal of the same person captured at the chest and diaphragm levels.
The figure shows small differences between the two signals. For quantitative results, we plot in Fig. 7b a
CDF of the the correlation between two breathing signals. The data in the figure are taken over 2-minute
windows from 6 individuals over 6 nights. As can be seen from the figure, the two breathing signals are
slightly different –i.e. their correlation is not 1. The average correlation is 0.915 and 90th percentile is 0.860.
This CDF provides a point of comparison. Specifically, since the RF signal captures reflections from multiple
areas of the human body, an ideal reconstruction would show a correlation comparable to the correlation
between the breathing signals captured in different locations on the body.
• Breathing Rate: Breathing rate is the number of breaths per minute. We compare our reconstructed signal
to the ground truth breathing rate as captured by the respiration belt. As in past work, we compute the
breathing rate over 2-minute windows.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:15
Fig. 8. Linearity of an observation as a function of its l-BNR. Blue line represents the average linearity of observations with
certain l-BNR and grey area shows the standard deviation. The figure shows that observations with high l-BNR are linear
functions of the breathing signals.
6.1 Empirical Validation of Our Model
The use of ICA to separate mixed signals is subject to three requirements: 1) the mixing is linear, 2) the sources
are independent, and 3) the distributions of the source signals are not Gaussian.
We empirically check that our formulation of the breathing separation problem satisfies all three requirements.
We conduct an experiment in which two people sit shoulder-to-shoulder on a couch. Each subject is asked to wear
a breathing belt to record his ground-truth breathing signal. The subjects breathe normally with no restrictions.
Each trial lasts for 5 minutes. In total, we invite 10 people to participate in this experiment and conduct 20 trials.
(a) Linearity of the Observations: To check whether the observations are linear combinations of breathing
signals, we measure the linearity of a given observation O(t) as follows:
lO = max
a1,a2
|ρ(a1s1(t) + a2s2(t), O(t))|, (17)
where s1(t) and s2(t) are the ground truth breathing signals, O(t) is the observation signal, and ρ() is the Pearson
correlation coefficient function. This metric computes the correlation between the observation and the closest
linear combination of the signals.
We plot in Fig. 8 the linearity of observations as a function of their l-BNR. The figure shows that the linearity
of an observation increases with l-BNR. This is expected because observations with low l-BNR are dominated by
noise. The figure also shows that when the l-BNR is higher than 0.15, linearity is higher than 0.9. Thus, we can
treat high l-BNR observations as linear functions of the breathing signals.
(b) Independence of the Source: Second, we examine the correlation between the breathing of two subjects as
a function of the duration of an observation. For each duration t, we divide the duration of the experiment to
non-overlap periods of length t. For each such period, we compute the correlation between the breathing of the
two subjects in the experiment. We repeat this computation for all subjects and trials. Fig. 9 plots the relationship
between the correlation of the subject’s ground-truth breathing and the duration of the observation. The blue
line represents the averaged correlation, and the grey area shows the standard deviation. The figure shows that
the correlation of the subjects breathing signals decreases as the duration of the observation increases, and is
lower than 0.1 when the duration is larger than 2 minutes. Thus, it is safe to assume that the breathing signals of
different subjects are statistically independent over periods equal or larger than two minutes.5
(c) Non-Gaussianity of the Sources: Finally, we look at the distribution of the breathing signals of our subjects.
We show a representative example of the ground truth breathing of a subject in Fig. 10a and its distribution in
Fig. 10b. Clearly the distribution is not Gaussian. The distributions of other subjects are similarly non-Gaussian.
5Note that two signals can look similar but still have low correlation if the frequency of breathing is slight different or the breathing cycles
are unsynchronized.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:16 • S. Yue et al.
Fig. 9. Correlation between the breathing of two subjects over windows with different duration. Blue line represents the
average correlation between subjects and and grey area shows the standard deviation.
(a) Example Breathing Signal (b) Example Distribution
Fig. 10. Figure shows that marginal distribution of a subject breathing is non-Gaussian
6.2 Evaluation of DeepBreath’s Performance
We deploy our system and evaluate it with 13 different couples. The experiments are run in the couple’s own
homes. All monitored couples sleep in the same bed. The bed size ranges from twin (1m wide) to king (2m). Each
subject wears a breathing belt for the whole night to obtain the ground truth breathing. We install our device at
the bedside. We refer to the subject who sleeps closer to the device as the near subject and the other subject as
the far subject. In total, we have collected 21 nights, and 151 hours of data.
We first generate stable periods for each night by detecting all motion using the motion detector. We remove
periods with motion and operate on stable periods. Our analysis shows that, on average, 11% of a night exhibits
motion. This is compatible with medical literature [10].6 We then process the stable periods and compare them
with the ground truth breathing signals.
We also compare the performance of DeepBreath with a baseline that uses an oracle to iterate over all voxels in
the bed area, and for each person, it zooms in on the voxel that results in the most accurate breathing signal for
that person. This baseline highlights the importance of disentangling the breathing signals as opposed to zooming
in on the best RF signal that corresponds to the person’s breathing, as in past work. Note that the baseline is a
conservative representation of past work since we allow it to look at the actual ground truth breathing as it picks
the best signal.
Fig. 11a plots a CDF of the correlation between the reconstructed breathing signals and the ground truth for
both DeepBreath and the baseline. The figure shows that DeepBreath’s average correlation is 0.920 and 0.908 for
the near and far subjects respectively. This is comparable with the average correlation between two belts that
capture breathing at two locations on the same person. In comparison, the baseline achieves a correlation of 0.874
and 0.733 for the near and far subjects respectively. This performance is significantly worse than DeepBreath’s,
6Healthy people experience around 30 minutes of intermittent awakenings each night [10]. Since we monitor a couple, we detect motion
when either of them moves.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:17
(a) CDF of breathing correlation (b) CDF of breathing rate errors
Fig. 11. Performance comparison between DeepBreath and an oracle-based baseline.
particularly for the far person. Note that, as mentioned earlier, the baseline is allowed to look at the ground truth
signals so that it can zoom in on the RF signals with the best correlation, which is not feasible in practice. Despite
this extra information, it is still unable to match DeepBreath’s performance.
Fig. 11b plots a CDF of the error in estimating the breathing rate for both DeepBreath and the baseline. The
median breathing rate error in DeepBreath is 0.121 and 0.158 for the near and far subjects. In contrast, the
baseline shows a breathing rate error of 0.200 and 0.633 for the near and far subjects respectively.
There are two reasons for the lower performance of the baseline. First, for most cases, since the subjects are
fairly close, their breathing signals are mixed in all locations in space. Thus, sometimes it is not possible to find a
good voxel that includes breathing from only one subject. Second, the signal from the near person can be much
stronger than the far person, and the body of the near person can sometimes occlude the body of the far person.
DeepBreath does not suffer from these problems because it is intrinsically designed to separate mixed signals.
Further, it combines information across all observations and can leverage multipath effects to reconstruct the
breathing of the far person.
Finally, Fig. 12 shows a few examples of our reconstructed breathing signals and the corresponding ground
truth signals. The figure shows that DeepBreath is able to separate a coupleâĂŹs respiration signals even when
their breathing patterns look similar. It also shows that DeepBreath can deal with irregular breathing patterns
such as those experienced by the far person in couple 2 and couple 3.
7 EVALUATION OF THE COMPONENTS OF DEEPBREATH
The above result shows that DeepBreath can correctly recover the breathing of each individual even when
they share the bed. In this section, we zoom in on the identity matching and motion detection components to
understand their performance.
Evaluation of Identity Matching: We report the accuracy of identity matching for all stable periods in the
collected 21 nights. We compute the average accuracy weighted by the duration of each stable period. The total
averaged accuracy is 99.1% and accuracy for each subject is shown in Fig. 13. Accuracies of all the subjects are
above 95%, which shows the robustness of our identity matching algorithm.
Evaluation of Motion Detection: We also evaluate the motion detection component. To obtain the ground
truth motion we have asked 4 subjects to sleep while wearing accelerometers on each ankle and each wrist. In
this experiment, each subject sleeps in a separate bed to ensure that the motion captured by the accelerometers is
as close to the ground truth as possible. Each subject also wears a breathing belt for ground truth breathing.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:18 • S. Yue et al.
Fig. 12. Examples of recovered breathing signals and the original ground truth signals from the breathing belt. The figure
shows that DeepBreath is accurate even when the monitored couple have similar breathing rates or their breathing signals
have irregular patterns.
Fig. 13. Accuracy of identity matching. Each bar shows the identity matching accuracy of each subject.
Accelerometers are affected by gravity. To eliminate this effect we subtract the average acceleration and
consider only changes. Because the reading from the accelerometer is noisy, for each 30 second period, we say
there is a human motion if the acceleration is 2 times larger than the standard deviation. We declare motion if
any accelerometer experiences a motion event. We compare the output of our motion detector to the result of
predicting motion based on the four accelerometers. On average we achieve a precision of 0.933 and a recall of
0.954. This result shows that our motion detector successfully detects motion.
7.1 Breathing Separation with Many People
Finally, we would like to show that DeepBreath is not limited to two people and can scale to a larger number
of users. We conduct an experiment with 5 subjects sitting shoulder-to-shoulder on a 1.9m couch, as shown in
Fig. 14. The subjects wear a breathing belt to capture the ground truth breathing signals. In total we invited 8
people to participate in this experiment, and we conducted 3 trials with different subject combinations. Each trial
lasts for 5 minutes.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from Entangled RF Signals • 86:19
Fig. 14. Experiment setup. 5 subjects are sitting shoulder-to-shoulder on a 1.9m couch.
1 2
3
4
0 20 40 60 80
Time (sec)
5
(a) Observations at each subject’s location
1
GrRunG Truth 5ecRnstructeG
2
3
4
0 20 40 60 80
Time (sec)
5
(b) Ground truth and reconstructed signals
Fig. 15. Five people experiment. Observations at each subject’s location are plotted in Fig. 15a. Because there are no gaps
between subjects, breathing signals are mixed together. But DeepBreath can reconstruct the breathing of each subject
accurately, as shown in Fig. 15b, with an average correlation of 0.92.
Fig. 15a shows the observations at the voxels centered on each of the five subjects. Each observation is a
different mixture of the breathing signals of the subjects. Fig. 15b plots the ground truth and the reconstructed
breathing signals. As can be seen, even though every observation is a mixture of multiple subject’s breathing, our
algorithm can still reconstruct the breathing of each subject accurately. On average, we achieve 0.922 correlation
and 0.034 breathing rate error with respect to the ground truth breathing signals. These results demonstrate that
DeepBreath can reconstruct the breathing of at least 5 people even when there is nearly zero distance between
them.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 86. Publication date: June 2018.
86:20 • S. Yue et al.
8 CONCLUSION
We present DeepBreath, the first wireless system that disentangles breathing signals of multiple individuals from
mixtures of such signals. As a result, it can provide contactless respiration monitoring of multiple people even
when they have zero distance between them. A user study with 13 couples who used DeepBreath for 21 nights in
their own homes shows that DeepBreath is highly accurate.
We believe DeepBreath opens the door for contactless multi-person sleep studies. Its output can directly serve
as the input for sleep stage classifiers [22, 49], or apnea detectors [3, 42]. As such it extends the benefits of such
contactless monitoring to couples and individuals sharing the same bed.
In this paper, we have focused on mixtures of breathing signals. However, the model and system components
that we developed extend beyond breathing to other small motions that modulate FMCW signals. Future work
will examine applications to disentangle other types of motion, e.g., typing, or the simultaneous motion of two
hands.