In this work, we explored the main characteristics of on- and offline shops with regard to customer shopping behavior and
frequency. Thus, we designed and implemented an immersive virtual reality (VR) online shopping environment. We tried to
maintain the benefits of online shops, like search functionality and availability, while simultaneously focusing on shopping
experience and immersion. By touching the third dimension, VR provides a more advanced form of visualization, which
can increase the customer’s satisfaction and thus shopping experience. We further introduced the Virtual Reality Shopping
Experience (VRSE) model based on customer satisfaction, task performance and user preference. A case study of a first VR
shop prototype was conducted and evaluated with respect to the VRSE model. The results showed that the usability and user
experience of our system is above average overall. In summary, searching for a product in a WebVR online shop using speech
input in combination with VR output proved to be the best regarding user performance (speed, error rate) and preference
(usability, user experience, immersion, motion sickness).
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → User centered design;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Virtual reality, customer satisfaction, shopping experience, virtual environment, 3D user
interfaces, user-centered design.
1 INTRODUCTION
Current online shops may be functional and efficient, but do not provide enough of an immersive shopping
experience [Buffa and Lafon 2000]. This paper focuses on developing an immersive virtual reality (VR) online
shopping environment that includes the major advantages of offline and online shopping (see Figure 5). The
main goal of the paper was to do the next step in investigating interaction in mobile VR shopping environments
Fig. 1. This figures shows a screenshot of our Virtual Reality Online Shopping Environment.
by taking a closer look on the influence of input (head pointing, speech) and output (desktop, HMD) on task
performance and user’s preference and behavior. In order to provide a realistic setting, we evaluated two common
hands-free interaction techniques using smartphone VR in a comparative user study.
Technological changes, in the form of online shops, pop-up stores and digitization in general, have not only
brought economic benefits to the retail sector. There is also a change in strategy underway, in which retailers
will put more and more emphasis on satisfying the customer. Therefore, a lot has been invested in research to
improve performance and usability of online shops’ user interfaces. Nevertheless, it is equally important for the
effectiveness of such user interfaces as well as for the customer’s satisfaction and shopping experience to provide
the user with the desired information in an appropriate and supportive way.
Using VR systems in the shopping area has grown in its importance and has emerged to a new trend to
create virtual stores. Retailers initiate these virtual environments to take customers along experiences. Although
VR shopping is still at the very beginning, this could fill the gaps of common online shopping (e.g., customer
satisfaction, and experience) and become one of the more popular ways to shop online. With the fast-growing
market of VR hardware as well as the data and knowledge that retailers have gathered in the last decades through
online shopping, the process is mutually beneficial. For the future of buying products online, retailers could
have a huge benefit. Using VR shops, in which a 3D rendering of products is created for customers to view
from every side, could lead to more satisfied customers as well as an ability to showcase detailed items, e.g., to
compare them with their 3D rendered counterparts. As ordinary online shops offer 2D content, they use simple
2D interfaces with hyperlinks, labels, icons and menus. Here, only the products are important, and you need to
find them quickly, for the sake of convenience and conversion rates. The products are mostly displayed in a list
or grid view, i.e. data browsing is done by scrolling or paged-based navigation. While this approach can have
high usability ratings, in particular for finding products, it abstracts away from the ”3D world” of stores, and
totally disregards the value of user experience and immersion, especially with an increasing number of products
and categories. A VR shop instead could profit by its third dimension and 3D interfaces such as 3D graphics,
natural metaphors or avatars. More vivid content representations might give a more positive consumer response.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:3
But modern media requires more complex interaction techniques, which consequently cause higher levels of user
instrumentation [Griffith et al. 2001]. By touching the third dimension, VR provides a more advanced form of
visualization, which can increase the customer’s satisfaction and thus shopping experience. It allows more natural
user interfaces (e.g. camera control using head rotation) than the usual mouse/keyboard interaction in a desktop
environment. But from a technological point of view, visualizations and interfaces of VR, shopping worlds, as well
as customer interactions in VR were rarely studied as well as the development of VR online shopping platforms.
Thus, there are only a few results that give insights on how such technologies provide compensation for the
lack of multi-sensory input and output (see look-oriented interaction with objects as in 360◦ product views,
spatial interaction with fresh food counters [Gehring et al. 2012] or interactive clothes booths) or ways to enable
multi-sensory interactions online.
In this work, we explored the main characteristics of on- and offline shops. Equipped with this knowledge, we
moved from the task of searching for a product to the design and implementation of a VR shop prototype. We tried
to maintain the benefits of online shops, like search functionality and availability, while shopping experience and
immersion should not be disregarded. Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that the experience and immersion
of a mobile online VR shop is strongly influenced by its technical limitations (e.g., lower resolution and render
quality, less computing performance, and possible network latency). So, our focus was more about evaluating
common potential input mechanisms for selecting products in a mobile interactive VR shop and the experience
of using desktop versus HMD. Our concept can be further applied to existing online shops, as they are connected
to a database consisting of adequate data quality and market layout data. Therefore, we developed an immersive
virtual shopping environment that includes the major advantages of e-commerce and WebVR using a smartphone.
Smartphones are already available for most users, and therefore are the cheapest, most affordable scenario for
virtual online shops. Additionally, WebVR applications can be used as mobile apps instead of high-resolution
VR applications requiring a wired Oculus Rift or HTC Vive device plus expensive high-performance hardware.
So our system allows the user to search for products by head pointing and speech input in a virtual shopping
environment.
In order to evaluate our system, we conducted a comparative user study to investigate the task of searching for
a product in a VR web store with different combinations of hands-free input (pointing vs. speech) and output
(desktop vs. VR) types. The motivation behind the two hands-free input methods instead of using text entry
was to reduce the inconvenience of shopping, because searching by typing the name can cause issues like
mistyping or not knowing the correct spelling of the desired product name. We used the desktop condition as the
baseline and because it is the standard output device for common 3D shopping environments. The VR setting
should particularly enhance the immersion and user experience. Moreover, the textured and true-to-scale 3D
representation of the product should also increase the customer’s satisfaction [Ohta et al. 2015; Pine and Gilmore
1998]. The results showed that the usability and user experience of our system is above average overall. As
expected, the search tasks were performed faster using the mouse and keyboard setting in the desktop mode.
Particularly in VR, speech input turned out to be the essential factor for usability and performance compared to
more commonly used head pointing and to both desktop inputs. The study also proves that the users had an
outstanding sense of presence and immersion in VR, although motion sickness was rated as quite high compared
to related VR applications, which could be due to the limitations of smartphone VR. In summary, searching for a
product using speech input in combination with VR output proved to be the best regarding user performance
and preference.
In the following, the structure of the remaining parts of this work is outlined. First, we assessed the current
situation of prior work in the fields of virtual shopping environments and interaction through literature review
(see Section 2). The next step was to introduce the VRSE model (see Section 3) as a theoretical approach and
metric for evaluating VR shopping environments based on common metrics in the related fields of customer’s
satisfaction, 3D User Interfaces, and Virtual Reality. As part of the user-centered design cycle, we conducted
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:4 • M. Speicher et al
a customer survey to understand the user and explore the main characteristics between on- and offline shops
(see Section 4.1), followed by the definition of first design principles for designing interfaces for VR shopping
environments based on related work and the survey results (see Section 4.2). These parts formed the basis for the
development of a proof-of-concept in the form of a mobile interactive VR shop using head pointing and speech as
input (see Sections 4.3,4.4 & 4.5). The next step was to conduct a case study and evaluate our VR shop prototype
(see Sections 5) with respect to the VRSE model. Finally, we formulated design guidelines for developing VR
shopping environments based on new findings from the customer survey and experimental results (see Section 6).
Hence, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Exploration of the main characteristics of on- and offline shopping with regard to customer shopping behavior and frequency.
• A case study of a first VR shop prototype was conducted and evaluated with respect to customer satisfaction, task performance and user preference. The study further investigated potential input mechanisms
for selecting products in a mobile interactive VR shop and the experience of using desktop versus HMDs
for output.
• Introducing the Virtual Reality Shopping Experience (VRSE) model based on customer satisfaction,
task performance and user preference.
2 RELATED WORK
The investigation and evaluation of virtual reality shopping experience using head pointing and speech input in
VR approaches from different domains. Specifically we identified (1) prior work in the field of shopping in virtual
environments, (2) reducing motion sickness in virtual environments, as well as (3) interaction in mobile virtual
reality applications.
2.1 Shopping in Virtual Environments
Currently, a major problem of online shops is the lack of clarity, realism and immersion. Buffa et al. [Buffa and
Lafon 2000] describe advantages and limitations of 3D stores. Adding a third dimension could fill these gaps in
the virtual shopping experience. In their point of view, customers will then benefit from always-open unstaffed
warehouses, time-saving shopping and multi-modal product information. This applies for online shops, but not
for physical stores. These findings have provided the basis on which we investigated the benefits of online versus
offline shopping and tried to combine them in the form of an interactive VR shopping environment.
In the last decades, more and more VR shopping environments have emerged, but mostly very simplistic. Some
projects are equipped with avatars [Zhao and Zhang 2012] or a personalized assistant. They further claimed that
VR shopping environments provide a „more feel experience” compared to 2D e-commerce environments [Chen
et al. 2008; Zhao and Zhang 2012] and 3D applications for e-commerce are feasible [Bei et al. 2005]. Sanna et
al. [Sanna et al. 2002] presented a virtual shopping environment generated from preferred products the users
chose before. This all indicates that personality and feasibility are crucial factors and should be addressed
when designing VR shopping experiences. In our work, we focus more on efficiency and feasibility, but the
personal aspect nevertheless will be considered as well as using speech input for searching product. AWE3D and
ADVIRT [Chittaro and Ration 2000] are architectures for adaptive 3D e-commerce websites. Here the store layout,
organization, and appearance were adapted to the personalized rules of the user. Nevertheless, these 3D shop
concepts only focus on adaptability, not availability, for VR technology. There are different concepts of creating
virtual shopping environments, but we will focus on dynamically generated environments, based on existing
on- or offline shop data, because of scalability, availability and sustainability. But the technology to develop
e-commerce applications for immersive VR already exists. Laver et al. [Laver et al. 2012] developed a grocery
shopping simulator to investigate the interaction between the user and the program. Patients participating in
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:5
neurological rehabilitation performed user tests resulting in mainly positive feedback. Although they focused on
usability, their results indicated that VR could have a strong impact on immersion. So we adapted the concept of
fully dynamic generated 3D online shops and extended it with immersive VR for output.
In Shop-WISE [De Troyer et al. 2007] the user is able to pick up 3D products and inspect them. A product
database is maintained separately and thus it can be altered very easily. Like common e-commerce systems and
online shops, we adapt this to our system to read out a product list dynamically to provide an up-to-date overview
of the inventory. Besides that, Shop-WISE allows searching for products by text input and moves the user to the
desired product after it has been selected from a results list. Here, the fact that all products have static locations
makes the shopping experience more realistic. However, in their approach the user chooses a product from a
text list without knowing if the product is the desired one, except by its title. We adapted their approach and
extended it using 3D model representations of the search results, so the user gets better clarity, whether the
desired product has been found, which can also persuade users to buy the product [Häubl and Figueroa 2002].
Ohta et al. [Ohta et al. 2015] propose a concept of a mixed reality shopping system to let the user explore a
virtual store in VR using a smartwatch as input. Their goal was to support disadvantaged shoppers and help
customers speed up their shopping trip. As one of the first ones, they provide a clear distinction between online
and offline shopping and stated characteristics. They claimed that e-commerce reduces the inconvenience of
shopping, but searching by name (speech or textual input) has issues like wrong inputs or not knowing the
store’s name for the desired product. Moreover, product images can also be insufficient for checking details, and
many products change their appearance more frequently, which can lead to high maintenance effort. We entirely
agree with this, so we used rotating 3D product representations in our system. In order to extend and verify their
claims and characteristics of online and offline shopping with regard to the users’ needs, we decided to conduct a
preliminary customer survey (see Section 4.1). Magic Home [Wan 2000] is a concept prototype of a VR furniture
store, which illustrates what the shopping experience could be like in future of hybrid reality systems. In their
scenario, the customer walks through a local physical store, where he or she can try out and feel the furniture.
And because this store provides a connection to a virtual representation of the customer’s home, he or she can
get a preview of how it will look like. We adapted this concept of a connection between physical and virtual
world, but vice versa. In our approach of a mobile interactive VR shop, the customer can go shopping in a virtual
3D representation of a grocery store from home or anywhere else.
But also commercial solutions are appearing on the market. A very recent example, but not yet market-ready, is
the eBay VR Shop Australia1, with more than 8, 000 products grouped in categories in a connected graph, instead
of rendering a virtual shopping market. Here, the user can select products by head pointing using dwell time (6
seconds). They call this interaction Sight Search, but, however, it is not more that the standard ray-cast pointing
technique for object selection using head orientation [Argelaguet and Andujar 2013]. This graph approach
provides a good overview of coarse-level categories, but can quickly break down into doubt and confusion if a
finer-level product search is needed, and is strongly dependent on the data quality and categorization complexity.
ShelfZone VR2 is a retail space simulator and reproduces shops dynamically generating a virtual shopping
environment by the use of planogram output, with data categorized into products, shelves, and zones. When
standing in front of a shelf, the customer can grab a product to get detailed information, which requires HTC
Vive controllers in their approach. They also provide a speech interface which can receive voice commands and
give feedback.
1https://vr.ebay.com.au/
2http://invrsion.com/shelfzone
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:6 • M. Speicher et al
2.2 Reducing motion sickness in virtual environments
When developing immersive VR applications using HMDs, motion sickness is one of the most crucial problems
and a main factor influencing user preference and experience. The main symptoms of motion sickness are nausea,
eye strain, headaches, and blurred vision. Sharples et al. [Sharples et al. 2008] showed that the symptoms are
greater when using immersive VR. Although they are negligible in a desktop setting, it can be used as a reference
for comparing different VR applications based on results in a desktop setting. However, there are different methods
for reducing motion sickness in virtual environments. Research of offline shopping experience in HCI is either
context-aware [Kim et al. 2015] or social [Garcia-Perate et al. 2013; Morris et al. 2014]. Based on findings of Black
et al. [Black et al. 2010] concerning context- aware shopping experience, we integrated a virtual shopping cart
into our design. Whittinghill et al. [Whittinghill et al. 2015] displayed a virtual nose to reduce motion sickness.
The users didn’t perceive the virtual nose, but a study showed that the presence of the virtual nose reduces motion
sickness. Recent research in motion sickness indicates that high velocity could amplify the symptoms [Mourant
and Thattacherry 2000; Tanaka and Takagi 2004], e.g. driving on a highway causes stronger symptoms than in
the city. A non-trivial factor for motion sickness is the field of view (FOV), because a larger FOV gives the user
a greater feeling of presence, but also of motion sickness [Lin et al. 2002; Seay et al. 2002]. Furthermore, they
found a negative correlation between motion sickness and enjoyment. Fernandes and Feiner [Fernandes and
Feiner 2016] presented a trade-off using a dynamically changing FOV. They conducted a study which showed
that their approach could help to keep the sense of presence while reducing the symptoms of motion sickness. In
our approach, both the default velocity and the FOV are set to a certain value to minimize motion sickness while
keeping the immersion as high as possible for every participant in our study.
2.3 Interaction in Mobile Virtual Reality Applications
Today’s smart-phones have multiple built-in sensors providing 3D data. The accelerometer measures the acceleration relative to the free fall, unlike the gyroscope, which measures the absolute device orientation [Liu 2013]. By
combining the sensors’ data, the 3D orientation of the device can be computed, but involves a certain risk of
jitter. Google Cardboard3 is a cheap head-mounted display (HMD) solution, compared to Oculus Rift4 or HTV
Vive5 hardware, because in their setup only a state-of-the-art smart-phone is needed. Here, the computed device
orientation serves as head rotation, so the user can look around in the virtual environment by moving the device,
or head if it is attached to a HMD case. In our approach, we used such a mobile WebVR setup inspired by Google
Cardboard, because of its high availability and low costs, which are crucial factors in common retail scenarios.
Concerning interaction with such hardware in a virtual environment, Soojeong et al. [Yoo and Parker 2015]
presented some controller-less interaction possibilities especially for mobile VR applications. They claimed
that gaze is one of the simplest, and has two types: instant and dwelling gaze. Instant gaze triggers object
selection directly by looking at it without any confirmation. In contrast, by using dwelling gaze, the selection
is triggered if the user looks at an object for a few seconds. While instant gaze or pointing cause the ”Midas
touch problem” [Istance et al. 2008], dwelling gaze prevents it, so we chose dwelling gaze for our approach.
According to Kim et al. [Kim et al. 2015], gaze- or pointing-based interaction has several benefits: naturalism,
remote controllability, and easy accessibility. They present their concept of gaze-based interaction that augments
the physical world in a shopping scenario.
Another powerful sensor in smartphones is the built-in microphone, which can be used to interact with the
virtual environment by speech input. Speech input is a very comfortable and natural input modality, and there has
been much research in the last decades in the field of speech recognition, with major companies like Microsoft or
3https://vr.google.com/cardboard/
4https://www3.oculus.com/en-us/rift/
5https://www.vive.com/us/product/
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:7
&RQYHQLHQFH
&XVWRPHU¶V
6DWLVIDFWLRQ
>/RKVH	6SLOOHU@
9LUWXDO5HDOLW\
>/HH	&KXQJ@
'8,(YDOXDWLRQ
0HWULFV
>%RZPDQHWDO@
(QMR\PHQW
4XDOLW\&RQWURO
,PPHUVLRQ
3UHVHQFH
,QWHUDFWLYLW\
7DVN3HUIRUPDQFH
8VHU3UHIHUHQFH
6\VWHP3HUIRUPDQFH
9LUWXDO5HDOLW\6KRSSLQJ([SHULHQFH956(
Fig. 2. The Virtual Reality Shopping Experience (VRSE) model.
Google bringing services to market. With the increasing amount of available data and computational resources,
it becomes more and more accurate [Schalkwyk et al. 2010; Schuster 2010]. Finally, we decided to use the ”Web
Speech API”6 in our approach, which is a speech recognition framework at word level for browsers using Google’s
speech recognition web service.
However, VR-based e-commerce applications require validation of such findings and answers to new questions. In particular, springing up VR shops are mostly based on web or mobile guidelines. Therefore, we introduce
the Virtual Reality Shopping Experience (VRSE) model. This will enable designers to build more usable and
effective VR shopping systems and help to move towards a stronger theoretical basis and more principled design
guidelines for VR shops.
3 VIRTUAL REALITY SHOPPING EXPERIENCE (VRSE)
One purpose of this research is to develop principles for the design and evaluation of effective and usable VR
shopping environments. Although there is lots of research in multimedia and e-commerce [Nemetz 2000], we
believe that there are still open questions and especially designers of VR shopping environments are still faced
with little guidance as there is no link between VR and e-commerce. So, we introduce the Virtual Reality Shopping
Experience (VRSE) model in order to fill the gap between VR and e-commerce. Our model combines the metrics
of customer’s satisfaction, evaluation of 3D user interfaces, and the characteristics of virtual reality (see Figure 2).
3.1 Customer’s Satisfaction
Most users see the interface of online shops as appropriate [Kendall and Kendall 2002], mainly because of
their search functionality and opening hours. This can lead to the assumption that ordinary online shops with
user-friendly and attractive user interfaces would provide a higher customer satisfaction including three main
characteristics: convenience, enjoyment and quality control [Jarvenpaa and Todd 1996; Lohse and Spiller 1998].
Satisfied customers could tend to make not only more purchases at once, but also repeated purchases. Therefore,
6https://cloud.google.com/speech/
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.                   
102:8 • M. Speicher et al
we want to address the main characteristics of customer satisfaction regarding online and offline shopping. With
regard to online shops, convenience includes store navigation features like search functions, site maps or product
indices which are essential for large stores [Lohse and Spiller 1998]. Enjoyment is important, because people find
playful interaction intrinsically interesting, e.g. when they are involved in activities like purchasing something
for pleasure and enjoyment [Agarwal and Karahanna 2000]. Quality control by customers of online shops is still
a challenging task. It requires the ability to test a product before purchase or get an impression of its size and
shape, which is not handled well by current online shops. While isolated online stores offer 360◦ images or videos
of products, they cannot actually fill the gap in experience or immersion.
3.2 3DUI Evaluation Metrics
As VR applications necessarily consist of 3D user interfaces (3DUI), Bowman et al. [Bowman et al. 2004] differentiate
between three evaluation metrics for 3DUI: system performance, task performance, and user preference. Whereas
system performance metrics include benchmarking (like average frame rate, average latency or interaction
time), task performance metrics include quantitative measurements such as task completion time, error rate and
accuracy (or precision). These metrics indicate to what extent users are able to cope with the task and interaction
method. User preference metrics usually consist of subjective feedback, such as user experience, usability and
motion sickness. User experience should be measured by the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) [Laugwitz
et al. 2008], an end-user questionnaire consisting of 26 very short questions to measure user experience quickly
in a simple and immediate way. For the usability assessment, the System Usability Scale (SUS) [Brooke et al.
1996] should be used, which is likely the most popular questionnaire for measuring attitudes toward system
usability7. It is a reliable and valid measure of perceived usability. Furthermore, it performs as well as or better
than commercial questionnaires and homegrown internal questionnaires. For measuring motion sickness, we
recommend to let participants fill out the Motion Sickness Assessment Questionnaire (MSAQ) [Gianaros et al.
2001], which is a valid instrument for the assessment of motion sickness.
3.3 Characteristics of Virtual Reality
VR, however, could be the next component to a better customer satisfaction and shopping experience. Lee and
Chung [Lee and Chung 2008] formulated three important characteristics of virtual reality (VR): immersion,
interactivity, and presence. Immersion and presence could be combined into one characteristic, i.e. to what extent
the customer’s senses are isolated from the real and stimulated by the virtual world and the subjective experience
of being in one environment, but physically situated in another. Interactivity indicates to what extent users
can participate in manipulating virtual content in real time. We recommend to use the common immersion
questionnaire for VR applications from Slater et al. [Slater et al. 1994] to measure the immersion and presence of
a virtual shopping environment. Here, it is important to customize this questionnaire by changing the location
description from ’office’ to ’store or shop’. The âĂŹSUS (Slater Usoh Steed) CountâĂŹ shows the mean of the
SUS count of âĂŸ6âĂŹ or âĂŸ7âĂŹ scores amongst the 6 questions. The âĂŸSUS MeanâĂŹ uses the mean score
across the 6 questions instead.
In summary, we want to combine the VR characteristics and 3DUI evaluation metrics into a model for evaluating
VR shopping experiences with regard to customer satisfaction (see Figure 2). This will enable designers to build
more usable and effective VR shopping systems and help to move towards a stronger theoretical basis and more
principled design guidelines.
7Not to be confused by the Slater-Usoh-Steed (SUS) Count [Slater et al. 1994], which measures presence and immersion.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:9












       
	
	



	
	


 
		
 
Fig. 3. Shopping frequency online vs. offline (N=41).








	 		 	 	

	 

	 		


	
		 		 	 
	 		
Fig. 4. Shopping behavior online vs. offline with regard to groceries, textiles, clothes, furniture, and electronics. (N=41).
4 MOVING FROM TASK TO DESIGN
4.1 Customer Survey
In the run-up to our work, we conducted an exploratory customer survey with a focus on positive and negative
aspects of on- and offline shopping, and also with a focus on shopping behavior and frequency. Based on the
results of this survey, we designed and developed a WebVR online shop addressing the issues and including the
benefits of on- and offline shopping.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.                                
102:10 • M. Speicher et al
A total of 41 participants (19 female) took part on this survey including 13 short questions. The participants’
ages ranged from 18 to 58 years (M = 31.12, SD = 12.35). Based on this age distribution and on common standards,
we defined four different age groups: 18-20 (7.3%), 21-24 (31.7%), 25-39 (39.0%), and 40-59 (22.0%). The housing
situation of the participants was nearly balanced, with most 31.7% living with a partner, followed by 24.4% living
alone, and each 22.0% living with parents/family or in a shared apartment. They were recruited in the entrance
area of a collaborated German retail hypermarket and volunteered uncompensated. After we asked a potential
participant and he or she agreed to participate, we let him or her fill out the survey using Google Form on
an tablet with internet connection. The survey was designed as short as possible and didn’t last longer than 5
minutes. The results of the survey were analyzed by us using IBM SPSS Statistics 24.
We asked them on a scale from 0 to 5 (0: never, 5: daily), how often they go shopping on- and offline. The results
indicate that customers go shopping more often in offline (M = 3.91, SD = 0.62) than in online stores (M = 2.45,
SD = 1.02). 98% go shopping offline at least once per week, 83% several times a week, but only 7% daily (see
Figure 3). We further asked them about their shopping behavior on a scale from 0 to 5 (0: never, 1: only offline, 5:
only online) with regard to five common product categories: food, textiles, clothes, furniture, and electronics
(see Figure 4). Food (M = 1.29, SD = 0.55) and furniture (M = 1.62, SD = 0.86) are bought more locally than
online to a great extent, as well as textiles (M = 2.45, SD = 1.13) and clothes (M = 2.55, SD = 0.97) mostly
locally but occasionally online. Asked on a scale from 1 to 5 (1: doesn’t apply at all, 5: applies fully), whether
they find it easy to find a desired product in offline and online shops, over 78% preferred online shops (M = 4.05,
SD = 0.85), whereas the results were rather moderate for finding products in offline shops, in general (M = 3.45,
SD = 0.89). A Multivariate ANOVA with all frequencies of types of goods (groceries, clothes, textiles, electronics,
and furniture) as dependent variables, and family status (living alone, in a relationship, with family/parents, or in
a shared apartment) and age ranges (18-20, 21-24, 25-39, and 40-59) as factors was conducted. A significant effect
has been found in terms of grocery shopping frequency regarding the family status (p < 0.03, F (3, 41) = 3.80,
η2 = 0.29). Moreover, there was an interaction between age ranges and family status in terms of grocery shopping
frequency (p < 0.04, F (6, 41) = 2.62, η2 = 0.36). We conducted another multivariate ANOVA with online versus
offline shopping frequency as dependent with regard to age ranges and family status, which showed no significant
differences (p > 0.05, F (3, 41) < 1.60, η2 < 0.14). Finally, an interaction has been found between age ranges and
family status in terms of ease of finding desired products (p < 0.05, F (6, 41) = 2.47, η2 = 0.34).
With regard to the positive aspects of online shops, 68% of the participants mentioned the search functionality
(see Figure 5). In each case, however, 12% mentioned that the search functionality is often badly implemented,
and the display of products in lists or tiles is unstructured and confusing. On the other hand, as benefits of offline
shops, most mentioned employees (51%), signs (34%), and the use of departments and shelves as categories (24%).
In summary, today’s online shops are generally acceptable in their search quality and functionality, but lag
behind because of its often confusing and unstructured interfaces, which finally results in lower user experience
and customer’s satisfaction in general according to participants’ comments. This is also reflected by the product’s
dimensions and representation in ordinary online shops. The majority of participants of the customer survey
reported that the product representations in the form of colored 2D pictures in scrollable lists are hard to
understand, i.e. the user doesn’t get a clear sense of its size, shape, or weight. In addition, the user is forced to
scroll the list or navigate through several pages, so the workload (effort, frustration, etc.) and user experience
(attractiveness, stimulation, etc.) may thereby be impaired. Nevertheless, more and more 360◦ product pictures
and videos are to be found. This is a next step, but still not an optimal solution. The lack of clarity and the aspect
of experience and satisfaction still are issues.
VR could fill this gap by merging the advantages of on- and offline shops together and getting off their major
limitations. In any case, our concept provides 3D model representations of the products, placed in virtual shelves
and departments in a virtual store. The focus here is on user experience and customer satisfaction. But the user’s
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:11
positive aspects (N=102) negative aspects (N=30)
ONLINE (N=60) OFFLINE (N=72)
Ɣ search functionality (28)
Ɣ filter / categories (10)
Ɣ ratings / feedback / tests (8)
Ɣ experience (1)
Ɣ confusing / unstructured (5)
Ɣ bad search function (5)
Ɣ too big range of products (2)
Ɣ no filters (1)
Ɣ employees (21)
Ɣ signs (14)
Ɣ shelf names / departments (10)
Ɣ habit (10)
Ɣ store too large / lack of clarity (8)
Ɣ not sorted properly (4)
Ɣ not sorted (4)
Ɣ too frequent changes in sorting (1)
= 47 = 13
= 55 = 17
Fig. 5. This figure illustrates the main characteristics of off- and online shopping mentioned by the participants of our
customer survey (N=132, with N as the number of mentioned items).
performance (error rate, speed) is still an important factor, because even an otherwise satisfied customer needs to
find his/her desired products.
But nevertheless, further studies should be conducted to investigate the effects of VR in different shopping
areas or instances. The main reason why people prefer to buy furniture in physical stores is that they can feel the
texture of a furniture and get a better idea of how it could look like in their apartment. And thus here is the great
potential for VR furniture stores, because the customer could then look at the furniture in his home environment
and easily configure individual components, like color, texture, or size. IKEA has made a first step for VR furniture
shopping in the form of a free VR application in the Steam Store 8, where the user can explore and interact with
an IKEA Kitchen in VR. But also clothes can be tried in VR in mixed reality dressing rooms [Yang et al. 2009].
VR stores for electronics could enable the customer to test and try out products and configure their individual
components in VR before purchasing them. One example could be to arrange and test a new sound system in a
virtual representation of the user’s home environment. However, according to our customer survey, groceries
are bought above-average offline. Furthermore, groceries have, compared to other types of goods (e.g., furniture
or electronics), the most different product types, categories and ranges. In addition, online grocery shopping is
becoming more and more relevant with an increasing amount of offers to deliver groceries to your doorstep, but
8http://store.steampowered.com/app/447270/
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.    
102:12 • M. Speicher et al
the acceptance and feedback of online grocery shops is rather negative. Therefore, we decided to investigate
grocery shopping in a mobile online VR shop including a better experience than with traditional online grocery
shopping and better than the performance in physical offline stores.
In summary, the factors generated from our exploratory customer survey influenced our decision to develop our
system based on WebVR simulating a online grocery shop and equipped with search functionality. Nonetheless,
the VRSE model is generalizable to all the mentioned retail areas. And our experimental study includes one
example scenario how to use the VRSE model for evaluating VR shopping experience of a virtual shopping
environment, in our case with focus on online grocery shopping.
4.2 Designing Interfaces for Virtual Reality Shopping Experiences
When designing interfaces for VR shopping experiences, the main task of the application should be clear, so
that the designer can move from task to design. In this paper, we focus on the task of searching for products.
However, we recommend to conduct a preliminary customer survey preferably right in the offline store, which
should gather direct feedback from the target group. The main benefits should be respected while avoiding the
mistakes that surround online as well as offline shopping environments according to customer survey findings
(see Figure 5). Therefore, we provide a list of potential guidelines based on the survey results that could be used
to inform the design of VR shop interfaces:
i. CLARITY. The scene should be as simple as possible, but still keep the feeling of being in a store looking
for products. Therefore, signs, shelves and departments as visual categorizations and cues can help the
customers to be better oriented and feel more immersive. And an increasing number of products in a
store requires customer-friendly filters (organic food, allergens, sizes, colors, etc.) and a proper product
categorization to help the users finding their desired products faster.
But: Too many categories and a lack of clarity of the filters may also influence the performance and experience.
The customers wish well-structured stores, not confusing, not too large, and not a too big range of products and
departments. And do not overfill the shelves with products. In common large offline stores, when customers are
standing in front of a shelf searching for a product, it is like „they cannot see the wood for the trees”. Keep in
mind that in virtuality, there is no need to overfill the shelves with duplicates of products.
ii. EFFICIENCY. Provide the user with a user-friendly and efficient search functionality. Here, search filters
can help to select products by their attributes and features or by their description texts.
But: If you are using text-based methods, there will be a strong need of auto-completion, spell and synonym
checker. Otherwise the usability and performance might be influenced negatively.
iii. ORIENTATION. Use signs, shelf names or numbers in combination with a proper and useful categorization
to give the users a better orientation in the virtual market. In addition, depending on the size of the market,
the products and their shelves should be sorted properly in visually distinguishable departments.
But: Do not overload the user with disturbing colors, unintuitive names or „too much information”. A clearly
arranged assortment makes it easier and faster for the user to find and select the desired product.
iv. PERSONALITY. An essential factor is the personal aspect of a virtual shop. According to the feedback of
the customer survey (see Figure 5), the customers of offline stores prefer the presence and interactivity of
employees. More precisely, the ability to talk to an assistance and ask questions like „where can I find the
milk?” is preferred instead of typing text on a computer or terminal. Use speech input and/or output to
fill this gap. The speech interface serves as the personal part of the environment. Here, the customer can
use his voice to search for products instead of typing text, so she is interacting with the system in a more
personal way.
But: Today’s state-of-the-art speech-based interfaces are still in an infancy stage. So the developers should
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:13
always keep in their minds that the speech recognition ratio can have a crucial influence on the shopping
experience.
v. QUALITY. Provide the user with sufficient information about the products (e.g. feedback, ratings and
tests). Instead of providing textual detailed information about the product’s dimensions, shape or weight, it
can be visualized using interactive 3D object representations and gravity in the virtual environment.
But: Incorrect size, shape or weight will influence massively the user’s impression of the product and environment
itself.
4.3 Design
The virtual environment of our VR shop was designed to be as simple as possible, but still close to a real market
(see Figure 6). While in reality shelves are overfilled with products and the environment is decorated all over
with advertisements, our approach contains only a clearly arranged assortment for quick and easy selection. This
should solve one of the most common problems the customers complained of in the customer survey, namely
that they struggle more with the lack of clarity the larger the market is. The environmental colors were chosen
to be as neutral as possible to prevent positive or negative impact. Nevertheless, the attention of the user should
always be attracted to the products, therefore they are colorful and natural, unlike the colorless surrounded
elements. The contrast is emphasized by a subtle glossy reflection of the products.
Existing market layout and floor planning data provides information about dimensions, position and size
of different types of store elements (walls, shelves, departments), so they could be easily parsed and rendered.
Shelves contain at least one product, products are evenly distributed, and the space between each rack is computed
by the market is height and the number of tiers (levels in the shelf). A product is represented by a virtual 3D
model and is placed on its corresponding shelf level according to the floor plan data. After a product has been
Fig. 6. This figure illustrates the virtual environment of our VR shop including the shopping cart, a move plate (orange), the
speech interface in the back, and shelves equipped with products on the right. The colors of the environment were chosen to
be as neutral as possible, and only the products, move plates and the cursor were colored, in order to improve clarity and
minimize distractions.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:14 • M. Speicher et al
selected, a detail view is displayed, including a larger rotating 3D model of the product, side information like
price and description, and buttons for adding it to the shopping cart or closing the detail view. The cart is always
located in front of the user and holds all previously selected products, which can also be removed. A control
panel at the cart’s handle includes the total price, a button to open the speech interface and one to reset the scene.
Besides those store elements, waypoints are displayed as move plates and spread over the whole market. In order
to prevent unintentional movements, the user only sees nearby surrounding move plates. Thus for every possible
user position, it is ensured that there at least two move plates in range.
4.4 Controls and Interfaces
As we focus on a mobile online WebVR application without controller and hand interaction, our system provides
two different input modes: speech input and head pointing. According to the customer survey results, the majority
of the participants really valued the search functionality of online shops. But on the contrary, this can even have
the opposite effect if it is error-prone. Therefore, and because we want to avoid text entry in VR, our speech
input method should enable VR customers to find their desired products in an efficient way. The speech interface
is located on a wall in the scene and provides the functionality to search for products and list the results (see
Figure 8). The user starts by gazing at the button with a speech bubble icon and speaking the search term into
the microphone. After the search results are displayed, the user can select the desired product by gazing for five
seconds in order to be moved to the desired shelf. When the user is looking at a result, the front view of the
respective product is displayed in the middle of the search interface for better decision-support.
Another way to search for a product, and for the more exploratory characters among the users, we chose a
navigation through head pointing and waypoints. Here, the user is moving around using the way-points and
looking for it in the shelves (see Figure 7). Our system doesn’t include eye-tracking hardware, as it is the today’s
state-of-the-art for common VR installations and applications. But different concepts exist (e.g., PupilLabs’ HTC
Fig. 7. Head Pointing. Here, the user looks at a nearby waypoint in order to be moved. Then, a product is placed into the
shopping cart after it has been selected. Finally, the total sum and amount of items is displayed on the shopping cart’s
handle.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:15
Fig. 8. Speech input. Here, the user starts by gazing at the speech button, and speaks the search term into the microphone.
After the search results are displayed, the user can select the desired product in order to be moved to the desired shelf.
Vive or Oculus DK2 integration 9, or other commercial products like SMI 10), so it is just a matter of time until
the first mobile VR hardware equipped with eye-tracking will be affordable and usable. However, as we wanted
to focus on affordable, commodity and state-of-the-art mobile VR scenarios, we decided to use head pointing
interaction instead of eye gaze. Whereas the procedure of this input mode is straightforward, i.e. the user moves
around in the virtual environment by using (looking at) the move plates and looking around to explore the
market, it has the limitation that in the worst case scenario the user has to move through the whole virtual
environment until the desired product is found. The advantage is that efficiency should increase proportional to
the spatial knowledge of the market layout, i.e. once the environment is well-known, it is easy to find products by
moving straight towards them. Nevertheless, it can still take some time to find the product in the desired shelf.
Concerning the output devices, the system automatically detects which output devices are currently available
and displays the rendered scene to them. One way to use it is in a desktop setting with an attached monitor (see
Figure 9). Of course, the render quality is better than on a mobile device, but applications in the desktop setting
could be lacking in immersion and user experience. Another way is to use a mobile VR, which is cheap and
affordable, in contrast to high-end HMDs (see Figure 9). Whereas in a desktop setting, head pointing and speech
have to be tracked by an extra device (like Microsoft Kinect), both come for free using smart-phone sensors and a
built-in microphone. Another benefit is handiness, because the smart-phone doesn’t need a tethered connection,
so it can be used nearly everywhere, even in public. However, the most crucial limitation for smart-phone VR is
the render quality and computing performance, which is not comparable with the power of a PC.
4.5 Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality
The main benefits of WebVR are its mobility and affordability. Our choice of a WebVR application was made to
gain a further advantage, namely that existing web shops could be rendered in a 3D scene instead of on a classical
2D web page. Our approach includes a link to an existing product database and its search functionality, as well
as to the market layout system of the corresponding retail store. The novelty of our approach consists in the
visualization and interaction of a virtual store and not in product search or market navigation. We investigated
9https://pupil-labs.com/blog/2016-02/eye-tracking-for-vr-and-ar/
10https://www.smivision.com/eye-tracking/product/mobile-eye-tracking-hmd-samsung-gearvr/
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:16 • M. Speicher et al
how to enhance the shopping experience, as a combination of customer satisfaction and user experience, for
online shops. In an experiment to evaluate our system, the virtual environment (market layout, 3D models and
locations of the products) of the VR online shop is dynamically generated based on a fictive store’s product
database and floor plan.
5 A CASE STUDY: VR SHOP
We conducted an experiment in order to gather insights into user performance, preference, and unmet needs.
The study provides us with:
• Metrics. Objective and behavioral performance data that provides a usability baseline to measure future
improvements of virtual reality online environments.
• Customer insights. Actionable insights on how to optimize usability, satisfaction, and experience for the
customers.
• Actionable improvements. Concrete recommendations for improvements based on research findings.
The purpose of this experiment was to evaluate the end-to-end experience of users as they interact with our
system using, in each case, two different input (speech vs. pointing only) and output (VR vs. desktop) methods.
5.1 Pilot study
Before turning to the first main study, we first describe a preliminary experiment we conducted to establish the
trial time limit, appropriate product locations, different movement types and feedback modes. This pilot study
was conducted with four unpaid university students, without giving the participants feedback regarding their
trial time. The task of the pilot study was to process items on a shopping list after a short exploration phase
in the environment. One participant was concerned about the speech interface’s location, which initially was
dynamically positioned at the user’s position in his field of view. He or she complained about a lack of realism, so
the speech interface was finally positioned at a fixed location in the virtual market. Another participant asked for
functionality to add a product twice to the shopping cart. The participants had two options to move through the
scene, by moving along a path or teleporting. In the path movement setting, the user is moved over a minimal
path along way-points to the target position. The teleportation is based on concepts of dream research and uses
the metaphor of closing the eyes. After the user has been teleported to the target position, the „eyes” were opened
again. In our pilot study, the participants preferred the path movement, so it was used in the course of the main
Fig. 9. This figures show the output devices we used for our prototype. On the left: 22 inch display with Microsoft Kinect 2
for speech input and a standard mouse for camera control. On the right: a common smart-phone VR case and LG Nexus 5X.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:17
study. With regard to the product highlighting, all pilot participants preferred the cone highlighting method,
where a cone was placed above the product the user is currently looking at, fading out all other products. So in
the end, the cone highlighting was chosen as the standard feedback mode for product highlighting. As we used
real products from a common German retail store, product names can be very complex to detect from speech or
even pronounced by the participants. So, with regard to the planned speech input method, we used the pilot
study to remove product names to be searched by the participants in each task in the main experiment, which
couldn’t be recognized easily or impossible to be recognized using the Web Speech API from Google.
5.2 Hypothesis
H1 Desktop is faster than VR.
H2 VR is preferred by the user in terms of user experience and usability.
H3 Speech input is more efficient (speed, error rate) than head pointing only and is preferred by the user
(usability, user experience).
H4 VR with speech input outperforms the others in all aspects.
5.3 Participants
A total of 16 unpaid participants (13 male, 3 female) volunteered in this experiment, aged between 17 and 55
years (M = 23.88, SD = 8.52). 69% of the participants had a university background; the rest were staff members
and high-school graduates. The overall experience with VR and desktop applications, as well as the acceptance of
VR shopping, were rated on a Likert-scale from 1 to 5. The level of experience with VR applications was very low
overall (M = 1.25, SD = 1.34), whereas it was very high with desktop applications (M = 4.25, SD = 0.93). When
asked whether they would go shopping in VR in the near future, the answers varied widely (M = 2.88, SD = 1.31).
However, most of the participants tend to buy more often per month in real shops (M = 7.56, SD = 5.48) than
online (M = 2.93, SD = 2.23).
Fig. 10. Left: Desktop setting. Here, the participant controls the camera by moving the mouse with her/his dominant hand.
The speech was recorded by a Microsoft Kinect 2, placed under the display. The keyboard shown in this picture had no effect
and was not used in the experiment. Right: VR setting. Here, the user controls the camera by moving her/his head. Speech
was recorded by the smart-phone’s microphone.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:18 • M. Speicher et al
5.4 Apparatus
For the two desktop tasks a standard desktop computer was used with an i7 CPU, 16 GB RAM and a Nvidia
GeForce GTX 980Ti graphics card. The display screen was 22 inches with a resolution of 1920x1080 pixels. In the
desktop/pointing task, a standard mouse/keyboard setup was used for input devices (see Figure 10). The system
had to be connected to the web at all times, because the application itself was a web page, which permanently
sent logs to the a web server and was initially loaded from it. For displaying the WebVR content, a Google Chrome
web browser and Microsoft Windows 10 was used. The desktop/speech task was performed with the same setup,
but without the keyboard and mouse and instead using the built-in microphone of a Microsoft Kinect 2 for the
speech input (see Figure 10). For both VR tasks LG Nexus 5X smartphone with a display size of 5.2 inches was
used, which was put into Elegiant 3D VR glasses (see Figure 10). For using the system on the mobile device, only
the Google Chrome App has to be installed, in combination with at least Android 6.0.
5.5 Design
The experiment was a within-subjects design, having two independent variables with two levels, respectively:
• Input Method (head pointing, speech input)
• Output Method (desktop, VR)
The input method conditions were counterbalanced using a Latin square. Aside from training, this amounted
to 16 participants × 2 input methods × 2 output methods × 4 search terms = 256 trials. The four products were
placed all over the virtual shop, and in order to ensure equal conditions for every participant, all trials started
at the same position. Furthermore, the participants received only minimal instructions about the functionality
of the different interaction types, so that no explicit conceptual model was assigned to them. The dependent
variables were as follows:
• Performance (task completion time, error rate)
• Preference (usability, user experience, motion sickness, immersion)
It is also important to mention, that every trial had to be performed within a time limit of 120 seconds (see
Pilot Study 5.1); otherwise the trial was counted as failed. The average duration of the whole experiment per
participant was about 60 minutes, including an introduction and all questionnaires.
5.6 Task
The first experiment consisted of four different tasks representing all combinations of two output (desktop vs. VR)
and two input (pointing vs. speech) modes. Every participant had to perform each of these four tasks with the
goal to search for four specific products within the virtual shopping environment one after another, select them,
and put into the shopping cart provided for this purpose. In head pointing mode, the participants performed a
search task in order to find a certain product. As is standard practice, this product search task had two stages.
The participant could only interact with waypoints or products at near range. However, after they stood in front
of a shelf where they expected to find the desired product, the second stage of the search task began. Here, they
searched for the product in the shelf’s racks. When the participant had put the correct product in the shopping
cart, the trial was completed successfully. In speech mode, the navigation part of the search task was omitted and
replaced by a speech input task. Moreover, the participants then would not be able to move using the waypoints,
so they were not displayed anymore. They started in front of a speech interface panel. After a product search
was initiated by speech input, the search results were displayed. Since a search result has been selected, the
participant was moved to the corresponding shelf along the shortest path.
In summary, each of the four tasks consisted of four trials, one per product. A trial was completed if the correct
product was in the shopping cart within the time limit of 120 seconds; otherwise the trial was marked as failed.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:19
5.7 Procedure
At the beginning of the experiment, the participant was welcomed by the experimenter. After that, the participant
was to perform all four tasks in Latin-square order , which lasts about 20-30 seconds in average for one of four
trials per task, i.e. about 5-10 minutes for all four in- and output task combinations in average. Before each task,
the task goal and the handling of the interaction technique were introduced to the participant within a short
warm-up phase with a maximum of 5 minutes. After the warm-up phase in the virtual environment and after each
trial, the examiner reset all states in the virtual environment, so that the participant could always start from the
same position. When all four trials of a task were performed, the participant was asked to fill out questionnaires
collecting the subjective feedback: a System Usability Scale (SUS), User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ), Motion
Sickness Assessment Questionnaire (MSAQ) and (only for VR) Presence Questionnaire. Those questionnaires
took about 5 minutes after each of the four tasks. Furthermore, there was a 2-minute break after each set of
post-task questionnaires and before the next task. Finally, after all 16 trials were performed and all post-task
questionnaires were filled out, the participant was asked to fill out a final questionnaire collecting demographic
data. Overall, the experiment took about 60 minutes per participant in total.
5.8 Results
In this results section and in the following discussion we use abbreviations for the four tasks we tested: D
for desktop, V for Virtual Reality, 1 for head pointing, and 2 for speech input. Put together, they are: D1
(Desktop/Pointing), D2 (Desktop/Speech), V1 (VR/Pointing), V2 (VR/Speech). The results of the experiment were
analyzed by us using IBM SPSS Statistics 24.
5.8.1 Task Completion Time & Error Rate. The task completion time is the elapsed time for the user to complete
a trial within a search task. In the head pointing mode, it is defined by the elapsed time between the first pointing
interaction with a way-point and the moment the searched for product was added to the cart. In the speech mode,
the time measurement started with the first glance on the speech balloon symbol on the search interface panel,
and ended when the searched for product was added to the cart. The error rate is defined by the ratio of the
number of times that participants failed to find the desired products within a maximum period of 60 seconds. It is
also worth to mention that if the speech recognition has failed, i.e. the spoken command wasn’t detected correctly,
the trial would have not been automatically counted as a fail. But, however, only in a very small minority of
cases, which was not worth to mention due to our optimized choice of product names after the pilot study (see
Section 5.1), the time limit exceeded because of recognition fails instead of just „not finding the target product”.
The overall task completion time of all trials (N = 64) was on average 24.05s (SD = 11.68) with an error rate of
21% (SD = 0.41) in average. There were significant differences between the four tasks concerning task completion
time (p < 0.01, F (1, 202) = 4.461) and error rate (p < 0.01, F (1, 252) = 26.235). V2 was the fastest task with a
mean time of 22.80s (SD = 6.44), and with an error rate of 2% (SD = 0.13). While D2 lasted on average 23.00s
(SD = 12.27) and had an error rate of only 8% (SD = 0.27), D1 took 23.45s (SD = 8.29) with 22% (SD = 0.42)
of the trials failed. Finally, V1 came off the worst both in time (M = 31.07s, SD = 11.10) and a 50% failure rate
(SD = 0.50). When comparing the input mode, speech input was faster on average (M = 22.90s, SD = 9.67)
than head pointing (M = 25.83s, SD = 14.10), and with a notably lower error rate of 5% (SD = 0.21) against
38% (SD = 0.49). But concerning the output modes, the tasks D1 and D2 were faster, with a mean time of 22.85s
(SD = 13.45), than the ones in VR (M = 25.46s, SD = 9.05). The desktop tasks also had less failures (M = 15%,
SD = 0.36) than V1 and v2 (M = 27%, SD = 0.45). Furthermore, univariate ANOVA analysis were conducted
with task, input mode and output mode as factors, and the elapsed time and error rate as dependent variables. A
significance was found regarding the task (p < 0.01, F (3, 202) = 4.461), as well as a significant effect of completion
time with regard to the input mode (p < 0.05, F (1, 202) = 5.662) and output (p < 0.05, F (1, 202) = 5.990). In
addition, an interaction was found between the input and output modes (p < 0.01, F (1, 202) = 6.610). Furthermore,
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:20 • M. Speicher et al
Fig. 11. Results of the task completion time measurements. The values are given in seconds (s). D1 (Desktop/Pointing), D2
(Desktop/Speech), V1 (VR/Pointing), V2 (VR/Speech).
Fig. 12. Results of the error rate measurements. The values are given in percent (%). D1 (Desktop/Pointing), D2 (Desktop/Speech), V1 (VR/Pointing), V2 (VR/Speech).
there were also significant differences of error rate in general (not the recognition rate) regarding input (p < 0.01,
F (1, 252) = 53.480), and output (p < 0.01, F (1, 254) = 7.761), and finally an interaction was found between input
and output (p < 0.01, F (1, 252) = 17.463).
5.8.2 Usability. The System Usability Scale (SUS) [Brooke et al. 1996] is likely the most popular questionnaire
for measuring attitudes toward system usability. It is a reliable and valid measure of perceived usability. Furthermore, it performs as well as or better than commercial questionnaires and homegrown internal questionnaires.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:21
Fig. 13. Results of the System Usability Score (SUS)-Questionnaire. D1 (Desktop/Pointing), D2 (Desktop/Speech), V1
(VR/Pointing), V2 (VR/Speech).
The overall SUS score including all four tasks was on average 72.19 (SD = 15.92). V2 had the best SUS score
in average (M = 77.50, SD = 13.21), followed D1 (M = 75.00, SD = 17.18), D2 (M = 70.94, SD = 12.84) and
V1 (M = 65.31, SD = 17.39). Regarding the input modes, speech (D2 and V2) was rated higher (M = 74.22,
SD = 13.21) than head pointing (D1 and V1; M = 70.16, SD = 17.89). Here, a univariate ANOVA pointed out a
significance regarding each task (p < 0.01, F (3, 252) = 7.82), and a significant effect with regard to input mode
(p < 0.05, F (1, 252) = 4.56). The desktop tasks (D1 and D2) had with regard to output mode an average score of
73 (M = 72.97, SD = 15.25) and the VR tasks had an average score of 71 (V1 and V2; M = 71.41, SD = 16.41),
with no significant difference between them (p = 0.43, F (1, 252) = 0.623). However, an interaction between input
and output was found (p < 0.01, F (1, 252) = 18.22).
5.8.3 User Experience. We chose the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) [Laugwitz et al. 2008] as an
end-user questionnaire to measure user experience quickly in a simple and immediate way. Overall, the user
experience was rated at −0.116 (SD = 0.14) on average on a scale between −3 to 3. A closer look into the results
per single task shows that V2 and D2 were rated with a value of −0.11 on average (V2: M = −0.11, SD = 0.09; D2:
M = −0.11, SD = 0.13). Nevertheless, D1 had an average of −0.13 (M = −0.13, SD = 0.20) and V1 had an average
of −0.12 (M = −0.12, SD = 0.11). However, there were no significant differences between the tasks (p = 0.84,
F (1, 252) = 0.28). With regard to the input methods, speech was rated with −0.11 on average (M = −0.11,
SD = 0.11) and head pointing with −0.12 (M = −0.12, SD = 0.16), but also without significant differences .
Finally, with respect to the output methods, VR was rated with an average of −0.11 (M = −0.11, SD = 0.10) and
desktop with an average of −0.12 (M = −0.12, SD = 0.17). Unfortunately, there was no significant differences
between the output modes (p = 0.52, F (1, 252) = 0.41).
However, the data was subjected to a factor analysis, which resulted in the construction of a 26-item questionnaire including the six factors Attractiveness (A), Perspicuity (P), Efficiency (E), Dependability (D), Stimulation
(S), and Novelty (N), see Figure 14. A multivariate ANOVA with all six factors as dependent variables showed
no significance in terms of A, N, D and E with regard to the single tasks, but P (p < 0.01, F (3, 252) = 4.72) and
S (p < 0.01, F (3, 252) = 5.87). Regarding the two input methods, we found significant differences based on P
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:22 • M. Speicher et al
Fig. 14. Results of the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ).
(p < 0.01, F (1, 252) = 9.40) and a significant effect of N (p < 0.05, F (1, 252) = 4.69). Nevertheless, an interaction
was found between input and output regarding P (p < 0.05, F (1, 252) = 3.93) and S (p < 0.01, F (1, 252) = 13.15).
5.8.4 Motion Sickness. For measuring motion sickness, we asked the participants to fill out the Motion Sickness
Assessment Questionnaire (MSAQ) [Gianaros et al. 2001], which is a valid instrument for the assessment of
motion sickness, and gave a total score of 5% on average (M = 0.05, SD = 0.08). The results further show that V1
has the highest motion sickness score (M = 0.09, SD = 0.10), followed by V2 (M = 0.08, SD = 0.08), D2 (M = 0.03,
SD = 0.04) and D1 with the lowest score (M = 0.02, SD = 0.04). Pointing had an average score of 6% (M = 0.06,
SD = 0.08) compared to speech with an average of 5% (M = 0.05, SD = 0.07), but without significant difference
between them (p < 0.01, F (1, 254) = 61.23). Regarding the output, the desktop received a higher score of 2%
(M = 0.02, SD = 0.04) than VR with a lower average of 8% (M = 0.08, SD = 0.09), with significant differences
(p < 0.01, F (1, 252) = 45.16).
A Multivariate ANOVA with all four MSAQ factors (G: gastrointestinal, C: central, P: peripheral, S: sopiterelated) as dependent variables and single task as factor was conducted. It showed, that there are significant
differences regarding the single tasks (G: p < 0.01, F (3, 252) = 22.79; C: p < 0.01, F (3, 252) = 21.15; P: p < 0.03,
F (3, 252) = 3.29; S: p < 0.01, F (3, 252) = 18.93). Another Multivariate ANOVA with all four MSAQ factors as
dependent variables and input and output as factors was conducted. There were significant differences regarding
the output (G: p < 0.01, F (1, 254) = 67.10; C: p < 0.01, F (1, 254) = 61.23; P: p < 0.01, F (1, 254) = 6.81; S: p < 0.01,
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:23
F (1, 254) = 54.93). But apart from that, there were no significances found regarding the input (G: p < 0.33,
F (1, 254) = 0.97; C: p < 0.27, F (1, 254) = 1.25; P: p < 0.10, F (1, 254) = 2.85; S: p < 0.18, F (1, 254) = 1.86). There
was also no interaction found between the input and output types (G: p < 0.59, F (1, 254) = 0.30; C: p < 0.33,
F (1, 254) = 0.98; P: p < 0.65, F (1, 254) = 0.21; S: p < 0.93, F (1, 254) = 0.01).
5.8.5 Immersion. In order to measure the immersion and presence of the virtual environment, we used the
common immersion questionnaire for VR applications from Slater et al. [Slater et al. 1994]. So, there are no
results provided for D1 and D2, because this questionnaire As the SUS (Slater Usoh Steed) questionnaire is
designed primarily for VR applications, it was only filled out by the participants after the VR tasks. Moreover,
immersion measures are not the forefront of desktop applications and this part of the evaluation was more a
plausibility test for our proof of concept including the VRSE model. So these results will serve as a basis for future
studies exploring interaction in VR shopping environments. However, the ’SUS Count’ shows the mean of the
SUS count of ‘6’ or ‘7’ scores amongst the 6 questions. Here, the SUS count for V2 (speech) is slightly higher
(1.13) than for V1 (1.00). The ‘SUS Mean’ uses the mean score across the 6 questions instead. Both VR tasks
have nearly equal SUS means, whereas V2 (speech) has an average of 2.76 (SD = 0.91), and V1 (head pointing)
2.76 (SD = 0.86), which was slightly variable. Here, there was a significant effect concerning the input methods
((p < 0.05, F (1, 252) = 4.271). The overall immersion score of the VR shopping environment was 2.78 (SD = 0.88).
5.9 Discussion
In this work the role of speech compared to head pointing input in a desktop setting as well as in VR was
investigated. In the following the results of the first experiment will be discussed with a detailed consideration of
the objective (task completion time, error rate) and subjective (usability, user experience, motion sickness and
immersion) feedback.
5.9.1 Task Completion Time & Error Rate. The analysis of the results of the task completion time demonstrate
that searching for a product in the virtual environment by speech input performs faster than using only the
user’s head pointing, which partly confirms H3. So it seems to be easier for the users to simply pronounce the
product name and let the system search for its location. In speech mode, the system provides a list of search
results in realtime and the user only needs to choose one of these, instead of scanning the whole market for the
desired product. Although there was an exploration phase before each task, searching for a product only via
head pointing faces an additional handicap of spatial knowledge of the environment. However, maybe in smaller
shops the input methods could equalize. But even in larger stores the customers are familiar with, they still have
to move to the desired product through the whole store, which will always take longer than teleporting.
Regarding the task completion time of the two outputs, the desktop was more efficient than VR with regard
to speed and error rate (H1). On the one hand, this can be explained by the different means of pointing control
(mouse vs. head pointing) and the graphical resolution due to the technical setups. Then again, it is to be expected
that the desktop output tasks are faster on average than VR, because despite its more natural use of head pointing,
the participants were used to controlling the camera by mouse in 3D scenes. But in practice, this is contrary to
the subjective feedback of the participants (usability, user experience). The bad performance of head pointing in
VR could be also explained by the technical limitations of using WebGL on a smart-phone browser and the still
error-prone sensor input of mobile devices. Maybe using a more sophisticated VR HMD and hardware would
provide different results. However, this experiment focuses on commodity, affordable and state-of-the-art VR
hardware.
5.9.2 Subjective Feedback. Based on research, a System Usability Scale (SUS) score above 68 would be considered above average, and anything below 68 is below average [Gianaros et al. 2001; Sauro 2011]. Due to this
rating the overall SUS Score of 72.2 of our VR shop application in the experiment is slightly above the average
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:24 • M. Speicher et al
of 68, we can state that the participants understood the content, and it helped them accomplish their task. The
measured SUS score also illustrates that the system adequately communicates what users are required to do with
the application, namely find products in the store.
Since differences in User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) scores for each different tasks, as well as for the
input and output modes, hardly exist, all scores are still moderate on average. The hardware is still a bottleneck,
so special VR smartphones with a browser specifically developed for WebVR purposes could solve most of the
user issues. Nevertheless, the assumptions made in the discussion of the task completion time are reflected by
the result of the SUS and UEQ. In summary, the results of the subjective feedback questionnaires shows that VR
is preferred by the user in terms of user experience but not of usability. In addition, because there was also no
significance found between the output mode regarding user experience and usability, H2 could only be proved
partly. Thus, V2 reached (along with the highest efficiency) the highest usability and user experience score,
which can explained by its combination of in- and output methods, i.e. speech and VR. This totally confirms H4.
On closer inspection, VR outperforms the alternative especially in terms of perspicuity and stimulation, two of
the six factors of the UEQ [Laugwitz et al. 2008]. This underlines once again that our approach of a hands-free
virtual reality shopping environment application can be considered to have higher usefulness than a common
3D desktop variant. So the faster and more immersed the customers’ product search is, the higher usability and
user experience the system will have. It is worth noting, however, that the results are highly dependent on the
speech interface and its recognition, as well as the data quality of the product names to be searched. Whereas
head pointing is the commonly used input method for mobile VR applications, our results show that speech input
is preferred by the user over head pointing regarding usability and user experience (H3).
The results of the Motion Sickness Assessment Questionnaire (MSAQ) indicated that VR causes more motion
sickness than the desktop, which is emphasized by the found significances. Although this can been seen as
obvious, because 3D desktop applications should not cause motion sickness anyway, we have considered it to
be very important to use the desktop as a baseline especially for motion sickness. However, with regard to the
input method, head pointing causes more motion sickness than speech, which can be explained by the higher
physical demand due to the higher amount and frequency of head movements. Another indicator for higher
motion sickness can be the task completion time, whereas the participants stayed longer in the environment in
the head pointing tasks, which can consequently lead to higher motion sickness scores. However, the overall
high scores for motion sickness are largely due to WebVR and its technical limitations, like resolution, rendering
performance of the smart-phone and wearing comfort of the HMD.
Finally, the results of the immersion questionnaire showed that the intensity of immersion is not affected by
the input method, because both analyzed tasks had the same value. Overall, the values are located around the
middle of the scale, so we could assume that the users had a good feeling of presence when using the VR output.
The explanation for that is twofold. On the one hand, the render quality and computational power of the mobile
device is worse than on a desktop. So low-res textures, restricted lights, and shadows can reduce immersion,
which could be solved by using more powerful devices. On the other hand, the inaccuracy of the mobile device
sensors can cause a temporary latency of the head movement, which could be avoided by using a device with
better-calibrated sensors.
5.9.3 Observations. Besides all the results, there were some interesting and noteworthy observations during
the first experiment. Overall, the participants highlighted positively our varied and innovative idea of online
shopping. Most participants liked the fact, that they needn’t to leave the house to have a realistic shopping
experience. They further mentioned that our approach should be taken into consideration for online shopping for
disabled and elderly people. Another positive aspect was the “clear and tidy design” of the shopping environment.
However, almost every participant saw the speech input functionality as the most important benefit. More than
60% of the participants reported that they would use the application at home if they could. But there were
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:25
also varying opinions and negative aspects reported, such as the fixed position of the speech interface. Some
participants found it realistic, similar to terminals and consoles in real supermarkets. On the other hand, it
requires the user to move there in order to use it, so it would be better to place it dynamically at the user’s
position. But based on the majority of feedback in the pilot study, we chose the fixed position. The most negative
feedback was given about the product search by head pointing interaction only. In general, the head pointing
search wasn’t perceived to be pleasant, with almost all participants complaining about its efficiency. Despite a
detailed exploration phase before each task, the participants had orientation problems in the environment and
proposed a mini-map or at least signposts for better orientation. Here, it should be mentioned that the virtual
shop was rather small, with an area which equals ca. 200 square meters, so the orientation drawback would
increase dramatically in larger stores. Nevertheless, there were also negative aspects with regard to the VR
modes. Although the idea of placing the control panel onto the handle of the shopping cart was highlighted
very positively, the buttons were positioned too low, because some users had problems with looking down. In
general, the main problems in VR appeared when the user had to fix their view on an object (e.g. for selection). In
particular, the low render quality of WebVR and thus the blurry textures amplified this problem.
6 DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL REALITY SHOPPING ENVIRONMENTS
In the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) the user-centered design of interactive systems is extremely
important, i.e. the needs and desires of the users constitute the starting point for all development activities. After
an in-depth research, customer surveys and pilot tests should be conducted to collect and use data (quantitative
and qualitative) from the target group and stakeholders regarding the planned task to determine what content the
users want and where. Therefore, the methodology of developing our VR shopping environment was „moving from
task to design”. We wrap up this section with a set of general design guidelines for VR shopping environments,
highlighting some of the important points discussed earlier (see Section 4.2) and lessons we learned while
moving from the task of searching products to the design and development of a VR shopping environment.
When designing for experiences in VR a new set of design considerations comes into play than when designing
for 2D screens. To help coming VR designers and developers of VR shops to create experiences that doesn’t
frustrate or make users feel nauseous, we created the following design principles to guide the work. The following
guidelines include actionable insights on how to optimize performance, usability, satisfaction, and experience for
the customers of VR shops:
6.1 Choose speech as the appropriate input and VR as output modality for mobile VR shops with
regard to optimal performance and preference.
Choose the appropriate input and output device by analyzing the application’s goals and user’s needs. As in our
example of an online shopping store, consider a virtual environment that allows customers to explore a virtual
store and search for products. In case of collaborative shopping, a HMD or small screen would probably not be
appropriate, since a group of people are not able to see the display at the same time. Then a large-screen display
would be the better choice. In contrast, using a HMD allows the customer to browse through the virtual store
without being annoyed or distracted by other customers. According to participants of our customer survey, they
tend to keep their shopping trip as short as possible, especially in overcrowded stores. However, as we showed in
our case study, wearing a HMD influences the efficiency of finding a product in a negative way. But in terms of
user experience and usability, it would be more appropriate to choose a HMD as output device. Here, the error
rate is the crucial factor for the input method decision. The decision between speech and head pointing depends
mainly on the speech recognition rate concerning the product name database, too. So, if the error ratio grows
up above a certain threshold (about 10%, see Figure 12), it would be better to choose desktop screen for output.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:26 • M. Speicher et al
Nevertheless, concerning only mobile and online scenarios, and if the data quality allows for this, speech input
wearing a HMD should be chosen as it outperforms the others in all aspects (performance and preference).
6.2 Respect the main benefits while avoiding the mistakes that surrounded online as well as offline
shopping environments.
It is important to pay attention to the main characteristics of on- and offline shopping. According to customer
survey guidelines, the main strength of current online shops is their search functionality in contrast to physical
stores, where the customer needs to find and ask employees to find products. But the use of search functionality
involves serious disadvantages, if it is implemented badly or the data quality is insufficient. Moreover, bigger
ranges of products require proper and clear filters and categories. In our prototype, we used shelves and sectors/departments as a visual means of structuring products. But with a look at larger physical or online stores,
too many or unstructured categories and sectors can be very confusing for the customers and therefore influence
their satisfaction because of a lack of clarity. Here, if sorted properly, colored signs and understandable shelf
names can help. Another aspect which has been tried and tested in physical stores concerning product search,
interactivity and efficiency are in-store employees and consultants or even interactive terminals. In VR this could
be realized by using a virtual assistant with whom the customer can interact via speech input. Here, in case of
product search, textual input in VR shops should be avoided, because text entry in VR has not been adequately
researched. Especially in common mobile VR scenarios, the user hasn’t even a controller (e.g. keyboard or remote)
in order to entry text, apart from head pointing or speech input. In our scenario, we used the simplest form of a
virtual assistant, more precisely a product search interface using speech input, which allowed the users to search
for products by saying the desired product name instead of typing.
6.3 Design simple and relevant interfaces.
Virtual reality is a carefully crafted illusion. The better the experience looks, the better the illusion and immersion.
So, take every opportunity to optimize the visuals of your virtual environment. But as mentioned before, the
customer wishes a structured store, not confusing, not too big range of products, and the store should not be too
large. So it is up on the designers to build a virtual environment as simple as possible, but still keep the feeling of
being in a store looking for products. Use virtual signs and other visual means (like shelves, sectors or rooms) for
a better clarity, but no overfilling with products. Here, a clearly arranged assortment and intuitive interaction
technique eases a fast and easy selection of products. Furthermore, choose colors to be as neutral as possible and
adjust contrast of colors to prevent positive or negative impact to let the users keep track of the products. Again,
do not overfill the shelves with products, because in common large offline stores, when customers are standing in
front of a shelf searching for a product, it is like they cannot see the wood for the trees. In virtuality, there is no
need to overfill the shelves with duplicates of products. Moreover, the environment should be designed displaying
content upholding the immersion and experience, for example, put the 3D products into a virtual shopping cart
instead of using a list representation. In addition, due to user feedback in our pilot study, we decided to place the
speech interface panel static on a wall in the scene and a control panel at the cartâĂŹs handle displaying the
total price. Displaying a menu in front of the user’s point of view has led to negative feedback with regard to
immersion and user’s experience.
6.4 Avoid high resolution graphics and unnecessary head movements to reduce motion sickness in
virtual shopping environments.
Motion sickness is an aversive behavioral state that affects several psycho-physiological response systems.
There are individual differences in the extent to which motion sickness symptoms (e.g., nausea or dizziness)
are experienced and different contexts that cause motion sickness (e.g., visual simulators or vehicles) may
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:27
cause a symptom. However, as motion sickness can have a strong effect on the shopping experience, all efforts
should be made to prevent any motion sickness symptoms. As they are negligible in a desktop setting, there
are different methods for reducing motion sickness when using a HMD. In our prototype, we rendered a virtual
nose [Whittinghill et al. 2015], set the field of view to a comfortable value, and keep the velocity on a pleasant
and constant level [Mourant and Thattacherry 2000; Tanaka and Takagi 2004] while moving in the virtual store.
Therefore, we recommend to use speech input instead of head pointing only for the product search task whenever
possible in a VR shop to further reduce unnecessary movements. Latency due to technical limitations, rendering
and network performance of mobile online VR shops is another factor. If latency is high, the task should require
as few head movements as possible. So, the developers and designers should use less lights, if at all possible, low
quality shadows, and lower resolution textures and 3D models of the products, shelves and other shop elements.
Another indicator for motion sickness is the task completion time in VR shopping scenario. According to our
experimental results, users stay longer in the environment in the head pointing tasks, which consequently has
led to more head movements and consequently to higher sickness ratings. Furthermore, because we decided to
include movement via teleportation, we tried avoid „hard” and abrupt cuts at all costs, as this may be particularly
sensitive for motion sickness and immersion. For this, we were inspired by transitions in movies, e.g., dissolves
or „irises” (seen as the eyelids closing down over or opening up on a shot). All these parameters should be
customizable for each user.
7 CONCLUSION
Stronger demand for immersive virtual reality (VR) applications has led to a growing market for head-mounted
displays (HMDs). With this popularity, the computation and graphics power of mobile devices also increases,
which could catalyze their stagnating tendency. By using smart-phone VR, it is possible to use immersive VR
applications nearly everywhere, since the availability of mobile web also rises. Besides the gaming sector, use
cases can be found in the constantly growing e-commerce sector, which is used by almost every smart-phone
user nowadays, whether in online web shops or in-app purchases.
Current online shops may be functional and efficient, but do not provide enough of an immersive shopping
experience. So this paper focuses on developing an immersive virtual shopping environment that includes and
combines the major advantages of online and physical stores and tries to tear down limitations of e-commerce and
VR. In order to provide a realistic setting, we evaluated hands-free interaction techniques using smart-phone VR
in a comparative user study. Because the smart-phone itself is already available for most users, it is the cheapest
and most affordable scenario for VR online shops. Our system allows the user to search for products by head
pointing only or in combination with speech input in a virtual environment. The head pointing technique for
product selection was inspired by the eBay VR shop, whereas their approaches lacked in efficiency and experience
we included the speech interface into our proof of concept. Finally, in order to evaluate our system, we conducted
a case study including a search task in the virtual environment using a desktop monitor and smart-phone as
output devices, and head pointing and speech as input. Besides task completion time and error rate measurements,
the participants were asked to fill out questionnaires about their preferences. It could be confirmed that the
overall usability of the system is slightly above average, but not significantly; the VR setup with speech input
was especially preferred. Regarding efficiency, speech input was more efficient than using head pointing, but it
should be mentioned that proper data quality is essential to provide optimal recognition. In this respect, it is
worth mentioning that our prototype of a mobile online VR shop was measured to be inferior to non-mobile and
non-online solutions. So, however, whereas the task performance results regarding VR with speech input were
quite well, there is still much research and development needed to improve the user’s preference, more precisely
usability, user experience and motion sickness, of mobile online shopping environments. Nevertheless, our
concept includes availability and sustainability instead of only adaptability [Chittaro and Ration 2000]. Moreover,
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
102:28 • M. Speicher et al
besides usability as a crucial factor for shopping simulators [Laver et al. 2012], we provided immersive VR for
output. Here, using 3D model representations of the shelves and products turned out to be very important for
the user experience, and preference at all, according to user feedback and observations in the experiment. The
study also demonstrated an immersive shopping experience in VR; whereas VR causes higher motion sickness
than the desktop, with technological progress there will be more ways to reduce these symptoms in the future.
Overall, the results were very positive and the outcome of our study was accentuated by the throughout positive
resonance and feedback of the participants; however, because we looked at a virtual online grocery store with a
manageable number of products, shelves and departments, these findings may not translate to larger stores or
different types of goods (e.g., furniture or clothes shopping). So, further studies should be conducted in order
to explore differences of VR shop sizes, dimensions, or types of goods. However, it could be a while until such
VR online stores be real and market-ready due to a very slow progress of the digitization of the retail sector,
in particular with regard to groceries. More precisely, the data quality lacks of digitized market layout data or
even illegible product names, descriptions and pictures prepared for the user’s need. Although current product
management systems offer detail product information like its dimensions, weight and location in the market, but
neither the availability of 3D models of the products nor 360Âř pictures/video or even high resolution images is
guaranteed. However, when breaking new ground, it is likely that there are still a lot of gaps in the knowledge
base that need to be filled. Therefore, the next steps investigating alternative store visualizations and interaction
concepts, based on these results, would be to build a stronger overall evidence base.
Shopping in virtual reality environments is not a new concept. Deciding whether the users need mobile
VR shops is important and then following a user-centered design process offers the best chance of success. In
addition, it is important to use standardized and verified metrics for evaluating and comparing future VR shops
with regard to shopping experience, including task performance and user’s preference. Furthermore, there are
significant differences in the way that input methods as well as output modalities operate in VR compared to
other and there is a need to make sure that those differences are handled with care to deliver the best result. Here,
our experimental results indicate that using speech input wearing a HMD might be the best option for mobile
interactive VR shops. Overall, it is worth to consider the benefits from online, such as search functionality and
availability, as well as physical stores, which provide more personality and orientation.
8 FUTURE WORK
In summary, our VR shop creates compelling online virtual sensory richness through which customers can
experience the value of the product information more richly and engage in a more active shopping activity,
compared to ordinary online shopping applications. Similar to the work of Ohta et al. [Ohta et al. 2015], our
proposed hands-free VR shopping system can assist disadvantaged shoppers, so they can do shopping as if it
were done in offline stores. Using head pointing the user can move freely around the store while viewing the 3D
representation of the store displayed in mobile VR. Products can be searched, selected and freely viewed. This
would provide disadvantaged customers a better shopping experience, because they are limited in their ability
to go out when and where they want [Ohta et al. 2015]. But with regard to the user interface and design, this
scenario would require conducting a deeper customer and user analysis, specially tailored for disadvantaged
shoppers.
In an ordinary shopping mall, customers have to use a rather plain user interface, leading to lower customer
satisfaction. This might cause customers to become passive observers, merely observing the information. Whereas
VR customers are engaged in the inspection and control of the 3D visualized target products, due to the virtual
sensory richness driven by the 3D environment and user interface. But information overload in VR is more likely
and should be avoided. Therefore, different layouts and representations of VR shops should be explored and
compared, like graph-based approaches, or even more abstract concepts like searching in a virtual apartment.
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Vol. 1, No. 3, Article 102. Publication date:
September 2017.
VRShop—A Mobile Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment • 102:29
So, another aspect what should be studied in more detail in the future is the visualization of a virtual store. Our
virtual shopping environment was based on existing layout data, but due to performance issues of WebVR and
smart-phone we chose a smaller retail space of about 180 square meters within one single floor. Besides different
store layouts, future studies should explore differences between the store size in all three dimensions, i.e., different
number of floors and sizes of the market area. Because people tend to think two-dimensionally, and even the
front-back axis is more accessible than the left-right axis [Ishikawa and Montello 2006; Werner et al. 1997]. So, it
might be easier for customers to orientate in virtual stores or malls with less floors and less turnings to left or
right. As our work focus on evaluating common input and output modalities there is still much work to be done
regarding VR user interfaces especially for shopping applications. We suspect that common UI/UX guidelines as
they are existing for web shops or mobile shopping have to be adapted for VR, e.g., recommendations for colors,
fonts, shapes, and sizes of UI elements. So, VR UI designers should be careful with too bright and overloading
colors, because the userâĂŹs eyes are only a couple centimeters away from the screen. In addition, too thin fonts
or fonts with serifs can be very hard to read, because there are simply not enough pixels for a clear view of the
text. And because the VR technology itself is not yet mature, long stays in VR malls carry the implicit danger of
simulator sickness. So there should be more focus on reducing motion sickness when traveling through virtual
stores, for example by avoiding movement and using high-res VR hardware. However, the VR shopping mall in
our experiment is a trade-off, because it is inexpensive, multi-platform and easy to use, due to its hardware and
low complexity. So future studies should consider these important factors for VR e-commerce applications.
While our VRShop, the VRSE model and VR technologies in general have the potential to improve the
experience of consumers in electronic shopping environments, more research is needed in order to obtain a better
understanding of the factors that determine the degree of usefulness of such technologies.