This paper aims to provide a basis for the improvement of software-estimation research through a systematic review of previous work. The review identifies 304 software cost estimation papers in 76 journals and classifies the papers according to research topic, estimation approach, research approach, study context and data set. A Web-based library of these cost estimation papers is provided to ease the identification of relevant estimation research results. The review results combined with other knowledge provide support for recommendations for future software cost estimation research, including: 1) increase the breadth of the search for relevant studies, 2) search manually for relevant papers within a carefully selected set of journals when completeness is essential, 3) conduct more studies on estimation methods commonly used by the software industry, and 4) increase the awareness of how properties of the data sets impact the results when evaluating estimation methods
SECTION 1Introduction
THIS paper reviews journal articles on software development cost1 estimation with the goal of supporting and directing future estimation research. Our review differs from previous reviews [1], [3], [16] with respect to the following elements:

Different goal. While the main goal of this review is to direct and support future estimation research, the other reviews principally aim at introducing software practitioners or novice estimation researchers to the variety of formal estimation models. This difference in goal leads to a different focus. For example, our review focuses on research methods and does not include a comprehensive description of the different estimation methods.

More comprehensive and systematic review. We base the analysis on a systematic search of journal papers, which led to the identification of 304 journal papers. The review in [3] is based on about 130, that in [16] on about 65, and that in [1] on about 40 journal and conference papers. None of the previous reviews describe a systematic selection process or state clear criteria for inclusion or exclusion.

Classification of studies. We classify the software development estimation papers with respect to estimation topics, estimation approach, research approach, study context and data set. We found no classification, other than that with respect to estimation method in the other reviews.

Based on what we believed were interesting issues to analyze, we posed the eight research questions described in Table 1. The underlying motivation for all questions was our goal of improvement of the software cost estimation research. These research questions guided the design of the review process.

The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the review process. Section 3 reports the review results. Section 4 summarizes the main recommendations for future research on software cost estimation.

SECTION 2Review Process
2.1 Inclusion Criteria
The main criterion for including a journal paper in our review is that the paper describes research on software development effort or cost estimation. Papers related to estimation of software size, assessment of software complexity, or identification of factors correlated with software development effort, are only included if the main purpose of the studies is to improve software development effort or cost estimation. We exclude pure discussion/opinion papers.

There were examples of papers describing, essentially, the same study in more than one journal paper. Fortunately, the number of such cases was small and would not lead to important changes in the outcome of our analysis. We decided, therefore, not to exclude any papers for that reason. However, when conducting a review of a particular phenomenon, e.g., the robustness of a particular finding, we would recommend a clearer distinction between paper, study, and data set.

Table 1 Research Questions

2.2 Identification of Papers
The search for papers was based on an issue-by-issue, manual reading of titles and abstracts of all published papers, starting with volume 1, in more than 100 potentially relevant, peer-reviewed journals with papers written in English. These journals were identified through reading reference lists of cost estimation papers, searching on the Internet for previously not identified, relevant journals, and using our own previous experience. Both authors constructed a list of potentially relevant journals independently. These two lists were merged together. In spite of the high number of identified journals, it is possible that there are, e.g., national or company-specific journals with software cost estimation papers that we have missed.

Papers that were potential candidates for inclusion in our review were read more thoroughly to decide whether to include them or not. In total, 304 relevant papers were found in 76 of these journals. The 76 journals and 304 papers are listed in, respectively, Appendices A and C. The search was completed in April 2004.

2.3 Classification of Papers
For the purpose of our analysis, i.e., addressing the research questions, the authors of this paper classified the papers according to the properties and categories listed in Table 2. The categories are explained in Appendix B.

The categories were based on categories applied in previous estimation studies, e.g., [2], [3], [5], [8], [16] and adapted to the needs of our analysis. In particular, the classification aims at answering the research questions RQ6, RQ7, and RQ8. The classification schema was developed for the purpose of our review and is not intended to be a general-purpose classification of software effort estimation studies. We believe, however, that the classification may be useful for other researchers searching for relevant papers on, for example, a particular estimation approach. Note that most of the categories are nonexclusive, e.g., a paper may focus on more than one estimation approach and apply more than one research approach.

The initial classification was performed by the first author of this paper. The robustness of the classification schema and process was evaluated by testing a random sample of 30 papers (about 10 percent of the total). This classification test was performed by the second author of this paper. The classification test showed that several of the initial descriptions of categories were vague. In fact, there were disagreements over 59 out of the 150 classifications, i.e., 39 percent. Most of the disagreements were due to recurring issues, e.g., different interpretations regarding how much review of previous studies a paper should include to be classified as a review paper. Fortunately, fewer than 3 percent of the initial classifications were clearly inconsistent with the category descriptions. In other words, the main problem was the clarity of the descriptions and not so much the initial classification itself. We therefore decided that the initial classification had a degree of accuracy sufficiently high for the purpose of this paper, given that we 1) clarified the descriptions that led to disagreements (12 of the category descriptions were clarified), and 2) reclassified the papers that belonged to the problematic categories (109 papers were reread and considered for change of classification; 21 reclassifications were made in total). This clarification and reclassification was then completed by the first author.

Table 2 Classification of Papers

In spite of this effort to improve the reliability of the classification, it is likely that several of our classifications are subject to discussion, that the descriptions could be improved further, and that some of the papers are classified incorrectly. However, we believe that on the whole, the current classification is of sufficiently high quality to serve the purpose of our analysis. Furthermore, BESTweb (www.simula.no/BESTweb). the underlying bibliographic database, is publicly available and other researchers are free to reanalyze the data and draw their own conclusions.

2.4 Analysis
The classification of research papers provided a general picture of the characteristics of the software estimation research. This general picture served as a starting point for deeper investigation of findings that seemed, from the authors' perspectives, to suggest important shortcomings in estimation research and possibilities for improvement.2

2.5 Threats to Validity
The main threats to the validity of our review we have identified are these:

Publication Bias
The exclusion of conference papers and reports is based mainly on practical concerns, including workload, e.g., the problems of identifying all relevant conferences and the amount of analysis needed to handle the fact that many journal papers are improvements of previously published conference papers. This exclusion of conference papers would be more difficult to defend if we had studied a particular estimation phenomenon, e.g., whether the estimation method COCOMO or Function Points has been shown to be more accurate. In that type of study, all relevant papers should be identified and reviewed, regardless of type of source. However, we are interested mainly in properties of the research into software cost estimation. The main bias of our inclusion of journal papers is simply one toward papers with high scientific quality. We analyzed informally a selection of software cost estimation papers (about 50) published at conferences and found that the research topics, methods, study designs, and study contexts of these papers were similar to those of the journal papers. An important difference between conference and journal papers, relevant for our review, was that estimation experience reports not written by research scientists are typically only published at industry conferences. This means that we probably have excluded a major source of information about the software industry's experience in using different estimation approaches. Our analyses and recommendations try to reflect this bias. Apart from this difference, we believe that our analyses and recommendations would not be very different if we had included conference papers.

Another potential publication bias is that which might result from not publishing estimation research that has nonsignificant results, results that did not yield the desired outcome, company-confidential results, or results that were conducted on topics that do not fit into the common software engineering journals. The size and effect of the potential publication biases would be interesting to study but would require a study design different from ours.

Vested Interests of the Authors
Both authors of this paper are active researchers on software cost estimation. One of the authors mainly publishes papers on expert estimation and the other on formal, mainly analogy-based, estimation models. We are not aware of biases we may have had when categorizing the papers, but the reader should be aware of the possible impact of our own interests on the analyses. In particular, it is possible that the recommendations we make are affected by our interests and opinions.

Unfamiliarity with Other Fields
Clearly, estimation is a topic that is relevant to many fields; thus, it is possible that we have overlooked essential work and relevant journals published in another discipline, e.g., civil engineering.

SECTION 3.Results
3.1 Relevant Software Cost Estimation Research Journals (RQ1)
We found papers on software cost estimation in as many as 76 journals, i.e., the total number of journals with such papers is high, or at least higher than we expected. The 76 journals are listed in Appendix A. The 10 journals with five or more papers on software cost estimation are displayed in Table 3, together with the corresponding number, proportion, and cumulative proportions of papers. These 10 journals include two-thirds of all identified journal papers on software cost estimation. Reading only the 10 most relevant journals means that important research results may be missed.

3.2 Researcher Awareness of Relevant Journals (RQ2)
We were interested in the degree to which software estimation researchers were aware of and systematically searched for related research in more than a small set of journals. An indication of this awareness was derived through a random selection of 30 software cost estimation journal papers (about 10 percent of the total). These 30 papers are marked with (S) in Appendix C. The reference lists of each of these papers were examined. From this examination we found that:

The typical (median) software cost estimation study relates its work to and/or builds on cost estimation studies found in only three different journals. We examined the topics of the papers and found that some of the papers did not refer to previously published, seemingly relevant, papers on the same research topic. This indicates, we believe, that many research papers on software cost estimation are based on information derived from a rather narrow search for relevant papers.

Table 3 Most Important Software Cost Estimation Journals

The most referenced journal, with respect to related cost estimation work, was the IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (IEEE TSE). Estimation papers from this journal were referred to in as many as 70 percent of the papers. Relative to the number of cost estimation papers in each journal, there were surprisingly many references to the Communications of the ACM; fully 30 percent of the papers made references to at least one of the journal's nine papers on software cost estimation. There were, relative to the number of cost estimation papers available, few references to papers in Information and Software Technology (20 percent) or the Software Quality Journal (3 percent).

Papers published in Information System (IS) journals, e.g., Information and Management, contained mainly references to other IS journals, while papers published in Software Engineering (SE) journals mainly contained references to other SE journals. The only exception here was IEEE TSE. This journal was referred to frequently by both communities. To communicate software cost estimation results to other researchers from both communities, results may benefit from being published in IEEE TSE.

Few papers referred to estimation results outside the software community, e.g., to studies in forecasting, human decision making, and project management. The main portion of references to sources outside the software community seems to be to literature on statistics.

We made a separate test on references to two journals outside the software engineering field: the International Journal of Forecasting and the International Journal of Project Management. The former includes many relevant results on how to predict future outcomes (forecasting) and contains papers and results that are highly relevant for many papers on software cost estimation. The latter is the major journal on project management and provides results related to the project context of software cost estimation as well as project cost estimation results. Out of the 30 journal papers, only one referred to the International Journal of Project Management and none to the International Journal of Forecasting! Both journals can be accessed by using digital libraries, e.g., Inspec and Google Scholar, but may be hard to identify due to different use of terminology.

The above evidence indicates that several authors use narrow criteria when searching for relevant cost estimation papers. The most important issue, however, is whether papers on software cost estimation miss prior results that would improve the design, analysis, or interpretation of the study. This cannot be derived from our review alone. Our impression, however, based on the review presented in this paper and previous experience, is that the major deviation from what we assess as best research practice is the lack of identification and integration of results from journals outside the “top five” journals in Table 3. This is exemplified by the documented lack of reference to relevant papers in the International Journal of Forecasting and the Journal of Project Management.

An example of the incomplete summary of related work can be found in one of the authors' (Shepperd's) own papers [12]. That paper claims that “A number of researchers have used this type of approach [estimation by analogy] with generally quite encouraging results.” This claim was based on references to 6 studies (out of 20 relevant studies). Of the 6 studies, 3 were conducted by one of the authors. Including all relevant studies would have led to less optimism. Out of the 20 studies, 9 were in favor of estimation by analogy, four were inconclusive, and seven were in favor of regression-based estimation. An incomplete identification of relevant studies may, consciously or unconsciously, lead to conclusions that are biased toward the researcher's own vested interests [13].

3.3 Most Important Software Cost Estimation Journal (RQ3)
IEEE TSE was found to be the dominant software cost estimation research journal when considering both the number of papers (see Table 3) and citations made by other researchers (see analysis in Section 3.2). It is, therefore, an interesting question whether IEEE TSE has publication biases, e.g., whether it favors certain topics and rejects papers on other topics. A strong publication bias in IEEE TSE could, for example, have the unfortunate consequence of directing software cost estimation researchers' focus towards the topics most easily accepted by the journal. To analyze this, we compared the distribution of research topics, estimation approaches, and research methods of IEEE TSE with the total set of estimation papers published in journals.

We found that the distributions of IEEE TSE cost estimation topics, estimation methods, and research methods were similar to the corresponding distributions of the total set of papers. IEEE TSE papers had a somewhat stronger focus on “Function Point”-based estimation methods and less focus on “Expert Judgment,” but even here the difference was small. Moreover, there may be a time effect, since this topic was more popular in the 1980s and 1990s while not all other journals, e.g., Empirical Software Engineering, were publishing during this time. This suggests that the IEEE TSE software cost estimation papers reflect the total set of software cost estimation papers reasonably well. Notice that we have only studied high level types of publication bias and do not exclude the possibility that there are other types of difference regarding journal publication, for example, differences in the formalism used when describing estimation methods. We have had no access to information about papers rejected by IEEE TSE. There may, consequently, be publication biases that are not visible from a study of only the published papers.

3.4 Identification of Relevant Software Cost Estimation Research Journal Papers (RQ4)
Our search for estimation papers was, as described earlier, based on a manual issue-by-issue search of about 100 potentially relevant journals. This is, we believe, an accurate method of identifying relevant research papers, given that the people conducting the search possess sufficient expertise. It does, however, require much effort and, if possible, it should be replaced with more automated search and identification methods. The main tool for this is the use of digital libraries. To indicate the power of the digital libraries we conducted the following evaluation:

The search term: “software cost estimation” OR “software effort estimation” was applied in the digital research libraries Google Scholars (scholar.google. com) and Inspec. Wider searches would, obviously, lead to more complete searches. The number of “false alarms” would, however, also increase strongly and the benefit of automatic search may easily disappear. The search “software” AND (“cost” OR “effort”) AND “estimation,” for example, led to the identification of about 278,000 records in Google Scholar. A similar example using Inspec is presented later in this section.

The papers identified by using the above searches were compared with the set of papers from our manual search.

The main conclusion from this simple test was that the use of the search facilities of digital libraries to search for common software cost estimation terms is not sufficient for the identification of all relevant software cost estimation research. The search in Google Scholars (October 2005) resulted in 998 records. However, only 92 out of the 304 journal papers were identified, i.e., a recall rate of only about 30 percent. The search in Inspec identified 763 journal papers. As expected, Inspec performed better and identified 177 of the 304 papers, i.e., a recall rate of about 60 percent. The joint set of Google Scholar and Inspec led to the identification of 204 of the 304 papers, i.e., a recall rate of almost 70 percent. Nevertheless, even the use of both libraries missed a substantial part of relevant papers.

A closer examination of the titles and abstracts of the journal papers not identified by Google Scholar or Inspec suggests that the most typical reasons for nonidentification in our test were:

A variety of substitutes for the term “estimation,” e.g., “prediction,” “scheduling,” “cost modeling,” “use of costing models,” “application of cost estimation techniques,” “calculating the cost,” and “use of estimation technology.”

A variety of terms used instead of “software,” e.g., “system,” “maintenance,” “project,” and “task.”

Use of more specific terms derived from particular estimation methods, e.g., “function points,” instead of more general estimation terms.

Studies dealing with specific estimation topics, e.g., studies on the use of accuracy measures or cost interval predictions, may not use the general estimation terms.

In many cases, a software cost estimation researcher will use more specific terms when searching for relevant papers. This may reduce the effect of the last two of the above reasons and higher coverage rates can be expected. However, there remains the problem that a number of synonyms are used for the terms “estimating” and “software.” A paper written by one of this paper's authors (Jorgensen) titled “Experience with the Accuracy of Software Maintenance Task Effort Prediction Models” [9], illustrates this problem. The paper compares different formal software development effort estimation models. Assume that a researcher wants to summarize related work on regression-based software cost estimation models. Our paper is clearly relevant for this summary but turns out to be difficult to identify since we use “prediction” instead of “estimation” and “maintenance task” instead of, e.g., “software development.” A wider search, e.g., the search (“software” AND (“prediction OR “estimation”)) in Inspec, identified the paper. The set of identified records was, however, as high as 11,303. This is too large a set to be meaningful for an identification of relevant papers. In addition, if we had used variants of the terms, e.g., “predict” instead of “prediction,” we would not have identified the paper in spite of a very wide search. It is evident that searches in digital libraries that are sufficiently wide to identify relevant software cost estimation research can easily lead to higher workload than purely manual search processes.

Manual searches do not guarantee completeness, either. It is easy to make errors and to miss relevant journals. To illustrate the point, when we conducted this evaluation of Google Scholar and Inspec, we found three journals with potentially relevant papers that we had not identified during our manual search. These journals were country-and company-specific IT journals.

The current situation, with a lack of standardized terminology, may require a manual search of titles and abstracts in a carefully selected set of journals to ensure the proper identification of relevant research on software cost estimation. In the longer term, enforcing a more standard scheme of classification for software cost estimation or a more standardized use of keywords should be an important goal for digital libraries and researchers on software cost estimation. As an illustration on the current state, the ACM Computing Classification System prescribes the keyword “cost estimation” for the types of studies included in our review. As documented earlier this section, the use of this keyword (even when used together with the keyword “effort estimation”) identified only 60 percent of the estimation papers found by manual search. This search included the title and the abstract of the papers, i.e., a search for papers applying the term “cost estimation” as keyword will identify even less relevant papers.

3.5 Researchers with a Long-Term Interest in Software Cost Estimation (RQS)
There seem to be few researchers with a long-term focus on software cost estimation research. We found, for example, only 13 researchers with more than five journal papers on software cost estimation. Most of these researchers are still active; nine of them, for example, published journal papers on software cost estimation in the period 2000–2004.

The potential importance of researchers with a long-term focus on software cost estimation can be illustrated through an analysis of the papers covering the topics “measures of estimation performance” and “data set properties.” These topics are basic research on cost estimation necessary for meaningful analyzes and evaluations of estimation methods [6], [11], [13], [15]. There is, for example, currently no precise use of estimation terminology in research studies [7], which easily leads to problems when interpreting estimation accuracy measurement. Many of these basic topics require more than average experience and maturity in software cost estimation research. Not surprisingly, almost two-thirds of the papers on these topics were authored or coauthored by the nine active, long-term focus researchers identified above.

The current number of active researchers with a long-term focus on software cost estimation is low compared to the number of research topics and estimation approaches, and there could be a strong research bias toward these researchers' interests, e.g., through the active researchers' positions as reviewers, supervisors, and project leaders and from ideas generated from their research. Fortunately, these researchers seem to cover a wide spectrum of research topics, estimation approaches, and research methods: They publish papers on most topics and on most estimation approaches, and they apply most types of research methods. Several cost estimation topics have been the long-term focus of only one active researcher or research group.

A consequence of the low number of active researchers with a long-term focus on software cost estimation is that a substantial proportion of the research papers have authors (and reviewers) with a shorter-term focus on software cost estimation, e.g., as part of a PhD. The body of knowledge within software cost estimation and related areas is very large, and without supporting environments we cannot expect fresh researchers to deliver high-quality research. We recommend that research groups with an interest in software cost estimation should address this challenge, e.g., by developing and using supporting tools such as BESTweb and by cooperation with relevant estimation research expertise in software engineering and other disciplines.

Table 4 Research Topics

3.6 Distribution of Research Topics (RQ6)
Table 4 shows the distribution of topics for three periods and in total.

The distribution in Table 4 suggests that:

The most common research topic, with 61 percent of the papers, is the introduction and evaluation of estimation methods (Em).

The distribution of topics over time is quite stable, with a few exceptions. Papers on the production functions were more common before 1990, and there has been an increase in focus on the uncertainty of effort estimates since 2000.

Table 4 indicates that the most papers examine cost estimation from a technical point of view. This is connected with a strong focus on research on formal estimation model; see Section 3.7. Sixteen of the papers (category Oi) examine the organizational context of cost estimation. This focus on technical issues does not correspond well with what we have experienced are basic problems in many software companies. Contextual factors, such as the mix of planning and estimation processes [4], may be prerequisites for meaningful use of estimation methods.

3.7 Distribution of Estimation Methods (RQ7)
Table 5 shows the distribution of papers on different estimation approaches per period and in total.

The distribution in Table 5 suggests that:

Regression-based estimation approaches dominate. Notice that regression-based estimation approaches include most common parametric estimation models, e.g., the COCOMO model. Roughly half of all estimation papers try to build, improve or compare with regression model-based estimation methods.

Table 5 Estimation Approaches

The proportion of papers on analogy-based estimation models is increasing.

The proportion of papers on expert judgment-based estimation models is increasing.

The popularity of research on the function point-based estimation approaches was at its highest in the 1990s. In that period, almost one-third of the papers tried to improve upon, or make comparisons with, function point-based estimation methods.

Theory-based estimation approaches, e.g., the SLIM model and Halstead's software science, were initially very popular, but research interest has faded considerably since 1990.

The diversity of estimation approaches is very high and increasing, especially in the period 2000–2004. This increase is illustrated by the increased proportion of “other approaches” (16 percent in 2000–2004). “Other approaches” include, for example, the use of lexical analysis of requirement specifications, genetic programming, linear programming, economic production models, soft computing, fuzzy logic modeling, and bootstrap-based analogy cost estimation.

Table 5 shows that expert judgment-based approaches are discussed in 15 percent of the papers. This rather contrasts with the fact that the performance of more formal estimation techniques has been somewhat erratic to date, has not documented higher accuracy than expert judgment, and that expert judgment-based estimation approaches are, by far, the most common used approaches by the software industry (see [14] for a review of papers on this issue). The relative lack of focus upon expert judgment-based approaches suggests, we believe, that most researchers either do not cooperate closely with the software industry or that they believe it is better to focus on replacement, rather than improvement, of judgment-based approaches currently employed in industry.

3.8 Research Approach and Study Context (RQ8)
Table 6 shows the distribution of papers applying different research approaches, per period, and in total.

Table 6 Research Approaches

Table 6 suggests that:

There are few case studies that focus upon the actual effort estimation process published in the journals, i.e., in-depth studies of software effort estimation processes and outcomes. Overall, we identified only eight such estimation case studies. Even in the IS journals, which may have a stronger tradition for case studies, estimation case studies seem to be rare. There may be much to learn from well-described and well-understood real-life cases. It may, therefore, be unfortunate that so few estimation case studies are reported as journal papers.

Most papers evaluate estimation methods by employing historical data; few evaluations are completed in real-life estimation situations. Of particular concern is that the already-small proportion of real-life evaluations of estimation methods seems to be decreasing.

In short, there seems to be a lack of in-depth studies on the actual use of estimation methods and real-life evaluations published as journal papers. We investigated the papers that proposed a new estimation method or evaluated an existing, i.e., those with topic = Em. We found that most of these papers (more than 60 percent) were of the research approach Hv, i.e., they evaluated an estimation method by applying historical data. This is an understandable choice of evaluation method, given the extra noise added with more realism. However, there is a problem when there are few or no groups that conduct research on the actual use and effect of an estimation method in real-life settings. We believe this is the case for software cost estimation methods. We analyzed all the papers with topic Em and research approach Rl. We could find no study that had an in-depth data collection and analysis of how estimation methods were actually applied! Even for well-known models, such as the COCOMO-model, this type of study was missing.

As mentioned earlier, our exclusion of conference paper excludes a high number of cost estimation experience papers (case studies) published at conferences. These conference papers provide valuable information, but are, as far as we have experienced, typically lower in scientific rigor. We believe, therefore, that the lack of journal papers on real-life use of estimation methods point at a potentially important shortcoming, i.e., the lack of high quality research studies with in-depth, real-life evaluation of the use and impact of estimation methods.

Table 7 Study Contexts

Table 7 shows the distribution of papers applying different study contexts per period and in total.

Table 7 suggests that the study context is usually professionals and/or professional projects. This increases the realism of the studies. However, this does not necessarily mean that problems with realism are absent. In particular, the dominant use of historical data instead of real-life evaluation results in a decrease in realism. The “Not relevant” category includes papers where there are no empirical studies, e.g., the development of an estimation method without empirical evaluation or analytical comparison of properties of estimation methods.

Evaluation of estimation methods based on historical data sets obviously requires that these data sets be representative for current or future projects; or, at least, that their analysis should be a useful means of evaluating the strengths and benefits of an estimation method. We analyzed the use of historical data sets in the journal papers and found that there are good reasons to claim that the availability of a data set is more indicative for its use than its representativeness or other properties. An additional weakness related to the use of the data sets, is that the data quality is frequently not known and/or discussed in the papers.

The Boehm-Cocomo data set [2], for example, was published in 1981 and is readily available. However, it is based on software development projects that may be quite different from the most recent development projects, e.g., the technology used might well be different. In spite of that, the data set has been used in as many as 12 journal papers to evaluate estimation methods, calibration of methods, and estimation model size measures since 1995.

If a data set is not representative, it may still be useful for evaluating properties of an estimation method relative to properties of data sets Unfortunately, we found that very few papers (including most of our own) paid any attention at all to properties of the data set. The evaluations typically pick one or more easily available data sets and leave it to the reader to decide the degree to which it is possible to generalize the results to other contexts and other sets of projects. This is hardly a research method that leads to a systematic aggregation of results.

SECTION 4Summary
This paper reviews software cost estimation papers published in journals and tries to support other software cost estimation researchers through a library of estimation papers classified according to research topic, estimation approach, research approach, study context, and use of data sets. Based on our, to some extent subjective, interpretation of the review results and other knowledge, we recommend the following changes in estimation research:

Increase the breadth of the search for relevant studies. Software cost estimation research studies seem, on average, to be based on searches for relevant previous studies that use few sources. If the goal is to find relevant research on software cost estimation, it is not sufficient to conduct searches in digital libraries or to conduct manual searches of the most important software engineering journals. We identified as many as 76 journals with studies on software cost estimation, several software cost estimation papers that would have been hard to find through searches in digital libraries, and many journals from other domains that contained relevant results.

Search manually for relevant papers in a carefully selected set of journals when completeness is essential. There is a lack of standardized use of terms pertaining to software cost estimation. We believe that such a lack makes it is easy to miss important papers when relying on automatic searches in digital libraries. The search term “software cost estimation” OR “software effort estimation,” for example, did not identify more than 60 percent of the papers on software cost estimation identified by our manual search. We are aware of the practical limitations related to the use of manual search process, e.g., the required search effort. In cases where completeness is not essential, a combination of manual search of the most relevant journals and use of digital libraries to cover the other journals may be sufficient.

Conduct more studies on estimation methods commonly used by the software industry. In spite of the fact that formal estimation models have existed for many years, the dominant estimation method is based on expert judgment. Further, available evidence does not suggest that the estimation accuracy improves with use of formal estimation models. Despite these factors, current research on, e.g., expert estimation is relatively sparse and we believe that it deserves more research effort.

Increase the awareness of how properties of the data sets impact the results when evaluating estimation methods. Currently, a typical evaluation of an estimation method is based on an arbitrarily chosen data set, where the representativeness and other properties are not analyzed or much discussed. Even worse, quite a few papers are based on data sets that are clearly too old to be representative for more recent or future projects. We recommend that researchers on software cost estimation change their focus from the availability of project data sets to understanding the relationship between project characteristics (data set properties) and estimation methods.

We cannot claim, based on empirical evidence, that use of our library and adherence to our recommendations actually leads to better software cost estimation methods and fewer cost overruns in the software industry. However, adherence to the recommendations will, we believe, increase the probability that future cost estimation research builds on existing knowledge, is relevant for the software industry and is easier to generalize to other contexts. This in turn, we think, will increase the probability of better estimation methods and industry practice.