Online advertisements that masquerade as non-advertising content pose numerous risks to users. Such hidden
advertisements appear on social media platforms when content creators or “influencers” endorse products and
brands in their content. While the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) requires content creators to disclose their
endorsements in order to prevent deception and harm to users, we do not know whether and how content
creators comply with the FTC’s guidelines. In this paper, we studied disclosures within affiliate marketing, an
endorsement-based advertising strategy used by social media content creators. We examined whether content
creators follow the FTC’s disclosure guidelines, how they word the disclosures, and whether these disclosures
help users identify affiliate marketing content as advertisements. To do so, we first measured the prevalence of
and identified the types of disclosures in over 500,000 YouTube videos and 2.1 million Pinterest pins. We then
conducted a user study with 1,791 participants to test the efficacy of these disclosures. Our findings reveal
that only about 10% of affiliate marketing content on both platforms contains any disclosures at all. Further,
users fail to understand shorter, non-explanatory disclosures. Based on our findings, we make various design
and policy suggestions to help improve advertising disclosure practices on social media platforms.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Sponsored search advertising; Social advertising; Social
networks; • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI; • Social and professional topics
→ Governmental regulations;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Online Advertising; Advertising Transparency; FTC Endorsement Guidelines; Social Media; Sponsored Content
1 INTRODUCTION
Endorsement-based advertising is one of many advertising strategies that allows Internet content
creators—sometimes called influencers in marketing discourse—to monetize their content on social
media platforms and blogs. Because such advertising often appears in conjunction—and is merged—
with content creators’ non-advertising content, Internet users encountering these advertisements
may not recognize them as such, and may be misled or deceived [48]. To avoid any such deception and harm to users, several guidelines and regulations around the
world—including from Federal Trade Commission (FTC) [18] in the United States (US)—require
content creators to disclose and describe their relationships with advertisers to users. Having
adequate disclosures can better inform users when a piece of content is an advertisement, and
ensure that users appropriately weigh up content creators’ endorsements. In a recent case, the
FTC blocked an endorsement-based advertisement where bloggers were misleading consumers by
not disclosing hidden charges for products [9]. The FTC has also warned numerous other content
creators—including social media celebrities—who failed to disclose their relationships with brands
and companies in their social media posts [1, 13, 16, 17].
Unlike traditional online advertising, where disclosures are communicated using standardized
icons (e.g., AdChoices [2] for Online Behavioral Advertising or OBA) or text (e.g., Twitter’s promoted
tweets [41]) endorsement-based advertising disclosures are relatively unstructured, open-ended in
nature, and written primarily by individual content creators. As a result, we know little about how
many content creators actually disclose their relationship with advertisers in the first place, and
whether users notice and understand the disclosures’ underlying message.
In this paper, we examine disclosures accompanying affiliate marketing—an endorsement-based
advertising strategy that earns content creators money when users click on their customized
URLs—on social media platforms. We tackle three primary research questions:
• First, how prevalent are disclosures in affiliate marketing content on social media platforms?
• Second, how do content creators word and frame disclosures in affiliate marketing content?
• Third, and finally, how effective are these current forms of affiliate marketing disclosures
from a user standpoint?
Through our study, we aim to evaluate whether content creators on social media platforms
follow affiliate marketing disclosure guidelines set by various regulatory bodies such as the FTC,
whether their current disclosures effectively inform users about the underlying endorsement-based
advertisement, and if not, determine what steps various stakeholders in the affiliate marketing
industry, in policy and in design can take to improve disclosure practices.
To answer our research questions, we first measured the prevalence of affiliate marketing content
on two popular social media platforms that serve and enable user-generated content: YouTube
and Pinterest. We sampled ∼500,000 unique YouTube videos and ∼2.1 million unique Pinterest
pins, filtered content that contained affiliate URLs, and then examined this content for disclosures.
Following this analysis, we conducted a user study with 1,791 Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk)
users to determine how effective the disclosures we discovered are in practice.
We have four main findings:
• First, we find that only ∼10% of all affiliate marketing content on both YouTube and Pinterest
contains accompanying disclosures.
• Second, we find that the affiliate marketing disclosures on these social media platforms
can be broadly grouped into three distinct formats, which we term Affiliate Link disclosures, Explanation disclosures, and Channel Support disclosures. We find that Explanation
disclosures—which the FTC explicitly advocates for using in its guidelines—occur least frequently: only 1.82% of all affiliate YouTube videos and 2.43% of all affiliate Pinterest pins
contain Explanation disclosures.
• Third, we find that users are able to—by themselves—notice and understand Explanation
disclosures but not the other types. Disclosures of this type decreased users’ perceptions of the
content creator favoring the endorsed product by 0.46–0.53 times, and increased users’ ability
of identifying the underlying advertisement by 2.3–2.8 times. However, we only observed
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:3
this effect on Pinterest, suggesting that norms and design of social media platforms might
influence the efficacy of these disclosures.
• Fourth, and finally, we find that Affiliate Link disclosures are only half as effective as Explanation disclosures in communicating the underlying advertisement to users even when these
disclosures are presented to users without them having to look for it.
We make the following contributions through our study:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to empirically measure the prevalence of affiliate
marketing on social media platforms, and the compliance of content creators’ accompanying
disclosures in affiliate marketing content with the FTC’s endorsement guidelines.
• We describe a method to detect affiliate marketing content that is broadly applicable to
other social media platforms and the Web. As a result of our analysis, we compiled the most
comprehensive publicly available list of affiliate marketing companies and their URLs. We
make this list available in the Appendix.
• We describe a method to retrieve affiliate marketing disclosures from text data. Our method
can be easily extended to retrieve disclosures accompanying other forms of endorsementbased marketing techniques such as sponsored content.
• We provide new evidence that the wording and framing of disclosures impact user understanding of affiliate marketing advertising on social media platforms.
Based on our findings, we make design and policy suggestions aimed at various stakeholders
such as social media platforms and affiliate marketing companies to help enable content creators to
easily and clearly disclose advertising relationships. We also outline directions for future work in
this area to help users notice and understand affiliate marketing disclosures, and more generally,
help enable improved advertising disclosure practices on social media.
2 RELATED WORK
In this section, we describe endorsement-based advertising practices including relevant research
on advertising disclosures, and place our own study in context.
2.1 Endorsement-based Advertising on Social Media Platforms
Native advertising is a form of advertising where advertisements take the form, and structure of
non-advertising content, making it harder for users to identify it as such [3, 27, 29, 46]. For example,
an advertisement might masquerade as a news article along with legitimate news articles on a
news website. Endorsement-based advertising on social media platforms is a recent trend within
native advertising, where the advertisement is created by a user—termed the content creator—of
the platform to generate revenue for themselves rather than the platform itself. Broadly, such
advertising manifests in one the following three ways [47]:
• Sponsored Content, in which a content creator partners with an advertiser or merchant to
promote a product
• Affiliate Marketing, in which a content creator posts affiliate URLs to merchants in their
content to earn money from the resulting sales
• Product Giveaways, in which a content creator receives product samples from an advertiser
or merchant to promote and review
In this paper, we consider affiliate marketing advertising on social media platforms in depth. We
leave the other advertising strategies—Sponsored Content and Product Giveaways—for future work.
Affiliate Marketing. Affiliate marketing primarily involves three entities: a content creator, a
merchant and an affiliate marketing company. It comprises of two relationships: one between the
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:4 A. Mathur et al.
Content
Creator
(Affiliate)
Merchant
Affiliate
Marketing
Company
1
1
2
3
3
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 1. Overview of Affiliate Marketing and Its Use on YouTube. (a) Affiliate Marketing Ecosystem. (b) YouTube
Content Creator Endorsing a Product. (c) Affiliate URL in the Description of the Video (Red Box).
content creator and the affiliate marketing company, and another between the affiliate marketing
company and the merchant. Illustrated in Figure 1a, affiliate marketing typically works as follows:
• Merchants and content creators sign up with an affiliate marketing company (1)
• Content creators drive sales to the merchant through the affiliate marketing company; the
sales are tracked by means of customized URLs—called affiliate URLs—that are published by
the affiliate marketing company for the content creator to distribute (2)
• Each time a sale is made using the affiliate URLs, the merchant pays the content creator a cut
of the sale through the affiliate marketing company (3)
Figure 1b and Figure 1c illustrate how this works in practice on YouTube. A YouTube content
creator endorses a specific brand product (Figure 1b) in their video, and includes an affiliate URL in
the video’s description (Figure 1c). Any purchases through this URL provides a share of the sales—a
commission—to the YouTube content creator.
2.2 Advertising Disclosures
In the US, the FTC holds advertisers—regardless of the medium where they place their advertisements (e.g., radio, television, print media, or the Internet)—to the truth-in-advertising standard,
meaning that the advertisements they publish should not be misleading in nature. The FTC requires
that if additional information is required to prevent an advertisement from being misleading, then
that information must be disclosed to users by adhering to the clear and conspicuous standard [10];
it investigates any unfair and deceptive practices under Section 5 of the FTC Act [15].
The FTC categorizes an advertisement as misleading or deceptive if it conceals its commercial
nature from consumers [11]. Calling these advertisements—e.g., native advertisements, endorsements, sponsored content—Deceptively Formatted Advertisements, the FTC requires that they be
disclosed to consumers as advertisements so that consumers can identify them as such.
In the following sub-sections, we touch upon the landscape of such advertising disclosures.
2.2.1 Native Advertising Disclosures. Given that users find it hard to identify and distinguish
native advertisements (e.g., search engine advertisements, advertorials) from non-advertising
content [3, 27, 29, 46], several studies have examined ways in which the disclosures present on
these native advertisements can be designed for better recognition by users. These factors include
changing the position, visual appearance and prominence of the disclosure, and the branding of
the advertisement content itself. For instance, in a series of studies, Wojdynski et al. [44–46] found
that greater visual prominence of the disclosure such as by increasing text size, color and contrast
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:5
helped users better recognize the advertisement. Further, even varying the position of the disclosure
to the middle and bottom of the article, and using the word sponsored was more effective than using
a phrase such as presented by [sponsor] in helping users recognize the sponsored content.
In a recent report [38], the FTC also discovered that various aesthetic changes to disclosures, such
as including borders to surround the advertisement or contrasting the color of the advertisement
from other content can significantly increase users’ ability to identify native advertisements.
Collectively, these studies suggest that effective disclosures need to be visually distinguishable
from other content.
2.2.2 Endorsement-based Advertising Disclosures. Disclosures requirements for endorsement-based
advertising are described in the FTC’s endorsement guidelines [18]. The guidelines state that if
there exists a connection between an endorser and the marketer that consumers would not expect and
it would affect how consumers evaluate the endorsement, that connection should be disclosed. The FTC
also requires these disclosures to abide by the clear and conspicuous requirement so that consumers
can identify them and subsequently decide how much weight to provide to the content creator’s
endorsement. Further, the disclosures should also not be buried in an About or Terms of Use page.
For affiliate marketing, the FTC’s guidelines state that disclosures need to be placed close to any
recommendations and URLs included by the content creator. The guidelines highlight that using
affiliate link as a disclosure is insufficient, as users may not understand what an affiliate link is.
Instead, the FTC recommends using a short phrase such as I get commissions for purchases made
through links in this post close to the recommendation.
Only recently have studies begun examining how and whether users notice and understand the
disclosures made by social media content creators. For instance, Evans et al. [12] found that stating
paid ad was more effective than other disclosures in helping users identify advertisements on
Instagram. In another study [43], van Reijmersdal et al. studied how disclosing sponsored content
in blogs affected users. They found that after viewing the disclosure, users became more resistant
to the endorsement of the blogger.
2.2.3 Other Types of Advertising Disclosures. Numerous studies have examined advertising disclosure practices in other forms of media such as television content [5, 6, 23, 28, 34]. One set of studies
examined differences in television advertisements over time [23] and across demographics [34],
or content [28]. These studies collectively discovered that while the presence of disclosures in
advertisements have increased over the years in television advertisements, they still fail to adhere
to the clear and conspicuous requirement.
Other more recent studies [5, 6] have examined how the length and position of the disclosure
affects users’ perceptions of sponsored television advertisements. They found that longer disclosures and disclosures made before the sponsored content is presented to users improves users’
understanding of the nature of the content. These studies suggest that the timing of when a user
sees a disclosure is important for the understanding the meaning of the disclosure.
In OBA—one of the most common forms of online advertising today—users see targeted advertisements based on their interests, demographics, and browsing histories. These online advertisements
and the ability to opt-out of them are largely disclosed to users by means of the AdChoices icon—the
current advertising industry self-regulation standard. This icon appears in nearly 60% of online
advertisements from just 20 of the top 500 Alexa news websites [40].
Several recent studies [19, 26, 33, 42] have examined what various OBA disclosures communicate
to users in practice, collectively revealing several shortcomings of the AdChoices disclosure. Hastak
and Culnan [26] were the first to examine this in a survey of nearly 2,600 US adults users. They
studied the efficacy of various OBA disclosures in communicating the underlying notice (recognizing
the advertisement) and choice (being able to opt-out of tracking) to users. They found that the
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:6 A. Mathur et al.
AdChoices tagline did not work as well other tested taglines in aiding users’ comprehension of the
disclosure, suggesting that the wording of disclosures is important.
More recently, Ur et al. [42] and Leon et al. [33] found that non-expert users have several
misconceptions about the AdChoices icon, often assuming that clicking on the icon would lead
to more information about the advertised product or lead to more advertisements being shown.
Garlach and Suthers [19] tested users’ understanding of the AdChoices icon on mobile devices and
found that participants were unable to locate and click on the icon on the small screens. These
studies suggest that users may misunderstand visual indicators for disclosures altogether if they
are unfamiliar with what a particular visual is supposed to represent.
2.3 Summary
Unlike the above studies, our study is the first to examine affiliate marketing disclosures in the
context of endorsement-based advertising on social media. We perform a large scale measurement
of social media content that contains affiliate URLs which drive revenue to the creator of the
social media content. Further, rather than developing and testing new disclosures, we examine how
effective the disclosures content creators currently make are in communicating the underlying
endorsement-based advertisement to users. Based on prior work, we test how the placement and
wording of disclosures affect user comprehension of disclosures.
3 CHARACTERIZING AFFILIATE MARKETING DISCLOSURES
In this section, we describe how we gathered content from two social media platforms to find
affiliate marketing content and disclosures. Through this analysis, we answer our first and second
primary research questions: how prevalent are disclosures on affiliate marketing content, and how
do content creators disclose their affiliate marketing relationships with merchants to users? Figure 2
illustrates our data collection and analysis process.
We chose to specifically study YouTube and Pinterest to answer our research questions since
these are two popular social media platforms that are designed to share content and reviews.
However, our methods are platform agnostic and can be extended to other social media platforms.
3.1 Method
3.1.1 Data Collection. To answer our research questions, we first gathered data from YouTube
and Pinterest. Our goal in this process was to gather the least possibly biased sample of YouTube
videos and Pinterest pins in order to accurately model the prevalence of affiliate marketing content
and disclosures on these platforms.
We considered three sampling procedures—all of which have been used in past studies—for
collecting our data: sampling from large graphs, sampling using keywords, and prefix sampling.
Sampling from large graphs involves sampling Related content graphs or social network graphs—
both of which appear on YouTube and Pinterest as the Related Videos and Related Pins graph
respectively. However, because Related content graphs have non-randomly selected edges, which
are often biased towards content with high engagement—such as videos with higher view counts in
the case of YouTube [49]—they result in non-uniform samples. Sampling using keywords (e.g., [4])
involves gathering samples by querying the search facilities of platforms using a set of compiled
keywords. However, samples resulting from this procedure are likely to be biased towards the set
of keywords, and in most cases, compiling a set of representative keywords is challenging in itself.
We therefore employed prefix sampling which has previously been used for sampling from
YouTube [49] and Pinterest [20]. Prefix sampling works by generating—ahead of time—part of
the identifier of some record(s) in the population, a prefix, which is then used to sample records
beginning with that prefix. If the prefixes are uniformly generated, then the resulting samples will
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:7
405,471 URLs
[video description]
1,878,815 URLs
[pin url]
515,999
YouTube
videos
2,140,462
Pinterest
pins
URL resolution
[~2.5% timed out]
Extract affiliate URL
patterns
[57 patterns, 33 companies]
3,472
YouTube
videos
18,237
Pinterest
pins
Videos and pins containing affiliate URLs
Bag of words representation of
descriptions of videos and pins
Hierarchical
clustering
Extract disclosure
clusters
filter
Videos and pins containing affiliate
URLs and descriptions in English
2,250
YouTube
videos
11,468
Pinterest
pins
filter
Fig. 2. Overview of the Data Collection, Data Cleaning, and Disclosure Extraction Stages.
be uniform too. This sampling procedure is particularly useful when the search space of identifiers
is significantly larger than the number of already issued identifiers, and it is impractical to randomly
generate the issued identifiers.
To apply prefix sampling on YouTube, we first observed that YouTube videos are assigned
an eleven character long identifier. In order to gather our uniform sample, we first randomly
generated video identifiers of length five, a technique used previously [49]. We then searched
for those five character long identifiers using the YouTube Search API [21] which returned a list
of videos beginning with that prefix. Similarly on Pinterest, pins are assigned a varying length
identifier consisting wholly of numbers. The last five digits of the identifier however, represent
a timestamp [20]. To gather a set of random prefixes, we first retrieved 25 pins—the number of
pins returned on average—from the Pinterest Categories page [35] for each category. However,
these pins were always the most recent pins in that category, and the prefixes they contained
were non-random. Therefore, we then fetched all the related pins of these pins and sampled them
randomly to create a set of seed pins. We then varied the last five digits of these seed prefixes from
00000–01500 (arbitrarily) to construct the final sample of pins. In total, we retrieved 515,999 unique
YouTube videos and 2,140,462 unique Pinterest pins. While retrieving the videos and pins, we also
recorded their characteristics such as what category of content they belonged to, how many times
they had been viewed, how many comments had been made on the content, and details about their
creators. We gathered this data between August and September 2017.
3.1.2 Discovering Affiliate Marketing Content. After gathering the samples of YouTube videos and
Pinterest pins, we began the process of identifying affiliate marketing content in the samples. We
first compiled a database of all the URLs in the videos and pins, specifically looking for URLs in the
description of the YouTube videos and in the Pinterest pins. In total, we compiled a list of 405,471
and 1,878,815 URLs from the videos and pins respectively. To identify affiliate URLs from this set of
URLs, we relied on the observation that affiliate URLs contain specific patterns [8]. For instance,
Amazon’s affiliate URL contains a tag parameter which indicates the identifier of the affiliate who
stands to gain money from the purchase. However, while Amazon’s affiliate URL appears directly
on the destination website—the product page on Amazon.com—others may also appear during the
intermediate redirects to the destination. Further, unlike Amazon, affiliate URL patterns may not
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:8 A. Mathur et al.
necessarily only emerge as URL parameters; they may also be present in other parts of the URL
including its path and sub-domain.
To ensure that our analysis accounted for all such cases, we first resolved all the URLs in
our database, following both server-side and client-side redirects (HTTP 3XX, Meta refresh), and
recorded the resulting intermediate URLs and all HTTP response codes. A total of ∼2.5% of the URLs
across both datasets failed to resolve either due to timeouts or HTTP 404 error codes; we ignored
these URLs. Next, we performed a frequency analysis using each resolved URL’s domain, subdomain, path, and parameters, creating a list of commonly occurring patterns sorted by decreasing
order of appearance (counts). We reasoned that if there existed any patterns across the URLs we
resolved and visited, our frequency analysis would capture and bubble these to the top of the
list. Starting with the sub-domain and path, we first recorded how many sub-domains (paths)
each domain appeared with. A high number of sub-domains (paths) would signal that an affiliate
marketing company likely caters to different merchants through unique sub-domains (paths), or
that a constant sub-domain (path) appears as part of the affiliate URL. Next, we turned our attention
to domains and their URL parameters. Rather than recording the number of parameters associated
with each domain, we recorded the number of times a domain appeared with a URL parameter. A
frequent co-occurrence of domains and URL parameters would signal that the parameter conveys
some information about the content creator to the affiliate marketing company.
Because these lists contained a high number of false positives, we manually scanned each
list, examining which of the domains, sub-domains, paths, parameters corresponded to affiliate
marketing companies. To aid our examination, we used a combination of Google Search results, the
WHOIS database, and the FMTC affiliate database [14], which provides a mapping from merchants
to affiliate programs. Where possible, we also signed up on these programs as content creators to
validate our findings about the affiliate programs. To limit the effort required to manually examine
these lists, we only examined those combinations of domains and sub-domains/paths/parameters
that appeared at least 15 times.
3.1.3 Discovering Affiliate Marketing Disclosures. After finalizing the affiliate URL patterns, we
first filtered the list of resolved URLs to only retain those corresponding to these patterns. We then
filtered the YouTube videos and Pinterest pins datasets to only those containing the affiliate URLs.
Following this step, we began the process of extracting the disclosures from these videos and pins.
We could have expected to find the disclosures—in theory—either during the course of the videos,
the image of the pins, or the in the description boxes surrounding the videos and pins.
As a first step, we randomly sampled 20 videos and pins each from our filtered dataset of affiliate
marketing videos and pins. We then examined these videos and pins to look for any affiliate
marketing disclosures during the course of the videos and the pins’ images. Because we found no
disclosures in these random samples, we resorted to extracting disclosures in the descriptions of
the videos and pins.
To extract the disclosures present in these videos’ and pins’ descriptions, we first split each
description by its newlines and then by the sentences contained in each newline. We then tokenized
each resulting sentence into a bag-of-words representation, and clustered the sentences using
hierarchical clustering [36] with the euclidean distance metric. We chose a fairly low cut-off for
the clusters based on the idea that the relevant smaller clusters containing the affiliate disclosures
may already have been formed at that cut-off. We then manually examined these clusters one after
the other, and recorded ones that contained disclosures pertaining to affiliate marketing. For this
analysis, we only considered those descriptions that were written in English; doing so retained
64.8% and 62.8% of all affiliate videos and pins respectively.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:9
3.1.4 Limitations. Our analyses of affiliate marketing content and disclosures has limitations.
First, our method to discover affiliate URLs should be considered a lower bound on the number
of affiliate URLs and consequently on affiliate marketing companies since we ignored those URL
co-occurrences that appeared less than 15 times. Though we may have missed less prevalent
companies owing to our frequency analysis, we are confident that our analysis presents a close
approximation of affiliate URL prevalence. We also did not consider those affiliate programs that
use coupon codes to track and attribute sales. Second, our method to discover affiliate marketing
disclosures was limited to descriptions written in English. As a consequence, our findings may not
generalize to other languages. In our data set, the descriptions of ∼40% of all affiliate marketing
videos and pins were written in a non-English language.
3.2 Findings
In the following sections, we present our findings, describing the characteristics of affiliate marketing
content on both platforms, the types of disclosures made by content creators, and the characteristics
of these disclosures.
3.2.1 Examining the Affiliate Marketing Landscape. Through our analysis, we compiled a total
of 57 unique affiliate URL patterns from 33 different affiliate marketing companies—the most
comprehensive publicly available list of its kind. This list facilitated automated detection of affiliate
marketing content on both the social media platforms in our work and can be used to detect similar
content on other platforms in future studies. We found at least one affiliate URL in a total of 0.67%
or 3,472 videos on YouTube, and a total of 0.85% or 18,237 pins on Pinterest.
Table 5 in the Appendix lists the affiliate marketing companies we discovered along with their
URL patterns, and the number of times we observed their presence across all URLs resolutions in
our entire dataset. Note that a YouTube video may contain multiple affiliate URLs in its description
unlike a Pinterest pin, which only contains one URL (that is, the pinned URL).
Across both YouTube and Pinterest, Amazon’s Associate Program1 had the largest presence
(YouTube = 7,308, Pinterest = 7,368), closely followed by AliExpress’ Affiliate Program2
(YouTube =
2,167, Pinterest = 785). In addition to Amazon, we discovered other merchants that hosted in-house
affiliate programs, as opposed to explicitly redirecting through an affiliate marketing company. For
instance, Booking.com3
and Apple4 marketed products through their own affiliate programs. Some
of the companies in our list are easily recognizable but many are not likely to be familiar to users.
3.2.2 Fashion, Beauty, and Technology Content Contain Highest Affiliate Marketing. Next, we
analyzed how much content within each category—as defined by the platform—on YouTube and
Pinterest contained affiliate URLs, and ranked the resulting categories. For this analysis, we only
ranked those categories that had at least 100 affiliate marketing videos or pins.
The blue bar charts in Figure 3 illustrate our findings. Across both platforms, we found that
affiliate marketing was most commonly found across content within technology, fashion, and
beauty related categories. Prevalence of affiliate marketing across YouTube’s Science & Technology
and Howto & Style categories stood at 3.61% and 3.49% respectively. Similarly, prevalence of affiliate
marketing across Pinterest’s Women’s Fashion and Hair & Beauty categories stood at 4.62% and
2.04% respectively.
We suspect the presence of affiliate marketing in these categories may be attributed to at least
two different reasons. First, technology products, apparel, and beauty/cosmetics items are some of
1https://affiliate-program.amazon.com/
2https://portals.aliexpress.com
3https://www.booking.com/affiliate-program/v2/index.html
4https://www.apple.com/itunes/affiliates/
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:10 A. Mathur et al.
cience & Tech 0.0903 0.0361
owto & Style 0.2218 0.0349
ravel & Events 0.0412 0.0193
ilm & Animation 0.0486 0.0159
Music 0.0152 0.0094
ntertainment 0.0981 0.0068
aming 0.1024 0.0063
eople & Blogs 0.0825 0.0039
Science & Tech
Howto & Style
Travel & Events
Film & Animation
Music
Entertainment
Gaming
People & Blogs
Affiliate Content
0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
YouTube Categories
Disclosed Affiliate Content
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
Women's Fashion
Hair & Beauty
Sports
Design
Outdoors
Animals
No category
Affiliate Content
0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
Disclosed Affiliate Content
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
Pinterest Categories
1
Fig. 3. Percentage of Affiliate Marketing Content Across All Content (Blue Bar Charts) and Percentage of
Disclosed Affiliate Content (Red Bar Charts) Within Each YouTube and Pinterest Category. Only Categories
With More Than 100 Affiliate Marketing Videos and Pins Are Shown.
the most common products consumers shop for online [25, 31, 39], so their presence in affiliate
marketing might be indicative of this larger trend. Second, recent surveys have shown that users
proactively seek out reviews before shopping for technology products online, and therefore this
may be reflected in affiliate marketing content on these platforms [30].
3.2.3 Affiliate Marketing Content Has Higher User Engagement. Next, we examined how affiliate
and non-affiliate marketing content correlated with user engagement metrics such as view, like, and
comment counts. We conducted Mann–Whitney U tests to assess statistical significance. Accounting
for multiple testing using Bonferroni correction, we tested for significance at the 0.01 level.
Across both YouTube and Pinterest, we noted a common thread: videos and pins with affiliate
marketing content correlated with higher user engagement metrics. That is, these videos and pins
had more comments, were liked more, and viewed more often than other non-affiliate marketing
content. On YouTube, affiliate marketing videos correlated with longer duration length (U ∼
7.95 × 108
, p < 0.0001), higher view counts (U ∼ 7.72 × 108
, p < 0.0001), higher like counts
(U ∼ 6.96 × 108
, p < 0.0001), and higher dislike counts (U ∼ 6.52 × 108
, p < 0.0001). Similarly, on
Pinterest, affiliate marketing pins correlated with higher repin counts (U ∼ 1.93 × 1010
, p < 0.0001).
We could not directly compare the like and comment counts on Pinterest since the Pinterest API
returned both as zero for all the pins in our dataset. Given the higher user engagement, affiliate
marketing content is likely to surface through recommendations algorithms, and ensuring content
creators disclose these endorsements becomes an even more pressing issue.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:11
Table 1. Prevalence of Various Affiliate Disclosure Types On YouTube and Pinterest. Prevalence is Computed
Across All Affiliate Content.
Disclosure Platform Prevalence (%) Example
Affiliate Link YouTube 7.02 Affiliate links may be present above
Pinterest 4.60 (aff link)
Explanation YouTube 1.82
This video contains affiliate links, which means
that if you click on one of the links, I’ll
receive a small commission
Pinterest 2.43 (This is an affiliate link and I receive a commission
for the sales)
Channel
Support YouTube 2.44 AMAZON LINK: (Bookmark this link to support
the show for free!!!)
3.2.4 Three Types of Affiliate Marketing Disclosures. Across YouTube and Pinterest, we discovered
that 10.49% and 7.03% of affiliate marketing videos and pins respectively were disclosing the affiliate
URLs in their content descriptions as such to users. We found three distinct types of disclosure
clusters which we describe below; Table 1 summarizes our findings.
Affiliate Link Disclosures: The first type of disclosures communicated to users that affiliate
URLs were present in the content. On YouTube, these disclosures appeared in the video description
either as blanket disclosures—a single disclosure across the entire description—or as disclosures
highlighting the individual affiliate URLs, or both. Exactly 7.02% of affiliate marketing videos were
disclosing in this manner. The following statements describe how YouTube content creators made
these types of disclosures:
• Affiliate links may be present above
• Some of the links may be affiliate links
• (Disclosure: These are affiliate links)
• *Amazon link(s) are affiliate links
On Pinterest, Affiliate Link disclosures appeared in the description of 4.60% of all affiliate marketing pins. Unlike YouTube, content creators’ disclosures did not point to specific URLs, since the
Pinterest pins only contained the pinned URL. The following statements describe how Pinterest
content creators made these types of disclosures:
• (aff link)
• (affiliate)
• #affiliatelink
• This is an Amazon Affiliate link
Explanation Disclosures: The second type of disclosures content creators made offered users a
verbose explanation about affiliate marketing and affiliate URLs, and described how clicking on the
URLs impacts users viewing the content. In comparison to Affiliate Link disclosures, content creators
who used Explanation disclosures included more details, and often quoted specific merchants or
affiliate marketing companies. On YouTube, these disclosures appeared in the descriptions of 1.82%
all affiliate marketing videos. The following statements describe how YouTube content creators
made these types of disclosures:
• This video contains affiliate links, which means that if you click on one of the links, I’ll receive a
small commission
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:12 A. Mathur et al.
• I am an affiliate with eBay, Amazon, B&H and Adorama, which means I get a small commission
when you buy through my links
• **Links that start with http://rstyle, Beautylish & MUG links are affiliate links, I do earn a small
commission when you purchase through them, which helps me purchase products for review &
improve my channel
On Pinterest, Explanation disclosures appeared in the descriptions of 2.43% of all affiliate marketing pins. The following statements describe how Pinterest content creators made these disclosures:
• (This is an affiliate link and I receive a commission for the sales)
Channel Support Disclosures: The third type of disclosures content creators made communicated to users that they would be supporting the channel by clicking on the affiliate URLs, without
clearly explaining how. Only content creators on YouTube made these type of disclosures, which
appeared in the descriptions of 2.44% of all affiliate marketing videos. The following statements
describe how YouTube content creators made these types of disclosures:
• AMAZON LINK: (Bookmark this link to support the show for free!!!)
• Support HWC while shopping at NCIX and Amazon
• Purchase RP here and help support this channel via the amazon affiliate program
• Shop using these links to support the channel
To summarize, we found that only ∼10% and ∼7% of videos and pins respectively with affiliate
marketing URLs contained disclosures by content creators. When present, these disclosures were
of three types: Affiliate Link disclosures, Explanation disclosures, and Channel Support disclosures.
Our results show that Explanation disclosures, which the FTC explicitly advocates content creators
to use in its endorsement guidelines—and are also the most effective as we show our in user
study—appeared least frequently.
3.2.5 Affiliate Marketing Disclosure Prevalence by Content Category. We also examined how the
prevalence of content creators’ affiliate marketing disclosures varied across the videos’ and pins’
categories (as we described in Section 3.2.2). To account for the number of content creators contributing towards the disclosures in each category, we scaled the overall disclosure percentage by
the ratio of number of unique content creators accounting for those disclosures and the number of
videos and pins containing disclosures. If the all the videos and pins containing disclosures were
accounted for by unique creators, then the percentage remained unchanged.
The red bar charts in Figure 3 illustrate our findings. We observed some variance in the percentage
of affiliate marketing content on both YouTube and Pinterest that contained any form of disclosure,
with some outliers on both platforms. At about 22.5%, affiliate marketing videos in the Howto &
Style category on YouTube contained more disclosures than affiliate marketing videos in the other
categories. In stark contrast, disclosure rates in the corresponding Hair & Beauty and Women’s
Fashion categories on Pinterest was relatively low (0.5%–2.5%). Similarly, affiliate marketing pins in
the Outdoors category on Pinterest had an unusually high overall disclosure percentage, at about
15%. We suspect the relatively high rate of disclosures on YouTube’s fashion category may partially
be explained by recent awareness of the FTC’s guidelines among fashion and beauty vloggers
on YouTube [1, 32]. However, as stated before, our analysis only examined disclosures written in
English; the distribution of disclosures in affiliate content for other languages remains an area for
future exploration.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:13
Social Media
Usage
Watch Video
(Pin)
Video (Pin)
Questions
Read Video
(Pin)
Description
Product
Questions
Disclosure
Question
Demographic
Questions
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g)
Fig. 4. The Overall Structure and Flow of the YouTube and Pinterest Experiments. Blue Boxes Represent
Sections of the Experiment Where Participants Only Answered Questions; Red Boxes Represent Sections of
the Experiment Where Participants Only Viewed Content.
4 USER STUDY OF AFFILIATE MARKETING DISCLOSURES
Having discovered the different types of affiliate marketing disclosures on YouTube and Pinterest,
we turned to our third primary research question: How well do users notice and understand current
forms of these affiliate marketing disclosures? More specifically, we asked:
• Do users notice the disclosures present in the description of the affiliate marketing content?
• Does the position of the disclosure affect whether users notice the disclosure?
• Regardless of whether users notice the disclosures, what do these disclosures communicate
to users?
• How much do users think of the product embedded in affiliate marketing content (e.g.,
Figure 1b) as an endorsement by the content creator?
• How does the presence of a disclosure change users’ perception of the endorsement?
To answer these questions, we conducted online experiments on the MTurk platform. We describe
the logistics of the experiment, our subsequent data analysis, and findings in the following sections.
4.1 Method
4.1.1 Experiment Instrument. We conducted two online randomized controlled experiments on
MTurk—one each for YouTube and Pinterest—employing a between-subjects full-factorial design
in each experiment. We examined the effect of two independent variables—disclosure type and
video/pin—on several dependent variables, which we describe in the following paragraphs. The first
independent variable, disclosure type was a fixed factor and its levels consisted of the disclosure
types that we found in the previous analysis. We further varied the disclosure type by position
to appear either at the top or the bottom of the content description. In the YouTube experiment,
this resulted in six levels with three disclosure types—(Affiliate Link, Explanation, and Channel
Support)—spread across two disclosure positions (top, bottom). We chose the following disclosure
statements for each disclosure type:
• Control: [No Disclosure]
• Affiliate Link Disclosure: Affiliate links may be present
• Explanation Disclosure: This video contains affiliate links, which means that if you click on one
of the links, I receive a commission for the sales
• Channel Support Disclosure: Shop using these links to support the channel
Similarly, in the Pinterest experiment, the disclosure type independent variable contained four
levels with two disclosure types—(Affiliate Link and Explanation)—spread across two disclosure
positions (top, bottom). We chose the following disclosure statements for each disclosure type
(Recall, Pinterest had no Channel Support type disclosures):
• Control: [No Disclosure]
• Affiliate Link Disclosure: Affiliate link
• Explanation Disclosure: This is an affiliate link and I receive a commission for the sales
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:14 A. Mathur et al.
(a) Affiliate Link [Top] Condition (cropped) (b) Explanation [Top] Condition
Fig. 5. Examples of the Treatment Conditions in the (a) YouTube Experiment and (b) Pinterest Experiment.
The Disclosure Statements Were Added to the Top of the Descriptions in these Treatment Conditions.
Our choice of the disclosure statements warrants a justification. Our goal with the user study
was to determine the efficacy of the types of disclosures currently being made; we did not set
out to design and test new hypothetical affiliate marketing disclosures, and we leave doing so for
future work. This reasoning is reflected in our choices above: for each level in the disclosure type
factor—whether in the YouTube or Pinterest experiment—we picked an instance of the disclosure
that we thought would best represent disclosures in that category on that platform, but at the same
time would generalize across videos and across pins.
The second independent variable video/pin, reflected the videos and pins participants watched
during the experiments. This independent variable was a random factor in that we created its
levels from the affiliate marketing videos and pins in our dataset. We considered video/pin as a
random factor since we wished to examine how our dependent variables varied considering the
differences across videos and pins, rather than examining the effect of video/pin on the dependent
variables per se. To construct the levels of the video/pin random factor we sampled five videos
and five pins from the list of affiliate marketing videos and pins our dataset. However, in order
to limit the duration of the YouTube experiment, we only sampled the five videos from around
the overall median affiliate marketing video length (∼210 seconds); we added no such constraints
to the five randomly selected affiliate marketing pins in the Pinterest experiment. We specifically
chose five videos and pins to balance experimental overhead; a larger number would require more
participants for a between-subjects design. None of these videos and pins contained any disclosures
during the video or on the pin’s image.
With these two independent variables and including the control, we arrived at a (5 X 7) and a (5 X
5) full-factorial design in the YouTube and Pinterest experiments respectively. In each experiment,
we randomly assigned participants to one of the cells of the experiments.
Figure 4 illustrates the overall structure of the YouTube and Pinterest experiments. Each experiment contained five parts.
Part One. In the first part of the experiment (Figure 4a), we gathered details about participants’
social media use. Specifically, we asked participants whether they had an account on a list of
popular social media platforms including YouTube and Pinterest, how often they visited those
platforms, and how often they posted content on those platforms.
Part Two. In the second part of the experiment, participants either watched a YouTube video or
looked at a Pinterest pin (Figure 4b) which was embedded in the experiment page without its textual
description. Immediately after this step, we asked participants’ opinions about the content they
watched (video, pin impression) on a Likert scale (extremely negative–extremely positive; 5 point),
and by means of an open-ended question (Figure 4c). Based on how accurately they described the
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:15
content, the responses to this question helped us ascertain whether participants actually viewed the
content. In the YouTube experiment, we also logged participants’ interactions with the embedded
video player (play, pause, stop) to determine whether they watched the video.
Part Three. In the third part of the experiment (Figure 4d) we evaluated users’ perceptions of
the product embedded in the video or pin as an advertising endorsement by the content creator. In
this part, we presented participants with a screenshot of the description of the video or pin they
had just viewed. Depending on the condition, this was—including the control—either one of the
seven conditions in YouTube experiment or one of the five conditions in the Pinterest experiment.
Figure 5 shows one of treatments conditions for one video and one pin from both the YouTube and
Pinterest experiments.
In the following page (Figure 4e), we presented participants with an image of the merchant’s
website that contained the product that was linked using an affiliate URL in the video or pin’s
description. We then asked participants to report their impression of the product (product impression)
on a Likert scale (extremely negative–extremely positive; 5 point), and how much they thought the
content creator of the video/pin favored the product (content creator favors) on a Likert scale (does
not favor at all–strongly favors; 5 point). We used the latter as a measure of users’ perceptions of
the underlying endorsement by content creators.
To understand whether users notice the disclosures present in the descriptions of affiliate
marketing content, we then asked participants how likely they thought there was a relationship
between the content creator and the organization selling the product (content creator relationship)
on a Likert scale (extremely unlikely–extremely likely; 5 point). We also included an open-ended
question asking participants to explain their reasoning behind their answer to the previous question.
Part Four. In the fourth part of the experiment (Figure 4f), we presented the disclosure statement—
which again varied depending on the treatment condition—to participants and asked them to explain
what the statement meant in their own words by means of an open-ended question (explain). Using
this question, we evaluated what these disclosures communicate to participants when they are
presented—and are paying attention—to the disclosure statement.
Part Five. Finally, the fifth part of the experiment (Figure 4g) contained demographic questions.
Throughout the experiment(s), we referred to the product that was linked using the affiliate URL
and the merchant as an item and organization selling the item to ensure that our questions appeared
neutral and not leading.
4.1.2 Experiment Pilot and Deployment. We piloted the experiment(s) with 10 participants on
UserBob5
, a usability testing website that employs MTurk workers for think-aloud screen-capture
sessions. During the sessions, we asked participants to describe—in their own words—what the
purpose of each question was, and whether they experienced any difficulty in answering them.
Using this feedback, we restructured and refined the questions.
We then deployed the experiment(s) on MTurk as a Give us your opinion about this YouTube Video
(or Pinterest Pin) task. We used this neutral phrase to avoid leaking any information about our
motives behind the experiment. We required that participants completing the experiment be from
the US, and have a MTurk approval rating of 95% or higher. Accounting for the minimum federal
wage in the US ($7.25/hour), we paid participants $1.25 for completing the YouTube experiment
and $0.75 for completing the Pinterest experiment since these took no longer than 10 and 5 minutes
to complete respectively. We gathered all the data in March 2018. The study was approved by the
Institutional Review Board of our university.
5http://userbob.com/
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:16 A. Mathur et al.
4.1.3 Participants. We recruited a total of 1,052 participants in the YouTube experiment and 753
participants in the Pinterest experiment, resulting in ∼30 participants in each condition for each
video and pin. Of the 1,052 participants in the YouTube experiment, 14 (∼1.3%) skipped watching
the video—as revealed by our measurements—or were not paying attention—as revealed by their
open-ended responses—and were subsequently filtered out.
The mean age of participants in the YouTube experiment was 37.78, with a standard deviation
of 12.11. Over half (52.60%) of all these participants were male, and nearly two-thirds (64.07%)
had either a college or bachelor’s degree. Close to nine-tenths (91.62%) of all participants had a
YouTube account. Similarly, the mean age of participants in the Pinterest experiment was 38.29,
with a standard deviation of 12.49. A little over two-fifths (41.57%) of all participants were male, and
nearly two-thirds (63.21%) had either a college or bachelor’s degree. Close to fourth-fifths (82.50%)
of all participants had a Pinterest account.
4.1.4 Data Analysis. We built ordinal logistic regression mixed-models to analyze participant
responses. Ordinal regression is used when the dependent variable is ordinal in nature (e.g., a Likert
scale response). We used mixed-models to account for the video/pin independent variable, which
we considered as a random factor. We built separate models for both YouTube and Pinterest using
the ordinal package in R6
. For each model, we also verified that the proportional odds assumption
was not violated.
To analyze the open-ended response in which we asked participants to explain what the disclosure statement meant to them (explain), we adopted a qualitative data analysis approach and
performed deductive coding [37]. Two researchers created and agreed upon a codebook after an
initial exploration of all the responses. Using this codebook, both researchers independently coded
the responses, blind to the condition of the responses to avoid biasing the assigned codes. We
then calculated inter-rater reliability using Krippendorff’s alpha (α), and achieved an α = 0.82
and α = 0.84 in the YouTube and Pinterest experiment responses, indicating high agreement. We
then resolved the disagreements, and arrived at the final codes for each response. We make our
codebook available in the Appendix (Table 6).
4.1.5 Limitations. Our user study has limitations. First, we only tested one disclosure statement
within each disclosure type on both YouTube and Pinterest. We picked statements that were fairly
generic enough to generalize across all the videos and pins. Second, our studies were limited in
generalizability to the broader MTurk population. While the demographics of our participants,
including age, gender, and education, were broadly comparable to the Internet users population [7],
MTurk users may have differed in terms of Internet literacy, proficiency, and experience. Third, we
randomly sampled the five YouTube videos around the median length of affiliate videos, and as a
result our results may not generalize to videos of relatively longer and shorter duration.
4.2 Findings
In the following sections, we present our findings, highlighting the efficacy of the various disclosure
types on both platforms. The output of the various ordinal logistic regression models for the YouTube
and Pinterest experiments is summarized in Table 2 and Table 3 respectively. For each dependent
variable across both experiments, the regression models compared the treatment conditions against
the control.
4.2.1 Users Notice Explanation Disclosures, But Only On Pinterest. We asked participants how
likely it was that there was a relationship between the content creator and the merchant selling
the product. As seen in Table 2 we found no evidence that suggested any of the disclosure types
6https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ordinal/index.html
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:17
Extremely Unlikely Somewhat
Unlikely
Neutral Somewhat Likely Extremely Likely
Control 6 15 41 74 35
Affiliate [Top] 8 16 25 54 40
Affiliate [Bottom] 10 19 20 60 39
Explanation [Top] 4 12 18 48 67
Explanation
[Bottom]
4 13 13 45 67
Control
Affiliate [Top]
Affiliate [Bottom]
Explanation [Top]
Explanation [Bottom]
0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Extre. Unlike. Somew. Unlike. Neutral Somew. Like. Extre. Like.
2
(a) Content Creator Relationship
Table 1
Does Not Favor At
All
Slightly Favors Somewhat Favors Moderately Favors Strongly Favors
Control 3 8 31 60 69
Affiliate [Top] 4 13 29 58 39
Affiliate [Bottom] 5 7 21 63 52
Explanation [Top] 6 22 36 45 40
Explanation
[Bottom]
10 12 37 39 44
Control
Affiliate [Top]
Affiliate [Bottom]
Explanation [Top]
Explanation [Bottom]
0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Doesn’t Fav. Slight. Fav. Somew. Fav. Mod. Fav. Strong. Fav.
1
(b) Content Creator Favors
Fig. 6. Distribution of the Creator Relationship and Creator Favors Variables from the Pinterest Experiment.
in the YouTube experiment had a statistically significant effect on participants’ awareness of this
relationship when compared to the control condition. This suggests that the participants either
failed to notice the disclosures or interpreted them incorrectly, regardless of their type and position.
However, in the Pinterest experiment, and as summarized in Table 3, we found that the presence
of a Explanation disclosure either at the top (O.R. = 2.37, p < 0.0001) or bottom (O.R. = 2.82,
p < 0.0001) of the description multiplicatively increased the odds of participants’ awareness of the
relationship between the content creator and the merchant selling the product by 2.37 and 2.82
times respectively when compared to the control condition. Figure 6a shows the distribution of
the content creator relationship dependent variable aggregated across the pins. While about 60% of
participants in the control condition stated that it was either somewhat or extremely likely that
there was a relationship between the content creator and the merchant, nearly 75% did so in the
Explanation disclosure (Top & Bottom) conditions. This suggests that participants noticed and
correctly interpreted the Explanation disclosures regardless of their position in the pins’ description.
Across both platforms, we found no evidence to support that Affiliate Link disclosures were
effective. As we show in a later result, this is likely not just because users may have not noticed
these disclosure, but also due to unclear nature of the disclosure wording itself.
4.2.2 Similar Product Impressions Across All Conditions. We asked participants about their impression of the videos and pins (video, pin impression) before they were exposed to any treatment. As
shown in Table 2 and Table 3, we found no evidence that suggested any of the disclosure types had
a statistically significant effect on participants’ impressions of the videos and pins when compared
to the control condition in both experiments. We expected this result because the participants
had not yet been exposed to the treatments when they answered this question. Therefore, any
impressions of the videos and pins were likely averaged out due to randomization.
After participants read through the description of the video and pin—which varied depending on
the condition of the experiments—we asked them about their impression of the product (product
impression) that was linked by the content creator using an affiliate URL. As shown in Table 2
and Table 3, we found no evidence that suggested any of the disclosure types had a statistically
significant effect on participants’ impressions of the product when compared to the control condition
in both the YouTube or Pinterest experiments. This suggests that participants’ impression of the
products did not vary due to the presence of any of the kinds of disclosures.
4.2.3 Explanation Disclosures Decrease Participants’ Perceptions of Content Creators’ Endorsement
On Pinterest. After they had read through the videos’ and pins’ descriptions, we asked participants
how much they thought the content creator favored the product that was linked using an affiliate
URL (content creator favors). Only 3.13% and 3.71% of participants—across all the conditions—in the
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:18 A. Mathur et al.
Table 2. Ordinal Logistic Regression Models for the YouTube Experiment. Each Column Represents an
Ordinal Regression Model. The Name of the Column Indicates the Dependent Variable. Values Within
Brackets Represent the 95% Confidence Interval.
∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001 ∗ ∗ ∗∗ p < 0.0001
Experimental
Condition(s)
Video
Impression
Product
Impression
Creator
Favors
Creator
Relationship
[Control: No Disclosure] Odds Estimate [95% C.I.]
Affiliate Link [Top] 0.90
[0.60, 1.36]
0.85
[0.56, 1.29]
0.78
[0.52, 1.17]
0.79
[0.53, 1.17]
Affiliate Link [Bottom] 0.81
[0.53, 1.23]
0.91
[0.59, 1.40]
1.01
[0.68, 1.55]
1.00
[0.66, 1.52]
Explanation [Top] 0.74
[0.48, 1.13]
0.89
[0.58, 1.38]
0.80
[0.52, 1.23]
1.08
[0.71, 1.66]
Explanation [Bottom] 0.86
[0.56, 1.32]
0.91
[0.63, 1.52]
0.84
[0.54, 1.30]
1.30
[0.85, 1.97]
Channel Support [Top] 0.86
[0.55, 1.33]
0.73
[0.47, 1.14]
0.89
[0.57, 1.39]
0.68
[0.44, 1.05]
Channel Support [Bottom] 0.91
[0.60, 1.39]
0.95
[0.62, 1.45]
0.93
[0.61, 1.42]
0.74
[0.49, 1.12]
Random Effect [Std. Dev.] 0.67 0.66 0.68 0.42
YouTube and Pinterest experiments respectively thought the content creator did not favor the product at all. Specifically in the control condition—having no disclosure—this number was comparable:
only 2.76% and 1.75% of all participants in the YouTube and Pinterest experiments respectively
thought the content creator did not favor the product at all. This suggests that participants do think
of the products featured through affiliate URLs as endorsements by the creators.
As seen in Table 2, we found no evidence that suggested participants’ perceptions of the creators’
endorsement of the affiliate marketing product varied across the disclosure types in the YouTube
experiment compared to the control condition. However, in the Pinterest experiment, and as
summarized in Table 3, we found that the presence of an Affiliate Link disclosure at the top of
the description (O.R. = 0.62, p < 0.05), or an Explanation disclosure both at the top (O.R. = 0.46,
p < 0.001) or the bottom (O.R. = 0.53, p < 0.01) of the description, all multiplicatively decreased
the odds of participants’ perceptions of content creators’ endorsement of the product by nearly half
when compared to the control condition. Figure 6b shows the distribution of the content creator
favors dependent variable aggregated across the pins. While about 75% of participants in the control
condition stated that the content creator either moderately or strongly favored the product, only
50% of participants did so in the Explanation (Top & Bottom) conditions. This result from the
Pinterest experiment suggests that participants noticed and correctly interpreted the Explanation
disclosure, and as a result perceived the content creators’ disposition to be more neutral relative to
the control condition. As before, we found no evidence to support that Affiliate Link disclosures
were effective.
4.2.4 Participants Accurately Interpret Explanation Disclosures. We asked participants to explain
what the disclosure statement meant to them in their own words by means of an open-ended
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:19
Table 3. Ordinal Logistic Regression Models for the Pinterest Experiment. Each Column Represents an
Ordinal Regression Model. The Name of the Column Indicates the Dependent Variable. Values Within
Brackets Represent the 95% Confidence Interval.
∗ p < 0.05 ∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001 ∗ ∗ ∗∗ p < 0.0001
Experimental
Condition(s)
Pin
Impression
Product
Impression
Creator
Favors
Creator
Relationship
[Control: No Disclosure] Odds Estimate [95% C.I.]
Affiliate Link [Top] 0.98
[0.65, 1.47]
1.49
[0.99, 2.24]
0.62∗
[0.42, 0.93]
1.21
[0.81, 1.81]
Affiliate Link [Bottom] 0.92
[0.61, 1.38]
1.44
[0.96, 2.16]
0.90
[0.61, 1.35]
1.13
[0.76, 1.68]
Explanation [Top] 1.01
[0.67, 1.52]
0.93
[0.62, 1.40]
0.46∗∗∗
[0.30, 0.69]
2.37∗∗∗∗
[1.58, 3.56]
Explanation [Bottom] 1.29
[0.85, 1.87]
1.24
[0.82, 1.87]
0.53∗∗
[0.35, 0.80]
2.82∗∗∗∗
[1.86, 4.29]
Random Effect [Std. Dev.] 0.49 0.25 0.12 0.44
Table 4. Participants’ Interpretation of the Disclosure Statement Broken Down by Disclosure Type.
Disclosure
Type
YouTube Pinterest
Incorrect Correct Incorrect Correct
Affiliate Link 115 217 145 146
Explanation 14 270 15 276
Channel Support 40 236 NA NA
question. We classified the resulting codes from the qualitative data analysis into two groups:
Correct and Incorrect. The first group consisted of all those codes that suggested a relationship—
not just financial—between the content creator and the merchant, or that the content was an
advertisement, was sponsored or was a promotion. The second group consisted of all other codes;
these represented either incorrect interpretations of the disclosure statements or null responses.
Our goal with this division of codes was not motivated by whether participants understood the
specifics of affiliate marketing, but more generally, that they understood that the content creator
benefited in some way from a partnership with the merchant. Table 6 in the Appendix indicates
the codes we marked Correct and Incorrect.
Table 4 summarizes our results. In the YouTube experiment, nearly 95%, 85%, and only 65% of
participants in the Explanation, Channel Support, and Affiliate Link conditions respectively correctly
interpreted the disclosure statement. A Chi-sq test of independence was significant (χ
2 = 93.14,
p < 0.0001), indicating indicating that the disclosure types and their interpretation—as defined by
our groups—were not independent of each other. Post-hoc comparison tests revealed that there was
a statically significant difference between the Affiliate Link and Explanation conditions (χ
2 = 79.82,
p < 0.0001), the Affiliate Link and Channel Support conditions (χ
2 = 31.15, p < 0.0001), and the
Explanation and Channel Support conditions (χ
2 = 13.62, p < 0.001). Similarly, in the Pinterest
experiment, nearly 95% and only 50% of participants in the Explanation and Affiliate Link conditions
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:20 A. Mathur et al.
respectively correctly interpreted the disclosure statement. A Chi-square test of independence
was—as before—significant (χ
2 = 183.85, p < 0.0001).
Overall, when presented with the disclosure statement, the majority of participants correctly
interpreted the Explanation and Channel Support disclosures, understanding that posting the affiliate
marketing content benefited the content creator in some way. In contrast, fewer participants found
Affiliate Link disclosures interpretable.
In summary, we found that Explanation disclosures are more effective than Affiliate Link disclosures when users can find them (e.g., on Pinterest); users likely fail to either notice or correctly
interpret Affiliate Link disclosures. Further, we think the Explanation disclosures likely had an
effect in the Pinterest experiment but not the YouTube experiment because of the norms and design
of social media platforms. In the five affiliate pins we used in the experiment—and this is true for
affiliate Pinterest pins more generally (Median = 1 line)—the descriptions were short and no more
than one or two lines. On the other hand, because YouTube descriptions in the five videos were
longer—with this being true for affiliate YouTube videos more generally (Median = 14 lines)—this
may have limited the ability of users to identify the disclosures.
5 DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the implications of our findings and suggest directions for future work.
5.1 Detecting Affiliate Marketing Content and Disclosures
Through our work, we demonstrated a new method for discovering affiliate marketing companies’
URL patterns. Using this method, we were able to detect affiliate marketing content on two social
media platforms and generate a publicly available list for researchers to contribute to and use.
Similarly, our method for discovering disclosures within content creators’ textual descriptions
can aid in building automated disclosure detection tools; we think this can be of broad use for
regulators, platforms, and researchers to ultimately help users better identify endorsement-based
advertisements. Lastly, both methods are extensible and can be used to replicate our study on other
social media platforms.
5.2 Effectiveness of the FTC’s Endorsement Guidelines
5.2.1 Low Prevalence of Disclosures. Our results showed that only a small percentage of affiliate
marketing content from YouTube and Pinterest contained any disclosures at all. This suggests that
the FTC’s endorsement guidelines have only had a limited effect in ensuring that content creators
disclose their affiliate marketing relationship to consumers. Even within the small set of disclosures
that are made, the majority are of the kind the FTC specifically discourages using: the short Affiliate
Link disclosures.
This presents an opportunity for further investigation and study: why do content creators fail
to follow the guidelines? We think there might be at least two contributing reasons. First, it is
not clear whether content creators are even aware of the guidelines to begin with. Future work
could—by means of surveys and interviews—examine the reasons behind why content creators on
social media choose to or fail to disclose their affiliate marketing content. Second, the FTC has only
recently begun enforcing its endorsement guidelines, setting precedents for violations [1, 13, 16, 17].
We expect that endorsement disclosures—including those related to affiliate marketing—will appear
more frequently as awareness around the guidelines grows.
5.2.2 Explanatory Disclosures Help But Only When Users Can Find Them. Our study validates the
FTC’s endorsement guidelines that explanatory disclosures are indeed effective. Users are able
to better understand the underlying relationship between the content creator and the merchants
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
Endorsements on Social Media 119:21
through the Explanation disclosure, but our results also show platform-specific effects: users may
not be able to notice and interpret disclosures that are buried in long texts, regardless of their
clarity, such as on YouTube. Therefore, we recommend that content creators ensure that they create
disclosures in a manner that facilitates discovery (e.g., by surrounding the disclosure by asterisks
and underscores).
5.3 Shifting the Burden to Affiliate Marketing Companies
Content creators could be held accountable to better disclosure practices by the affiliate marketing
companies they associate with. We examined the affiliate marketing terms and conditions, where
publicly available, of eight of the most prevalent affiliate marketing companies from our dataset:
Amazon, AliExpress, Commission Junction, Rakuten Marketing, Impact Radius, RewardStyle, ShopStyle and ShareASale. We could not find any publicly available terms and conditions from Impact
Radius or RewardStyle. Only Amazon7
and ShopStyle8
explicitly referenced the FTC’s guidelines
in their affiliate terms. While we did not find any references in the Rakuten Marketing, ShareASale,
Commission Junction affiliate terms, we noted all three companies blogging about the guidelines
on their company blogs9,10,11
.
However, its unclear how many other affiliate marketing companies follow this practice, and
whether they explicitly point the content creators that register with them to the FTC’s guidelines.
In addition to focusing on the content creators, we suggest that the FTC could work with these
companies to revise their disclosure requirements and standards.
5.4 Design Suggestions for Effective Disclosures
Our findings also unlock several design suggestions that various stakeholders in the social media
advertising ecosystem—including social media platforms and web browsers—can incorporate to
improve disclosure practices, and help users identify these disclosures.
5.4.1 Affordances Through Social Media Platforms. Along with content creators, social media
platforms play a critical role in shaping the disclosures that content creators make. The disclosures,
generally speaking, are limited by the character space available to them. For instance, the description
length can be as long as 5,000 characters on YouTube, but on Pinterest it is capped to 500 characters;
similarly, tweets can only be as long as 280 characters on Twitter. Because some of these interfaces
may be more more conducive for content creators to add disclosures than others, social media
platforms can help design their interfaces to make it easier for content creators to disclose without
crowding their other promotion text.
In fact, Instagram recently added an option for sponsored content to be disclosed by using the
Paid partnership tool, which enables disclosures outside of the traditional image description [24].
Similarly, YouTube recently added the ability for create a Contains Product Placement overlay to
their videos [22]. Such disclosure tools are a step in the right direction, however it is unlikely
that any one blanket disclosure will cover all marketing practices. As the FTC’s endorsement
guidelines evolve, social media platforms can also help design tools that enable content creators
to retroactively edit disclosures from their past posts. Future research could focus on examining
in depth the kinds of affordances that can be built into social media platforms to enable content
creators to disclose their advertisements clearly and conspicuously.
7https://affiliate-program.amazon.com/help/operating/agreement
8https://www.shopstylecollective.com/terms
9http://blog.shareasale.com/2017/09/08/ftc-updates-and-faq-s/
10https://blog.marketing.rakuten.com/topic/ftc-disclosure-guidelines
11http://junction.cj.com/article/disclosures-what-you-need-know
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 119. Publication date: November 2018.
119:22 A. Mathur et al.
5.4.2 Protection Through Web Browsers. Web browsers could also help inform users that the content
they are watching has affiliate URLs by means of in-built support or through add-ons and extension.
Such tools could function like current Ad-blockers, but rather than blocking advertisements,
they could either highlight when a piece of content should contain disclosures, or highlight the
actual disclosures when they are present. These tools could leverage Explanation disclosures’ high
interpretability rate in presenting the disclosure information to users.
Web browsers can achieve this in practice using machine learning and natural language processing based approaches in which algorithms can be trained on large datasets of labelled social
media content. Our findings provide a starting point, showing that the three categories of affiliate
disclosures often use wording that exhibit a common pattern. In future work, we aim to build such
tools, and conduct user studies to evaluate how well they work in practice.
6 CONCLUSION
We examined advertising disclosures accompanying affiliate marketing content on two social media
platforms: YouTube and Pinterest. Our study reveals that only about 10% of affiliate marketing
content on both platforms contains any disclosures at all. Further, the explanatory disclosures
which the FTC recommends using are indeed the ones we found most effective; however, these
were also the least prevalent of all disclosure types. We offer practical recommendations from both
a design and policy perspective to help enable better disclosures for users. Doing so can ultimately
help increase transparency surrounding social media endorsements.