Designing technical systems to be resistant to bias and discrimination represents vital new terrain for researchers, policymakers, and the anti-discrimination project more broadly. We consider bias and discrimination
in the context of popular online dating and hookup platforms in the United States, which we call intimate
platforms. Drawing on work in social-justice-oriented and Queer HCI, we review design features of popular
intimate platforms and their potential role in exacerbating or mitigating interpersonal bias. We argue that
focusing on platform design can reveal opportunities to reshape troubling patterns of intimate contact without
overriding users’ decisional autonomy. We identify and address the difficult ethical questions that nevertheless
come along with such intervention, while urging the social computing community to engage more deeply
with issues of bias, discrimination, and exclusion in the study and design of intimate platforms.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Interaction design theory, concepts and paradigms;
Keywords: Platforms; online dating; intimacy; bias; discrimination; design; ethics; law; policy
1 INTRODUCTION
Mobile dating and hookup platforms, which we call intimate platforms,
1 have become vital spaces
where we meet and connect with intimate partners. Today 15% of American adults report using
dating sites and mobile dating applications [83], with some research estimating that one-third of
marriages start online [14]. The impact on same-sex relationships is even more dramatic: one study
found that in the late 2000s, over 60% of same-sex couples met online [78]. Tinder and Grindr have
tens of millions of users, with Tinder facilitating 20 billion connections since its launch [42].
Intimate platforms provide unparalleled access to prospective lovers and partners. Importantly,
they present opportunities to create connections between formerly distant social groups. Rosenfeld
and Thomas highlight how online dating "allows [people] to meet and form relationships with
perfect strangers, that is, people with whom they had no previous social tie," displacing traditional
patterns of intimate affiliation that involved close ties—such as families, neighbors, and mutual
friends—and connections made locally in bars, neighborhoods, and workplaces [78, p. 524]. This
process of orienting individuals away from close ties and personal networks has the potential to
disrupt existing patterns of assortative mating [81], encouraging interaction between members of
social groups that might have had little contact in the past. For example, some research suggests
that online dating could increase rates of interracial marriage [69].
While intimate platforms can provide new social opportunities, bias and discrimination may limit
the degree to which such opportunities are realized in practice [11]. Troubling research documents
broad and pervasive inequities in the desire for, and appeal of, users of minority racial and ethnic
backgrounds on intimate platforms [21, 79].
User profiles laced with phrases like "No blacks, sorry," "No Indians, no Asians, no Africans," or
"Only here to talk to white boys," have given rise to critical research on and popular discourse about
what many consider to be sexual racism [1, 5, 17, 52]. Numerous platforms have come under fire for
design practices that contribute to prejudicial modes of thought and action, such as race-based filters
and search tools or race-based matching algorithms [82, 84, 86]. In light of these challenges, new
intimate platforms, design practices, and marketing strategies are emerging that seek to intervene
against user bias and discrimination, and more generally to promote social justice and equality
[40, 63].
Designing technical systems to be resistant to bias and discrimination represents vital new terrain
for researchers, policymakers, and the anti-discrimination project more broadly [59]. However,
as a realm of private personhood, intervening in intimate affairs is controversial: romantic and
sexual choices are understood as intensely personal, well outside the scope of preferences that
platforms might feel justified in influencing [94]. Such reluctance, we argue, rests on a fundamental
misapprehension about both the nature of desire and the degree to which platforms can avoid
exercising influence over our preferences in partners. The objects of our affections are shaped
by our cultural environments, as well as the affordances of the platforms that facilitate intimate
interactions.
This article proceeds as follows. First, we consider critical and empirical work on the importance
of intimacy, intimate platforms, and design. We then review three design strategies used by intimate
platforms popular in the United States, drawing on theories of Queer and social justice-oriented
HCI to explore their impacts on intimate discrimination. We argue that focusing on platform design
can help alter troubling patterns of social interaction, without unduly interfering with individual
intimate choices. We then consider the roles for designers and platforms, and the ethical issues that
arise when designing intimate interventions. Ultimately, we call for the social computing research
community to engage more deeply with issues of bias, discrimination, and exclusion in the study
and design of intimate platforms.
2 INTIMATE IMPACT
The intimate sphere is central to virtually all social life. It is the site of the "privileged institutions
of social reproduction, the accumulation and transfer of capital, and self-development" [7, p. 282].
To that end, the intimate is inextricably tied to relations of power [70]. Our intimate affiliations
(and the structures that manage them) shape our selves, families, neighborhoods, communities,
and nations. In the words of Berlant, "intimacy builds worlds" [6].
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:3
While individual intimate preferences are generally regarded as private matters that ought to
be free from outside assessment and influence, systematic patterns in such preferences—and the
structures that promote and preserve these patterns—hold serious implications for social equality.
As others have shown, the intimate sphere has historically been a crucial locus of state control, as
well as a key determinant of social and economic welfare [5, 31, 38].
The intimate sphere has a particularly loaded social and legal history. The management of
intimate affiliations and attachments played a critical role in colonial North America, helping to
establish social distinctions and categories of identity that served as the basis for oppression and
subjugation [85]. On numerous occasions, the U.S. government has enshrined particular forms of
discrimination in intimate marketplaces, such as anti-miscegenation laws that prohibited interracial
marriage and anti-sodomy laws that prohibited homosexual intercourse (see [32, 54] for review).
Furthermore, the state has advanced a variety of policies that impact who we are (and are not) able
to meet, interact, sleep, or fall in love with. For example, scholars highlight the U.S. government’s
role in redlining, residential segregation, school segregation, and the institutionalization of persons
with mental and physical disabilities as "institutional examples of the state’s shaping which intimate
accidents can occur" [31, p. 1380], and argue that these restrictions have played a role in shaping
intimate preferences and social norms in ways that impede certain relationships. These norms and
relationships are then solidified over time, in a self-reinforcing loop that concretizes disadvantages
for certain groups in intimate marketplaces and in the social world more broadly [31]. In this view,
individuals’ intimate affiliations are not the product of "pure" individual choice, but are instead
shaped by accretions of state and social power.
Access to or exclusion from intimacy has a host of individual and structural outcomes. For
individuals, intimacy is tied to a number of consequences for personal welfare, including (but not
limited to) community attachment, sexual sociality, health, and well-being [37]. Extensive research
has established a positive relationship between sexual activity and such outcomes as lifespan [71]
and overall happiness [8]. Marriage is also associated with decreased mortality risk and improved
health outcomes [51]. Intimacy also has socioeconomic consequences: assortative mating has been
shown to contribute to income inequality [12, 39].
3 INTIMATE DISCRIMINATION
The intimate realm represents one of the only remaining domains in which individuals may feel
entitled to express explicit preferences along lines of race and disability [31]. Even describing such
preferences as biased or discriminatory can be challenging. As a matter of personal preference,
sexual attraction might seem definitionally discriminatory: to have any preference is to favor some
people, and disfavor others, as potential partners. But describing desire as discriminatory is a way
to capture more than the mere fact of sexual preference; it is a way to recognize and name intimate
affinities that emerge from histories of subjugation and segregation.
At the extreme, preference in potential partners might very well rest on racial animus and
overt prejudice—a belief that those of a different race are unworthy of affection or respect. Or, an
individual might limit intimate encounters to others that belong to her own race, on the belief
that her race is categorically superior to others. Such preferences might be rightly described as
sexual racism in the sense that they reflect generally racist attitudes as expressed in choice of
romantic partners. Objecting to sexual racism is a way to object to racism more broadly, while
recognizing the distinct harms that victims of racism suffer as a result of discrimination in the
intimate sphere and the secondary effects that such experiences have on other crucial areas of
their lives. But objections might also focus on the fact that sexual racism is likely to be particularly
pernicious, given the significant deference that the choice of intimate partners tends to command
in comparison to similarly biased decisions in other important domains [94].
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
73:4 J. Hutson et al.
Making claims of bias in sexual preferences is more difficult in the absence of overt prejudice
[30]. If desire is the expression of some unconscious inner drive—a preference well outside control
and beyond reason—then there seems little hope in calling out people for predilections that fall
on racial lines. On this account, while we may choose our romantic partners, we do not choose
whom we find attractive. Yet sexual preferences do not emerge from a psychological or cultural
vacuum. The fact that ideals of beauty vary across time and place makes this rather obvious. Sexual
preferences are historically and culturally contingent—as much the product of the social world in
which one grows up as some biological imperative (see [19] for review). Cultural representations of
love and sex inform our understanding of which intimate affiliations are acceptable and desirable,
and they serve as the psychological material from which our preferences are fashioned [38]. While
culture does not instill desire in us, it so profoundly shapes the focus of our desires that preferences
in romantic partners cannot be understood as simply a matter of individual and idiosyncratic
choice. In this sense, sexual preferences might exhibit bias if they reflect prevailing representations
of desirable partners—and if these representations demean, denigrate, or fetishize members of
particular racial groups [76].
Resisting biased sexual preferences does not depend on the existence of some pure state of desire
stripped of cultural influence. Instead, resistance simply requires recognizing that desire is malleable,
and that such preferences can have a significant practical impact on the lives and livelihoods of
marginalized populations [5, 38]. Expanding people’s sexual horizons does not mean overriding
some "true" or innate preferences; it means intervening in the unavoidable and ongoing processes
by which our preferences emerge in our interactions with our social and cultural environment.
Not only do intimate platforms influence people’s willingness to express and act on their sexual
preferences, they actively shape those very preferences in the way they present potential partners.
4 INTIMATE INEQUITIES ONLINE
While discrimination certainly occurred (and continues to occur) in offline spaces, intimate platforms
provide easy-to-use features that allow users to act on such preferences. As platforms become
centralized marketplaces for finding intimate partners, even small design decisions that impact
matching behavior can have significant effects in the aggregate.
Extensive research documents disparities in racial preferences in online dating. As OKCupid
founder and data scientist Christian Rudder stated of the matches formed on his site, "when
you’re looking at how two American strangers behave in a romantic context, race is the ultimate
confounding factor" [79]. For example, white users of OKCupid are more likely to receive messages
or have their messages responded to than their non-white peers, while Asian men and black women
are least likely to receive messages or responses [80]. Heterosexual women of all races prefer white
over nonwhite partners [80, 91]. White men and women of all ages are more likely to pursue dates
with white rather than non-white partners [62] and are least likely to date outside their race [77],
while Asian and Latino men and women demonstrate comparable patterns of racial exclusion [77].
College students are more likely to exclude blacks, particularly black women, as possible dates
[4]. Black men and women are ten times more likely to message whites on an intimate platform
than whites are to message blacks [65]. The extent of self-segregation in online dating, however,
is shown to peak at the first stage of contact: users are more likely to communicate across racial
boundaries when reciprocating than when initiating romantic interest [60]. Importantly, users who
receive messages across racial boundaries engage in more new interracial exchanges than they
would have otherwise [60].
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:5
A wealth of empirical work documents racial discrimination among gay and bisexual users of
online platforms in particular.2 This research describes the many ways in which discrimination
reinforces racial stereotypes, hierarchies, and social distance (e.g., [16, 72]; see [5] for further
review).
In the context of intimate platforms, gay and bisexual men are more likely than their heterosexual
counterparts to distinguish between potential sexual or romantic partners on the basis of race
or perceived racial identity [74, 75]. In a 2012 study of racialized language in user profiles on
Manhunt.net (a dating website for gay and bisexual men), researchers found that racialized language
is leveraged in user profiles for a variety of purposes, including negative discrimination (e.g., "No
Blacks."), positive discrimination or fetishization (e.g., "Black guys are sexy."), and marketing of
the self to other users [15]. Moreover, recent research demonstrates that discrimination between
potential intimate partners on the basis of perceived racial identity is closely associated with generic
racist attitudes (i.e., racism in non-intimate contexts) [17]. These findings challenge the narrative
of racial attraction as simply being a matter of innate personal preference by revealing a complex
interaction between sexual politics and broader attitudes toward different racial and ethnic groups.
For minority racial groups, pervasive forms of rejection, discrimination and marginalization—
whether on- or offline—can cultivate deep feelings of personal shame and lead subjects of discrimination to view themselves as less attractive or desirable [17, 18, 44]. A 2015 study found that 84%
of gay and bisexual men from minority racial backgrounds had experienced racism within gay
communities, and 65% of those respondents reported resultant stress [46]. Another study found that
Black gay and bisexual men’s experiences with race-based discrimination in sexual interactions
were significantly associated with sexual and relationship issues, including problems maintaining
affection and finding a partner [96].
Even when people from minority groups are the object of sexual attraction, their desirability is
often framed by stereotypical images [74], often associated with particular racial bodies and identities. Research has documented perceptions of Asian men in white-dominated spaces as effeminate,
submissive, and docile, forcing them to take on the "submissive" intimate role in hookup settings,
and making them more likely to contract sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS
[22, 43, 45]. Similarly, experiences of social discrimination were found to predict likelihood of engaging in risky sexual behavior, and resulting HIV transmission, among gay Latino and Black men
[3]. These findings draw a direct connection between sexual racism and public health outcomes.
5 JUSTICE, DESIGN, AND INTIMATE PLATFORMS
The fields of human-computer interaction and social computing have long histories of considering
large-scale techno-social issues of power and justice, and actively promoting pro-social design
solutions. HCI theorists and researchers have worked to promote positive online communitybuilding [56], environmental sustainability [28], civic engagement [47, 55], bystander intervention
[25] and social justice generally [29] in a variety of contexts and using a variety of technologies.
Many newer HCI theories promote a more critical and activist approach to design, encouraging
debate and questioning of historical scripts and norms by both designers and users in such a
way that makes these theories ideal for tackling issues of intimate discrimination. Historically,
much HCI work has had the goal of making user interfaces as easy to use as possible—supporting
"natural" behaviors, without questioning why they are considered to be so. According to one
seminal work, "HCI practice reflects and reproduces existing relations between groups of people,
whatever they happen to be" [61]. Queer, feminist, and postcolonial theories of HCI, however,
2Sexual minority communities have been early and active adopters of online platforms for communication and intimate
affiliation. Accordingly, a good deal of the literature on intimate platform user experiences has focused on these groups.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
73:6 J. Hutson et al.
encourage "troubling" and reimagining historical relations as mechanisms for seeing outside the
design status quo [61, 73, p.23]. These theories encourage the use of design to question what is
natural, challenge the boundaries created by the histories of heteronormativity, and inspire design
that helps to expand users’ intimate horizons [53, 64].
The importance of critical engagement with intimate platform design has been noted in other
fields. Legal theorists have understood intimate platforms by analogy to physical social institutions,
like bars, schools, and houses of worship [59, 76]. These physical spaces operate as "architectures
of intimacy" that determine both which potential romantic partners one is likely to meet, and
attitudes about the type of potential partners worthy of one’s attention [31]. Political theorists
also argue that intimacy is a matter of justice, as access to meaningful intimate affiliation can be
critical to accessing primary social goods such as wealth and self-respect [5]. They describe how the
racial steering and screening tools available on intimate platforms reify extant racial stereotypes
and hierarchies, impacting the likelihood that users express and act on racial preferences, while
contributing to the social pressure on people of color to conform to racialized sexual stereotypes
[5, 76]. They note that discrimination-enabling design practices would run into legal trouble in
other domains, such as housing and employment, and even suggest "regulating web site design
decisions that produce, exacerbate, or facilitate racial preferences" [76, p. 2794].
Empirical research confirms these worries. For example, sexual minority men who use intimate
platforms more frequently viewed multiculturalism less positively and sexual racism as more
acceptable [17]. Researchers attribute these findings to the use of "simplified racial labels" in profile
design and in search and filter tools, contending that these design choices "encourage the belief
that [simplified racial labels] are useful, natural or appropriate for defining individuals and sexual
(dis)interest" [17, p. 1998]. Other research describes how intimate values are "scripted" into platforms
by founders and designers, constructing an ideal "desiring user" [48]. The experiences and identities
of culturally and geographically diverse users can clash with the platform’s idea of who a user
should be, causing the script to break down.
Considering intimate platforms as architectures of intimacy empowers designers to intervene in
issues of bias and discrimination at the structural level: changing the underlying affordances [67] of
platforms without directly prescribing or proscribing users’ intimate decisions. Users who harbor
intimate biases, whether conscious or not, may well continue to make intimate decisions informed
by these biases. Individual decisions, and their outcomes, can still be discriminatory, fetishizing,
or otherwise marginalizing regardless of the structural design solutions in place. However, these
approaches to HCI encourage designers to abandon the pretense of neutrality in favor of promoting
overall social good. Design interventions of this type do not remove from users the ability to make
intimate decisions on the basis of protected characteristics, but instead frame users’ choices and
expand intimate possibilities in a way that works toward equity and justice for all users.
6 DESIGN FEATURES FOR MITIGATING BIAS
How might intimate platforms be designed to mitigate bias and discrimination in user behavior?
In this section, we highlight current design features on intimate platforms that may impact the
degree to which preferences on the basis of race (or other protected characteristics) affect whether
and how users encounter one another. We identify three prominent design features common on
intimate platforms: search, sort, and filter tools; matching by algorithm; and community policies and
messaging.
3 This list is by no means exhaustive; we selected these features for discussion based on
3This review focuses on platforms that have received scholarly attention or media coverage related to bias and discrimination.
This is not to suggest that discrimination on these platforms is especially pronounced or that other platforms do not warrant
critical assessment. Rather, the dynamics that we identify in these examples are likely to be common across platforms.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:7
the attention they have received in the political theory literature [5, 76], on their relation to Queer
and feminist HCI theories (e.g. [61]), and on our own previous research about the implications of
platform design features on user-to-user bias and discrimination in other contexts (e.g., in market
exchange, job-seeking, or ride-sharing [59]) .
6.1 Search, Sort, and Filter Tools
When creating an account on an intimate platform, users are often encouraged (and in some cases
required) to categorize themselves according to a number of characteristics.4 Users are then allowed
to search for, sort by, or filter out potential partners based on these self-described characteristics.
Search and filter functions allow users to specify what they do or do not wish to see in potential
mates, and return only users that meet those requirements. Sorting functions allow users to specify
which characteristics are more or less desirable, and return an ordered list of potential partners.
Search, sort, and filter tools rely on users placing themselves, and the partners they seek, into
platform-defined categories. A platform’s provision of certain categories (and the concomitant
exclusion of others) for searching, sorting, and filtering legitimizes such categories as socially
reasonable bases for including or excluding potential partners [9]. On one hand, these labels can be
useful for letting users (including those in marginalized groups) self-identify according to particular
characteristics and find one another. The converse implication is that these design features reduce
the diversity of the field of potential matches [33]. They allow users to explicitly or implicitly
exclude, demote, or fetishize others on the basis of race or other protected characteristics. These
features cause the users excluded from a search to become invisible: they are screened out of the
"dating pool" before they are even recognized as potential participants.
Many of the sortable categories provided on intimate platforms, such as age, gender, and sexual
orientation, likely strike us as reasonable grounds for sorting potential romantic or sexual matches.
However, several intimate platforms also allow sorting by race, ethnicity, and HIV status.
These design choices reify—and tacitly validate—extant stereotypes related to race, ethnicity,
and other categories [5, 76]. They map onto historical notions of psychological and physical group
difference, and promote these categories as both natural characterizations of other users as well
as appropriate axes for determining romantic or sexual (dis)interest. Screening tools based on
protected characteristics undermine the potential of intimate platforms to bridge social distance
[69, 78], as they allow users of different social or economic backgrounds to be made invisible. Harms
may be magnified when platforms make these features available only to users who have paid extra
for "premium" service, as doing so expands the agency of the socioeconomically privileged, while
undermining the capacity of filtering tools as a means for users of lower socioeconomic status
(often racial and ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities) to do the same.
By including design features that permit screening on the basis of these protected characteristics,
platforms provide individuals with a form of control over their selection of potential partners, but
do so in a way that naturalizes discriminatory preferences. The inclusion of filters that, for example,
exclude users of certain races implicitly presents such preferences as normal and acceptable. It need
not be so. Rather, platforms could seize an opportunity to challenge users’ pre-existing notions
through thoughtful design.
Instead of prioritizing perceived control to exercise preferences on the basis of protected characteristics, platforms could introduce friction or "seams" into the sorting and filtering process.
These design philosophies emphasize the importance of making the technologies and decisions
4For example, of the 25 top grossing dating and hookup apps on the iOS App Store in the United States (in March 2018)[2],
19 requested that users input their own race or ethnicity; 11 collected users’ preferred race/ethnicity in a potential partner.
17 allowed users to search, sort, or filter others by the race or ethnicity.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
73:8 J. Hutson et al.
underlying an interface visible, adding opportunities for users to pause, reflect on their behavior,
and build their understanding of a design product’s internal logic [20]. Making the process of
screening based on protected characteristics more difficult or "seamful" could encourage users to
consider potential partners as individuals undefined by race, ethnicity, or ability, rather than as
nuisances to be screened out.
Here, Queer HCI’s emphasis on exploring beyond preconceived notions of what is desirable can
directly inform platform design. Rather than allowing users to search for what they think they
want, platforms could remove filtering features along these axes entirely or provide results that
intentionally introduce diversity into the results displayed to a user. Diversity metrics are already
common features in search and recommendation engines, and could also be incorporated into
intimate platforms (e.g. [93]).
Alternatively, platforms could replace standard sorting features with new ones that help users
categorize others along new axes, or into categories that are less burdened by extant biases and
stereotypes. These categorization issues have long been found in the the world of online pornography, whose search terms, content tags, and other organizing principles reflect stereotypical
categories of race, sex, age, and ability. The sorting and filtering features that allow users to find the
pornography of their choice are highly specific, and may encourage users to think of the videos they
search for in racialized or otherwise discriminatory terms. Just as potential partners on intimate
platforms shape intimate preferences [76], consumption of sexually explicit materials has been
shown to influence sexual preferences, including along racialized lines (see for review [26]).
In response to these concerns, adult-film stars Stoya and Kayden Kross launched the porn site
TrenchcoatX.com [90], which notably removes racial tags from its content and racial categories
from its search mechanism [57]. Instead, users are required to search for individual performers
or specific acts. This design decision introduces friction by making it more difficult for users to
find content that they desire. But, in so doing, it compels the user to separate a performer from
stereotypical search terms, and to individuate performers who might otherwise be known or
seen through the lens of categories like "black MILF" or "Latina teen." This encourages users to
look beyond existing fetishized categories in their pornography consumption, which may in turn
encourage them to look beyond these categories in their intimate lives more broadly.
Other intimate platforms have included features that encourage users to de-categorize and
re-categorize themselves and each other according to characteristics other than race, ethnicity, and
ability. Many platforms include filters based on other non-demographic personal characteristics
and interests, like education, political views, relationship history, and preferences around smoking
and drinking. Platforms might also categorize potential partners along new axes unassociated with
protected characteristics. The Japan-based gay hookup app 9Monsters groups every user into one of
nine categories of fictional "monster" according to a process that includes both the user’s own type
preference and the community’s perception of them [66]. While 9Monsters may still sort users into
categories along established lines like body type or weight, it’s possible that this re-categorization
may also help users look past other forms of difference, such as race, ethnicity, and ability. If the
platform allows users to cultivate common ground based on newfound affinity groups rather than
existing categories, new forms of connectedness and identification may result [33]. In cases where
searching, filtering, and sorting mechanisms are based on stereotypical categories, these new modes
of identification and categorization may function to unburden historical relationships of bias in the
intimate realm and encourage connection across existing boundaries.
6.2 Matching by Algorithm
The widespread use of algorithms to match users of intimate platforms with one another can
introduce more subtle forms of bias and discrimination. Often, users are asked to complete profiles
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:9
or surveys soliciting details about their own characteristics and their preferences for those characteristics in others. These often include ratings (weights) of the importance of those characteristics in
users’ intimate preferences. Users are then presented with potential mates who are recommended
as "good matches" by the platform, presumably based on the preferences and weights specified.
While algorithm-driven approaches promise to simplify the matching process, they also bring
many of the same risks that accompany the sorting and filtering features previously discussed. To
the extent that matching algorithms rely on users’ stated preferences for protected characteristics,
these mechanisms can reify group differences and naturalize historically fraught decision criteria
for selecting romantic partners.
However, algorithms’ opaque operation and potentially biased inputs can further magnify these
harms. When the screening process is automated, users may be unable to determine precisely how
their matches were selected, or why others were deemed incompatible and thus made invisible.
Users may assume that their stated preferences had some impact on their outcomes, but the use of
aggregate user preferences to make match predictions can make the logic behind intimate matches
difficult to understand [33].
The structural assumptions and potential harms of algorithmic matching are made salient in
the case of the dating app CoffeeMeetsBagel. Like many such apps, it allows users to specify both
their own race and their preferred race(s) in a partner. In 2016, a series of well-publicized incidents
[68] demonstrated that the app’s matching algorithm tended to show users potential partners
of their own race—even when they stated that they had no preference as to the race of matches.
A spokesperson for the app clarified that "data shows even though users may say they have no
preference, they still (subconsciously or otherwise) prefer folks who match their own ethnicity.
[The algorithm] does not compute "no ethnic preference" as wanting a diverse preference" [68].
This response reveals two underlying assumptions about automating intimate interactions.
First, it assumes that, despite an explicitly stated assertion of a lack of racial preference, a user’s
inferred desires should instead dictate with whom they are matched. Specifically, it suggests that
because other similar users preferred matches of their own race, this presumed preference should
supersede the user’s expressed choice to be matched with users of different races [88]. In the
case of CoffeeMeetsBagel, the platform has implemented an algorithm that provides users with
a conservative interpretation of what they might seek. The user’s stated choice is to be open to
exploration, and instead of embracing this preference and offering diverse or creative suggestions
that expand the user’s field of potential matches, it instead intentionally narrows that field based on
inferred preferences. Second, it assumes that a platform and its algorithm should strive to reproduce
the preferences and choices of existing users. There is no indication to users of what data are used
to form recommendations, or how such data were processed or analyzed. Platforms like these
define a "good" future match by using the definition of a "good" past match, without considering
how those past matches came to be.
There may be no easy way for platforms to establish a natural baseline of user compatibility
against which to measure the effectiveness of their matching algorithms. Some intimate platforms
have tried to establish such a baseline experimentally: OKCupid, for instance, ran a series of
experiments in which users were (unwittingly) presented with "bad" matches (according to the
site’s algorithms) but told that they were highly compatible [80]. The site found that the power
of suggestion had a real effect on user behavior: users who were predicted to be incompatible
had more successful interactions when they were told by the platform that they were compatible.
Though OKCupid’s experiment faced public criticism (e.g. [95])—primarily because users were
not informed and did not consent to it—its results suggest that intentional experimentation with
matching algorithm design can not only help users explore their preferences, but may be necessary
in order to determine the efficacy of these tools and to discover unexpected good matches. As in
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
73:10 J. Hutson et al.
many other contexts, algorithmic reliance on users’ previous matches fail to account for the biases
in those data and stand poised to reproduce those biases.
Instead, intimate platforms could take this opportunity to explore the new interactions, and
new data, that exploration could generate. In the words of pioneering Queer HCI theorist Ann
Light, this strategy would let "(other) values and lifestyles surface—not the ones already in use, but
ones that might come to be if allowed enough space to emerge" [61, p. 433]. Here, preferences are
disrupted through exploration: instead of relying on assumptions about subconscious preferences,
on un-imaginative algorithms, or on questionable historical patterns, intimate platforms should
instead encourage accidents and exploration with the goal of actively counteracting bias.
Research suggests that people’s intimate preferences are somewhat fluid, and are shaped both
by the options presented to them and through encounters with things they don’t expect 5
[35, 38].
Facilitating new or surprising experiences can encourage people to explore beyond their conscious
(or even subconscious) preferences [33, 80]. Instead of using algorithms that choose the "safest"
possible outcome, matches could be calculated with significantly more enthusiasm for diversity.
This is not only true for people who have no preference as to the race of their potential partner.
Matching algorithms could also subtly encourage people with explicit preferences to look beyond
what they thought they wanted.
6.3 Community Policies and Messaging
Some platforms attempt to address issues of overt discrimination or other antisocial behavior by
including rules against it in their community policies.6 A common approach is the inclusion of
community policies or profile guidelines that specifically warn against inappropriate behavior
or promote respect and openness. Others use behavior agreements, profile badges, or shareable
media articles to establish positive behavior norms and promote meaningful inquiry into intimate
preferences (for review of the use of such mechanisms to mitigate bias on platforms, see [59]).
While discrimination based on race or ethnicity is a top concern for many of these platforms,
disability is also a salient concern. Individuals afflicted with HIV/AIDS, for example, face significant
obstacles in social and intimate marketplaces. Popular gay dating and hookup applications are
working with HIV/AIDS organizations to develop strategies to reduce the stigma associated with
HIV [34]. For example, DaddyHunt, a location-based real-time dating and hookup application for
sexual minority men, informs its users of the stigma and alienation experienced by users afflicted
by HIV, and offers users the opportunity to indicate whether they are "open to dating someone of
any [HIV] status" [24]. It then gives users the option to sign a "Live Stigma-Free" pledge, and if
they choose to do so, adds a visible indicator of this pledge to users’ profiles with the text "[user]
lives Stigma-Free," as described in [59].
By encouraging education and voluntary affirmation of this pledge, DaddyHunt prompts users
to reflect on their own preferences. Instead of simply asking users for their serostatus or that of
their preferred partners, the pledge signals to users that understanding and openness are important
platform norms. It then visibly marks the profiles of users who promise to uphold these norms,
allowing users to signal to each other both their own intimate preferences and their broader social
attitudes. Because the pledge is entirely voluntary, DaddyHunt can encourage a more inclusive
approach to HIV without coercion.
5Platforms taking exploratory approaches should, however, assess whether doing so might create risks for marginalized
users. On Tinder, for example, people who were surprised to find themselves matched with transgender users sometimes
subjected those users to harassment and hate speech [59]. Platforms should holistically consider the affordances of their
platforms when designing "surprising" experiences.
6Of the 25 top-grossing dating and hookup apps on the iOS app store in the United States (in March 2018)[2], 5 platforms
included explicit anti-discrimination community policies or profile guidelines.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:11
Beyond seropositive stigma, platforms could encourage users to reflect upon the consequences of
expressing a preference for a particular race or ethnicity (whether in their profile or in their match
preferences). One approach is to explicitly prohibit certain user behaviors: gay dating app Hornet,
for example, bars its users from including any language referring to race or racial preferences in
their profiles or bios [49].
Platforms could also play a role in informing users of the extent of disparities faced by racial
and ethnic minorities in online dating marketplaces—potentially including the harms to dignity
that accompany both fetishizing and marginalizing behavior toward people of certain races, or
the socioeconomic harms of assortative mating. Grindr’s newly launched media arm "Into More"
opens possibilities for intimate platforms to proactively engage these issues [41]. Upon successfully
logging onto the Grindr platform, users are greeted with a preview of one of the daily "Into More"
stories. These stories range from current events to fashion and public health, and often engage
specific issues relating to bias and other problematic stereotypes that involve Grindr’s community
of users. For example, the Into More article "14 Messages Trans People Want You To Stop Sending
On Dating Apps" [23] explores the biases and problematic behaviors that Grindr users exhibit
toward trans users. It explains how describing trans people as a personal fetish, which many see as a
positive expression of sexual preference, is inherently dehumanizing, and how negative preferences
against intimate affiliations with trans people (as well as "disabled folks, fat folks, [and] femmes"
[23]) are the result of broader systems of subjugation and oppression.
Design features that encourage users to explore their own preferences and biases challenge
the presumption that intimate platforms have no role to play in shaping the social norms that
create bias and discrimination. We contend that encouraging individual users to critically reflect
on their preferences may support larger social norms that call biases into question. By encouraging
inquiry and education via community guidelines and messaging, platforms may help their users
look beyond existing categories or stereotypes and toward more diverse possibilities.
7 ROLES FOR DESIGNERS AND PLATFORMS
Because so much intimate interaction begins in online spaces, the design features of intimate
platforms—whether search, sort, and filter functions, matching algorithms, or community guidelines—
necessarily shape the intimate possibilities that are available to each user. Platforms may emphasize
their roles as facilitators of individual preference, attempting to remain "neutral" in their actions
and allowing users to enact their own desires. However, platforms have no choice but to decide
whether to include or exclude certain informational categories or present certain types of users to
others as potential partners. No design choice is neutral: even attempts to cede as much control
as possible to users does not relieve platforms of their powerful roles in structuring mediated
social interactions [36]. Claims of neutrality from platforms ignore the inevitability of their role
in shaping interpersonal interactions that can lead to systemic disadvantage. They also ignore
well-established theoretical concepts, such as affordances, seamfulness, and friction, that describe
the behavior-changing power of design [20, 67].
If we understand the position of platforms to be necessarily non-neutral, asking that designers
rethink their products to proactively minimize discriminatory outcomes for all users begins to seem
like a less radical position. Design and social computing researchers have already called for more
activist approaches to design, encouraging questioning of norms by both designers and users, and
prompting debate on how designers imbue their creations with their own values [10, 27]. Other
work promotes efforts that recognize unjust practices, and hold those who enable such practices
responsible [29]. These theories encourage designers to create tools that promote cooperation,
equality, and good citizenship among users of all types, and can be extended to intimate platforms
to advance pro-social outcomes.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
73:12 J. Hutson et al.
Designers of intimate platforms have several other advantages that put them in an ideal position to
intervene in discrimination. First, they have the scale required to address these issues. Users’ intimate
decisions on such platforms compound: the cumulative effect of millions of individual decisions can
have profound impacts on the nature of intimate affiliation in society more broadly. Therefore, it is
reasonable to expect the architects of these platforms to ensure that those preferences are examined
and considered such that they do not unduly map onto historical patterns of discrimination.
Second, design has advantages over other methods of intervention, like legal approaches, in
mitigating intimate discrimination. In contexts covered by United States civil rights laws (like
housing and employment), many of the categories we discuss here—including race, gender, and HIV
status—constitute protected classes. While some offline establishments that facilitate relationship
formation may be subject to anti-discrimination laws (e.g., guaranteeing accessibility and preventing
discrimination on the basis of protected characteristics), these often do not apply to online platforms.
Legal scholars have begun to argue for the application of such laws to platforms like Uber and
Airbnb [58], but their application to intimate platforms has not been established; it is unlikely
that federal civil rights laws would be construed to protect directly against users’ discriminatory
behavior on intimate platforms, and we do not intend to argue that they should do so.
We note, however, that there is some possibility that broader state civil rights statutes might be
construed to protect against discrimination on intimate platforms. For example, the dating website
eHarmony was sued under California’s Unruh Civil Rights Act, which grants Californians the right
to "full and equal accommodations [... and] services in all business establishments"; the plaintiffs
claimed that eHarmony violated the law by only allowing users to search for opposite-sex partners
on their site. The case was resolved via a settlement agreement in which eHarmony agreed to provide
an alternative same-sex matching service [13]. There are few useful lessons to draw from this
case, as it was settled rather than adjudicated. eHarmony’s apparent violation was also sufficiently
extreme that it does not provide obvious guidance to more complicated situations: eHarmony’s lack
of a mechanism to search for same-sex partners amounted to an effective prohibition of gay users
from the platform, whereas the design elements we discuss in this paper might allow marginalized
populations to make use of the platform, but have a diminished experience there. Although we
consider this case a fairly weak signal about the applicability of state civil rights law to the forms
of intimate discrimination we discuss here,7
it raises important questions as to whether design
features like search and filter tools—which enable users to systemically exclude others on the basis
of protected characteristics—deprive certain users of full and equal services on intimate platforms.
Ideally, the architects of these platforms should not be solely responsible for problems of discrimination; these challenges also require the engagement of policymakers, independent designers,
researchers, and activists, with input from the communities affected by issues of bias and discrimination. However, in the absence of guidance from legal or governmental authorities, platforms
themselves may be in the best position to take the lead in mitigating harms to marginalized groups.
7Another legal framework often invoked regarding online discrimination is Section 230 of the Communications Decency
Act, which grants platforms immunity against users’ discriminatory (or otherwise illegal) conduct. However, platforms may
be liable if their designs structure users’ interactions in ways that "help[] to develop" such conduct. In the most influential
case interpreting Section 230, Fair Housing Council of San Fernando Valley v. Roommates.com (521 F.3d 1157 (9th Cir. 2008)),
the 9th Circuit Court held that a roommate matching platform was not immune because its drop-down menus required
users to state preferences for gender and sexual orientation, and its search and filter functions then steered users toward
those elicited preferences. This conduct was considered to violate the Fair Housing Act, which forbids discrimination in
housing. Section 230 is legally inapposite in the context of intimate platforms, as there is no federal law that prohibits
discrimination in intimate partner selection. But it may be the case that platforms’ concerns about maintaining "neutrality,"
derived from this jurisprudence, generally influence their willingness to intervene purposively on users’ choices.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:13
8 THE LIMITS & POLITICS OF INTIMATE INTERVENTION
Despite the potential for pro-social intervention through design, there are a number of ethical issues
that must be considered when designing these interventions. By no means do we claim to resolve
these tensions, nor to stake out a specific normative prescription for platforms’ decision-making.
Rather, we suggest that anti-bias interventions on intimate platforms must, at minimum, contend
explicitly with the issues we highlight here.
8.1 Respect for autonomy and agency
In suggesting that intimate platforms view design as a mechanism to combat bias and discrimination,
we are encouraging them to consciously and purposefully intervene in the intimate decision-making
practices of their users. While all design choices necessarily impact the horizon of possibilities
available to users [89], such interventions might be viewed as an unjustified attempt to shape users’
attitudes, beliefs, and ultimate decisions in matters of sex and love. Even platforms that do not
force decisions on users nevertheless raise questions of autonomy; the power to influence users’
choices is enough to court controversy [80].
While such reactions might give platforms pause—perhaps appropriately so—they cannot escape
responsibility for the influence they already wield. Users cede an enormous amount of agency to
intimate platforms, with the expectation that the user’s ideal outcome (e.g., a successful match) is
the same as the platform’s. In reality, exactly what those outcomes are and how platforms should
go about realizing them may be ambiguous. As the case of CoffeeMeetsBagel [68] reveals, when
algorithms find that daters’ stated preferences are different from the characteristics of the people
with whom they choose to interact, which should take precedence? Either choice can be understood
as betraying users’ intentions and interests.
Resistance to anti-bias interventions that rest on a strict notion of autonomy assumes that
platforms know and understand how to satisfy users’ true preferences [94], yet recent research
has found that accurately predicting compatibility between two people using even sophisticated
machine learning techniques is challenging [50]. In contrast, limiting the ease with which users
can act on certain preferences in the interest of reducing bias rests on the belief that preferences
are never completely determined in advance. No user is a completely independent agent, with
perfect self-knowledge to act in ways that accord with their pre-established preferences. Rather,
preferences take shape and evolve in the process of navigating these platforms [33, 38].
Even if a platform takes the position that users arrive with pre-established preferences over
which the platform itself has no influence, it may feel justified in discouraging users from expressing
certain preferences. For example, it may adopt policies that prohibit users from stating explicitly
that they are uninterested in others of a particular race (e.g. "No blacks, sorry") or only willing
to engage with those of their same race (e.g., "Only here to talk to white boys"). Platforms may
not expect to change users’ preferences by limiting their ability to express these preferences, but
platforms may do so nonetheless in the interest of protecting the dignity and sense of self-worth of
other users. When confronting such messages, users who are (or are not) members of the identified
racial group are likely to feel demeaned and unwelcome.
In other words, a platform may view users’ preferences as their own, while still rejecting the idea
that users from minority groups must face denigrating messages as a condition of navigating the
platform. It may enforce this policy by simply communicating that such behavior is unacceptable,
or it may take affirmative steps to police users’ expressions, perhaps limiting their ability to employ
certain terms in their profiles or relying on similar keyword-based techniques to prompt manual
review by human moderators [59]. Of course, limiting users’ ability to express certain preferences
may not prevent users from maintaining or acting on these preferences. In fact, it may do little to
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
73:14 J. Hutson et al.
change how marginalized populations ultimately fare on the platform, as they may be no more
successful in finding interested or receptive partners. But the cumulative effect of reducing the
incidence of encountering such exclusionary messages may be substantial if such changes make
marginalized users more likely to use the platform.
However platforms approach these issues, they should be transparent with users about their
policy and design choices—as well as their rationales for these choices. Doing so can mitigate
concerns about manipulation, provide users with greater agency to select platforms that work for
them, and can provide additional incentive for other platforms to be more reflective about their
own practices and goals.
8.2 Histories of aggression and harmful intervention
While social and political histories of subjugation are grounds for intervention to counter contemporary discrimination, they also ought to give us pause about the consequences of such intervention.
Active intervention in the realm of intimate affiliation carries with it a litany of historical baggage
that warrants substantial caution. Through anti-miscegenation laws, anti-sodomy laws, conversion
therapy regimes, or forced sterilizations of persons with disabilities, state actors and policies have
deprived many of the requisite agency and dignity to participate in intimate opportunities [31, 54].
Although platform design presents an opportunity to engage intimate bias and discrimination in
ways that are less bound up in issues of state power and violence, we cannot ignore the pitfalls of
history; as such, we must consider how structural interventions through design map onto historical
efforts to intervene in intimate marketplaces.
Simultaneously, we ought to consider how some of the design features we describe here that can
serve as vehicles for bias may also be of tremendous utility to historically marginalized groups.
For instance, users whose identities are highly stigmatized might find search and filter functions
essential for achieving intimacy, ensuring safety, and building community; offline and online
sites specifically for gay communities have been incredibly important for these purposes [87, 92].
Decisions to remove, alter, or preserve design features should consider and balance the potential
harms of inclusion against this utility.
8.3 Which categories are appropriate for intervention?
While it may strike us as normatively acceptable to encourage intimate platform users to be open to
more diverse potential partners, we might find some categories more palatable for such intervention
than others. For example, it might seem inappropriate to suggest that a Jewish user seeking other
Jewish people "expand her horizons" past those preferences, which might be based on a number of
religious and cultural considerations. Similarly, a platform suggesting that a gay user "consider"
dating someone of a different gender would likely strike us as problematic. Intimate platforms can
be very useful for minorities looking to meet others who share their background and values. Instead
of drawing a bright line on what should or should not be acceptable categories to consider, we
suggest that designers should take the needs of marginalized or historically oppressed populations
into account when considering how intimate platform features are used. Careful consideration of
the outcomes of the exercise of intimate preferences may reveal that some of these groups are at
greater risk for harm than others, and that platform features should be implemented accordingly.
9 CONCLUSION
As intimate platforms grow, so does their influence on individual and structural outcomes within and
beyond the intimate sphere. Intimate platforms already intervene in and mediate our private lives
and decisions, and many are beginning to work toward counteracting the bias and discrimination
that often manifests in our most personal interactions. Recognizing the serious challenges and
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 73. Publication date: November 2018.
Addressing Bias & Discrimination on Intimate Platforms 73:15
opportunities presented by design practices among popular intimate platforms, we advocate for
the social computing research community to engage intimate platforms as critical structures for
intervening in and reflecting on issues of bias, discrimination, and exclusion. Exploring structural
rather than individual interventions allows us to move beyond debates of individual preference
versus discrimination, and toward conversations that are concerned with how these preferences
and practices arise and are sustained. Future research in the social computing community could
work towards building design mechanisms that mitigate extant forms of discrimination, developing
theories and practices of design that unsettle entrenched preferences, and unpacking complex legal
and policy questions about the design, operation, and role of intimate platforms