The sharing economy has quickly become a very prominent subject of research in the broader computing
literature and the in human–computer interaction (HCI) literature more specifically. When other computing
research areas have experienced similarly rapid growth (e.g., human computation, eco-feedback technology),
early stage literature reviews have proved useful and influential by identifying trends and gaps in the literature
of interest and by providing key directions for short- and long-term future work. In this paper, we seek to
provide the same benefits with respect to computing research on the sharing economy. Specifically, following
the suggested approach of prior computing literature reviews, we conducted a systematic review of sharing
economy articles published in the Association for Computing Machinery Digital Library to investigate the
state of sharing economy research in computing. We performed this review with two simultaneous foci: a
broad focus toward the computing literature more generally and a narrow focus specifically on HCI literature.
We collected a total of 112 sharing economy articles published between 2008 and 2017 and through our
analysis of these papers, we make two core contributions: (1) an understanding of the computing community’s
contributions to our knowledge about the sharing economy, and specifically the role of the HCI community in
these contributions (i.e., what has been done) and (2) a discussion of under-explored and unexplored aspects of
the sharing economy that can serve as a partial research agenda moving forward (i.e. what is next to do). 1
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Human-computer interaction (HCI); Collaborative
and social computing;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Sharing Economy; Literature Review; Collaborative Economy; Collaborative
Consumption; Physical Crowdsourcing; Gig Economy; Taxonomy.
1 INTRODUCTION
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) have enabled individuals to share many new
aspects of their lives, ranging from their cars (e.g., Lyft and UberX) to their households (e.g.,
Airbnb). These sharing practices have been described as the “sharing economy.” Although there is
no widely adopted formal definition of the sharing economy, the term is often used to broadly refer
to exchange of un(der)used assets or services between peers or between businesses and consumers,
either free or for a fee [11]. According to a 2016 report from the U.S. Department of Commerce, at
least 17 sharing economy firms are each worth more than $1 billion, with Uber leading the pack at
a $62.5 billion market value [93] (for comparison, Ford Motor Company’s market value is about $45
billion). Alongside this trend, the sharing economy has quickly become one of the most prominent
subjects in the computing research community, especially in human-computer interaction (HCI)
[58].
In the past, when other computing research areas have experienced similarly rapid growth,
early stage literature reviews (e.g., [26, 38, 81, 103]) have helped to identify trends and gaps in the
literature and have provided key directions for short- and long-term future work. The goal of this
paper is to do the same for the computing community’s research on the sharing economy. While a
more general literature review of the sharing economy exists [20], this review did not consider the
computing community’s contributions to the literature. In this paper, we seek to address this gap.
More specifically, following the approach of prior reviews in computing, we conducted a systematic literature review (SLR) of sharing economy papers (112 total) in the Association of Computing
Machinery (ACM)’s Digital Library (DL)—the most comprehensive repository of computing literature [3] —published between January 2008 and June 2017. In keeping with the standard approach
to SLRs [53], we started by framing our two key research questions:
• What is the state of sharing economy research in computing and in HCI particularly? In
other words, what has been done?
• What research areas have been unexplored and underexplored? In other words, what should
we do next?
In addressing our questions above, we examined our results with both a general computing
lens and a narrower lens focused on the subset of the computing literature that comes from the
HCI community. Our inclusion of HCI as a secondary facet of analysis was not only driven by
the home discipline of this submission: rather, we hypothesized that (1) HCI would provide the
most numerous contributions to the computing literature and thus would demand further inquiry
and that (2) HCI’s contributions would be relatively distinct compared to those of the rest of the
computing literature, possibly providing important insight for future research directions. As we
discuss in the next sections, our findings supported both of these hypotheses.
More generally, our results (1) reveal important trends in current computing and HCI research on
the sharing economy and (2) point to a partial agenda for future sharing economy research. With
respect to the former, we found that the most common themes in computing research on the sharing
economy include optimization, socio-technical design, geography, and social relationships, and we
provide summaries of the research in each of these high-interest areas. We also found that half of
the sharing economy literature in the ACM DL comes from HCI and is overwhelmingly qualitative
(as opposed to the non-HCI research), among other results. With respect to a research agenda, our
results highlight immediate opportunities for future sharing economy work that focuses on diverse
geographies, marrying HCI perspectives with non-HCI approaches, prioritizing implications for
policy, incorporating knowledge from pre-sharing economy analogous contexts, and others.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:3
Next, we highlight exemplative work that informed the design of our literature review. We then
discuss our methods, and this is followed by an elaboration of the findings as they relate to each of
our research questions.
2 RELATED WORK
Because this paper is a literature review, the bulk of our consideration of related work comes in
the form of the data we analyze, the results that emerge from our analyses, and the implications
we drew from these results. However, prior to beginning our discussion of methods, results, and
implications, we want to highlight two areas of prior work that can provide useful context for our
research: (1) the approaches taken in previous literature reviews in computing and HCI (and how
we followed standard approaches here as well), and (2) existing summative work on the sharing
economy (and how our research complements this work).
2.1 Literature Reviews in Computing and HCI
Conducting literature reviews is a relatively common practice in computing [26, 38, 65, 81, 85, 103].
Indeed, as noted, early-stage reviews have identified trends and gaps in the literature and provided
insights for future research that have proven to have substantial impact (e.g., [38, 81]). In this paper,
we seek to provide the same benefits for computing research on the sharing economy.
Many of the aforementioned literature reviews make specific contributions to a sub-field of
computing, such as HCI, ICTD, or CSCW. While these researchers used the ACM Digital Library as
a primary database, most searched specifically for sub-fields (e.g., [38]). Following the approach
of these prior literature reviews, we turned to the ACM Digital Library (ACM DL); however, we
searched the full database and all of its venues. According to the ACM2
, the ACM DL is the most
comprehensive set of bibliographic records and full-text articles in computing and information
technology. Following Pittaway [79], we took a systematic approach to our literature review. We
also considered López’s general call for more SLRs in HCI, CSCW, and Ubicomp [65]. This approach
helped us to identify existing gaps in the research field and to make suggestions for addressing
them.
2.2 Reviews of the Sharing Economy
We only identified two literature reviews of the sharing economy: (1) a short review of how the
sharing economy has been defined from Oh and Moon [74] in the ACM, and (2) a holistic and
broad review of the sharing economy outside of the ACM [20]. Oh and Moon’s short paper was a
literature review of definitions of the sharing economy from 172 academic journals, magazines,
and dissertations from 2008 to 2015. The authors excluded online publications and did not specify a
review of conference papers. The authors conducted their search in the LexisNexis database, which
describes itself as a “provider of legal, government, business and high-tech information sources”
[63].
Cheng’s article is a systematic and holistic review of 66 journal articles about the sharing economy
from 2008 to 2015. The search for this article [20] was done from three of the largest online search
engines and online databases, Science Direct, Google Scholar and EBSCOHost [16]; however, the
researcher focused his discussion of implications on those for the tourism research (the home
discipline of the publishing journal). Additionally and critically, deeming industry reports and
conference papers—the primary publication outlets for computing—as “grey” literature, this review
excluded most of computing’s contributions to the sharing economy literature. Our review is
intended to address this important gap in our summative knowledge about the sharing economy.
2http://www.acm.org/publications/about-publications
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
38:4 T. Dillahunt et al.
3 METHOD
To address our two research questions, we conducted a systematic literature review (SLR) of sharing
economy research in the ACM Digital Library (DL). As discussed above, we selected the ACM as
our corpus because it has been used in past work as the corpus for similar literature reviews in
other domains (e.g., [26, 38, 65, 81, 85, 103]).
SLRs are designed to identify existing gaps in a research field and to make suggestions for
addressing these gaps. Our methods were informed by Pittaway’s guide to conduct an SLR [79].
Because the conception of applications as part of a larger sharing economy has only arisen since
2008 [62], our search included literature from January 2008 to July 2017. Next, we provide a summary
of our steps.3
3.1 Identifying Search Terms / Corpus Collection
The first step of any SLR is to identify relevant work [53, 79] and to achieve this, we identified
our search terms. The sharing economy has been referred to by many terms. We sought to build
a comprehensive set of keywords to include terms for the sharing economy that may have been
used in older literature. To accomplish this, we conducted an iterative search of repeated, relevant
keywords in our corpus. First, we identified search terms based on common terms that have been
used in HCI and in well-known and cited monographs of the sharing economy literature [14, 90]. The
initial search terms were: “sharing economy,” “collaborative consumption,” “peer-to-peer exchange,”
“physical crowdsourcing,” and “gig economy.”
Next, we extracted the author-defined keywords from the corpus resulting from our first search
of the digital ACM library. We compiled a list of all keywords that appeared in two or more papers,
and then filtered those keywords that were overly vague (e.g., multi-agent systems, transportation)
or conceptually unrelated to the sharing economy (e.g., dynamic pricing, experimentation). We
considered the remaining repeated keywords to be synonymous or closely related to the sharing
economy, and performed a search with that list. We performed this process three times, until the
search yielded no new papers, for a total of four searches. Ultimately, we identified the following
21 keywords, which served as seeds for our final ACM search: “sharing economy,” “collaborative
consumption,” “peer-to-peer exchange,” “physical crowdsourcing,” “gig economy,” “algorithmic
management,” “collaborative economy,” “local online exchange,” “mobile crowdsourcing,” “network
hospitality,” “on-the-go crowdsourcing,” “platform economy,” “ridesharing,” “social exchange,” “surge
pricing,” “timebanking,” “micro tasking,” “microtasking,” “situated crowdsourcing,” “workplace
studies,” and “spatial crowdsourcing.”
This search procedure yielded 354 papers. Next, we filtered articles using specific selection
criteria to assure their appropriateness, or fit to the SLR, as described in the next section.
3.2 Selection Criteria
Our first selection criterion was that articles had to be written in English owing to the constraints of
the research team and the general tendency for high-quality research in computing to be published
in English (for better or worse). Second, we filtered articles to exclude research that was not
substantively connected to the sharing economy (despite its use of one of the keywords) or research
that fell below a quality threshold. To implement this second stage, we utilized a version of the
approach by Busalim and Che Hussin [17]. Specifically, researchers read each paper and ranked
each article as high, medium or low on the following four criteria: (1) the paper’s topic was related
to the sharing economy, (2) the paper had a clear research methodology, (3) the paper described
the data collection process, and (4) the paper had key findings that aligned with the posed research
3 Details of the SLR process are available in Appendix A.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:5
questions. Those criteria that ranked as high received a score (loading factor) of 2, medium 1, and
low 0 [73]. Research papers that received a 0 for the first criterion (papers unrelated to the sharing
economy) were immediately excluded. Any paper that received a 1 or a 2 on the first criterion and
had a total score of 5 passed through the filter; if the total score was 4 or below, the paper was
excluded. It is important to point that out we did not exclude short papers, extended workshop
papers, panels, or alt.chi paper purely due to their format; they were processed like full papers.
After the second stage of filtering, we were left with 119 sharing economy articles. Of these 119
articles, we further excluded seven that we considered to be irrelevant to the sharing economy or
to be think pieces (see Appendix A.2.2 Selection Criteria for details). This left us with a final corpus
of 112 papers. 4
.
3.3 Data Extraction
Per [24, p.36], we extracted excerpts from each work to provide: (1) the stated or implied problem or
research question that was being addressed, (2) the central purpose or focus of the study, (3) a brief
statement about the sample population or subjects, and (4) key results that related to the proposed study.
In addition, we extracted the list of authors, publication year, title, publication venue, geographic
region, the research questions, and how each paper defined the sharing economy. We also extracted
keywords and coded the methodology employed as quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods,
design5
, math modeling6
, or literature review. In some cases, two methodology codes were applied.
For example, a paper that presented the design and field deployment of a new sharing economy
application, and reported results from a qualitative user study, it would be coded as both “design”
and “qualitative.”
3.4 Data Analysis
To identify topical themes in the literature, three members of our research team coded each
paper in the final corpus. This was beneficial for addressing both research questions. We used
the selection criteria to extract and summarize article contents as attribute codes [75, 84] into a
shared spreadsheet. This allowed us to develop a synopsis for each work and to sort the literature
according to publication year, methodology used, populations sampled, instances or applications of
the sharing economy studied (e.g., Airbnb, Lyft), and by publication venue.
More specifically, we used hybrid coding to assign topical codes to each paper [98]. We leveraged
existing frameworks [76] to create a priori codes. We also coded openly in our initial coding phase
and followed this with focused coding.7 Focused coding allowed us to categorize significant or
frequent codes that emerged from our data [84].
4 RESULTS
In this section, we discuss the state of the sharing economy in computing and in HCI specifically.
In other words, we address our first research question, i.e. What has been done? This section
introduces our results with respect to our first question in three sections. In the first two sections—
one dedicated to the broader computing literature and the other dedicated to HCI—we present
high-level descriptive statistics on the publication rate, geographic focus, research questions and
methodologies employed. The third section contains an in-depth discussion of some of the major
4A list of these papers can be found at the following URL: http://tinyurl.com/yd6u39vj
5A paper was coded as “design” when its central objective was the design or implementation of a prototype application or
system.
6A paper was coded as “math modeling” when it used a simulation or modeling to test the research objective.
7 A summary of the codes is included in Appendix B.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
38:6 T. Dillahunt et al.
Fig. 1. Publication counts in ACM DL as HCI and Non-HCI, and all venues from 2010 to 2016. Our corpora
encapsulates all papers up to July 2017, but 2017 is not shown here because a full year of publication results
was not available.
trends identified in both the broader computing literature and in HCI. The final section provides a
summary of themes that were under-explored.
4.1 Descriptive Statistics: Computing Literature
The papers in our corpus represent 47 distinct publication venues, including full conference proceedings, conference companion proceedings, and some refereed journals. The most common
venues are CHI (N=14), CSCW (N=13), CHI Extended Abstracts (N=10) and SIGSPATIAL (N=7). An
additional 28 venues appear only once such as ACM GROUP, TOCHI, and WWW. Though IEEE
publications are not ACM venues, one IEEE paper ([78]) was included in our final corpus because
it was published in IEEE and Automated Software Engineering, a joint ACM venue.
As shown by Figure 1, research in computing as it relates to the sharing economy grew rapidly
from 2011 to 2015. This resonates with our understanding of the birth of the concept of a sharing
economy, marked by Botsman and Rogers’ early work [14]. However, the publication count declined
from 2015 to 2016.
Seventy-six articles specified a country in which the study was conducted and/or from which
data were drawn. Out of the 76 articles, the United States was the most common study site (N=32).
China (N=8) and Finland (N=7) were the next two most frequent countries where studies took
place.
4.1.1 Research Methodologies and Questions. Per Figure 2, in the ACM DL, most published
studies used either quantitative (N=44) or qualitative (N=43) methods. Math modeling (N=25),
design (N=25), and mixed methods (N=14) are also commonly used. One literature review (N=1)
also appeared and this was a short paper by Oh and Moon [74] calling for a shared definition of the
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:7
sharing economy. Figure 3 shows that a large majority of the ACM computing studies addressed
descriptive research questions (N=73). Very few studies were causal (N=8) or predictive (N=9) in
nature.
Fig. 2. Research methods distribution in ACM (separated into HCI and Non-HCI Computing)
4.2 Descriptive Statistics: HCI Literature
To understand the HCI contributions to the sharing economy in the computing community, we
coded the publication venues into HCI Computing (N=56, 50%) and Non-HCI Computing (N=56,
50%). In the next section, we discuss general HCI trends within the broader context of the ACM.
As shown in Figure 1, HCI research as it relates to the sharing economy started in 2011 and
began growing rapidly starting in 2013. However, publication count declined from 2015 to 2016.
Non-HCI computing research has seen a steady increase since 2011.
In terms of geography, 46 study sites were specified within the HCI papers. Of the 46 sites, the
most common country was the United States (N=20). The remaining 26 sites were in Finland (N=5),
Germany (N=4), Australia and India (each N=3), the UK and Singapore (each N=2), and Austria,
Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, Namibia, South Korea, and Taiwan (each N=1). China did not appear in the
list of study sites considered in the HCI sharing economy literature.
4.2.1 Research Methodologies and Questions. Per Figure 2, in HCI studies, most published studies
used qualitative (N=38) methods. Eight (N=8) used quantitative methods and ten (N=10) used mixed
methods to address their research questions. Fifteen (N=15) papers employed design, deploying a
prototype system that was generally paired with a user study.
The vast majority of HCI computing studies addressed descriptive research questions (N=54),
with only two addressing other types of questions (Figure 3).
4.3 Major Topical Themes in Computing and HCI
Table 1 summarizes the results of our hybrid coding for themes in the sharing economy literature
and Appendix B contains a complete listing of these results. In the overall literature, the most
prominent themes in the literature are: (1) optimization (which is a theme almost exclusively in nonHCI articles) (2) socio-technical design of these platforms such as platform governance, entry barriers,
and how specific features are used; and (3) understanding why individuals have been motivated
to participate. Within the HCI literature specifically, the top three themes are: (1) socio-technical
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
38:8 T. Dillahunt et al.
Fig. 3. Research questions distribution
Venue Theme Count Salient Examples
HCI
(N=56)
Socio-technical design 34 Lampinen, 2014 [57]
Motivation 26 Bellotti et al., 2015 [8]
Social relationship/sense of community 25 Ganglbauer et al., 2014 [39]
Working conditions 15 Ahmed et al., 2016 [4]
Special populations 13 Dillahunt & Malone, 2015 [30]
User experience 12 Raval & Dourish, 2016 [83]
Cost & benefit to society 10 Lee et al., 2015 [61]
Trust 10 McLachlan et al., 2016 [69]
Business/economic/pricing model 9 Ikkala & Lampinen, 2015 [49]
Non-HCI
(N=56)
Optimization 38 Etienne and Latifa, 2014 [34]
Geography 25 Dwarakanath et al., 2016 [33]
Business/economic/pricing model 19 Bistaffa et al., 2015 [10]
Motivation 8 Kooti et al., 2017 [56]
Privacy 7 Xu et al., 2017 [101]
Cost & benefit to society 6 Quattrone et al., 2016 [80]
Table 1. HCI and non-HCI venues focus on a different set of themes. Please see Appendix B for the full set of
themes and their descriptions.
design of these platforms; (2) motivation; and (3) social relationships between platform participants
and sense of community. In addition to optimization, the other two key non-HCI contributions
include geography, which occurs at the same frequency as social relationships/sense of community,
and business/economic/pricing models (see Appendix B for a complete listing of our final codes).
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:9
The next subsections provide a brief summary of the research in these six themes—the most
prominent themes in the HCI and non-HCI literatures—and a description of some salient papers
contributing to these themes.
4.3.1 Optimization. While almost non-existent in HCI (N=2), sharing economy optimization
work is quite common in non-HCI computing venues (N=38). Research related to optimization
investigated ways to maximize the utility and efficiency of the various systems and platforms used
in the sharing economy ecosystem. The majority of optimization papers proposed and evaluated
algorithms to improve the matching or task assignment in the context of ridesharing (N=17) or
spatial/mobile crowdsourcing systems (N=14). In papers concerned with ridesharing, researchers
proposed new approaches to improve upon the current matching and path planning algorithms (e.g.,
[21, 41, 47, 66]). Many of the papers on mobile or situated crowdsourcing defined new utility models
for task assignment, and proposed various algorithms to best solve those problems, evaluating their
designs on synthetic data and public datasets from major metropolitan areas such as New York
[22], Los Angeles [27], Tokyo [54], and Shanghai [97]. There is also research that uses past data
to provide optimized ridesharing recommendations for users [45] and suggests ways to optimize
ridesharing payments to increase fairness among riders [10].
4.3.2 Socio-Technical Design. Papers that are related to the socio-technical design of sharing
economy platforms predominantly appear in HCI venues (N=34). These researchers studied and
evaluated how specific features/designs are used, or suggested features/design to better enhance
user motivation, reduce entry barriers, and regulate user behavior in sharing economy services.
For example, Gheitasy et al. evaluated features on Etsy and identified a socio-technical gap
(which is defined as the divide between what must be supported socially and what can be supported
technically) in features such as customers’ reviews, rating systems and social presence tools [40].
Dillahunt and Malone described design solutions for some of the trust and safety issues among
people in disadvantaged communities, including the importance of meeting in safe spaces, twoway background checks, the need for understanding neighborhood makeup and cohesiveness,
and the value of referrals [30]. Many researchers investigated the challenges of onboarding users
or sustaining users, often through exploratory studies employing qualitative methodologies. A
common assertion among these studies was that for a platform to be sustainable it first needs to
attract a critical mass of users (the standard “cold start problem” in social computing) [29, 42, 88, 89].
In one group of studies the researchers investigated ways users adapted platform features to
meet their own needs. For example, Lampinen [57] examined account sharing in the context of
Couchsurfing. Her results revealed challenges for multi-person households that engage in account
sharing, such as presenting multiple people in one profile and coordinating negotiations over access
to shared space. The work called for system designers to monitor the obscure and non-popular use
cases in their platforms.
Note that the papers coded for socio-technical design often overlapped with the papers coded for
motivation or for social relationships, demonstrating the close connection between understanding
users and design implications in the HCI literature.
4.3.3 Motivation. One central question researchers have attempted to answer is why people
participate in the sharing economy. For example, through interviewing both users and providers of
46 different sharing economy systems, Bellotti et al. identified eight distinct motivations for the
use of sharing economy services—value/morality, social influence, status/power, empathy/altruism,
social connection, intrinsic/autotelic reasons, safety, and instrumental motivations [8]. Liao et al.
proposed the Theory of Planned Behavior as a model for studying user behavior in the sharing
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
38:10 T. Dillahunt et al.
economy [64]; this theory frames decisions as influenced by a user’s attitude toward the behavior,
perceived social norms related to the behavior, and perceived behavioral control [5].
Researchers have identified a tension between instrumental motivations versus idealistic/altruistic
motivations [8, 86]. For example, Shih et al. found that highly active timebank users were more
idealistic and participated because they believed in “equal time, equal value,” whereas less active
timebank users, who were mostly regular members, more frequently utilized timebank service
exchanges in order to fulfill instrumental needs [86]. The same tension sometimes exists between
system providers and users: providers tend to place great emphasis on idealistic motivations; users,
on the other hand are often looking for services that provide what they need [8].
In addition to examining what motivates people to participate in the sharing economy, some
researchers investigated what demotivates people. For example, Meurer et al. found that independence
and decisional autonomy are viewed as constraints for older adults to utilize ridesharing services
[71]. Dillahunt and Malone showed that distrust and safety concerns are obstacles to adopting
sharing economy among disadvantaged communities [30]. Similarly, in studying P2P exchange
systems, Sun et al. found that trust concerns about sharing objects and the potential risks of
entrusting a possession to someone else have hindered the adoption of these systems [89].
4.3.4 Social Relationships & Sense of Community. As noted in the motivation section, social
connections play an important role in motivating people to participate in the sharing economy.
However, social relationship and sense of community is distinct from motivation because it considers
aspects of interaction that extend beyond a single user. The papers about social relationships and
community examine how pairs, groups, or communities interact with sharing economy platforms.
For example, Ganglbauer et al. studied a food-sharing Facebook group to understand online social
media’s role in the emergence and sustainability of such a community [39]. In doing so, Ganglbauer
et al. analyzed the interactions between community members and found pro-active appeals and
critical awareness of community members. Mirisaee et al. studied the “social fabric” of ridersharing,
which they defined as “[the] composite of both the physical and virtual sharing infrastructures
(social networking groups, community email lists, sports clubs, local school events etc.) and the
networks of relations formed within and between them” [72, p.451]. Works by Lampinen et. al [59]
and Suhonen et. al [88] on Kassi, a local online gift exchange system, showed that the use of stable
online identities in a geographically local context helped build a sense of community and trust that
was hard to achieve in large-scale anonymous social exchange systems.
4.3.5 Geography. Geography was a very common theme in papers focusing on physical or
mobile crowdsourcing, and overlapped heavily with the theme of optimization. Non-HCI papers
with the geography code (N=25) were largely focused on spatial variables in ridesharing and
crowdsourcing systems. Many papers described spatial or mobile crowdsourcing as an “emerging
technology” and were devoted to problems within the domain of task assignment or user matching,
contributing algorithmic approaches that outperformed existing solutions on various synthetic
and real datasets. These papers introduced previously ignored variables to maximize the number
of successful assignments, reduce the number of workers needed, or improve performance in
circumstances of high uncertainty or limited workers.
The majority of the geography papers in HCI venues (N=9), however, involved field deployments
of mobile crowdsourcing applications and employed user studies to evaluate the system and extract
design implications. These deployments were local, frequently within a single community, and
consistently found that the sense of community and relationship between users was essential
to the platform’s success. These findings align with those of another study, which investigated
perceptions of a hypothetical local favor-exchange platform in a small town in Italy, in which
the most salient finding was “the importance of the relationship between participants” [50]. The
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:11
remaining HCI papers investigated the impact of geographic factors in mainstream platforms and
found that socioeconomic differences across neighborhoods and regions were strongly connected
to differences in participation and success [95, 96].
4.3.6 Business, Economic, and Pricing Models. The “business/economic/pricing model” theme
was present in papers from both non-HCI (N=19) and HCI (N=9) venues. In non-HCI computing
venues, researchers directly studied the existing sharing economy platforms and the models these
platforms incorporated. For example, researchers used large-scale data to analyze Uber’s pricing and
matching models [56]. Researchers also suggested alternative pricing schemes for sharing economy
platforms, such as dynamic pricing models based on real-time supply and demand [7] or biddingbased models that reallocate some pricing control to the consumer [21]. Papers about business
models discussed the viability of specific products for the sharing economy [19] or investigated how
business models may influence the priorities or the governance of the platforms [9]. This theme
also overlapped significantly with the optimization theme (N=12). Many of the papers introduced
different pricing models that maximized the revenue, social welfare, and quality of work of sharing
platforms [35, 102].
In contrast, HCI researchers tended to explore the social implications or social dynamics related
to business, economic or pricing models. For example, Ikkala and Lampinen [49] found that the
monetary-based model of Airbnb gives hosts more control compared to other non-monetary-based
hospitality services: the hosts can select the guests consistent with their preference and have control
over the volume and type of demand. In their 2014 paper, Ikkala and Lampinen studied how the
social and economic factors get intertwined in this context of Airbnb and how hosts divert their
accumulated reputational capital into the rental price [48].
4.4 Underexplored Themes in ACM
Our results suggest that the three least-explored sharing economy themes in the ACM research
were 1) topics related to the pre-sharing economy, or the sharing of under-used assets before the
rise of the sharing economy (e.g., carpooling, rickshaws, and timeshares); 2) safety; and 3) special
contexts of sharing (e.g., shared space, couches, etc.). In the HCI research, the least-explored themes
included optimization, sustainability or environmental effects, pre-sharing economy, and special
sharing contexts. Outside of HCI, the least-explored topics were special populations (N=0) and
algorithmic auditing, participant diversity, pre-sharing economy, safety, and sustainability (all N=2).
While this list suggests implications for future work, it is unclear why these topics were the
least explored. Perhaps these topics are not as relevant to their specific sub-field. For example,
optimization as an unexplored topic within HCI is reasonable given the number of optimization
papers in non-HCI-related fields. It is possible that algorithmic auditing papers are published outside
the ACM. These are all points that we revisit in the next section.
5 IMPLICATIONS FOR COMPUTING AND HCI RESEARCH
Our findings show key trends in the literature on the sharing economy in computing and HCI
specifically. For example, for computing overall, we saw a steady increase in sharing-economy
papers from 2009 to 2015 and a decrease from 2015 to 2016; this decrease represents a drop in HCIrelated research particularly, despite a steady increase in non-HCI-related work over time. We found
that overall, there were an equal number of HCI and non-HCI papers and an equal representation
of qualitative and quantitative methods. Few papers used mixed-methods approaches and many of
these were from HCI. There was only one literature review on this topic [74]. An overwhelming
majority of research questions were descriptive in nature and were primarily from HCI; causal and
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
38:12 T. Dillahunt et al.
predictive research questions were few in number. Finally, our results show that 42% (N=32) of the
works specifying a location (N=76), were from the United States.
In this section, we draw on these results to address our second research question, i.e., What
should we do next? In other words, this section highlights the under-explored topic areas identified
in our results to derive key directions for future sharing economy work in computing and HCI.
5.1 Environmental Sustainability and Concerns
Broadly, environmental sustainability, a well-studied topic in HCI (e.g., [32, 38]), was not well
represented in our results. In general, the papers in our corpus presented a physical-crowdsourcing
application to report environmental concerns such as water and air quality issues [55] and food
sharing applications to reduce domestic food waste [36]. A paper from Pargman et al., identified in
our review, noted that the sharing economy offers a potentially beneficial solution in a resourcescarce future [77]. Outside of computing, Cheng identified sustainability and development as one
of three main focus areas across the literature in the sharing economy that receives little attention
[20]. It was also noted that while environmental savings from shared mobility may exist [23],
there is a dearth of studies that actually confirm that these savings exist (despite most sharing
economy platforms’ advertising supposed environmental benefits). More work is needed to address
sustainability and the sharing economy, a point that has also been suggested by Silberman et al. in
their discussion of sustainable HCI [87].
5.2 Engaging with Pre-sharing Economy Phenomena
One purpose of the sharing economy is to bridge the online and offline worlds by connecting
individuals who need goods or services, to those who have access to these goods and services
[11, 14] via technology. Although the sharing economy has rapidly become a prominent subject
across many disciplines including computing, business, policy, and law [74], the underlying notion
of sharing is not a new concept. Despite this, our results suggest that very few papers discuss
sharing prior to the rise of the sharing economy. There are some exceptions: one paper from
Kasera et al. [51] conducted an exploratory study of shared taxis in Namibia to understand how
successful ridesharing is achieved without digital technology. Similarly, Carroll and Bellotti [18]
conceptually traced the development of bartering and gift exchange by studying literature in history
and anthropology. These studies benefit the field by informing the design of sharing economy
applications.
The need to consider the precursors to modern sharing economy platforms is particularly
important as the sharing economy enters new domains. For instance, Cheng’s findings suggest
an emergence in food sharing and land sharing in urban environments [20]. Land sharing and
food sharing have extraordinarily long precedents in human history (e.g., [1, 2]), complete with
many positive (e.g., [1]) and negative examples (e.g., [2]). An important direction for future work is
examining the prior research on these historical sharing economy platforms to develop implications
for the design of computer-mediated sharing tools in these domains.
5.3 More Diverse Geographic Contexts
Our results related to the geographic distribution of study sites—combined with very recent work
by Thebault-Spieker et al. [96]—point to a clear and important direction for future sharing economy
research. In particular, our study site results show a clear bias toward the United States in the HCI
sharing economy literature. While it is not uncommon in the computing literature for there to be
geographic biases in study site selection, the work of Thebault-Spieker et al. suggests that this should
be a particularly serious issue for sharing economy research. More specifically, Thebault-Spieker et
al. showed that local geographic factors ranging from population density patterns to urban structure
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:13
to community mental maps have major effects on many of the phenomena of interest in the sharing
economy literature (e.g. user motivation, optimization of important properties; see Table 1). Because
these local geographic factors vary from city to city and from country to country (e.g., Chinese
urban structures are very different from those in the United States and those in sub-Saharan Africa
[15], there is a strong probability that many of the findings in our paper corpus would change if
studies were repeated in new geographic contexts. Exploring the nature of these changes—and
better explicating the relationship between local geography and variables of interest—should be a
high priority in future research.
Additionally, on a much more specific note that was also reflected in Cheng [20], our results
point to the glaring need to do much more HCI sharing economy research in China: no HCI papers
considered Chinese study sites, despite China having an enormous sharing economy ecosystem
consisting of unique platforms that do not exist in Western countries. As such, important contributions can likely be made in the near-term by simply re-examining several influential HCI sharing
economy papers in a Chinese context using Chinese platforms.
As is typical in the computing literature, more attention should also be paid to the sharing
economy in developing countries. While a minority of work occurred in countries like Namibia
and Kenya, the sharing economy is known to play a different role in developing countries than
developed ones (e.g., [4, 43, 51]). A similar approach to what we have recommended for China
could likely yield important near-term contributions.
Finally, the work of Thebault-Spieker et al. [95, 96] discussed how local geographic factors are
not only critically important determinants of the performance of sharing economy platforms, but
also that they can cause geographic biases that benefit certain demographics. However, as suggested
by Thebault-Spieker et al., this result needs exploration in diverse geographic contexts with a
wide range of demographic biases and organizations of the built environment. There are many
immediate opportunities for research here, as well.
5.4 Pro-Social Objective Functions
Our results highlight a specific and important arbitrage opportunity between the more qualitative
and descriptive HCI sharing economy literature and the optimization work that is predominately
being done outside HCI: quantifying and optimizing sharing economy properties that are not currently the priority of the optimization literature. In other words, our results suggest an opportunity
for doing human-centered optimization in the sharing economy.
For instance, a relatively straightforward human-centered extension of the optimization literature
would involve attempting to increase decisional autonomy of workers and consumers (as was found
to be important by Meurer et al. [71]) while minimizing other costs (e.g., prices, reduced availability).
Over the longer term, however, our results suggest that there is a large need for research that
takes a much broader human-centered view of optimization in the sharing economy. For instance,
networks and platforms could be optimized for social tie-building over time (as was studied by
Mirisaee et al. [72], for accruing trust and safety in disadvantaged communities (c.f. Dillahunt and
Malone [28]), or for minimizing the socio-technical gap (c.f. Gheitasy et al. [40]). Another issue
worthy of study at the nexus of HCI and optimization relates to this question: “How optimized is
too optimized?”. There is a long history of HCI literature on the long-term costs of maximizing
short-term human performance. A similar phenomenon is plausible for many sharing economy
platforms. This is perhaps an especially large concern given the “emotional labor” (i.e. attending to
the social and emotional needs of customers) demanded of workers in the sharing economy [83], a
concern that did not arise in Cheng’s study [20].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
38:14 T. Dillahunt et al.
5.5 More Implications for Policy
Although several papers were included in the topic theme government and policy (e.g., [67, 68, 92]),
only a small number of empirical studies in this group of papers provided direct implications
for policy. The few studies that did so include the work of Lecuyer et al. [60], who provided a
method for improving transparency and extracting detailed data that are otherwise hidden, such as
a comprehensive transaction history and estimated revenue of Airbnb hosts. In this quantitative
analysis, the authors concluded that advocating a policy enforcing a 90-day maximum of Airbnb
rentals per year would eliminate the majority of concerns surrounding illegal hotels [60]. Similarly,
in a qualitative analysis, Dillahunt et al. [29] uncovered barriers to ridesharing applications that
can be used to inform policies for ridesharing subsidies for transportation-scarce individuals from
low-socioeconomic areas.
Given the importance of policy in the sharing economy domain, the small number of papers
focused on implications for policy in our corpus highlights the immediate need for more research
in this direction. Indeed, Cheng identified a similar problem in his review of the non-computing
literature [20]. More generally, our results back recent calls for more policy work in HCI more
broadly (e.g., [46, 52]). One approach to addressing these calls in the sharing economy domain
would be to work to implement fair wages across sharing and gig economy platforms as suggested
by the contributors of Meatspace Press [70], a new project concerned with important issues of
technology and society for people of diverse backgrounds.
5.6 More Diverse HCI Approaches are Needed
A key takeaway from our results is that the majority of HCI research on the sharing economy
is qualitative and descriptive in nature. Given the societal import of the sharing economy, it is a
credit to qualitative researchers in the HCI community that they have so quickly established major
lines of research in this domain. This should clearly continue. However, our results highlight that
the important perspectives provided by the quantitative and system-building traditions of HCI are
incomplete in the sharing economy literature. Future sharing economy work in HCI should seek to
bolster these perspectives.
5.7 Is HCI Losing Interest?
Finally, our results show a small decrease in sharing economy papers in 2016 relative to 2015, driven
primarily by a decline in HCI sharing economy papers. This negative slope surprised us, and it
is unclear whether it is a temporary reduction of interest or whether HCI interest in the sharing
economy has peaked. Given the number of important directions for future HCI work outlined in this
section— and the many others that can likely be drawn from our results—we hope that the former
is the case rather than the latter. As has been highlighted by our results, the HCI community has a
distinct perspective, and our belief is that this perspective should remain strong in the computing
literature.
6 LIMITATIONS
Literature reviews on ACM publications around the sharing economy are subject to a number of
limitations. First, the ACM Digital Library’s search engine has its own set of limitations [85]. For
example, the search engine at times generated inconsistent results despite researchers using the
same search terms and date ranges. To minimize this limitation, several team members confirmed
consistency among the final search results.
In addition, the articles in our review were limited to papers written in English, and papers
published in other languages might exhibit different trends. Next, although we went further than
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 2, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1, No. CSCW, Article 38. Publication date: November 2017.
The Sharing Economy in Computing 38:15
most computing SLRs by considering the entire ACM DL rather than just a subset and although
ACM DL claims to be the most comprehensive digital library in computing, the ACM DL does
not contain all possible relevant articles. Our review does not include articles from the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (aside from one joint ACM/IEEE venue) or the
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), for instance. That said, the
exclusive use of the ACM Digital Library is common in prior early-stage reviews (e.g., [85]). To
minimize this limitation, we considered our results in the context of a separate review of 66 sharing
economy journal articles by Cheng [20].
7 FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION
This research highlights a few opportunities for further reviews of the sharing economy literature,
for instance expanding our literature review beyond ACM venues and performing co-citation
analysis (c.f. Cheng [20]). Such a citation analysis would, for instance, identify which of computing’s
works bridge to other fields as well as identify opportunities to bridge clusters of research. Although
this would be a very substantial endeavor, there is some ongoing research to make this process less
intensive [99].
To conclude, we have provided the results of a systematic review of 112 sharing economy papers
in the computing literature, thereby filling an important gap left by the only other major sharing
economy literature review [20]. Our review reveals important trends in the computing community’s
sharing economy research and those of our focus sub-community, human–computer interaction.
These trends include a predominance of descriptive work and a tendency for the HCI community
to use qualitative rather than quantitative methods. These results inform the presentation of a
number of short- and long-term opportunities for new sharing economy research directions in
computing and HCI, for instance expanding the geographic range of current research, focusing on
environmental effects, and combining the strengths of the HCI and non-HCI literature.
