Online communities provide spaces for people who are vulnerable and underserved to seek support and build
community, such as LGBTQ+ people. Today, some online community spaces are mediated by algorithms.
Scholarship has found that algorithms have become deeply embedded in the systems that mediate our routine
engagements with the world. Yet, little is known about how these systems impact those who are most vulnerable
in society. In this paper, we focus on people’s everyday experiences with one algorithmic system, the short
video sharing application TikTok. TikTok recently received press that it was suppressing and oppressing the
identities of its growing LGBTQ+ user population through algorithmic and human moderation of LGBTQ+
creators and content related to LGBTQ+ identity. Through an interview study with 16 LGBTQ+ TikTok users,
we explore people’s everyday engagements and encounters with the platform. We find that TikTok’s For You
Page algorithm constructs contradictory identity spaces that at once support LGBTQ+ identity work and
reaffirm LGBTQ+ identity, while also transgressing and violating the identities of individual users. We also
find that people are developing self-organized practices in response to these transgressions and violations.
We discuss the implications of algorithmic systems on people’s identity work, and introduce the concept
of algorithmic exclusion, and explore how people are building resilience following moments of algorithmic
exclusion.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing.
Additional Key Word
1 INTRODUCTION
Marginalization, as presently conceived, relates to how certain groups of people are relegated to the
fringes of society and denied their place within it [131]. One of the primary societal mechanisms
through which people are marginalized is centered around people’s identity, or self-concept [51],
and people are often pushed to the periphery of society based on various identities, such as one’s
gender expression, race or ethnicity, sexual orientation, ability, or socioeconomic status [122, 131].
Marginalized people experience barriers every day in living their lives and being themselves because
their identities expose them to marginalization, which becomes normalized and institutionalized
over time [33, 138]. Today, people have access to a broad range of Information and Communication
Technologies (ICTs), such as social media platforms, which can empower them to live their lives
and be themselves where they may otherwise struggle with self-expression [43, 61]. While scholars
have shown that people use social media and online community spaces to reflect upon and negotiate
their identities [44, 116, 117], as well as to seek out and provide social support [31, 96], people with
marginalized identities continue to experience exclusion [110, 133] and harassment [14] in digital
spaces.
To further examine the relationship between marginalization and sociotechnical systems, in this
paper we focus on one historically marginalized population, individuals who identity as Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer (LGBTQ+), as well as their other identities (such as race
or ethnicity). While scholars in the fields of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) and Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) have explored the various traumas involved with LGBTQ+
people’s “coming out” experiences—where individuals articulate to themselves and others a part
of their identity that they had not yet recognized or had concealed [43]—here, we focus on the
everyday experiences of being LGBTQ+. For people who identity as LGBTQ+, routinely enacting
that identity, acting out that identity, and visibly recognizing that identity in others, can be a
challenge in everyday life [43]. For example, people can be immersed in homophobic, transphobic,
or otherwise prejudiced environments [50, 104], and their identities may be further suppressed and
oppressed through formal institutions such as mass entertainment media [111].
While we know that LGBTQ+ people have found community online [32, 43, 56, 60], there is also a
systematic push to silence LGBTQ+ identities in sociotechnical spaces [43, 60, 70, 109]. This is best
exemplified by Tumblr’s recent move to ban adult content from the site, which has silenced LGBTQ+
individuals who relied on the site to explore their gender and sexual identities by classifying even
safe-for-work LGBTQ+ content as ’adult’ [60]. While scholars are starting to explore how LGBTQ+
voices and identities are being suppressed in online community and social media spaces, here, we
pay explicit attention on LGBTQ+ people’s experiences with algorithmic systems.
Algorithms have become deeply—and invisibly—embedded in the systems that mediate our
routine engagements with the world [89, 90]. Scholars have found that algorithms routinely
influence our behavior without our knowledge [8, 22], signaling a need to better understand
people’s routine experiences with algorithms. In this paper, we pay specific attention to people’s
everyday experiences with one algorithmic system—TikTok—which recently received press that
it was suppressing and oppressing the identities of its growing LGBTQ+ population through a
combination of algorithmic and human intervention [9, 15, 70, 109]. TikTok, or Douyin, as it is
known in China, is a short video creation and sharing application by the company ByteDance. The
application is used for making and sharing short (15 to 60 second) videos. TikTok does not require
an account to view videos, but an account must be created in order to create video content, view
and write comments, like videos, or engage with the more personalized aspects of the application,
particularly its For You Page (FYP) algorithm. To our knowledge, there is no existing work on
people’s day to day experiences with TikTok, particularly with its FYP algorithm This paper aims
to address this gap.
We conducted an interview study with 16 LGBTQ+ TikTok users, where we explore their
everyday engagements and encounters with the platform. To frame this exploration, we develop a
conceptual lens that brings together the concepts of identity, identity work, infrastructure, and
algorithmic identity, to describe these experiences and encounters. We find that TikTok’s FYP
algorithm constructs contradictory identity spaces that at once support LGBTQ+ identity work
and reaffirm LGBTQ+ identity, while also transgressing and violating individual user identity
intersections. We also find that LGBTQ+ users are developing self-organized practices in response
to these transgressions and violations. We discuss the implications of algorithmic systems on
people’s identity work, developing the concept of algorithmic exclusion. We also explore how
people are building resilience following moments of algorithmic exclusion.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:3
2 RELATED LITERATURE
Our study focuses on the experiences LGBTQ+ people have within algorithmic systems. To situate
our contribution, we start by defining the concept of identity for our work, and unpacking the
relationship between people’s identity and personal security. Here, we highlight the relationships
between people’s ability to routinely enact and present their identity and their sense of personal
security. We draw on the concept of infrastructure to articulate the relationship between identity
and personal security because it is an analytical lens through which to understand how human and
non-human entities are entangled and embedded in larger, often society-scale systems. We provide
the context for LGBTQ+ representation and how infrastructure can be biased against that identity
more broadly, such as through stereotypes and misrepresentation, which can create insecurity.
Algorithmic systems, which are the focus of this work, have become digital infrastructure that
mediate our routine engagements with the world that also normalize certain identities and identity
expressions, which can have deep—and invisible—implications on people’s ability to routinely enact
and/or perform an LGBTQ+ identity. Finally, we situate this work in the context of the algorithmic
platform under investigation here—TikTok.
2.1 A Lack of Security in Routinely Enacting and Visualizing LGBTQ+ Identity
We conceptualize self-identity as a person’s self-concept, which is how individuals think about and
view themselves socially or physically [51]. Self-identity is a representation of who we believe we are
and how we want others to see us. While traditional constructions of self-identity relate to a person’s
individuality [45], for many, self-identity is a collective construct developed through perceived
membership in various social groups [129]. Thus, self-identity can be defined across a range of
categorical identities, such as race, gender expression, and sexuality. A strong conceptualization
of self-identity can give people a deep sense of security in their daily lives [72]. The sense of
security brought about by routines is best articulated by Giddens [52], who describes how people
have a secure mental state when routines are continuous and predictable; he defines this state as
ontological security. In this view, the ability to both routinely enact and assume an identity while
also seeing aspects of one’s identity visually represented in others provides individuals a sense of
security about their existence.
In order to enact their routines, or their everyday patterns of action [48], people often rely
on infrastructure. Infrastructure is traditionally perceived as “the underlying foundation or basic
framework” of a system or organization [73]. A society relies on infrastructure to support routine
activities. For example, roadways and highways enable people to routinely travel to and engage
in activities ranging from grocery shopping to socializing with friends and family. As computing
systems emerged and became habitually used across social settings, information systems scholars
began to argue that technical systems are also infrastructure. This perspective was advocated by
Hanseth and Lyytinen [64], who developed the concept of information infrastructure. They contend
that information and networked technologies (e.g., personal computers, databases, and social media)
have become embedded and entangled in information delivery and other technology-enabled
societal practices [64]. For example, organizations now rely on a diverse range of information
and networked technologies to maintain routine operation, such as databases, the internet, email,
enterprise resource management systems, and more. Thus, information infrastructure has become
an installed base upon which other systems are built; it actively supports people’s routines, such as
the ability to communicate with others and exchange information across a variety of contexts.
Star and Ruhleder [127] showed how infrastructure is sociotechnical, rather than the traditional
view of it being either physical or technical. They describe how infrastructure is interwoven
with corresponding social practices [127]—what Lee, Dourish, and Mark [80] refer to as human
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:4 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
infrastructure. Lee and colleagues define this term as the “arrangements of organizations and actors
that must be brought into alignment in order for work to be accomplished” [80]. Moreover, they
describe how forms of human infrastructure is “the underlying foundation of a system constituted
by the patterns of relationships of people, through various networks and social arrangements” [80].
Much like physical and technical infrastructure, human infrastructure is critical in enabling the
routine functioning of society. Human infrastructure is not to be conflated with social networks;
while human infrastructure may comprise known ties like family or friends, it also consists of
unknown ties that we may never encounter but upon which we rely. For example, there are people
who work to animate the electric and network infrastructures that mediate our ability to engage in
daily routines. We often do not know these people but their work is vital to our ability to engage
in our daily routines. Thus, human infrastructure is critical in enabling the routine functions of a
society.
Oftentimes infrastructure is invisible, operating in the background and supporting our ability to
engage in routines without paying it much thought [127]. When infrastructure fails—what Star and
Ruhleder [127] dub an “infrastructural breakdown”—it becomes visible and draws our attention.
When the systems of roads and highways we use to routinely travel to and from work are under
maintenance, we become aware of the physical infrastructure as well as the members of the system
of human infrastructure, such as repair and maintenance crews, who are working to resolve these
breakdowns.
For some populations, however, infrastructure can be chronically visible through its routine disruption of people’s lives. Infrastructure is embedded with logics that have invisible power in guiding
and shaping our daily practices. For example, the logics which guide the placement of roadways
and bridges have created inequities in these infrastructures that have disproportionate impact on
minority communities, as these roadways are often built through their neighborhoods. This leads
to an important point—infrastructure is designed, implemented, maintained, and shaped by people
[16]. People are not value-neutral and their biases can become embedded in the infrastructure [139]
that mediate people’s routine lives and serve as a source of disruption.
The logics embedded within infrastructure can especially burden the lives of people with marginalized identities; they can be habitual sources of anxiety and insecurity. For the purposes of this
paper, we focus primarily on the experiences of LGBTQ+ people. For LGBTQ+ people, enacting that
identity, acting out that identity, and seeing that identity in others, can be a challenge in everyday
life. The normative logics that uphold the infrastructures that LGBTQ+ individuals inhabit everyday
can be prejudiced against and invalidate their identities [49, 69, 111].
LGBTQ+ identity has historically been influenced by harmful normative representations that
have flooded and subsequently dominated the infrastructures that constitute society, such as
the legal system [140], health systems [40], entertainment media channels [111], and domestic
and educational contexts [49]. The spaces that LGBTQ+ people inhabit are often immersed in
homophobia—that is, prejudice against homosexual people [45]. Beyond living in domestic environments with people who can be hostile towards their identities, for decades, LGBTQ+ individuals
globally have fought for equal rights and, for example, only recently were same-sex marriages
legalized and recognized institutionally in the United States [67, 98]. Until 1973, homosexuality was
considered immoral and was a diagnosable disorder in the United States [40]. For decades, media
networks, and especially film media, were disallowed from creating content that visually represented LGBTQ+ romantic couples. Today, while there are more visual representations of LGBTQ+
people in popular media, these visual representations tend to skew in favor of cisgender gays and
lesbians, while transgender, asexual and bisexual individuals, among other LGBTQ+ identities still
struggle for positive representation and acceptance both within the larger LGBTQ+ community
and more broadly in entertainment media[133]. Moreover, these visual representations are often
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:5
ill-conceived or problematic, generating normative stereotypes across media ranging from film
to video games that are not aligned with LGBTQ+ individual’s lived experiences [43, 111]. These
threats can be experienced as identity crises [45]: the representations and norms that permeate
infrastructure that people draw on to enact their identities come in conflict with their personal
realities.
When people’s identity routines are threatened, they often work to resolve those threats to
reestablish ontological security and continue to authentically enact their identities. The process
through which people remedy threats to, or reconstruct, or reaffirm their identities is a part of
a larger process of identity work [20]. It is important to note that not all identity work occurs
in response to threats to, or disruptions of, routine identity presentation; rather, identity work is
a continual process individuals take part in over time. Snow and McAdam [125] define identity
work as a process through which people engage in “forming, repairing, maintaining, strengthening,
or revising” their identities. Moreover, identity work can also take place during acts of identity
play, whereby people assume temporary identities or observe potential future identities as a means
for understanding one’s own self-identity [72]. For example, an individual might roleplay as a
Democrat and a Republican, or observe discourses engaged in by Republicans and Democrats,
as a means of reflexively figuring out their political identity. Importantly, identity work is often
prompted when people experience difference or are routinely “othered” in their daily lives [132].
2.2 Digital Infrastructures for Routine LGBTQ+ Identity Work and Visibility
While identity work and identity reaffirmation can be especially threatened in physical world contexts, scholars have explored the extent to which digital infrastructures support identity work and
community building for different identities. Prior work exploring the uses of digital infrastructures
for social support has focused on the ways platform affordances — their design attributes — allow
individuals to use such spaces to develop social support across many identity intersections [60], and
converse around aspects of self-presentation and identity while maintaining strategic anonymity
as a measure of safety [44, 116]. Within the CHI and CSCW community, previous studies have
examined the roles that digital infrastructure and their affordances play in enabling people who
are experiencing homelessness [79, 96, 108], transitioning to college [31, 124], working through
relationship breakups [112], dealing with intimate partner violence [4, 38], and coming out as
LGBTQ+ [30] to find social support and develop community.
Social media and online community infrastructures allows individuals to engage in identity
work and identity play while also highlighting the existing tensions within such spaces, such as
the presence of friends and family on Facebook, which can make disclosure of gender transition
challenging [59], or how when fathers sharing information about their children can become
stigmatized [2]. These studies demonstrate how, while beneficial for social support, social media
can also cause undue stress for individuals wishing to do identity work. However, some scholarship
has focused on how individuals use anonymity or indirectness to disclose potentially stigmatized
information around identity and experience of self [3]. Dym and colleagues [43] introduce a concept
of selective visibility, where the design of online platforms does not directly afford social support
for identity work, such as transformative fandom spaces, but allows individuals to find and create
community infrastructures where they can engage with aspects of themselves which they may not
be able to safely explore in other spaces[113].
Scholarship on the LGBTQ+ community specifically has focused on the creation and use of digital
infrastructures such as blogs [60], vlogs [32, 56], websites specifically for the LBGTQ+ community
[68], and creative works within transformative fandom[43] as methods for creating social support
for identity work. Vanessa Kitzie [77] determined that platform affordances of visibility, anonymity,
and association can both enable and constrain LGBTQ+ people’s identity work. This echoes findings
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:6 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
by Carrasco and Kerne [25] around the specific privacy concerns LGBTQ+ people must contend
with in order to fully utilize social media platforms. This body of research shows how LGBTQ+
people leverage the existing online infrastructures of blogging platforms, video streaming platforms,
and social media more broadly to engage in identity work, as well as create their own spaces for
community support. It follows that the digital infrastructures of ICTs can provide a much-needed
space for social support and identity work. When these spaces are not available in an offline context,
they can, at times, serve as the only place where such identity work and exploration can take place.
Some digital infrastructures are considered to be more LGBTQ+ friendly than others, to the
point where they become queer-coded, meaning that although they are not not explicitly designed
for LGBTQ+ community, they have come to implicitly support engagement by members of the
LGBTQ+ community. For example, Haimson and colleagues [60] discuss how certain platforms,
such as Tumblr, can be considered queer by both researchers and users alike because they provide
space for LGTBQ+ identity work. Recent platform policy changes on Tumblr, however, have
effectively pushed away many users from the platform [60]. Further, applications and websites
specifically designed for the LGBTQ+ community, such as dating applications or online support
groups, create visibility and provide spaces for social support and identity work. Location-based
social networking sites such as Grindr or SCRUFF, as well as other LGBTQ+ dating apps, offer
space for community visibility and connection, especially when such spaces may not be physically
available or where safety is a concern [13, 66]. However, such digital platforms present their own
set of challenges. Dating applications, for instance, have been shown to contribute to a sense of
loneliness and isolation [42] and can introduce privacy concerns in more rural locations [66]. As
Dym and colleagues [43] note, there is limited designated digital space exclusively for the LGBTQ+
community. These studies illustrate how LGBTQ+ digital spaces can be altered through platform
policy and user-generated norms, or how available spaces may not constitute viable avenues for
social support or identity work.
2.3 Algorithms and Normative Identity Construction
While users of digital infrastructures, especially online community spaces, often have agency in
moderating the norms that come to mediate people’s routine experiences [39], in this paper, we
focus on those systems where people’s routine experiences are mediated by and through algorithms.
Algorithms, though often black boxed, are infrastructures that have become deeply entangled
with people’s routine interactions with the world [89, 90]. We can find algorithms embedded in
the digital infrastructures we encounter and use in our daily lives ranging from traditional news
media [55] and search engines [11, 18, 99], to social media platforms [36]. Yet, the invisible logics
embedded in algorithms can have deleterious impacts on our routines. Previous work has examined
how algorithms potentially can influence us in ways we cannot see [8] and can challenge social
media users to actively shift their routine behaviors toward making themselves more visible [22].
Similar to how physical infrastructures such as single-gender public restrooms can perpetuate
harmful logics that impact individuals who identify outside of gender binaries, algorithms can
also exhibit similar behavior. To frame this exploration, we drawn on the concept of algorithmic
identity, developed by John Cheney-Lippold [26]. He argues that our digital identities are presently
constructed through algorithms that process data to measure certain features about us, such as
our gender, age, or race. The information used to measure and identify us is made up of myriad
data points as realized through our online activities, including our browser history, purchasing
behavior, and social networks, and this data is used to identify us and target us, such as through
advertisements. For example, when we peruse Facebook or check our email, the advertisements we
see reflect the digital identity categories that algorithmic systems have assigned us. Cheney-Lippold
[26] draws explicit attention to how these categories are “you,” but not you, meaning that users are
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:7
being placed into categories based on data that may not accurately reflect their life experiences
or their self-identify. Similarly, Cheney-Lippold writes that “gender” is not the same as gender, in
that “gender” is a datafied version of ourselves used for marketing rather than our actual gender
presentation. As a result, LGBTQ+ people might struggle in their identity work or in enacting an
LGBTQ+ identity when algorithmic infrastructures routinely perpetuate heteronormative logics
and/or deprive users of the right and agency to choose how they identify themselves.
Prior work has shown that algorithms are political artifacts which are shaped by societal norms,
as well as the individual’s or company’s politics within which they are designed [22, 53, 139].
These technological artifacts can include biases and reinforce social norms or stereotypes. For
example, Engin Bozdag examines the potentials for bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization,
noting that the technical systems and the algorithms governing what information is presented
can carry the bias of their designers [18]. Studies within the algorithmic fairness community have
demonstrated the ways algorithms can be biased based on race [78, 101], gender [62], and age [1].
Other studies have focused on the ways algorithms can enforce stereotypes. Safiya Noble, looking
at Google, demonstrates how its search algorithm reinforces racist stereotypes about Black women
and girls, over-sexualizing them while also reducing them to racial caricatures rooted in the United
States’ white supremacist past [100]. Further work has examined how auto-complete forms on
Google can reinforce homophobic or racist stereotypes [7]; and how Reddit’s post sorting and
popularity algorithm can reinforce toxic masculinity during periods of high-traffic misogynistic
engagement with the platform [95].
Moreover, the CHI and CSCW community has explored how technical systems enforce particular normative presentations of self which disproportionately harm marginalized individuals
by invalidating their identity expression in a push for ’authenticity’ or collapsing non-normative
gender identities into binary categories for the purposes of advertising [12, 61]. Scholars have also
started to explore how algorithms produce and reinforce societal norms. Some focus on search
algorithms. For instance, Kay and colleagues [75] examine several image database search results
for professional occupations, finding that search results have stereotype exaggeration and tend
to portray the minority gender of particular roles in unprofessional ways (e.g., the "sexy" woman
scientist). They conclude people will believe the search results are good if they agree with the
existing stereotype, thus showing how algorithmic search can re-enforce preexisting perceptions a
person may have about the profession [75]. Similarly, Otterbacher and colleagues [103] examined
the gender stereotypes in Bing Image Search results for the search query "person", finding offline
gender biases are re-created through algorithmic search. Other studies into the ways in which
algorithms produce and reinforce societal norms have focused on societal perceptions of normative
gender. For example, Scheuerman and colleagues [114] focus on algorithmic facial classification
systems around gender norms, finding that many individuals’ non-normative self-expression of
gender can be in direct conflict with the underlying infrastructure of commercial facial analysis systems. Further work by Scheuerman and colleagues [115] focuses on how identity is operationalized
within technical infrastructures (in this case the training databases for facial analysis algorithms),
finding that racial and gender identities are treated as fixed and apolitical within these technical
infrastructures, ignoring the sociocultural constructions of both race and gender. This body of work
demonstrates how societal norms and prejudices around race and gender identity can be reinforced
by algorithms; however these studies all focus on technical infrastructures that can potentially
produce and reinforce societal norms.
To our knowledge, less is known about how people experience and encounter algorithms in their
routine lives. Theoretical scholars of algorithms have encouraged empirical work examining people’s experiences interacting with algorithmic systems [141]. Previous work on people’s everyday
experiences with algorithmic systems has focused on the participants’ imaginaries — how they
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:8 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
make people feel — as a means of understanding the social power algorithmic systems hold [23].
Several scholars have focused on the development of evolving and malleable folk theories around algorithmic systems in order to: better understand their outcomes and effects, such as how they guide
an individual’s behavior and self-presentation practices [35, 36]; to account for news information
discovery [130]; and to understand the way affordances can manipulate Facebook’s News Feed [46].
Other studies have focused on individual experiences with algorithmic systems through examining
the information sharing practices around visibility on Instagram [29], individual’s awareness of
news feed personalization [47, 106, 107], and the ways algorithms can influence self-presentation
on various dating applications [41, 134]. Additionally, we know that health insurance and loan
systems that rely on algorithms to make decisions "learn" to make decisions that are gendered
and racialized, often privileging white men [21]. Understanding people’s experiences with and
within algorithmic systems is becoming increasingly important, especially when we consider the
ubiquity of these systems and their capacity to create habitual insecurity in people’s lives. This
problem is particularly acute for people who are already marginalized given that such systems
might be reinforcing the exclusionary norms and logics of power that have permeated society.
This leads to the question: How might people whose identities are marginalized by algorithmic
systems experience these systems, and what practices might they be developing to counter how
such systems oppress and suppress their identities?
In this paper, we contribute to these emergent discourses by explicitly focusing on the everyday
experiences of LGBTQ+ users on the application TikTok, which has received press that has criticized it for oppressing and suppressing people’s identities through both algorithmic and human
interventions [9, 15, 70, 109]. To our knowledge, there is no existing work on people’s day-to-day
experiences with TikTok, particularly with its For You Page algorithm, and this paper aims to
address this gap.
2.4 Viral Dances, Quick Comedy, and Personalized Content Delivery: The Case of
TikTok
TikTok is a video creation and sharing application used for making short (15 to 60 second) videos.
TikTok does not require an account to view videos but an account must be created in order to
create video content, or engage with the more personalized aspects of the application, such as the
For You Page algorithm. Users are offered video editing filters, similar to the ones popularized by
Snapchat and Instagram, as well the ability to dub sound onto video. User-provided hashtags help
to categorize the video and disseminate it to other users via: two side-by-side screens available for
viewing content; the Following page; including only videos made by creators people are following;
or the personalized For You Page. Once a user’s video is ready to be shared, creators can add
captions and tag the content with free-form hashtags, which serve organizational and contentrelated purposes. Once uploaded, the user has a choice to control where the video goes: to their
followers only, or to a global audience. TikTok’s For You Page is unique in that users have no
control over the content they will encounter on the page; rather, the ‘for you’ page is “full of things
[users] seem to have demonstrated [they] want to watch, no matter what [they] actually say [they]
want to watch” [71]. The recommendation algorithm learns from users’ behaviors and further
personalizes the content it delivers with every video a user watches and/or likes, every user they
follow, and every hashtag they engage with through content creation and/or click engagement. The
For You Page will contain videos of people a user follows, but not exclusively. Unlike Instagram or
Snapchat, or even TikTok’s spiritual predecessor, Vine, TikTok completely removes a user’s ability
to control what content they see on the For You Page. While this increases the discoverability of
user generated content, it also strips the user of a level of control over what they might be seeing
at any given time on their For You Page.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:9
Previous studies on TikTok examine the intersections of technological creativity and individual
user creativity through user experience [144] and have drawn attention to "AI powered content
creation, dissemination and interaction technologies" [91]. Other studies have examined the linkages
and interactions between user generated-content and social interaction on TikTok [84], as well
as the co-attention to the user and video modalities needed to create user recommendations on
micro-video sharing platforms such as TikTok [83]. Others have focused on the more creative
aspects of TikTok. Qiyang Zhou [143] discusses the potentiality of TikTok as a platform for creative
practice. McRoberts and colleagues [97] suggest that applications like TikTok afford children
opportunities to create collaboratively with friends. "TikTok liberates young people to play without
adhering to the visual styles, narratives and online cultures of the past" argues Ethan Bresnick [19].
Badillo-Urquiola and colleagues[6] conducted participatory design sessions with young users of
TikTok to determine their perceptions of how TikTok (and similar apps) promoted their online
safety. Other work focuses on the use of TikTok to communicate various forms of information
beyond entertainment such as university communication to future students [105], self-expression
[102], subversion of TikTok’s popular trends as a counter cultural presentation of self through
parody [92], for more interactive political communication than on other platforms [121] and for
microblogging [81].
There have, however, been some concerns regarding TikTok, including the platform’s failure
to protect children’s privacy [34]. Wang and colleagues [136] discuss community on TikTok,
commenting that due to its low threshold for engagement and loose organization, the community
which forms there is unstable. Wang and colleagues’ [136] work demonstrates the ease with which
individuals can join TikTok and engage with the platform’s content. The low threshold for entry is
part of what makes the app enticing to children and teenagers. TikTok’s Community Guidelines1
and Terms of Service2
state users must be over 13 years old to use the platform, and children and
teenagers under the age of 18 are a large portion of the TikTok’s userbase[71].
Within the CHI and CSCW community, previous work has touched on the platform’s capacity to
livestream outdoor environments [87], for preserving cultural practices and sharing knowledge
[85, 86], as well as for general entertainment and “keeping up with fashion” [88]. Finally, others have
focused on the platform’s use of humor to drive engagement with creative content [135]. To date,
there has been little work within the CHI and CSCW literature around user’s everyday experiences
everyday user experiences with TikTok, particularly with its For You Page algorithm. Following
several articles in popular press regarding the systemic and algorithmic removal of LGBTQ+ content
from TikTok’s For You Page (e.g. [15, 70, 109]), we chose to examine the experiences of LGBTQ+
individuals on TikTok.
In our study, we argue that TikTok’s For You Page algorithm constructs contradictory identity
spaces that at once support LGBTQ+ identity work and reaffirm LGBTQ+ identity, while also transgressing and violating individual user identity intersections. We also explicate the self-organized
practices TikTok users employ in response to these violations and transgressions.
3 RESEARCH METHODS
This paper focuses on LGBTQ+ people’s uses of TikTok and examines the experiences LGBTQ+
people have with TikTok’s For You Page (FYP) algorithm as a place for identity work and play. This
study received approval from Syracuse University’s Institutional Review Board. Prior to beginning
the interview, the first author read participants an oral consent form. All respondents granted their
consent which allowed us to record the interviews, and they agreed to continued contact with
1https://www.tiktok.com/community-guidelines?lang=en
2https://www.tiktok.com/legal/terms-of-use
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:10 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
the first author to receive copies of their interview transcripts and updates on the project. The
interviews took place prior to and during the first two weeks of social distancing, an outcome of the
COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on New York State. Due to the fact that the authors were under strict
social distancing orders due to the virus’ impact on New York State, only one of our interviews
was conducted in person, with the remaining conducted over video chat and the telephone.
3.1 Participant Recruitment
Directly recruiting individuals from TikTok proved challenging, as the privacy controls on TikTok
allow users to limit the number of direct messages they receive from people they are not following.
Following nearly six-weeks of embedding herself into the space to determine community norms
and common video tropes, the first author made two, one minute long recruitment videos directly
soliciting responses on TikTok, where she introduced herself and the project’s general goals. These
two videos were tagged with various queer-related hashtags: #lgbtq, #queer, #gay, #trans, #nb,
#lesbian, and #tiktok—to ensure the recruitment videos would gain visibility. These tags were
identified based on the first author’s initial exploration on and of the platform. The first author
directly contacted anyone who responded to the video stating they were interested in participating
via direct message on TikTok. Additionally, on March 1, 2020, the first author used her personal
TikTok account to directly message individuals appearing in her For You Page (FYP) feed with
clear indicators in their profiles of both LGBTQ+ identity and their age. These solicitations were
short introductions of the authors, the project, and the university affiliation of the research. In
order to broaden the scope of our recruitment, a short recruitment survey based upon eligibility
criteria around participant age, queer identity and TikTok use was created and shared via social
media on Twitter and Tumblr, as the first author’s social network is extensively connected with the
LGBTQ+ community on both platforms. To broaden its reach, the recruitment tweet was tagged
using the hashtags: #lgbtq, #tiktok and #queer. Following the conclusion of each interview, we used
a snowball sampling approach [10], asking informants to recommend people we should speak to
about potential participation in our study. By using multiple recruitment techniques, it was our
intent to avoid sampling bias. This approach has been used in other CHI and CSCW studies [58].
We developed eligibility criteria for participation in this study. Specifically, eligibility was determined based on the following criteria: participants must be (1) 18 years of age or older; (2) a regular
TikTok user; and (3) identify as LGBTQ+. We wanted to speak to LGBTQ+ identifying individuals
following a series of articles in popular press implying that TikTok was not a very queer-friendly
space [15, 70, 109]. This ran in contradiction to the first author’s ethnographic observations of
TikTok as a platform and her own For Your Page curated feed. Further, some preliminary discussions
with TikTok users implied that following Tumblr’s adult content ban, which targeted safe for work
LGBTQ+ content for removal using an algorithmic system [60], many Tumblr users left for other
community spaces, including TikTok.
Using this recruitment strategy, we identified and contacted 45 potential informants, and we
successfully recruited 16 eligible participants for interviews. We recruited 2 informants from
the TikTok recruitment videos (P9 and P15), and 4 informants being recruited through direct
solicitation via TikTok direct messaging (P5, P12, and P13) and Instagram direct messaging (P14).
Nine informants were recruited via the recruitment form circulated on Twitter and Tumblr by the
first author (P2, P3, P4, P6, P7, P8, P10, P11, and P16). One informant participated in an exploratory
interview and was recruited in person (P1).
3.2 Interviews
Following the qualitative methodology outlined by Strauss and Corbin [128] and Yin [142], we
conducted 16 in-depth semi-structured interviews between February 20 and April 4, 2020. Interviews
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:11
lasted between 70 minutes and 2 hours (averaging at 90 minutes). The first interview (P1) was
conducted in person, in a closed office at Syracuse University. The subsequent interviews were
conducted using the technology that was most comfortable to our informants, including phone
and Zoom. Participation was voluntary, and participants did not receive any compensation for
their participation. We initially estimated the interviews would take approximately 60 minutes, and
informed our participants when that time was reached. However, most participants indicated they
wished to continue past the given hour. Importantly, as more states went into mandatory social
distancing and university students (P1, P2, P4, P5, P6, P9, P10, P11, and P15) were sent home, care
was taken prior to each interview to determine if the informant was in a space where they felt
safe to discuss sensitive topics around LGBTQ+ identity freely. This question was added to our
pre-interview discussion on March 15th, 2002, after completing our first six interviews. We asked
all subsequent participants this question prior to receiving their oral consent to participate in the
interview.
We structured the interview questions such that informants could guide us through their understandings of TikTok as a platform. These semi-structured interviews were designed to serve
as life histories [137], where informants were asked questions about their lives, as well as their
experiences with coming out, enacting an LGBTQ+ identity, and in finding community spaces,
and using TikTok. More specifically, we asked our informants to discuss how they came into their
gender and sexual identity, and how they would define each. When inquiring about community,
we asked informants to provide their own definition and then reflect on various places and spaces
where they had experienced community, as well as their motivations for joining or departing from
these places or spaces over time. In discussing TikTok, we asked our informants to describe TikTok’s
algorithm, affordances, and the communities they encountered on the application. In addition, we
asked participants probing questions regarding their routine use of social media community spaces,
any challenges or obstacles informants faced, and how TikTok has impacted these routines.
With participant consent, the interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for analysis.
Following the interview, the first author asked the participants recruited by the social media
recruitment form to be added to informant’s TikTok account with the understanding that the
first author was going to create TikTok videos to engage in a community-based discussion of the
study’s results. The participants recruited via TikTok were already connected with the first author
through the recruitment process. To date, many of the participants continue to remain in regular
contact with the first author via email, Twitter, TikTok, and Instagram. In addition to this continued
relationship, we used content that the participants created and shared with the first author to
validate our informant’s experiences on TikTok. The first author produced several TikTok videos
around potential findings (2 videos), theoretical framing approaches (1 video), general discussion
of the results (1 video), and ongoing thoughts based on findings (1 video). These videos, published
to the first author’s personal TikTok Account, integrated sounds and memes that were popular at
the time of production. As we had previously gained permission from our participants to follow
their TikTok accounts, and many of our participants had followed us back, we were able to ensure
that the content produced would appear in their FYP feeds and/or on their Following page. Several
participants and other community members commented on the videos or through direct messages
on other platforms such as Instagram and Twitter. We also examined news reports and social media
discussions to further synthesize our interview data.
3.3 Data Analysis
In analyzing our data, we used an approach based on grounded theory [28]. Grounded theory
has been adopted and is commonly used by HCI scholars [39, 74, 86, 119]. We used MAXQDA, a
qualitative data analysis program to code the interview transcripts. The first author conducted a
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:12 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
preliminary round of open coding and memoing of the 16 interviews, meeting with the second
author to discuss emergent codes every other day throughout the analysis process. During these
interactive and collaborative sessions, emergent codes were discussed, particularly around our
participants experiences with TikTok as being contradictory and multi-faceted, as well as their
experiences finding community both on and off of TikTok. Codes like "algorithmic experience" and
sub-codes such as "initial collaboration" and "continued collaboration" characterize our informant’s
direct experiences with personalizing the content they saw on their FYP. Under these codes, we
also situated any and all discussion of TikTok’s affordances and the affordances’ relationship to
tailoring content which appears on our participants’ For You Pages. These codes were gathered
under the general code of "algorithmic experience", along with another emergent theme, which
captured participants descriptions of feeling as though certain aspects of themselves were being
"silenced." This emergent theme also describes and the related ways by which our participants
described being silenced, such having content removed from TikTok. Codes also emerged around
the "resistance strategies" that our participants developed in order push back against what they felt
were various transgressions and violations by TikTok; an example of a resistance strategy would
be reposting content that has been removed. Other codes emerged around the joy our participants
felt at "finding others like me" and being afforded a space for "creative identity work." Despite the
inherent joy of finding others like themselves on TikTok, our participants also spoke of various
transgressions and violations they perceived as taking place on TikTok, such as discomfort with the
application "figuring them out", the ways in which there seemed to be a "normative queer identity"
that they were repeatedly exposed to that "silences other identity intersections." By collapsing and
assessing the codes, we merged them into a coherent story regarding our participants’ experiences
on TikTok, and produced three categories as reported in the results section: Perceptions of the Inner
Workings of TikTok, Identity Work and Identity Affirmation, and Transgressions and Violations.
The collapse of the codes into these three categories touch on the main topics our participants
discuss in their interviews, and they speak to the contradictory nature of our participant’s general
experiences on the platform.
3.4 Participants
Of our 16 participants, 15 hail from the United States and 1 from England. They are between 18 and
37 years old. Eleven of our informants self-identified as Caucasian, 1 identified as Hispanic/Latina,
1 as both Black and Haitian-American, 1 as Black and White mixed race, 1 as South Asian and
White mixed race, and 1 as a member of a Mid-Atlantic Indigenous nation. They were diverse in
terms of gender expression, with 9 self-identifying as cisgender female, 3 identifying as non-binary,
1 identifying as genderqueer or non-binary, 1 identifying as male and non-binary, 1 identifying
as genderfluid, and 1 identifying as two spirit. Our informants were also diverse in terms of
sexuality, with 2 identifying as gay, 4 identifying as bisexual, 1 identifying as both demisexual and
biromantic, 7 identifying as lesbian, and 2 identifying as queer. Ten use she/her pronouns, 4 use
they/them pronouns, 1 uses he/him pronouns, and 1 alternates between she/her and they/them. Of
our informants, 7 are currently seeking undergraduate degrees, 1 is a master’s student, and 1 is a
doctoral student. The remaining are working professionally across diverse industries, including
automotive mechanics and big tech. See Table 1 for a detailed breakdown.
3.5 Limitations
There are several limitations to this study. First, it was challenging for the first author’s recruitment
videos to gain a far reach within the broader LGBTQ+ community on TikTok. Participants had
to self-select into the study on TikTok itself, and we had to identify and recruit participants
across multiple social media networks outside of the one in question. A second limitation came
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:13
# Age Gender and Pronouns Sexuality Race/Ethnicity
P1 23 Female - She/Her Lesbian White
P2 25 Female - She/Her Lesbian White
P3 22 Female - She/Her Lesbian White
P4 22 Female - She/Her Lesbian White
P5 19 Non-Binary - They/Them Bisexual Black/White
P6 21 Female - She/her Bisexual Black/Haitian
P7 18 Non-Binary - She/Her Lesbian White
P8 23 Genderqueer - She/Her Gay South Asian/White
P9 22 Female - They/Them Lesbian Hispanic/Latina
P10 20 Non-Binary - They/Them Queer White
P11 21 Female - She/Her Lesbian White
P12 37 Female - She/Her Bisexual White
P13 35 Genderqueer/Non-Binary - They/Them Demisexual/Biromantic White
P14 26 Male/Non-Binary - He/Him Gay White
P15 27 Female - She/Her Queer White
P16 21 Two Spirit - She/Her or They/Them Lesbian Native American
Table 1. List of study participants.
in generating trust on TikTok regarding the study, as some initial responses to the recruitment
call expressed skepticism in the legitimacy of such research. Thus, when they were contacted by
the first author with a more in-depth pitch of the project, including the consent form, these users
declined to participate or did not respond to the initial or follow up contact. Third, our participants
skew white, cisgender female, and lesbian; as this is how the first author identifies. To mitigate this
limitation, we continued to recruit participants of other racial, gender, and sexual identities as social
distancing policies spread across the United States and Europe. Fourthly, as discussed previously,
this study was done during the beginnings of what is now an ongoing period of quarantine and
physical distancing due to the COVID-19 pandemic. While we have taken care in our analysis to
note when participants discussed how the pandemic has changed their use of TikTok, we do not
believe LGBTQ+ people’s experiences on the application changed following physical distancing
orders. Fifth, we were unable to speak to anyone under the age of 18, which limited our ability to
interview a large portion of TikTok’s userbase. Finally, our participant sample is limited in that we
have only interviewed a small number of mostly white LGBTQ+ individuals. We find it important
to note that our study may be missing the voices of non-white content creators and consumers of
TikTok and that there is evidence in popular press that non-white creators are as impacted TikTok’s
policy as non-normative white creators [9]. However our results offer insight into the day to day
interactions between humans and algorithms, and can help to inform the contradictory nature such
interactions create.
3.6 Research Positionality Statement
Care was taken in this study to ensure that our positionality would not potentially impact the
research. The first author is a white, cisgender, lesbian woman, and the second author is an IraqiAmerican, cisgender, heterosexual man. The first author served as the only point of contact with our
participants, while the second author helped with data analysis and reporting after the interviews
concluded. It should be noted that the first author has prior work experience creating short-form
video content for the LGBTQ+ community on YouTube and therefore was not entirely unknown
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:14 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
to some of the study’s participants. While this allowed for the establishment of trust with the
first author as she conducted the interviews, steps were taken to mitigate this potential for this
familiarity to color participants’ responses: the first author did not engage with any mention of her
previous creative work beyond acknowledgment of it. We continued to honor the trust we fostered
by maintaining continued relationships with our participants on TikTok and other social media
platforms, as well as by regularly checking in during the analysis and writing process through
a series of TikTok videos that the first author created. Our participants were also provided with
contact information for mental health services, per our IRB protocol.
4 RESULTS
Our results are structured as follows. Firstly, we describe our participants’ perceptions of how
TikTok works through their experience using the system. We then discuss how TikTok affords our
participants an opportunity to engage in identity work and identity affirmation work. Following
this, we describe the contradictions that emerge when using this platform, primarily through the
perceived transgressions and violations exhibited by the platform and the For You Page algorithm
which inhibit identity work and identity affirmation work. Finally, we discuss the strategies our
informants engage in and observe to push back against these transgressions and violations by the
platform.
4.1 User Perceptions of the Inner Workings of TikTok: The For You Algorithm
Our informants described their first interactions with TikTok as a platform following account
creation, as somewhat disjointed. Often, participants found the content shown on the For You Page
(FYP) to be wildly divergent from their personal content desires and contradictory to what they
were told their experience would be like by family members, friends, romantic partners, or internet
acquaintances who were established users of the platform. When an account is created TikTok
prompts, but does not require, new users to select several categorical interests (such as "outdoors"
or "makeup") in order to receive what TikTok presents as “personalized video recommendations”.
This offer for personalization implies an outcome that runs counter to our participants’ initial
experiences with the application. Several participants expressed initial confusion with the FYP
algorithm, more generally, how TikTok functions as a platform. Participant 16, a 21-year-old
indigenous two spirit lesbian, describes her initial encounter with the FYP as confusing:
“Yeah, it didn’t know what I wanted. . . so a lot of stuff I was being shown was like, very
Jake Paul, Logan Paul-esque. . .I was like, why is anybody on this? I was confused.”
Participant 10, a 20-year-old white non-binary queer person expressed a similar confusion regarding
the platform:
“I was...confused as to how it worked; I didn’t really understand like where things
were.”
The new user offers "help," according to Participant 13, a 35-year-old white demisexual and biromantic non-binary person, to the FYP algorithm to begin constructing a digital "them" to “figure
out what you want to watch" based on those initial categorical responses. Yet despite this help, our
participants’ initial experiences on TikTok were not aligned with the experiences of established
peers on the platform. This was particularly evident around issues of identity, and representation
of people like them (e.g., queer people, people of color, disabled people) in the content the FYP
delivered without the trace data used to further tailor content specifically for "them" [26].
Several of our participants noted that while they were indeed interested in these categories, this
was not what they were looking for on the app. Several participants joined based on funny TikTok
compilation videos they had seen on Facebook, Instagram or Twitter (P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P16,
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:15
P13, P15). Others stated they joined because they had friends, partners, or family on TikTok (P1,
P2, P9, P10, P11), or for professional reasons (P12, P14). Citing friends’ experiences on the app, or
the lack of the funny videos they had seen in compilation videos on other platforms, 10 out of our
16 participants turned to friends or family for assistance in improving the content of their FYP.
Participant 16 stopped using TikTok following her first encounter with the unfiltered FYP until
friends encouraged her to rejoin and provided her with suggestions of who to follow to receive the
content she wished to see. Participant 16 explains:
“And then my friends would start sending me funny ones. They were like, no, you just
need to follow these accounts. And then you’ll start seeing stuff that you like. [...] [S]o
I followed some similar accounts [to] what my friends were and then sure enough. . .I
was like, oh, this is really funny. Oh, shit, I’ve been on this damn app for two hours.”
Participant 16 combined the videos her friends shared with her and the following affordance to
further refine her FYP to the point where her initial distaste of TikTok shifted into comfortable and
continued use. As per Cheney-Lippold [26], Participant 16 was using these affordances to create
a digital "Participant 16." This practice was common amongst our participants. Participant 4, a
22-year-old white cisgender female lesbian, used her friends’ accounts to start to refine her FYP:
“I started following what my friends [were] following and then saw. . . different people
that they followed in the LGBT community and so that started to shape out my For
You Page.”
Three participants (P3, P8, P13) sought out popular YouTubers with whom they were already familiar
to follow on TikTok as a means of controlling the content they initially received. Participant 8, a
23-year-old mixed-race (South Asian and white) genderqueer gay person, explains:
“I started out by following a load of people that I knew from YouTube that always make
me laugh. I was like, Okay, if I follow them, then supposedly I’ll get recommended stuff
that is to my sense of humor.”
Participant 11 and Participant 4 both discussed how the TikTok users their friends recommended
were creators that identified as, or were friendly to, LGBTQ+ people. Participant 8’s YouTubers, in
their words, were also LGBTQ+ content creators. After following these accounts, P4, P8 and P11’s For
You Pages started to shift toward showing more LGBTQ+ content. This led to an emergent perception
within our participants that the FYP algorithm must be "trained" in order to provide desired content.
Put another way, engaging with content helped our participants construct "themselves" out of trace
data via the FYP. Participants expressed deep and confident understandings of how to shift and
alter their FYP based on engagement with various affordances on TikTok itself, such as following
specific accounts, liking videos, and sending them to friends and family.
4.1.1 Using Affordances to construct "you" for the For You Page. Our participants universally
expressed awareness that the FYP uses an algorithm to deliver content, and they expressed very
well-developed understandings as to how the FYP algorithm was meant to work and how to
manipulate it into providing desired content. These findings demonstrate that our participants
believe the FYP algorithm reacts to affordance engagement. Participant 8 describes the process:
“I. . .liked the things I found funny. . .I imagine that’s what a lot of people do. And then
it. . . gets whittled down more and more to that kind of content. . . something sort of
relate[d] to that [content] ends up being recommended to you.”
Engaging with content by liking it on TikTok was mentioned by all of our participants as a way
to influence the FYP algorithm over time and push it toward providing desired content. Use of
the "like" feature was universally understood by our participants as the primary way to shape the
content appearing on their FYP. Participant 2, a 25-year-old white cisgender lesbian, suggested
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:16 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
that the FYP had to be “trained” in order to provide desired content and that liking content was
one way to “get my For You Page where I wanted it to be.” Participant 13 explained that, by liking
content, the FYP algorithm could be “rigged” to display more refined results. Liking content provides
content-related engagement with particular categories of content on TikTok, which helps the FYP
algorithm to construct a data version of our participants. These findings suggest our participants’
believe that they have a clear understanding of how to continually refine the FYP algorithm by
liking content.
Some participants noted a additional detail about posts they were liking. Participant 14, a 26-
year-old white gay non-binary man, added a further caveat that the posts he liked had to include
hashtags as well:
“The way TikTok’s algorithm works from my understanding. . .if you like a certain
post with certain hashtags they start to show more of that content.”
Hashtags were another tool way that participants understood they could leverage to manipulate and
shape their FYP and the content they saw. Through direct engagement with hashtags, participants
indicated that they could manipulate and shift what they saw on their FYP.
Another way our participants discussed influencing the FYP algorithm was through sharing
content. Oftentimes our participants discussed sending videos to friends and loved ones in order to
communicate various affective sentiments, such as support, solidarity, or love. In doing so, however,
they also discussed their perceptions of how sharing content, and having content shared with them,
shaped their FYP algorithm. Participant 3, a 22-year-old white cisgender lesbian, described the
process as the following:
“[T]hey’re taking what I’m [...] sharing and sending to my friends and stuff and being
like oh well she likes this content let’s feed her more of it.”
This sentiment was echoed by Participant 9, a 22-year-old Latina cisgender lesbian:
“I found through like my own personal experience when people share TikToks with
you from like, sending it like on iMessage or something like that, and you click on that
link, and then it takes you to. . . your actual TikTok page and then takes you to that
video that adds whatever that video is into. . . the algorithm.”
11 out of our 16 participants discussed sharing videos with friends, and having friends share videos
back with them. These eleven discussed how these videos improved their FYP, helping to steer
them to the content they wanted. Our participants have clearly developed and well-thought out
understandings of how affordance use on TikTok, and how the social aspects of TikTok (e.g. sharing
content) shape their FYP algorithm. This process is continual, according to all of our participants,
and has to be maintained over time though continued engagement.
4.1.2 Continued Refinement and the building of a more sophisticated "You". Our Participants describe
gradual shifts in their FYP algorithm over time, mostly an evolution from more hobby-related
content (such as do-it-yourself videos or cosplay videos) to content created by LGBTQ+ people
who share those same interests. Participant 9 described the development of her FYP over time:
“[A] lot of the stuff that came up in the early part of me like using TikTok was history
related. . . Like, anime related, animal related. . . and then the inevitable scrolling of
there’s a queer person on my screen.”
Participant 2, a 25-year-old white cisgender lesbian described a slightly more in-depth refinement,
which she believed was complicated by her rural American mid-west location:
“When I first got it, I guess by my location, my For You Page was all messed up. There
was a lot conservative Trump Supporters. [...] There was some cool stuff in there –
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:17
because I enjoy rural farm humor. [I]t took me a while to get my For You Page to where
I wanted it to be. . . ”
This shift in our participant’s experiences on the FYP over time demonstrates how the FYP is
constructing categorical versions of them based on their engagement, as well as presenting content
which intersects across multiple potential aspects of their identities. For example, location was a
reoccurring theme for 9 of our participants (P1, P2, P3, P4, P9, P10, P11, P13, P15) around continued
refinement of the FYP. Participants described seeing content directly related to where they live,
which shifted if they traveled, as well as increasing amounts of content directly related to their
sexualities and gender identities once they first encountered and engaged LGBTQ+ content via
TikTok’s affordances on their FYP. The subsequent section discusses our participant’s encounters
with LGBTQ+ content on their For You Pages, as well as the space the FYP allows for identity work
and identity play in terms of both visual representation and creative avenues.
4.2 Identity Work and Affirmation: TikTok for You
As our participants further refined their FYP they described either deliberately seeking out LGBTQ+
content to follow (P4, P6, P8, P12, P15), or described seemingly serendipitous encounters with
LGBTQ+ content (P3, P9, P14) which then helped to further connect them to more LGBTQ+ content
creators. This, in turn, helped our participants learn more about and actively embrace aspects of
themselves which they had previously considered to be invisible. Identity work, the process by
which individuals make sense of or change one’s identity, can be a collaborative process [125] and
a creative process for play [72]. On TikTok, the collaborative and creative process around identity
work is mediated though the FYP algorithm. As we detail below, participants reported new feelings
of confidence in certain aspects of their identities by "finding people like them", and a sense of
community with other LGBTQ+ people they encountered on the app as manifest through their
individual creativity and expression.
4.2.1 Finding People Like Me. Our Informants described how TikTok has created a space where
they can see parts of themselves that are often invisible in other spaces. For example, Participant
13 discussed how TikTok helped them to reconcile their role as a non-binary mother:
“Before TikTok was just like, you’re a mom. And you’re non-binary. How do you
resolve the two? One of them is very like...a binary thing and like what I’ve figured out
myself and I started to try and teach others is that a parent is a title and a role that you
choose for yourself and has nothing to do with your gender. And once I figured that
out, it help[ed] a lot. It resolved a lot of the stress in my head of being like, why am I
okay with being a mom, but not okay with like being feminine? I don’t know. And I
figured it out.”
Seeing visual representations of people who are similar to you is useful to identity work. It can lead
to a more explicit realization of one’s self-concept [43, 72]. Seeing one’s self in media allows more
space for deliberation and self-evaluation compared to other depictions of one’s own self-concept.
Our informants also discussed how TikTok provides a space that individuals can turn to for
identity support and validation. Participant 9 commented on TikTok’s ability to create access to a
supportive community:
"[I]t’s given so much more like accessibility. . . Those environments and those communities that people are able to now actively participate with them without trying to
find discussion boards or forum boards. . . even with the discourse and you know, the
growing pains like the queer community has on TikTok, it’s a great place for you to
find a community that you’re a part of."
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:18 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
Being a part of a community that is supportive and welcoming is also demonstrated through the
LGBTQ+ community’s transformative content creation around specific audio clips. Participant 15,
a 27-year-old white cisgender queer woman, described an early experience she had on the app with
a trending audio clip:
“[O]ne of the biggest trends that I saw. . . was the “this girl straight this girl’s not” . . .
[W]atching the genuine reactions of support and like, people can’t – you can’t fake
hearing something for the first time and your reaction is like, just pure love. Yeah, it
was just really cool to see that. . . I would just like scroll that down for forever and I
will just look at all the videos of people coming out to their family and liking them.”
Coming out, to close family members, can be a traumatic experience for some LGBTQ+ people, and
often they turn to digital infrastructures for trauma recovery [43]. Seeing repeated representation
of successful coming out stories is both affirming of LGBTQ+ identity and provides individuals with
chances to see other aspects of their identity, which they may only just be realizing or struggling
to accept about themselves. Seeing one’s self, and being able to reflect on the various identity
performances of people who identify similarly to our informants was collectively recognized by
our participants as an important aspect their of experiences on TikTok.
Other Participants discussed how being on TikTok, and being continually exposed to the identity
performances of others, allowed them to relax into and validate their LGBTQ+ identities. The
combination of validation and repeated exposure leads to pride in who one is, argues Participant 5,
a 19-year-old mixed (Black/white) race nonbinary bisexual person, describing their FYP:
“[P]eople who fit into my algorithm have – they’re very – they’re prideful for their
identities. Of LGBTQ+ identity. Definitely of trans identities, I know that fits into that,
but I just want to point that out. Of Black identities. People are prideful of who they
are – and I enjoy those kinds of videos.”
Our informants described repeated exposure to positive and visible representations of their own
identities was as ‘validating’ and ‘feeling seen.’ . Our participants repeatedly expressed being
grateful for the LGBTQ+ content the FYP algorithm delivered them. Specifically, in these cases,
their algorithmic identities aligned with their internalized self-concept, and several participants
(P5, P12, P13, and P15) directly tied TikTok use to increases in their confidence, their identities, and
their ability to be their authentic selves both on and off of TikTok.
4.2.2 Creativity as Identity Work. Creativity and expression are forms of identity work [43, 72].
People enact different identities through playful videos on TikTok; participating in video challenges
(e.g. outfit changes for various situations or characters) or by using trending sounds specifically
related to LGBTQ+ identity (e.g. femme lesbians using a sound featuring a techno beat and the
repeated phrase: "No One Knows I’m a Lesbian" to promote femme visibility). This process of
creating visible representation through performance helps to normalize and make visible different
identities. Over half of our participants (P5, P6, P9, P11, P12, P13, P14, P15, and P16) discussed
making videos for various other identity intersections, hobbies or interest-related subjects. Several
of our participants, however, discussed making LGBTQ+ content specifically for the LGBTQ+ community around LGBTQ+ visibility, both in terms of representing themselves, but also representing
statements of solidarity and support. Participant 16 discussed how creating content related to her
own identity, through its performance, was important as it would allow others to see themselves in
her.
“So I think anybody. . . that put some. . .material out there for people to look at and go,
I’m not alone. There’s a group people that are similar to me. . . they had such a diverse
cast. . . that had different gender expressions, different ethnicities, different sexual
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:19
orientations. I think it’s so important when people with the ability to put something
like that out that is different for everybody to look at. TikTok is interesting [in] how
there are so many little sub-communities on it.”
Creative content, and creating content for the community, helps others to find their place within
the numerous sub-communities that exist within the LGBTQ+ community. To this end, Participant
12 discussed how she created a video with a statement of solidarity and support following an
encounter in a grocery store with a younger teenager who complimented her rainbow watchband:
“I put up a video. . . I was in the grocery store and it was really packed. . . This young
girl that looked like about 13. . . She had a cute little haircut was sticking very close to
her mom. . . and she kind of like came up and like waited for her mom to walk away a
little bit. . . And she leaned in, like she was gonna grab something off the shelf and she
went, “I really like your watch band” and ran away. And I was like, baby girl.”
Participant 12’s video of her expression of solidarity and support was a creative venue to express her
own identity as a bisexual woman, as well as validation for this young person she’d encountered.
Other participants discussed making educational videos for their LGBTQ+ followers on how to
"get their content to go." Participant 13’s professional knowledge of algorithms led them to create a
series of videos for their followers on how to create further visibility for their own content:
“[A] lot of people will ask me like. . . how do you keep keeping your videos to go?
And like, I can get my videos on average to do better than some like accounts with
50 thousand followers. And it’s because of that inside knowledge of knowing how
algorithms spin things up and down. . .I made it for them. . . For sanity sake, we’re just
going to turn this into a video like series that y’all can use for your own information.”
Participant 13 used knowledge gained outside of the LGBTQ+ community to create a series of
videos around the functionality of the FYP algorithm, helping to educate their followers on how to
get their own creative content to become more visible. This series of videos is both an act of identity
work, as a non-binary person has created them, but the series also serves as means by which
more members of the community can further their own, visible, identity work though enhanced
knowledge of the algorithmic system which governs the FYP.
4.3 Transgressions and Violations: TikTok For "You"
Despite the positive attitudes our informants expressed toward the space TikTok afforded them
to engage in identity work, many also identified problems they felt with the space. As we will
elaborate, these perceived transgressions and violations of TikTok and the FYP algorithm are seen
through our participants’ discomfort at TikTok’s “figuring out” their LGBTQ+ identity, the ways in
which the For You Page is perceived to present only certain kinds of queer identities, and the ways
our participants perceived the injection of unwanted content onto their For You Page as violating.
Lack of explicit user control over the TikTok’s FYP delivers has led our participants to develop
strategies for “correcting” the FYP when they are presented with content they do not like, or when
they are silenced by content moderation actions that TikTok has taken.
4.3.1 Being Figured Out and Being Seen. In many conversations, our informants discussed their
experiences on TikTok as though they were “being seen.” Participants generally considered this
to be a good thing, as it afforded a space for identity work and provided our participants with an
audience for their creative outputs. In being seen, however, our informants also questioned how,
exactly, TikTok was figuring them out and delivering content via the FYP that was so explicitly
tailored to their content interests. Many of our participants (P1, P2, P3, P4, P9, P10, P12, P13, P15),
considered this to be a transgression, not necessarily a bad aspect of TikTok, but not an inherently
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:20 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
good one, either. Participant 12 commented on how eerily similar the experiences people on her
FYP were describing were to her own life:
“[T]he first few times that happened, it freaked me the fuck out. I was like, wait a
minute. I actually tried to figure out if I knew that person, or if we like went to the
same college, or lived in the same area because like, how the fuck did you know that?”
Participant 12 later related her feelings of uncanny back to a lack of awareness of queer experiences
that she later came to realize were somewhat universal. Participant 7, an 18-year-old white nonbinary lesbian, reiterated the feeling of discomfort with how their FYP constantly knows what
content they wanted to see:
“TikTok. . . just continually knows what content you want and gives it to you. And
you’re like, that’s a little scary. But also, I really like. . . seeing all this content and not
having to search it out. . . It’s nice, but it’s a little scary."
Discomfort with the TikTok’s FYP algorithm’s ability to deliver content based on who our participants were and what they wanted to see was a common sentiment for many of our participants
(P1, P2, P3, P4, P9, P10, P12, P13, P15).
Despite feelings of discomfort with being seen as LGBTQ+ by TikTok and being placed into what
Participant 13 called “pools” (algorithmic identity categories) for LGBTQ+ individuals by the FYP
algorithm, our participants expressed a general level of resignation toward the ways TikTok was
using their personal data to construct algorithmic identities. Participant 11, a 21-year-old white
cisgender lesbian, described her feelings of resignation with her FYP being completely different
than her former partner’s. TikTok had “put a pin” on her in a way that was noticeably different
than her partner’s when they shared videos with each other:
“I think there’s a part of me that’s been instilled from previous generations that like
bucks against that, like, oh, you can’t use my content to make decisions about what
I’m going to see. But then at the same time, I’d much rather if I’m going to look at the
For You Page, I’d much rather [it] be tailored to what I’m interested in than not. That’s
the whole point.”
This sentiment was echoed by others (P1, P2, P3, P4, P9, P10, P12, P13, P15), all of whom mentioned
that TikTok’s identification of their gender or sexuality, where they lived, or aspects about themselves they did not publicize on TikTok (e.g. Participant 13’s being a parent), did not sit well with
them. Through engagement with the FYP algorithm, the discomfort our participants expressed
exemplifies how you and the digital "you" may not be the same in algorithmic systems [26]. Yet
this uncomfortable feeling was something our participants expressed acceptance of in exchange for
the space TikTok’s FYP afforded them to do their identity work and enjoy a feeling of community
with alike strangers.
4.3.2 Constructing Normative Queer Identity: Silencing Identities That Don’t Fit "The Norm". As
Dym and colleagues [43] previously noted, normative social and cultural representations of self
can shape identity and identity performance which can, in turn, force individuals to perform and
enforce particular performances of identity within social spaces as well as prohibit individuals from
acting against hegemonic societal identity norms. Our participants expressed concern that specific
normative intersections of LGBTQ+ identity are becoming more visible and thus more normalized
through the FYP algorithm. While, this concern was generally considered a transgression by many
of our participants, for others these norms became a violation, where the FYP algorithm was
perceived to be violating aspects of their real life identities; that is, the algorithm’s decisions had
progressed from something which could be tolerated to something more violating and invalidating
of their identities.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:21
Eight out of our 16 participants (P1, P2, P5, P6, P9, P11, P13, P16) discussed how their interactions
with the FYP were making them feel like certain aspects of themselves were marginal and not
visible. For example, Participant 1 discussed a common problem of conflation she saw on TikTok:
“For me, being a femme, and being a switch/top femme, that was always really annoying
the conflation between femme/bottom [and] stud/top. I’ve actually seen maybe three
TikToks that have been about femme tops being like ‘this isn’t how it is, look at me,
here I am, I’m a real person I’m not just a femme/bottom.’ But again, it’s very minimal
and I do not think it’s reaching the broader community.”
Participant 1’s observations that people like her are not visible and their content not reaching
broader audiences is an example of a violation, where her identity as a femme/top lesbian is
perceived to be actively minimized by TikTok’s FYP algorithm.
This was particularly true for our participants of color. Participant 6, a 21-year-old Black cisgender
bisexual woman discussed how her FYP delivered content mostly by white LGBTQ+ people:
“Sadly, there’s a lot of creators of color or LGBTQ creators that are not really featured
even though there’s so many – the majority of [my] feed is white people. . . which there
is nothing wrong with that obviously. . . Like yeah there’s so many others using the
app; you guys need some Black people up here.”
Participant 6’s experiences with the FYP algorithm made her feel as though TikTok was not
prioritizing creators of color and LGBTQ+ people. We characterized this too as a violation as there
is no recourse for such feelings. As outlined in Section 4.1, our participants generally perceived that
they have some control over their FYP, such as the ability to manipulate the FYP to deliver desired
content. This lack of ability to discover alike others and content connected to their specific identity
intersections made our participants feel silenced, and that the FYP algorithm’s digital construction
of them was seeing only selective parts of them.
Moreover, our participants also noted TikTok’s FYP algorithm seemed to be enforcing stereotypical presentations of LGBTQ+ identity, as well as playing into harmful societal norms around
body size, ability, and sexuality. Participant 2 noted that the content on her FYP presented her with
content of people like "her" who were nothing like her.
Honestly before I met [partner], I acted like a douche because I thought that’s what
girls are attracted to because of Tumblr and because of TikTok. [Butches] kinda act all
big and bad and kinda douchey [...] that’s not who I am...[...] for those popular videos,
it’s always the same thing.
TikTok’s continual presentation of specific identity intersections, as Participant 1, Participant 2,
Participant 5 and Participant 6 all note, made our participants feel as though their identities are
not as worthy of being seen by others within the community they imagine themselves a part of
on TikTok. The over-reliance on stereotypes also felt like a violation to our participants, as it was
silencing who they are and replacing their identities with a stereotype.
Further noted in our interviews was the belief that particular parts of participants’ identities are
being silenced through moderated activity. Participants commented on various silencing actions,
starting with the over-reliance on stereotypes discussed above before moving on to other forms of
silencing, such as censorship or content removal, what which they perceived as ‘shadow banning’
– where content is prevented from achieving more than a certain number of views—or through
malicious actions from other members of the community. Participant 16 discussed how one of her
videos was removed:
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:22 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
“I had a video taken down where. . . I went from one outfit to another, and I guess
somebody reported it. I’m not sure; it didn’t tell me exactly what part of the guideline
it violated. . . they don’t tell you what part it violates.”
Participant 15 told a story of a non-binary user that she follows, whose account had not only had
content removed, but had been banned entirely from TikTok:
“They are very funny, and they have been. . . shut down by TikTok. . . it was their fourth
account because they keep making content that TikTok does not like and that pushes
the boundaries a little bit on their community guidelines.”
Many of our participants (P1, P2, P3, P5, P6, P8, P11, P15 and P16) commented on their own
experiences or observations around the perception that TikTok was censoring or actively removing
content from people in the LGBTQ+ community. We characterize content removal as a violation as
it was silences voices that would not otherwise be heard.
Along with content removal, our participants also discussed how members of the TikTok community will sometimes maliciously report LGBTQ+ content as a means of silencing users. Participant
3 discussed how sometimes she sees LGBTQ+ people on TikTok’s live-streaming service be actively
silenced:
“Like not necessarily sensitive but like if somebody’s asking a question like ‘is it okay
to be gay’ and. . . they’re telling their coming-out story and then all of a sudden they get
banned on live. . . somebody in the community that’s watching that live going ‘That’s
not appropriate you should not be talking about that’ and then they report them?”
Although a few of our participants (P1, P3, P13) discussed TikTok’s live feature, actions taken by
humans to remove and silence queer voices was more broadly discussed by all of our participants.
Reporting content as violating TikTok’s community guidelines in order to get it removed is an
example of how the larger TikTok community actively silences queer voices for community support,
such as Participant 3’s story, but also prevents community policing more broadly around undesirable
behaviors within the community as observed by other participants (P1, P13, P16). These silencing
actions are perceived as violations by our participants against the LGBTQ+ community on TikTok,
as they are actively silence LGBTQ+ users by preventing or removing their voices from the broader
community discourse.
4.3.3 Resistance to Silencing. Despite these reports of silencing, our participants discussed their
ways of resisting and pushing back against the forces they perceived to be silencing their actions.
When Participant 16’s video was taken down, she reported that she “just re-uploaded it and it
wasn’t taken back down.” Reposting content is an example of resilience, a refusal to be silenced
by TikTok. Simply being able to repost content makes the violation of having it removed in the
first place seem less impactful, more like transgressions than true violations. However, there is also
a sense of confusion with removed content also led our participants to observe other behaviors.
Participant 5 discussed their encounters with and awareness of TikTok’s content removal decisions,
which emerged by watching videos the creators posted that recapped what had happened. They
explain:
“Sometimes I’ll have seen the video and then they say that, but I think that’s rare. Or,
sometimes, they do a recap on what the video was about. Or just put the video back up
and say TikTok took this down I’m putting this back up.”
Recapping content or reposting it to draw attention to the fact that the content was removed are
both examples of resistance of the dominance of TikTok’s system. These forms of resistance also
highlight participants’ observations that the community guidelines are unevenly enforced. These
ways of pushing back against the perceived transgressions and violations of TikTok’s FYP enforcing
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:23
normative queer identity though making aspects of themselves feel invisible and through silencing
them through content moderation and the removal of content.
4.3.4 Unwanted Interjections of Content. Our participants also discussed how sometimes content
will appear in their FYP algorithm which they do not wish to see, expressing various ideas about
why this content appeared. More specifically, they tended to express distrust of TikTok in these
negative encounters. Participant 6 explained that she would often encounter Katelyn Bennett,
a conservative activist on her FYP. At first, these videos would appear on her feed with people
dueting Bennett, that is, posting her video along side a video of themselves reacting to the content
in the first video.
“Okay I don’t know she’s a social experiment or something but. . . she’s basically been
parading around recently saying how abortion is bad and women shouldn’t vote. . .
Mostly I get videos making fun of her but I have gotten one of her videos – like actually
her.”
This unwanted encounter with a conservative activist’s content is an example of a perceived
violation by TikTok’s For You Algorithm, where the algorithm provided content which was not
only destabilizing for Participant 6, but also put her at risk of seeing content from a person whose
beliefs could directly invalidate her identity not only as an LGBTQ+ person, but as a Black person
as well. Participant 16 described a similar violation by the FYP:
“Something I’m struggling a lot with so there’s a huge pagan witch community on
TikTok. I’m not a practitioner myself, at all, but there’s a huge common theme of
appropriation of native cultures on there.”
As a Native American, Participant 16 was presented with content by the FYP which overlapped
with content she enjoyed (such as videos of indigenous practices) but was not what she wanted to
see. Participant 16’s way of countering this unwanted interjection of content which she considered
to be appropriative of her culture was to create a short video:
“And [I] made couple quick little videos like hey, don’t smudge; like hey, this is Palo
Santo or white sage, they’re endangered. It’s a closed practice. And the backlash is, at
times a little scary.”
Creating is considered a way of speaking things into being [72]. The harassment Participant 16
received as a result of her video was both violating and destabalizing for her. TikTok users called
her by racial slurs and confronted her with white supremacist attitudes, all because she tried to
resist the unwanted content on her FYP by explaining why the content was problematic.
Other participants (P7, P11, P12, P13) described their strategies of pushing back as being more
affordance-based. Participant 12 described a recent conversation she observed on TikTok around
the presence of more heteronormative content that was appearing on many of LGBTQ+ people’s
For You Pages:
“every other person that I follow was like did you just start getting a bunch of straight
shit in your FYP. Where did that come from? Why are there straight boys like with
their shirts off humping stuff on my feed? [. . . ] A very quick way to fix that which I
tried to comment on. . . literally go to the LGBTQ plus hashtag. . . just smash like on
about 30 posts and it immediately fixed itself.”
Active correction of the FYP algorithm through deliberately excessive use of the ‘like’ affordance,
as well as engagement with LGBTQ+ specific hashtags is a practice of resistance against the
enforcement of more heteronormative content being injected into Participant 12’s FYP algorithm.
Participant 7 describes using TikTok’s ‘not interested’ affordance to remove content from her feed:
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:24 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
“And so usually if it’s. . . something I don’t like and I don’t like experiencing or watching.
I say I’m not interested, then it doesn’t show me anything else that’s like that little
niche, like genre of anything, which is nice.”
Our participants describe actions they have taken to deliberately shift the FYP algorithm when
it presents them with content they do not wish to see. By using affordances, TikTok users once
again demonstrate their beliefs about how FYP content is delivered and how to manipulate this
process. What is more, our participants understand TikTok’s transgressive or violating injections
of content to be actions entirely out of their control, rather than choices informed by previous
actions our participants had taken. Their use of affordances to ‘correct’ their For You Pages shows
how selective the application of the imaginary of the FYP is to our participants [23].
5 DISCUSSION
As algorithms continue to become deeply embedded in the systems that mediate our routine
engagements with the world, it becomes increasingly important to understand people’s everyday
experiences with algorithmic systems. Our study illustrates the growing need for continued analytic and scholarly attention to people’s experiences with algorithmic systems, especially when
considering how these systems might be suppressing and oppressing the identities of people whose
identities are already marginalized.
Our study contributes a deep understanding of people’s everyday experiences with algorithmic systems and the relationship of these systems to identity work, highlighting the inherent
contradictions that emerge when identities are categorically assigned by and through algorithms.
In returning to Chenney-Lippold [26], TikTok’s FYP algorithm was at once For You, in that the
datafied representations were adhering to people’s internalized self-concept, whereas in other cases
it was For “You”, relegating other intersections of people’s identities to the margins.
To build upon our findings, and prior to concluding, we discuss the implications of algorithmic
systems, developing the concept of Algorithmic Exclusion. We then describe the self-organized
practices people develop in response to algorithmic exclusion as a kind of resilience whereby people
are pushing back against the heteronormative structures introduced or reinforced by algorithmic
systems. Finally, we conclude with a brief discussion of our member checking strategy using
short-form videos to solicit feedback and community discussing on TikTok.
5.1 Algorithmic Exclusion
With so much focus on the concept of inclusion in research into underrepresented and marginalized
groups, exclusion is often presented as its foil. However, efforts at inclusion can often come with
exclusionary effects [63]. For example, urban renewal projects can lead to increases in property
values in minority neighborhoods, which, in turn, leads to gentrification and the loss of that
neighborhood space for minority communities. Moreover, exclusion is a systemic practice across
multiple levels of society which has disparate impacts on the most marginalized individuals in
society [76]. For our work, we define exclusion as the mechanism through which the harms of
societal power are enacted on one or more marginalized groups across space and time. Online,
exclusionary practice is often connected to normative conflicts which are replicated, reinforced,
or exacerbated by the sociotechnical system wherein the exclusionary interaction takes place
[133]. Following our observations on TikTok, we propose an additional layer to this mechanism in
algorithmic exclusion, which we define as the ways in which algorithms construct and reconstruct
exclusionary structures within a bounded sociotechnical system, or more broadly across societal
structures.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:25
One of the ways this power is enforced is through societal norms [65]. Donna Haraway, in
developing the concept of the informatics of domination, articulates how Western traditions, such
as patriarchy and colonialism, have enabled the development of problematic taxonomies, or binary
demarcations, that are re-enforced through language and information. These traditions create
power differentials in society, such as man/woman, normal/abnormal, heterosexual/homosexual,
and white/Black [65]. In this view, the informatics of domination is used as a means of questioning
what is considered normative and non-normative in society, as well as how and these hegemonic
norms influence how people think about themselves and conceive of their self-concept. For example,
LGBTQ+ people may have non-normative gender expression or identify as bisexual, making
acceptance of their gender or sexual identity challenging. This can, in turn, challenges the sense of
order and continuity in one’s routine presentation of self.
Our participants’ observations as reported in our results section indicate that TikTok’s FYP
algorithm categorically constructs and shapes the kinds of identity that are visible through it’s
content delivery system and prioritization of certain kinds of identity routines. Our ontological
security comes from the salience of our routines around who we are[52]. When people do not see
their identities represented, their identity routines are made unstable, which can, in turn lead to
insecurity and anxiety about their self-identity [117]. The exclusionary structures perpetuated by
algorithms create a sense of ontological insecurity, as people are only seeing parts of themselves
represented while other parts of their identities are being excluded. We saw this in the ways
our participants’ experiences of community and how they saw intersections of their identities
visually represented. In the sections that follow, we will explore two primary features of algorithmic
exclusion as related to community and identity.
5.1.1 Algorithms can define "your" community versus your community. There is a growing body of
work how people’s understandings of technological systems, such as algorithms, are in a constant
state of flux [35, 46, 47]. A consistent theme in our results is our participants’ discussion of the
presence of a "community" on TikTok for them and people like them. To frame this exploration,
we draw on the work of Benedict Anderson [5] who conceptualizes community as a mental state
relative to how connected people feel to others. Anderson studied nationalism among citizens who
are unlikely to interact with each other, but share a sense of unity and identity. He uses the term
“imagined community” to describe how people living in modern civilizations imagine a connection
to other citizens, despite the impossibility of interacting with everyone in their society [5].
In our study, participants imagine community with and feel connected to like-minded strangers
based on shared collective experiences [5, 57] that the FYP algorithm has shown to them. Some
users, in turn, create content for an imagined audience of people similar to themselves [82], trusting
the algorithm to deliver their content to people who wish to see it, and thus contributing to the
overall sense of community they share with these imagined others. These feelings of community are
brought to the fore in moments of uncanny, such as Participant 12’s growing comprehension of the
universal experiences of growing up LGBTQ+ and in moments of acceptance, such as Participant
3’s and 15’s engagement with multiple iterations of identity validating stories of coming out. Yet
when an algorithm is creating common ties between the data-derived version of a person and
other data-derived people like "them," this imagined community can also be exclusionary in how it
silences certain aspects of people’s identities. This is seen through Participant 16’s encounters with
the Pagan community’s appropriation of appropriating her native culture, or with Participant 5 and
6’s awareness of the lack of fat or Black people on their For You Pages. On TikTok, "community"
is derived not from the actual collective experience and language of our participants, but rather
through the common ties between their datafied and categorical selves [26]. While finding "your"
community can produce feelings of validation and connection to alike others, it can also exclude by
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:26 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
silencing non-normative identities, and it can potentially cause harms to the "community" people
are connected to. This contradictory understanding is also seen in certain identity performances
that are made visible and invisible by algorithms within sociotechnical systems such as TikTok.
5.1.2 Algorithms define "your" self-concept vs. your self-concept. Algorithmic exclusion has severe
implications for how people define and present themselves. To better frame this articulation, we
first return to traditional conceptualizations of identity. Identity is often conceptualized in two
primary ways: identity as self-concept [51] and identity as performance [24, 54]. First, and as we
previously defined for the purposes of our work, identity as self-concept refers to how individuals
think about and view themselves socially or physically [51]. This relates to people’s internalized
view of themselves. Moreover, identity as a performance [24, 54] asserts that our identity also
matches elements of our social context. This perspective suggests that we develop our identities in
relation to extant rules and norms within the social settings in which we are embedded [17, 94].
This social interactionist view of identity underscores how much we as individuals are products of
our relations with others and with society as a whole.
Sociotechnical systems, primarily identity-based platforms like Facebook, are often designed
around a social interactionist view. Scholars have explored how people who use social media, for
example, are cognizant of their audiences [94]. From research on impression management in social
media, we know that people commonly present different information depending on the audience
[94, 123] and that they engage in a variety of self-presentation strategies [118]. This research
highlights how people’s identity performances are often mediated by their imagined audience on
any given platform [94]. For example, in the context of people coming into a new identity, such
as a transgender identity, the presence of family and friends can serve as both a source of stress
or support [61]. Yet, in other cases, studies have underscored how people are strategically using
multiple ICTs, or different affordances within any given platform, to engage in identity work and
perform identities while staying true to their self-concept [37, 43].
Our work builds on this previous work in a key way: we find that algorithms can play a significant
role in promoting and thus making visible certain kinds of identity performances while silencing
and thus excluding other identity performances. In this view, algorithmic systems can enforce
or recreate exclusionary structures when they promote and popularize certain performances at
the same time that they silence others. In other words, algorithms create exclusionary structures
around the myriad ways in which people may see themselves and want to articulate themselves to
others, especially when those parts of themselves are not visible or made invisible on a platform.
In sum, algorithmic platforms like TikTok may suggest that affordances they offer allow users to
create and participate in communities according to their own understandings of themselves, but in
actuality, the platforms have predetermined the types of performances that are allowed and thus
considered meaningful.
5.2 Resilience: Against Algorithmic Exclusion
Many of our participants described the practices they performed as an effort to push back against
feelings of algorithmic exclusion. We believe these practices are a kind of resilience. Resilience is
broadly defined as the ability of human and/or technical systems to bounce back from threat or
vulnerability [27]. Southwick and colleagues [126] note that there is no one definition of resilience
and that definitions of resilience must emerge from any given field site or dataset. Based on our
findings, we adopt a practice-based perspective on resilience, understanding it as the patterns of
action people develop in response to threat or vulnerability [93]. Here, Resilience is the reestablishment of routine and the recreation of ontological security following moments of algorithmic
exclusion.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
For You, or For "You"?: Everyday LGBTQ+ Encounters with TikTok 252:27
Previous work in CSCW and HCI has predominately used the concept of resilience to explore
how people overcome crisis events, such as natural disasters and war [58, 93]. Specifically, studies
have explored the relationship between disaster recovery and the uses of ICTs like social media
and online communities [58, 120]. To a lesser extent, scholars have started to explore how people
draw on technology to build resilience when disruption becomes routine. For example, Bryan
Semaan [117] explores how people improvise and creatively adapt to internal or exogenous threats
and vulnerabilities when disruption becomes an everyday experience, such as when people are
members of marginalized populations. Here, we shift our emphasis of resilience from how people
draw on ICTs to build resilience to the emergent practices people develop to push back against the
vulnerabilities associated with algorithmic exclusion.
In our study, we see resilience our participants’ practices of reposting, recapping, and recreating
removed accounts as a form of redundancy against deplatforming efforts; seeking to adjust their
FYP through affordances after unwanted content is interjected into the space; as well as in their
creative endeavors to speak out about the toxic community norms and behavior. These resilience
practices can be seen in the ways our participants respond to both perceived transgression and
perceived violations, which we explore in the next two sections.
5.2.1 Resilience Against Transgressions. Our participants discussed their resilience strategies
against unwanted interjections of content as more affordance based. TikTok provides individuals
the ability to say that they’re "not interested" in particular content, and some of our respondents,
participants 7, 10, and 11 in particular, used this feature to help them curate their feed. Participant 13
took this process a step further—they described using the not interested feature and then searching
for the person who created the unwanted content and blocking their account. Participants 6 and
12 discussed how they would engage with particular hashtags to get unwanted content go away.
These tactics are intuitively learned through interaction with the platform, and our participants
use them to push back against what they perceive to be disruption in their routines, in this case the
content they routinely see on their For You Pages.
Another tactic our participants described can be characterized as a transgression or as a violation,
depending on how our participants discussed it. Many of our participants described seeing content
removed by LGBTQ+ creators, or had their own content removed. The resilience strategies of
recreating removed accounts, reposting or recapping removed content were all either observed
or used by our participants. Participant 16, for instance, simply reposted a video of hers that was
taken down. That TikTok’s affordances allow users to create and recreate content so easily has a
minimizing effect on our participant’s perceptions of the transgression they may experience when
their content is removed. Being able to repost content and not face the same transgression of having
it taken down for violating vague community guidelines points to how TikTok’s infrastructure
almost encourages the recreation of removed content. It also points to malicious actions by TikTok
users to actively deplatform LGBTQ+ people who become visible on the platform. This presents risk
for LGBTQ+ people in their identity expression. And while it is easy enough to structure resilience
around recreation of content, there are few ways for users to respond to the deeper violations of
the algorithmic system which we discuss below.
5.2.2 Resilience Against Violations. Pushing back against perceived violations of TikTok was more
complicated for our participants, as it often came with further unpleasant engagement, or direct
invalidation of their identities. For example, participant 16’s experiences with harassment by the
pagan community, which focused on her Native American identity and followed her creation of
a video explaining why a practice she observed was appropriating her culture; or participant 3’s
experiences witnessing live streams being taken down because users were discussing if it was okay
to be gay. These invalidating acts can disrupt people’s routines and cause feelings of insecurity, but
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW3, Article 252. Publication date: December 2020.
252:28 Ellen Simpson & Bryan Semaan
they can also cause moments of resistance. Here resilience efforts promoted direct action, such
as Participant 16’s decision to make her rebuttal video in the first place, alongside the further
conversations she had with people after posting the video. Further, our participants (P1, P2, P11,
P12, and P15 in particular) discussed their frustrations with the normative identity presentations
they observed on TikTok, discussing how "this isn’t me" and "this isn’t how it is" when it came to
stereotypes of lesbian identity and presentation in particular. Yet these examples show how the
burden of representation falls the marginalized to educate the uneducated, correct the stereotype,
or to repost the content if it was taken down though community moderation or deplatforming
efforts by bad actors. Resilience in this case comes from trying to recreate feelings of ontological
security, be it through the rejection of hegemonic norms or through the creation of materials meant
to educate the community as to why certain behaviors are not acceptable within an exclusionary
algorithmic system.
5.3 Member Checking and Community Engagement Through Short Form Video
During our data analysis, we produced several short form videos on TikTok using popular sounds
and video style trends and we tagged them with various LGBTQ+ identity related hashtags (e.g.,
#lgbtq, #lesbian, #trans, etc.) to ensure they would be seen. While this method was fruitful for
communicating with members of the first author’s primary network on TikTok, and by extension
many of the participants of the study, these videos did not travel beyond this network, with few
getting more than 100 views. One participant (P13) used TikTok’s duet feature to showcase the
video that was created to discuss preliminary findings, and several others commented on videos
with their sentiments on the findings (P9, P13, along with 3 other non-participants). This strategy
for member checking is useful in certain circumstances, such as when the researcher and participant
are connected on the same platform. However, on TikTok, where content is randomly delivered by
the FYP algorithm, this form of member checking should be used to augment more traditional forms
of continued participant engagement, such as though email, and should not serve as the sole form
of community engagement following research. Distilling complicated academic concepts easily
digestible short form video, however, places fewer less demands on participants’ time and allows
them to voice (dis)agreement with the findings with considerably lower effort than traditional
means may allow. This is a space for future research and investigation within the CHI and CSCW
communities.
6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Our study presents a nuanced account of people’s everyday experiences with the algorithmic
system TikTok. We found that TikTok’s For You Page algorithm constructs contradictory identity
spaces that are both supportive and also exclusionary. There is still a lot of work left to be done.
For example, potential avenues for future work could examine content creators more closely, to
gain a better understanding of their resilience strategies in the face of disruption. This work may
address the content producing and identity routines of both human and technical actors on TikTok,
future work may also address the impact of stereotypes on LGBTQ+ visibility, such as the harms
that these stereotypes may cause, or the tendency of normative stereotypes to reduce the visibility
of non-normative gender identities and sexualities. Because sociotechnical systems are constructed
and reconstructed by the social and cultural norms of society, the continued study of people’s day
to day experiences with such systems provides fruitful insight into the functions of these systems,
as well as how they structure and restructure these societal norms.