Abstract
When presenting to a large group of students, either in an amphitheatre or through an online platform, effectively connecting to the audience – understanding how well the audience is following the presentation and taking appropriate actions promptly if they experience difficulties – is a serious challenge. Backchannel systems are sometimes deployed to address this issue by allowing audience to give feedback to the presenter without interrupting the current discourse. However, these systems are not designed to immediately aggregate and present the audience's feedback to the presenter in a meaningful way that is easy to quickly digest. To fill this gap, we have explored a proof-of-concept method for analysing the emotions and sentiments from the audience's feedback in real time and displaying to the presenter a morale graph showing a trend of the audience's overall reaction over time. This allows a presenter to effectively connected to their audience in real time, knowing whether their presentation is going well and what issues their audience may have in common at any specific moment. We have further implemented this method in an educational context, using a prototype backchannel system, known as ClasSense, for a lecturer to effectively connect to their students. This paper presents the evaluation of this system, which shows that lecturers accept and prefer the morale graph based user interface developed over other backchannel user interfaces that display all posts in chronological order. Students also positively expressed their agreement that the system not only makes their feedback an important part of the class but also increases their interactions with the lecturers. This is further confirmed with a Markov chain predicting the probability that students’ and lecturers’ survey results lead to their overall positive sentiment towards the tool. The flexibility of the ClasSense system suggests it may also be suitable in contexts other than education.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Backchannel system

Emotion

Sentiment

Morale

Visualisation

1. Introduction
The most common method for a lecturer and her/his students to interact during a lecture is verbal questioning and answering. On one hand, the lecturer asks students questions to keep them engaged in the content delivery. On the other hand, students may also ask the lecturer questions, which gives them an opportunity to express their ideas and evaluate their learning, and at the same time inform the lecturer of their understanding so that the lecturer can revise their instructional method if students are experiencing difficulties (Morgan and Saxton, 1991). Gagne et al., (1993) argue, students’ responses are important in learning because they provide a means for the lecturer to give informative feedback to students to help them know what to do next. Student feedback can help improve teaching and develop effective learning (Sadler, 2010).

Verbal interaction is not a viable method in a large amphitheatre with hundreds of students, as such an environment impedes students’ ability to interact with the lecturer (Anderson et al., 2003). In turn, this does not promote active learning as recommended in undergraduate education guides (Chickering and Gamson, 1987a). Often students’ opportunities to interact with the lecturer are determined by their seating arrangement (Roth et al., 1999) or academic achievements (Shachar and Sharan, 1994). In order to address these deficiencies, alternative methods were explored, in particular, the use of mobile devices as a means for students to interact with the lecturer (Wagner, 2005; White and Turner, 2011). The proliferation of smartphones among students made them an obvious tool for communications in an earlier pilot study1. They were used to run a backchannel system that provided a supplementary virtual space in which students could interact with the lecturer and other students by sharing their thoughts and engage in collaborative activities without interrupting the current discourse (Pohl et al., 2011).

While the backchannel systems investigated support student feedback, they do not provide aggregated feedback from the students as a group so that the lecturer can respond to the most important concerns of students share in common. Moreover, it found that current mobile backchannel systems are not capable of providing lecturers immediate and meaningful responses. And, as Fies and Marshall, (2006) report, lecturers found tracing the individual student's questions burdensome due to the scattered and sparse nature of posts.

The demonstrable usefulness of digital backchannel systems to supplement live demonstrations and online learning environments for real-time interaction between students and lecturer has been reported in the literature (Yardi, 2006; Cogdill et al., 2001; Pohl et al., 2011). However, less has been reported about the impact of students’ emotions and opinions in their feedback during a lecture in the teaching and learning processes (Russell, 2003). Thus, if a lecturer can detect and manage information about their students’ emotions and sentiments in a lecture environment, it may be possible for her/him to better understand and address students’ potential needs better (Ortigosa et al., 2014).

From the above, we identified a gap in the field of knowledge in the evaluation and demonstrability for a backchannel system to capture and aggregate students’ emotional state. Such a system could be used by lecturers to better understand their students affective state and emotional engagement with learning material, its form of delivery and comprehensibility. We designed and implemented such a system, known as ClasSense, that can analyse the emotions and sentiments from the students’ feedback in real-time and display to the lecturer a morale graph showing a trend of the students’ overall reaction over time (Jiranantanagorn & Shen, 2016; Jiranantanagorn et al., 2015).

This paper reports on the evaluation of this tool in a real-world setting. It provides insights to the effectiveness of the tool for both lecturers and students alike. The study was designed based on the frameworks of Davis’ (1989; 1993) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education and Brooke et al.’s (1996) System Usability Scale (SUS). A series of research questions and hypotheses are proposed for this study. They aim to address student and lecturer satisfaction with the ClasSense backchannel interface developed within Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) 7 principles framework, and tested against Davis’ (1989; 1993) TAM. The research questions are addressed by descriptive and inferential statistical analyses. The results suggest the ClasSense backchannel system developed confirms findings reported in the literature by others, as well as being a more useful tool for aggregating emotional sentiment in a manner that can be acted upon.

The rest of the paper is divided into related work in Section 2, a theoretical framework in Section 3, a methodological framework in Section 4, development of the ClasSense tool in Section 5, instruments and processes in Section 6, results and discussion in Sections 7 and 8, and conclusion in Section 9, respectively.

2. Related work
Mobile backchannel systems such as Hotseat (Aagard et al., 2010), Backstage (Pohl et al., 2011), ActiveClass (Ratto et al., 2003), and ClasCommons (Du et al., 2012) were investigated. They are applications that allow students to use their smartphones to ask questions, vote on questions from their peers, respond to polls set by the lecturer, and give feedback to the lecturer during a lecture session.

Common to these systems is the inability to aggregate and trace student responses in real time and display them to the lecturer in a meaningful way. The issue is amplified by teaching interactions in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) (Dabbagh et al., 2016), such as that used by courses like MIT's Open Course Ware (OCW) (Abelson, 2008), edX and Coursera. It results in difficulties for lecturers to understand learners’ feedback that might otherwise help them improve their courses. These asynchronous online course platforms have added monitoring and analysis tools, such as edX's Metrics Tab, Khan Academy's Coach monitoring system (Stephens-Martinez et al., 2014), Hew et al.’s, (2020) ML analysis of MOOC user sentiment, the hyper-linked Ligilo system (Kent et al., 2019), Kawahara et al.’s, (2016) ML prosodic and lexical featured backchannel analysis, Mayhew's (2019) Mentimeter, and Wu et al.’s, (2019) ZUVIO. However, these tools only provide a limited set of visualisations of basic quantitative information, such as the clickstream that consists of various “click” actions (e.g. “play”, “pause”, “seek”) learners use while watching course videos (Shi et al., 2015).

While interactions in asynchronous online courses, such as e-learning and MOOCs, are primarily through lecture videos and discussion forums, synchronous online courses usually provide real-time interactions through virtual classroom technologies. In such environments, students can work in collaboration on assignments or problems. Interaction between students can be mediated by technologies such as Zoom, Teams, Skype, Google hangouts, and sharing of materials via Google Docs and social media, such as Facebook (Oberhelman & Dunn, 2019; Swinnerton et al., 2018). In the field of networked learning, the emphasis is on the importance of both human and digitally-mediated interactions (De Laat and Ryberg 2018; de Laat & Dohn, 2019). Indeed, according to Wang et al., (2019, p621)

…social-interactive engagement helps to reduce the dropout ratio [in MOOCs]; thus, learners should be encouraged to engage in online activities, such as discussions, note sharing, commenting and Q&A, to alleviate the feelings of being disconnected and isolated.

The literature shows that learners may struggle in online learning environments because they lack motivation: the ability to regulate their own cognition, and behavior. Moreover, their approach to solving a problem may be determined by environmental events such as an instructor's feedback (see Wong et al., 2019; Kizilcec et al., 2017; Littlejohn et al., 2016). Hence, feedback mechanisms like the ClasSense backchannel system evaluated in this paper can be critical to student learning success.

In order to provide feedback to students, currently lecturers may have access to a whiteboard for writing or drawing on, and highlighting her/his presentation, survey tools to create polling questions for reviewing of lecture content, text/audio chat functions for students to communicate with their peers and the lecturer, and desktop/webcam video sharing tools for the lecturer to better support students (Hrastinski, 2008; Skylar, 2009). Yet, despite these tools, it is difficult for lecturers to be aware of, and be able to interact and communicate with, large groups of students in real time, such as in a public lecture environment (McBrien et al., 2009). Hence, tools such as the ClasSense backchannel system discussed in this paper, and its ability to aggregate sentiments and emotions, could be crucial in providing students with the real-time feedback and opportunity to engage in large group teaching environments otherwise not possible as students’ learning involves emotions and their emotions have an effect on their learning process and possibly performance.

Recognising and responding to students’ emotions may be essential for effective learning and teaching in a classroom. Moreover, a student's attitude towards their learning can thus be linked to their emotional engagement in the overall learning process (see Dewan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2015; Im & Kang, 2019; Lim & Park, 2019; Kort & Reilly, 2002). Affective engagement is about emotional attitude towards learning – interest and enjoyment in learning. Emotional engagement is thus about a student's positive and negative interactions with lecturers and peers (Dewan et al., 2019). Moreover, as Wang et al., (2015, p153-154) argue,

…cognitive-affective states, [such as]… boredom and anxiety could negatively influence learning…. Effective and meaningful learning can be achieved when students have positive cognitive as well as emotional states during learning.

Others also identify learning satisfaction is related to learning achievement (Im & Kang, 2019). Hence, the need to understand the role of emotions in instructional design and the use of learning technologies (Lim & Park, 2019).

3. Theoretical framework
There are two parts to this section:

1
an overview of the role of affective emotion in learning success; and,

2
how to detect sentiment and emotion in large or online learning environments.

Together they provided literature relevant to the ClasSense system and facilitated the reasoning to use an online microblog service to provide the raw material for analysis from the system.

3.1. The role of affective emotion in learning
Students’ learning involves emotions. The literature on the connections between emotion and learning highlights a number of human feelings related to learning context and academic achievement, such as anger (Pekrun et al., 2002), boredom (Artino, 2012), desire (Cleveland-Innes and Campbell, 2012), enjoyment (Artino, 2010), happiness (White, 2013), pride (Regan et al., 2012) and yearning (Cleveland-Innes and Campbell, 2012). According to Falout et al., (2009), learning how to control one's emotions makes students become better learners.

With the importance of controlling one's emotions in mind, over the past decade, interest in emotional aspects of learning in traditional classrooms has grown. Educational researchers have recognised emotion as an important factor to consider in learning and teaching (Pekrun and Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2012). Many studies find that learners’ emotions have an effect on motivation, self-regulation and academic achievement (Schutz and DeCuir, 2002), learners’ study mode (Artino, 2010) and instructional design (Glaser-Zikuda et al., 2005).

Most recently, Dewan et al., (2019) identified how both positive and negative interactions with lecturers and peers can affect a student's learning performance. Wang et al., (2015), showed how boredom and anxiety in particular can negatively impact learning in a computer-based environment. Im & Kang (2019) reported how learning satisfaction is related to learning achievement. And, Lim & Park (2019) suggested a student's emotional state be recognised and integrated into instructional design. In order to understand the importance of emotions in classroom teaching and learning, and how recognising and reacting to students’ emotions is crucial for effective learning and teaching in the classroom, Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education was used to construct a suitable questionnaire. This is discussed in more detail in Section 4.4.

3.2. Sentiment and emotion recognition in large or online learning environments
In a small classroom, a lecturer can detect a student's emotion from their facial expression or response to questions, such as ‘do you understand?’ or ‘do you follow?’, and thus change their teaching strategy according to what they detect in the facial expression – quizzical, acknowledgement, excitement (Kung-Keat and Ng, 2016). According to Visschedijk et al. (2013), such emotions can be recognised through the combination of posture, facial expression, and tone of voice. As discussed earlier, it is widely reported that there is a strong connection between emotions, physiological signs (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure) and learning behaviour (Dewan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2015; Im & Kang, 2019; Lim & Park, 2019; Kort & Reilly, 2002; Chen & Lee, 2011). However, detecting students’ emotions in a large classroom, or in online learning environments, is more difficult (Reyes et al., 2012).

While backchannel systems have been developed to gauge student responses to questions in large classrooms and for online teaching, few existing systems support emotion detection. Most backchannel systems rely on text communication. As such, it is difficult to detect emotional state. Students need to intentionally establish an online presence by engaging in peer discussions and other online activities. And, lecturers need a way to extract students’ emotions embedded in their communication texts (Hara, 2000).

Existing emotion-recognition methods in an educational context tend to use facial expression and text analysis. A common method for detecting emotion recognition from facial expression requires a video camera. Many devices that students use include a video device – laptops, tablets and mobile phones (Bartlett et al., 2006). Hwang and Yang (2009) employed image processing technologies to automatically recognise 4 students’ affective states, such as drowsiness, inattentiveness and confusion, from their facial images. They report that lecturers have successfully used this to manage their students’ behaviours in distance learning. However, the use of video imagery for detecting emotional state in large student audiences has been found to be impractical (Eveland et al., 2003; Hwang and Yang, 2009).

While video detection of emotional state is impractical when scaled, text analysis, of data from integrated social networking platforms, such as Twitter and Facebook in higher education (Maleko et al., 2013; Ortigosa et al., 2014), can provide a rich source of information for recognising emotions (Hancock et al., 2007). Simple text and emoticons can be used. Short texts used in social networking websites, known as ‘microblogs’, allow users to quickly send text updates, usually less than 140 characters, to share and exchange their ideas with a specific group, individual or public (Java et al., 2007; Kaplan and Haenlein, 2011). Emoticons are also widely used to express emotions in microblog posts (Wen and Wan, 2014; Xue et al., 2014). Hence, the study reported here focused on using microblogs for conveying students’ emotions for both large classrooms and online learning systems rather than a facial recognition method.

Pang and Lee (2008) have developed several techniques for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Their technique automatically detects and classifies emotions and opinions of individuals, organisations, products, services or events from a large amount of online text, especially microblogs, in various genres, including news headlines (Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2007), marketing (Chamlertwat et al., 2012), politics (Mullen and Malouf, 2006) and movie reviews (Pang and Lee, 2008). More recently, sentiment analysis has been applied in an educational context, including e-learning (Ortigosa et al., 2014; Rodriguez et al., 2012) and students’ learning diaries (Munezero et al., 2013). Tian et al. (2009) used pattern generation to find what Chinese words were associated with particular emotions in an e-learning system. Hence, it is clear, analysing text can help a lecturer understand more about her/his students, reduce emotional distance between lecturers and their students, and improve the quality of their teaching and learning experience. Table 1 lists 27 key case-studies in the literature that investigated sentiment analysis and emotion recognition of online text communications (feedback, microblogs, tweets) between peers and lecturers using either rule-based text mining or supervised machine learning, or both. Slightly more than half (15) mine text directly using a pre-formulated lexicon – a more popular method, as machine learning methods require more resources and extensive training.


Table 1. Key case study literature for the sentiment analysis and emotion recognition using either text-based lexicon ranking or machine-learning, or both.

Reference	Rule-based text mining	Supervised machine-learning
Airoldi et al., 2004	✓	
Arguel et al., 2019	✓	
Chamlertwat et al., 2012	✓	
Dave et al., 2003	✓	
Faridani et al., 2010	✓	
Gamon, 2004		✓
Hancock et al., 2007	✓	
Hew et al., 2020		✓
Krcadinac et al., 2013	✓	
Matsumoto et al., 2005		✓
Melville et al., 2009		✓
Munezero et al., 2013	✓	
Ortigosa et al., 2014	✓	✓
Pang et al., 2002		✓
Rahayu et al., 2010		✓
Reyes et al., 2012	✓	
Rodriguez et al., 2012	✓	
Strapparava & Mihalcea, 2007		✓
Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010		✓
Thelwall et al., 2010	✓	
Tian et al., 2009	✓	
Wen et al., 2014	✓	
Wen & Wan, 2014	✓	✓
Wiebe et al., 2005	✓	
Xue et al., 2014	✓	✓
Yu & Hatzivassiloglou, 2003		✓
Sentiment analysis or opinion mining can be extracted from the positive or negative opinions embedded in textual communications, such as movie or product reviews (Pang and Lee 2008). The emotional state of the person texting can be gleaned from the words they use when aligned with a lexicon of agreed terms relating to particular emotions. Hence, sentiment analysis should focus on understanding the rationale and reasoning behind opinions. According to Rahayu et al. (2010), these rationales and reasonings can be used to reveal sentiment towards the specific features of a technological product or system. Here, we are analysing the sentiment towards the ClasSense backchannel as a tool for communicating the affective emotional state of its users in large learning environments.

As using facial recognition to detect emotional state of users is impractical, textual analysis was chosen as the preferred method. For textual analysis of sentiment embedded in textual communications, there are broadly two approaches commonly used: machine-learning and lexicon-based approaches. Machine-learning methods often produce only a binary result (positive or negative) from batch processing using a supervised classifier with a large domain-specific set of labelled training set, so that the classifier can distinguish between positive and negative patterns of messages (Hew et al., 2020). Some of the most popular machine learning algorithms for sentiment analysis are Support Vector Machines (Pang et al., 2002; Dave et al., 2003; Gamon, 2004; Matsumoto et al., 2005; Airoldi et al., 2004), Naive Bayes (Wiebe et al., 1999, 2005; Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Melville et al., 2009), and Maximum Entropy-based Classifiers (Nigam et al., 1999; Pang et al., 2002). While there are clearly many libraries for machine-learning analysis of text-based data, there are fewer training sets to work from. Hence, in most instances it is necessary to begin one's own training set.

As an alternative to machine-learning analysis of text-based data, a lexicon-based approach consists of analysing words in the target text by using a predefined sentiment lexicon - a dictionary of words annotated with their semantic orientation (sentiment polarity and strength) - and executing a function to calculate a sentiment score for a piece of text based on the predefined scores in the lexicon. A clear advantage of this approach is that lexicons are more easily available and extensible than training sets and more robust when considering cross domain applications (Turney, 2002; Taboada et al., 2011). There are several lexicons available, such as LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) (Tausczik & Pennebaker 2010), SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010) and SentiStrength (Thelwall et al., 2010).

The ClasSense tool also uses the lexicon-based method as it has the ability to produce a sentiment score, which is the key to generating a morale graph, as opposed to machine learning based method that can only produce a binary outcome of either positive or negative. In this study, we have customised the SentiStrength lexicon to fit an educational context (discussed in more detail in Section 5.1).

4. Methodological framework
There are three core components to the methodological framework for this study:

1
Davis’ (1993) Technology Acceptance Model to evaluate student and lecturer sentiment towards the technology;

2
Brooke et al.’s (1996) System Usability Scale (SUS) standardised questionnaire.

3
Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles for evaluating the effectiveness of the ClasSense backchannel system.

Together they provided a methodological framework for the evaluation study of the ClasSense system. The following discusses how these components were used in the study.

4.1. Davis’ (1993) Technology Acceptance Model
From Gunasinghe et al.’s (2019) thorough review of the current theories and models for evaluating technology acceptance in the classroom, Davis’ (1993) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) emerged as the most robust. TAM is the most cited framework in the study of technology acceptance. It has a considerable amount of empirical support. Critics claim it is only suitable in authentic environments. Hence, as this study was conducted under live conditions it was deemed most suitable (see also Davis et al., 1989; Venkatesh & Davis, 2000;).

Davis’ (1993;1989) TAM model is based on the hypothesis that a user's attitude towards a given technology is a determinant of whether they will use it. Their attitude is a function of two beliefs: perceived ease of use; and, perceived usefulness (see Davis, 1993, for a definition of each). This means that a technology can be designed in a manner that directly influences its perceived usefulness and thus perceived ease of use. Hence, design features can have an indirect effect on the user's attitude towards a technology's use and its actual use behaviour due to its perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.

In order to measure a group of users’ perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of a technology, Davis (1993) used Fishbein & Ajzen's (1975) attitude measurement scales – a seven point rating scale anchored in pairs such as good to bad. Davis (1989) suggested perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness can be individuated using two-factor statistical analysis. He further hypothesised that, while perceived ease of use has a direct effect on perceived usefulness this is not so in the other direction.

We adapted Davis’ (1993) original TAM (see Fig. 1) to predict user acceptance of our ClasSense backchannel system. Later extensions to Davis’ original model, TAM2 (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000) & TAM3 (Venkatesh and Bala, 2008), were rejected as they tend to include the capture of social influences on perceived usefulness of technology. Instead, we hypothesise that the acceptance and usage of the ClasSense backchannel system depends on personal preference, not social influences (Artino, 2010). Usage of the ClasSense system among lecturers and students should only come from their own decision. Hence, the social influences presented in TAM2 & TAM3 were not considered in this research.

Fig 1
Download : Download high-res image (100KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Adapted from Davis’ (1993) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM).

4.2. Brooke et al.’s (1996) System Usability Scale (SUS)
To assess participants’ satisfaction with the perceived usability of systems after completing a set of test scenarios, standardised questionnaires can be developed with advantages such as economy, scientific generalisation, communication effectiveness (Sauro & Lewis, 2011). These measures have been found to be more reliable than non-standardised usability questionnaires (Hornbæk, 2006; Hornbæk & Law, 2007; Sauro and Lewis, 2009). Of the many standardised usability questionnaires, such as the Questionnaire for User Interaction Satisfaction (QUIS) (Chin et al., 1988), Software Usability Measurement Inventory (SUMI) (McSweeney, 1992; Kirakowski & Corbett, 2006), Post-Study System Usability 4.2, and Design and development of measurement instruments 61 Questionnaire (PSSUQ) (Lewis, 1992), Brooke et al.’s (1996) System Usability Scale (SUS) was chosen. SUS was used as it has many attributes that make it a good choice for general usability testing, such as technology agnostic, quick and easy to use, ability to provide a single score on a scale that is easy to understand for general people, and being non-proprietary (Bango et al., 2008; Zviran et al., 2006). In this study we have adapted the original SUS to measure and compare usability of the ClasSense backchannel system to that of a conventional backchannel system.

4.3. Adapting Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles
In order to capture users’ sentiment towards the ClasSense system, Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education was adopted as a set of underlying rules for its operational functions. Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) principles are based on decades of research on undergraduate education and intended as a guideline for faculty members and students to improve teaching and learning. They have been widely accepted in the design and evaluation of many technology-enhanced learning environments (Junco et al., 2011; Koeckeritz et al., 2002; McCabe and Meuter, 2011; Suen, 2005). Their principles are intended as guidelines for lecturers and students to improve teaching and learning (Chickering & Gamson, 1987b; 1999). Each of the principles has been applied to a specific feature of the ClasSense backchannel system. In this way, we can be assured that sentiment towards the backchannel system itself is based on sound pedagogical principles. Thus, analysis of the usability of the system is more about how it supports the users’ experience with the learning environment enhanced by the tool than ability or preference for the tool's functionality alone. In other words, we are analysing the effectiveness of the tool to support an improved learning experience by allowing users to express their emotions, not normally possible in large or online learning environments. According to Bangert (2004), this is an important feature of Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) learner-centered instructional practices and constructivist teaching practices.

For Bangert (2004), active learning engages students in authentic learning that requires them to incorporate real experiences with pre-existing knowledge and thus create new cognitive schema (Hacker & Niederhauser, 2000). Clearly communicated authentic learning experience facilitates the insights necessary for real-world problem solving (Magnani, Nersessian, & Thagard, 1999; Vye, Schwartz, Bransford, Zech, & CTGVT, 1998). The constructivist notion of cooperation between students supports the notion that social interaction enhances learning (Svinicki, 1999). Moreover, deep learning is more likely to occur when students can communicate with their peers (Millis & Cottrell, 1998). In this way, learners take responsibility for their own learning (Jonassen et al., 2003). Prompt feedback from their lecturers also encourages self-efficacy and confidence (Bandura, 1986). A student's self-efficacy increases when they receive frequent feedback (Schunk, 1983). This leads to higher engagement overall, especially where they self-evaluate (Pajares, 2002). And finally, self-efficacy is crucial for maintaining time on task necessary for academic achievement (Lent, Brown, & Larkin, 1984; Pinitrich & DeGroot, 1990).

The following elaborates on how the Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) seven principles influenced the design of the ClasSense backchannel system for this study.

According to Principle 1: Encourages contacts between students and faculty, we designed a morale-graph-based user interface (Jiranantanagorn and Shen, 2016) to help lecturers understand the trend in students’ sentiments and emotions during a lecture. This lets the lecturers know what students are thinking of and respond to students’ feedback accordingly. This user interface allows the lecturer to navigate a large number of posts effectively (discussed in more detail in Section 5.3).

According to Principle 2: Develops reciprocity and cooperation among students, the ClasSense backchannel system is designed with a peer-rating feature. This allows students to view, comment on, and vote on posts made by their peers by using the “thumbs up” or “thumbs down” icon. The peer-rating feature helps students collaborate, share ideas, and respond to each other's ideas. This collaboration can then lead to a deeper level of understanding for all students.

According to Principle 3: Uses active learning techniques, we have integrated a microblogging feature into the ClasSense backchannel system to promote active learning. Students can use microblogs to exchange their thoughts, express their opinions and emotions and share lecture content with their peers and the lecturer. This means, they have more opportunities to reflect on the lecture content by reading, writing and discussing what they are learning.

According to Principle 4: Gives prompt feedback, the ClasSense backchannel system helps lecturers respond to students’ queries and problems in real-time. Using the morale-graph-based user interface, in both a traditional or online lecture, and during or after a lecture, it provides more opportunities for students to ask questions and review feedback.

According to Principle 5: Emphasises time on task, the ClasSense backchannel system is designed to allow lecturers to see students’ feedback while they are teaching. This means, lecturers can adjust their teaching in time without waiting until the end of semester to get the students’ feedback. Moreover, students can ask questions through the ClasSense backchannel system when they have something to ask instead of waiting to the end of a lecture session.

According to Principle 6: Communicates high expectations, a lecturer can refer to the morale graph before communicating her/his expectations with the class. For example, if a lecturer sees many negative posts, the lecturer may choose to pause her/his lecture, navigate the morale graph and posts to see what students are thinking in order to communicate her/his expectations with them appropriately.

According to Principle 7: Respects diverse talents and ways of learning, we integrated an anonymous posting feature in the ClasSense student application to allow students to post without disclosing their real name or email. This feature encourages students from different cultural backgrounds or shy students to ask anything they want to know without being afraid of losing face or being ridiculed.

5. Development of the ClasSense backchannel system
This section outlines how the ClasSense tool, developed by Jiranantanagorn et al. (2015), was used in this study. There are two main parts to the further development of the ClasSense backchannel system: developing a sentiment analysis protocol and an interface for visualising and interacting with the results.

In order to capture affective engagement in a class setting, Jiranantanagorn et al.’s (2015) ClasSense backchannel system was used to assist the lecturer's ability to monitor student sentiment towards their teaching. It featured the following attributes – the ability to:

1
help a lecturer capture, process and respond to the large amount of students’ posts effectively;

2
get an overall picture of students’ learning as well as their emotions and sentiments, and;

3
trace back a summary of incidents that happened during the lecture in order to improve the lecturer's delivery and understanding of the students’ comprehension level from their responses.

The ClasSense backchannel system allowed students to express their emotions and analysed the sentiments of their posts in real-time so that the lecturer can monitor the morale of the student population and respond to the most important concerns students have in common. The scarcity of literature on this topic suggests this is the first work that incorporates both emotion and sentiment analysis into a backchannel system for the purpose of giving the lecturer more insight to students’ feedback of their emotions and sentiments, and the ability to study the impact of students’ morale on learning and teaching in a large learning environment in real-time.

5.1. Using a Customised SentiStrength Lexicon for ClasSense
As discussed in Section 3.2, after evaluation of several lexicon-based methods, SentiStrength was chosen and integrated into the ClasSense backchannel system. SentiStrength was chosen because it calculates a numeric score rather than just a binary result, which is essential for the morale-graph-based interface, it is open source, and has been widely used by other researchers (Thelwall et al., 2010).

The SentiStrength lexicon is intended for general-purpose sentiment strength detection. However, there may be occasional or specific words that are frequently used to express sentiment in different domains. These words must be identified and reassessed to improve the accuracy of sentiment strength prediction in that particular context, for example, the teaching and learning domain for which ClasSense was designed. Hence, the lexicon adaptation method was used to revise words’ sentiment scores and add new words to the original SentiStrength lexicon (Thelwall, 2013). There were four main steps in customising the SentiStrength lexicon using the lexicon adaptation method:

1
collecting the data;

2
labelling data by human experts;

3
checking SentiStrength classification of each text against a human code; and,

4
adjusting the top 50 domain-specific terms in the lexicon.

The participants from the main study were used to customise the SentiStrength lexicon (discussed in more detail in Section 5.2).

5.2. Sentiment visualisation
Using a customised version of SentiStrength's lexicon-based sentiment detection package allowed the ClasSense tool to be used in a specific context. In this case, it was an education setting. In order to provide real-time performance evaluation for a presenter to promptly process an audiences’ feedback with little cognitive effort, some visualisation tools were also developed. A ‘morale-graph-based’ user interface was developed to help make sense of the captured sentiment and emotion data by visualising the results. This assisted in the analysis and understanding of the lexicon-based sentiment results.

Various tools are available for visualising the analysis of Twitter posts, blogs, customer reviews and other social network posts. The data is converted to a format that users can explore and validate. The following tools were investigated for the development of ClasSense:

•
Opinion Space uses an interactive map of varying size dots to allow users to visualise and navigate a range of online comments on many topics (Faridani et al., 2010).

•
Vox Civitas (Diakopoulos et al., 2010) and TwitInfo (Marcus et al., 2011) support exploration of selected events through an interactive timeline chart that summarises the events over time from a large collection of tweets, together with the sample tweets, sentiments and locations.

•
Conference Monitor helps academic conference organisers monitor and analyse conversations on a backchannel system through a timeline chart that is associated with popular hashtags and tweets (Sopan et al., 2012).

•
ALAS-KA uses a line chart together with annotations of relevant events to display the variations of affective states of learners in the Khan Academy (khanacademy.org).

•
Synesketch (Krcadinac et al., 2013), is an open source software library for emotion recognition and visualisation with a Moodle Learning Management System to allow lecturers to view emotions expressed by students during their online discussions within a dedicated Moodle discussion forum or chatroom (Krcadinac et al., 2012).

•
Affective Tutor was developed to help instructors determine students’ feelings about the lecture's pace in real-time (Hickey and Tarimo, 2014), but it only allows students to express 3 pre-defined emotions: Engaged, Bored and Confused.

The features, strengths and weaknesses of each of these existing systems were accounted for in the design of the ClasSense Backchannel system described here. Where ClasSense improved upon and extended these tools was in its ability to analyse and visualise students’ affective and cognitive feedback in large traditional and online classes providing real-time feedback.

The aggregated results of the real-time analysis of the customised SentiStrength Lexicon were visualised by ClasSense's morale-graph-based user interface. As the core purpose of this study was to help improve teaching and learning, sentiment towards the interface by its users is the subject of the evaluation study reported here. It reports on the evaluation of the use of text to analyse and visualise students’ affective and cognitive feedback provided by the ClasSense tool and its ability to support improved teaching and learning.

6. Investigative processes and instruments
6.1. Research questions
In order to evaluate the ClasSense backchannel system, we propose to address 4 research questions which raise a further 3 hypotheses. They are framed such that they test how effective the ClasSense is from both student and lecturer perspectives. They were based on our methodological framework consisting of the Seven Principles, SUS and TAM.

The first research question RQ1 measures the overall student satisfaction with the ClasSense backchannel system in the implementation of each of Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles.

RQ1. What are the levels of student satisfaction toward the integration of ClasSense backchannel system in an online learning system?

Secondly, in research question RQ2, to predict the students’ adoption of the ClasSense backchannel system in an online learning system, as TAM outlines, students’ perceived usefulness is tested. This is based on their perception of degrees of improvement in online learning experiences while they were using the ClasSense backchannel system against a general baseline backchannel system; and, perceived ease of use, which is a perception of how easy it is to use the ClasSense backchannel system with an online learning system.

RQ2. How does students’ perceived usefulness and ease of use affect adoption and satisfaction in using the ClasSense backchannel system as an online learning system?

To address the second research question RQ2, three alternative hypotheses are proposed where the corresponding null hypotheses simply state that there is no effect on the dependent variable. The rationales of hypotheses are based on a diagram of Davis’ (1993) TAM (see Fig. 1). It is contextualised on the acceptance of the ClasSense backchannel system.

H1: Perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use will positively influence students’ attitude towards use of the ClasSense backchannel system in an online learning system.

H2: Perceived usefulness and attitude toward using will positively influence students’ behavioural intention to use the ClasSense backchannel system in an online learning system.

In addition, we further hypothesised that the more students perceive usefulness and ease of use toward the ClasSense backchannel system features, such as giving feedback and expressing their emotions to lecturers in online learning system, the more satisfaction and chances for adopting the ClasSense backchannel system in the future. H3 is proposed to test the findings from the literature (Arbaugh, 2002; Arbaugh and Duray, 2002; Pituch and Lee, 2006).

H3: Perceived ease of use and usefulness of the ClasSense backchannel system will positively influence satisfaction of the ClasSense backchannel system.

The next two research questions focus on evaluating lecturer's experience. RQ3 aims to measure how much lecturers were satisfied with the ClasSense backchannel system compared to a general backchannel system.

RQ3. What are the levels of lecturer satisfaction toward the usability of the ClasSense backchannel system compared to a general backchannel system?

The fourth research question measures the level of lecturers’ perceived usefulness and ease of use with the ClasSense backchannel system.

RQ4. What are the levels of lecturers’ perceived usefulness and ease of use for the ClasSense backchannel system?

6.2. Participants
Thirty five (n=35) students studying a variety of degrees at Flinders University (Australia) were recruited from an advertisement posted for research participation on university billboards and emails. This number of participating students is normally considered a large class setting (Weaver & Qi, 2005). It was chosen as we were confident that we could have access to all these participants for the duration of the study. It also meets Cronbach's (1951) minimum sample size of at least 30 participants for a simple t-test significance. Seven (n=7) lecturers from the School of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics, Flinders University (Australia) were also recruited by invitation email with approval from the Dean of School. Although it could be argued this does not meet Cronbach's (1951) significance measure, the level of expertise of the participants provides confidence in the results.

The student respondents were almost equally divided by gender. The majority of the respondents were between the ages of 25 or older (n=16, 45.7%). There were more respondents in the 20 to 24 group (n=14, 40.0%) than the 19 or younger group (n=5, 14.3%). The number of international and domestic students were about the same. Most students were enrolled full-time (n=33, 94.3%), while students enrolled part-time made up only 5.7% (n=2) of the respondents. The proportion of respondents who were undergraduate and graduate students were about the same. The majority of the undergraduate respondents were first year students.

6.3. Data collection
A corpus of 2143 posts on 9 entry level Information Technology topics was collected through the ClasSense backchannel system over a period of 4 months. An online portal was developed for students to provide their feedback of the ClasSense backchannel system while watching 9 pre-recorded lecture videos in their own time.

Before the data collected from the participants in this study could be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the ClasSense tool, the terms in the SentiStrength Lexicon needed to be optimised for the specific context of this study.

6.3.1. Using the data to customise the SentiStrength Lexicon
In order to optimise the SentiStrength Lexicon for the specific context of this study three linguistic experts were engaged to differentiate the sentiment terms from the corpus of posts from the participants. The linguistic experts performed manual sentiment analysis and coded each post with a positive strength of 1 to 5 or a negative strength of -1 to -5. The percent agreements between human coders was moderate, as shown in Table 2. Krisppendorff's inter-coder weighted alpha was applied to determine the inter-rater reliability of our human coders. This was used for its reliability for annotation in studies on emotion and opinion analysis involving more than 2 human coders (Villaneau and Lefeuvre, 2014). Krisppendorff's alpha reliability estimation for both positive and negative posts was close to the lowest conceivable limit (α ≥ .667) (Krippendorff, 2004), but is still acceptable (Lombard, Snyder-Duch et al., 2004).


Table 2. Percent agreement between human manual sentiment coders.

Positive	Negative
Coder 1 vs. 2	32.52%	59.59%
Coder 1 vs. 3	47.88%	60.15%
Coder 2 vs. 3	49.84%	66.12%
Mean	43.41%	61.95%
Krisppendorff's alpha	.6397	.6475
6.3.2. Adjustment of terms
Half of the corpus (1072 posts) was randomly selected after receiving human-classified posts. These human scores were used to compare with the SentiStrength scores. The SentiStrength termWeights command was used to record each disagreement term in the corpus and calculate the term's frequency as well as the average difference between its SentiStrength and human scores for both positive and negative sentiments. The results were used to guide the adjustment of terms in the SentiStrength lexicon, including adding new terms and modifying the scores of existing terms. As such, the top 50 sentimental terms were selected – excluding noun, stop words and non-English words – based on their frequency. For each term, the score was adjusted based on the calculated average difference.

6.3.3. Testing the customised lexicon
The other half of the corpus (1071 posts) was used to compare the classification results made by human experts by SentiStrength with the original lexicon and by SentiStrength with the customised lexicon. Performance measurement was based on Pearson's correlation, precision, recall, accuracy and F1-score. Pearson's correlation was used to measure the closeness of SentiStrength’s predicted sentiment to the actual sentiment declared by the human coders. The results reveal a significant positive relationship between the scores produced by the human coders and those produced by SentiStrength for both the original and the customised lexicon (p<.001).

The results further show that the customised lexicon achieves a 23.63% increase in correlation from 0.55 to 0.68 for positive sentiment and a 22.5% increase in correlation from 0.40 to 0.49 for negative sentiment. This confirms the significance of customising the lexicon. Furthermore, overall accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of SentiStrength was computed with the original (O) and the customised (C) lexicon for both positive and negative scores by using the Scikit-learn machine learning library (Pedregosa et al., 2011). The results are summarised in a multiclass classification matrix (see Tables 3 and 4).


Table 3. Overall accuracy.

Original Lexicon	Customised Lexicon
Positive Score	Negative Score	Positive Score	Negative Score
Overall Accuracy	0.43	0.57	0.53	0.59

Table 4. Classification metrics for positive scores.

Positive/Negative Score	Precision	Recall	F1-score
O	C	O	C	O	C
Positive/ Negative	Positive/ Negative	Positive/ Negative	Positive/ Negative	Positive/ Negative	Positive/ Negative
1/-1	0.68/0.64	0.74/0.67	0.83/0.96	0.81/0.95	0.75/0.77	0.78/0.79
2/-2	0.13/0.19	0.21/0.19	0.39/0.16	0.20/0.15	0.19/0.17	0.20/0.17
3/-3	0.15/0.25	0.32/0.37	0.09/0.02	0.53/0.11	0.11/0.03	0.40/0.16
4/-4	0.62/0.43	0.64/0.55	0.06/0.03	0.25/0.06	0.11/0.06	0.36/0.11
5/-5	0.00/0.00	0.06/0.00	0.00/0.00	0.04/0.00	0.00/0.00	0.05/0.00
Mean	0.48/0.48	0.56/0.53	0.43/0.57	0.53/0.59	0.39/0.48	0.52/0.51
As shown in Table 3, overall accuracy of SentiStrength with the customised lexicon was higher than that of SentiStrength with the original lexicon for both positive and negative sentiments. The precision, recall and F1-score results in Table 4 further confirm that SentiStrength with the customised lexicon outperformed SentiStrength with the original lexicon. This validates the customisation of the lexicon.

6.4. Real-time visualisation of the data
The ClasSense interface was developed to provide a feedback visual analysis of students’ affective state from their posts suitable for large traditional and online classes. It allowed for real-time performance evaluation for a presenter of an audiences’ feedback. It used the ‘morale-graph-based’ user interface (discussed in Section 5.2) to present analysis of the lexicon-based sentiment results.

In Fig. 2, each bubble represents the normalised morale score. The bubble size is proportional to the number of posts and ranks the associated posts based on criteria in order of a polarity of class morale score, number of likes, number of dislikes, number of replies, and recentness. A lecturer can choose to explore posts at a particular time, to see what issues are raised in the class. Fig. 3 shows how the ClasSense student application was designed to display the lecturer's response for each student's post in real-time. This feature can be used to inform students that their feedback had been acknowledged by the lecturer.

Fig 2
Download : Download high-res image (272KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. A morale graph for visualising students’ sentiment.

Fig 3
Download : Download high-res image (618KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The main screen of the ClasSense student application.

Figs. 5 and 6 show the ClasSense morale graph and the associated posts of a pilot test in an Information Technology lecture respectively (Jiranantanagorn et al., 2015). In this example, when the lecturer noticed a sharp morale drop at the six-minute mark of the lecture, they immediately clicked on the corresponding bubble (in red) to investigate what happened from the associated posts. From the posts that were ranked based on a negative polarity (maximum to minimum) as the morale score is negative, the lecturer discovered the most important issues students had, such as cards and examples did not work well, distraction and interruption in the class, etc. As a result, they decided to go through the examples again in the lecture but to write a response about the cards after the lecture.

This demonstrates the effectiveness of the interface to provide lecturers and students alike real-time feedback and analysis of sentiment. Moreover, as the feedback is available to all participants, its effectiveness is further demonstrated in the follow-on action of the lecturer, in response to what the aggregated sentiment suggests – a change in teaching method was needed (discussed in more detail in the discussion and conclusion sections).

6.5. Measurement instruments and Theoretical framework for system evaluation via user study
We used three measurements, with a 5-point Likert scale, to assess satisfaction and acceptance towards using the proposed visualisation and functions of the ClasSense backchannel system:

1
Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles were used as a framework to evaluate students’ satisfaction in using the ClasSense backchannel system. From this, we adapted 24 questions (see appendix) aligned with the Seven Principles regarding students’ perception on classroom response systems (see also DeBourgh, 2008; Graham et al., 2007; Laxman, 2011; MacGeorge et al., 2008; Pelton et al., 2008; Porter and Tousman, 2010; So and Brush, 2008), and the Classroom Emotions Scale (CES) (Titsworth et al., 2010), to measure student's satisfaction with using the ClasSense backchannel systems in online classes;

2
Brooke et al.’s (1996) original System Usability Scale (SUS) was used as an instrument to compare lecturer satisfaction with using the ClasSense backchannel system and a more conventional backchannel system; and,

3
We used Davis’ (1993) TAM to predict the lecturers’ and students’ acceptance of the ClasSense backchannel system. We used adapted items from the TAM to predict student and lecturer acceptance of the ClasSense backchannel system.

6.6. Procedure for user study
The ClasSense backchannel system was trialled at Flinders University for 4 months. We tested its technological features, usability and user acceptance through an online learning portal. During the experiment period, participating students were asked to provide their feedback, such as asking questions and expressing emotions using emoticons, whilst they used the ClasSense backchannel system to watch 9 lecture videos on entry-level Information Technology topics in their own time2. At the same time, participating topic lecturers were asked to use the morale-graph-based user interface in the ClasSense backchannel system to respond to the students’ feedback to provide academic and affective support for the students.

At the end of the experiment period, the students were asked to complete two questionnaires regarding student satisfaction and acceptance after having watched all 9 lecture videos and seen the responses to their comments from the corresponding lectures. As a comparative study, the lecturers were asked to use both ClasSense and an alternative user interface, which is commonly found in general backchannel systems, to navigate and respond to the students’ posts. Once the lecturers finished with each interface, they were asked to answer the same SUS questions and the lecturer acceptance questionnaire. Data from the returned surveys was recorded and analysed using the Statistical Package for Social Science (SPSS) tool (Field, 2013). All these questionnaires can be publicly accessed from this website3.

Collected data was first processed by an internal consistency calculation using Cronbach's (1951) coefficient alpha for questionnaire reliability analyses. Then, research questions and associated hypotheses were proposed based on our methodological framework consisting of the Seven Principles, SUS and TAM. The proposed research questions and hypotheses were addressed and analysed by applying both descriptive and inferential statistics. Finally the Markov model was used to confirm findings from the regression analysis and provide probability pathways for what components of Davis’ (1993) Technology Acceptance Method (TAM) influenced their general sentiment towards the tool based on Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) seven principles.

7. Results
The results of reliability analysis are presented in Tables 5 and 6. Good reliability with Cronbach's (1951) Alpha values was found in both student and lecturer questionnaires. A high level, exceeding the threshold of 0.8, was found (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1978).


Table 5. Overall reliability of student questionnaires.

Questionnaire	Cronbach's Alpha	No. of Items
Student satisfaction questionnaire	.901	24
Student acceptance questionnaire	.921	12
Overall	.946	36

Table 6. Reliability of lecturer acceptance questionnaire

Factor	Cronbach's Alpha	No. of Items
Perceived Usefulness (PU)	.556	4
Perceived Ease of Use (PEU)	.203	4
Attitude Towards Using (ATU)	.702	3
Behavioural Intention to Use (BIU)	.931	3
Overall	.864	14
7.1. Student satisfaction and acceptance
To address the first research question RQ1, descriptive analyses of student questionnaire results was conducted, both on the satisfaction feedback in percentages on individual questions and the overall satisfaction levels of the 5-point Likert scale according to the Seven Principles. The descriptive statistics of student satisfaction with the ClasSense backchannel system in the implementation of each principles of the Seven Principles is summarised in Table 7. The following outlines in detail how each of the principles was met by the ClasSense backchannel system.


Table 7. Overall student satisfaction with the ClasSense backchannel system.

the Seven Principles	Mean	SD	Rank Order
Principle 7 (respects diversity)	4.17	0.67	1
Principle 1 (student - faculty contact)	4.02	0.54	2
Principle 2 (reciprocity and cooperation)	3.92	0.58	3
Principle 4 (prompt feedback)	3.90	0.78	4
Principle 3 (active learning techniques)	3.54	0.62	5
Principle 5 (emphasises time on task)	3.50	0.82	6
Principle 6 (expectations communicated)	3.47	0.70	7
Principle 1: Encourages contacts between students and faculty

Students perceived that the ClasSense backchannel system helped maintain interactions with the lecturer throughout their online learning experiences. The majority of students felt that the ClasSense backchannel system helped give feedback to lecturers (94.3%), increased their interaction with lecturers during online lessons (88.6%), helped them express their feelings to a lecturer (82.8%) and increased a level of confidence in asking questions (80%). Students noted, “I totally agree that using ClasSense backchannel system will increase my interaction and opinion in the online class”, “Good opportunity to interact with lecturer”, and “The ClasSense backchannel system is a very interesting and useful tool for both students and lecturers. It makes it easier to ask questions even when not confident or shy to talk”. These comments tend to support the results. However, less than half of students felt that the ClasSense backchannel system helped them get emotional support from a lecturer (45.7%). Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle 1 is 4.02/5, which is ranked 2nd highest among all principles.

Principle 2: Develops reciprocity and cooperation among students

Results from the questionnaire indicate that a high percentage of students perceived that the ClasSense backchannel system allowed them to be aware of other students’ opinions (85.7%) and attitudes (74.3%). Students also responded that the ClasSense backchannel system created more interaction with their peers (68.6%) and helped them know their performance in relation to their peers (54.2%). Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle 2 is 3.92/5, which is ranked 3rd highest among all principles.

Principle 3: Uses active learning techniques

Student responses suggest that the majority of students perceived that the ClasSense backchannel system helped them actively exchange ideas with their online classmates (68.6%), express true feelings through the ClasSense backchannel system (65.7%), develop new knowledge from their online classmates (62.9%), and have clearer thoughts than in a normal online learning system without the ClasSense backchannel system (51.4%). However, less than half of students felt that the ClasSense backchannel system helped them understand better (45.7%) or develop new skills from their online classmates (45.7%) during online class sessions. Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle 3 is 3.54/5, which is ranked in the bottom half among all principles.

Principle 4: Gives prompt feedback

Responses to the three items of principle 4 indicated that 80% of students felt more engaged while using the ClasSense backchannel system. 71.5% of students perceived that the ClasSense backchannel system helped lecturers responded to their concerns and feelings, and 60% of students felt that they got immediate feedback from lecturers in an online learning system. Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle 4 is 3.90/5, which is ranked in the middle among all principles.

Principle 5: Emphasises time on task

Results from questions pertaining to principle 5 suggest that 60% of students surveyed agreed that the ClasSense backchannel system helped them move at the right pace and maintain concentration in online classes (57.1%). Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle 5 is 3.5/5, which is ranked second last among all principles.

Principle 6: Communicates high expectations

Student responses indicate that only 31.4% of students felt that using ClasSense backchannel system helped them get a higher grade, and 57.1% of them felt more confident in online classes. Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle 6 is 3.47/5 (with a close score to Principle 5), which is ranked last among all principles.

Principle 7: Respects diverse talents and ways of learning

The majority of students agreed that the ClasSense backchannel system made their feedback an important part of online classes (80%), and allowed them to answer anonymously (77.2%). Overall, the mean student satisfaction score towards Principle is 4.17/5, which is ranked the highest among all principles.

In summary, the implementations of principle 7, 1 and 2 are the top three most satisfies functions of the ClasSense backchannel system. This result shows that the students liked the anonymous posting feature of the ClasSense backchannel system most, and they felt that using the ClasSense backchannel system gave them more opportunity to interact with their lecturer and classmates in an online learning system (see Table 7).

The second research question RQ2 was addressed by testing the associated research hypotheses, each with an inferential regression analysis on the allocated independent and response/dependent variables. The testing data is formed by responses from the student satisfaction and acceptance questionnaires. The inferential regression statistics are presented in Table 8.


Table 8. Multiple regression testing results of H1, H2 and H3.

Hypotheses	Dependent variables	Independent variables	β	R2	Sig.
H1	ATU	PU	.473	.496	.002*
PEU	.346	.020*
H2	BIU	ATU	.808	.683	.000*
PU	.028	.831
H3	Student Satisfaction	PEU	.375	.752	.002*
PU	.396	.002*
⁎
Standardised beta coefficient is significant at the .05 level (2-tailed).

From the table on the first hypothesis H1: ATU∼PU+PEU, the tested independent variables perceived usefulness (PU) and ease of use (EU) are statistically significant (p<0.05), which together with their beta values in the range of 0.3-0.5, indicates their moderate positive linear impact on the dependent variable attitude toward using the system (ATU). In addition, the R2 value of nearly 0.5 suggests a moderate effect of the independent variables as a whole on the dependent variable. Therefore, the alternative hypothesis H1 is accepted at a moderate level. Furthermore, the different beta values of PU and PEU essentially mean that students’ perception of the ClasSense backchannel system's usefulness for giving feedback and emotion expression in an online learning system encouraged them to use the ClasSense backchannel system more than the perception of how easy the ClasSense backchannel system was to use.

A strong relationship was found between attitude toward using the system (p=.000 and β = .808) and behavioural intention to use it (BIU), but there was no statistical significance between its perceived usefulness and behavioural intention to use it (p=.831>>0.05 and β = .028). As a result, H2 can only be partially supported in that the attitude toward using the system largely decides the behavioural intention to use it whereas the perceived usefulness doesn't have much effect.

For hypothesis H3: SS∼PEU+PU, interestingly either PEU or PU independently only has weak positive effect on student satisfaction (SS) as their beta values both are less than 0.4. However, when PEU and PU are combined together, the explanatory power is strong due to a high R2 value close to 0.8. Hence, the alternative hypothesis H1 is accepted at a strong level, which suggests that ensuring both PEU and PU is critical to the overall student satisfaction.

7.2. Lecturer satisfaction and acceptance
To address research questions RQ3 and RQ4, a descriptive analysis and paired samples t-test was conducted. The usability satisfaction of the ClasSense backchannel system was evaluated using a comparison between SUS scores of the ClasSense backchannel system and a general baseline backchannel system. The results from all participating lecturers are shown in Fig. 4.

Fig 4
Download : Download high-res image (241KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. A comparison of SUS scores between the General and ClasSense backchannel system.

In summary, 6 of 7 participating lecturers preferred using the ClasSense backchannel system over the more traditional backchannel system with a high mean of SUS scores at 86.07. This indicates excellent usability for the ClasSense backchannel system (Mean of SUS score >80 of 100 (Bangor et al., 2008)) (see Fig. 4). A paired-samples t-test was run to test for statistical significance of the ClasSense over the more traditional backchannel system. The results show that the ClasSense backchannel system (M = 86.07, SD = 6.10) had significantly higher SUS scores than the General backchannel system (M = 72.86, SD = 9.94), t(6) = -3.011, p = 0.024.

According to the lecturer acceptance questionnaire, the perceived usefulness score shows that, using the ClasSense backchannel system enabled lecturers to effectively manage a large amount of students’ feedback and know class morale from an online class. The lecturers’ perceived usefulness of the ClasSense backchannel system can be further categorised as four aspects – how useful the ClasSense backchannel system is to a lecturer in terms of (average Likert value):

1
reading a large amount of student feedback (4.3),

2
viewing the class morale graph (4.1),

3
viewing the most popular feedback (3), and

4
reviewing the history of feedback (4.1).

As shown in Table 9, the high average mean value (Mean = 3.89/5, SD = 0.90) of perceived usefulness of the ClasSense backchannel system suggests that lecturers were satisfied with the proposed functionalities of the ClasSense backchannel system and felt that the system was useful.


Table 9. Average mean values of TAM variables.

TAM variables	Mean	SD
Perceived Usefulness (PU)	3.89	0.90
Perceived Ease of Use (PEU)	4.23	0.74
Attitude Toward Using (ATU)	3.95	0.83
Behavioural Intention to Use (BIU)	3.62	0.72
The perceived ease of use score shows how lecturers perceive how easy it was for them to become skilful at using the ClasSense backchannel system. The perceived ease of use of the ClasSense backchannel system can be further categorised as four aspects, how easily (average Likert value):

1
a lecturer can learn to operate the ClasSense backchannel system (4.4);

2
a lecturer can get the ClasSense backchannel system to do what he or she wants it to do (3.7);

3
it is to be good at using the ClasSense backchannel system (4.3); and,

4
it is to use the ClasSense backchannel system overall (4.4).

Again, as shown in Table 9, the high average mean value (Mean = 4.23, SD = 0.74) of perceived ease of use of the ClasSense backchannel system indicates that the lecturers felt that the system was easy to use, reflecting on the above four categories.

Attitude to use has a high average mean value (Mean = 3.95, SD = 0.83), as shown in Table 9. This confirms that the lecturers had positive feelings about using the ClasSense backchannel system. The average mean value of lecturers’ behavioural intention to use (Mean = 3.62, SD = 0.72) indicates that the lecturers were willing to use the ClasSense backchannel system at a level above average.

7.3. Markov model confirmation of findings
The multiple regression analysis conducted to test the hypotheses proposed in Section 5 and reported in Section 6 suggest inter-correlational effects. They are here further tested using a Markov model in order to predict the likelihood of respondents’ survey results leading to their general sentiment towards using the tool in the future. The Markov model analysis not only confirmed our findings but also suggested some predicted future outcomes.

As the survey questionnaires were structured sequentially – from perceived usefulness through ease of use, attitude towards using and behavioural intention to use – the probability transitions between states can be analysed using a Markov chain.

Figs. 5 and 9 show the summarised transition paths and their probabilities for students and lecturers respectively. The start state, or initial probability distribution, was nominated as the mean score across all questionnaire responses for that field (PU, EOU, ATU, or BIU). The probability that a particular Likert scale value (between 1 and 5) would be followed by another was calculated based on the number of times a particular token occurred. As there were few instances of 1s or 2s, these were combined so only 4 tokens were possible (1&2, 3, 4, or 5). From this, the transition paths were generated.

Fig 5
Download : Download high-res image (128KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Markov diagram showing transition paths and probabilities of the four types of usability represented in the adapted TAM model from the student survey data.

In the case of the students’ sentiment toward usability of the ClasSense tool we find that BIU and ATU have the greatest influence on PU and EOU, whereas PU and EOU seem unconnected. This is consistent with the findings from the multiple regression analysis in Section 5. We can surmise from this that it is indicative of the tasks the students were asked to perform: reflecting on their own behaviour and attitude to the use of the tool in class. Hence, their responses to the questionnaire reflects also their expectations of its use and usefulness. We can predict that whether this results in future adoption of the tool in their learning practice would be similarly influenced by their attitude and behaviour towards the tool's usefulness to their learning experiences (see Fig. 5).

For:

E = {P, E, A, B}

q1 = q0p = (0.86, 0.83, 0.78, 0.75) 
 
= (0.78, 0.77, 0.78, 0.80)

In the case of the lecturers’ sentiment toward usability of the ClasSense tool we find that EOU and ATU is more influential on BIU than PU, whereas PU is influenced by ATU and BIU alone. This perhaps reflects the pragmatic approach the lecturers took towards the survey task. They were asked how and would they use this tool in their teaching practice. Similarly, this reflects their pragmatic approach to comparing ClasSense with a more conventional backchannel tool. From this, we can predict that whether it results in actual adoption of the tool in their teaching practice would be similarly influenced by their pragmaticism towards how useful this tool would be in their teaching practice (see Fig. 6).

Fig 6
Download : Download high-res image (130KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Markov diagram showing transition paths and probabilities of the four types of usability represented in the adapted TAM model from the lecturer survey data.

For:

E = {P, E, A, B}

q1 = q0p = (0.78, 0.84, 0.79, 0.72) 
 
 = (0.78, 0.77, 0.78, 0.80)

The similarities in sentiment characteristics between lecturer and student results in a high probability that they would actually adopt use of the ClasSense tool in future. In turn, this suggests more generally that the tool has significant potential use in the teaching and learning domain and would indeed support the activities it was designed to do.

8. Discussion of results
This study presents the evaluation of the ClasSense backchannel system by using a System Usability Scale (SUS), Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles, with university student and lecturer participants. There are three parts to the discussion section: theoretical contributions (correspondence with findings from the literature), managerial implications (practical applications) and limitations and future research.

8.1. Theoretical contributions
According to the literature (Dewan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2015; Im & Kang, 2019; Lim & Park, 2019; Kort & Reilly, 2002), student feedback is an important part of learning and can be used to increase interactions with the lecturer. Our study found that students using the ClasSense system had improved satisfaction levels. Moreover, it is the ClasSense backchannel that supported their engagement in class, consistent with expectations reported in the literature (see reviews by Yardi, 2006; Cogdill et al., 2001; Pohl et al., 2011; Russell, 2003; Ortigosa et al., 2014).

Although only the ATU appears to have had an influence on the BIU, if we consider that the introduction of the BIU replaces the relationship between PEU and PU as outlined in Davis’ (1983) original TAM model study, then this is still consistent with his findings (Davis et al., 1989; Venkatesh and Davis, 2000; Venkatesh and Bala, 2008). Indeed, this is further confirmed by the Markov probability modeling, which also shows a stronger relationship between ATU and BIU than between PEU and PU.

Baron et al.’s (2016) finding that a backchannel can be a distraction for students was also found in our study. In some instances the interface disrupted students’ concentration (discussed in more detail in Section 8.3). This is also consistent with Arguel et al.’s (2019, p62) finding that if students do not have a positive experience using a backchannel “…they will probably avoid using it, regardless of the quality of its pedagogical intent” (Corrin, Lockyer, & Bennett, 2010).

Most of the literature regarding the use of backchannels and sentiment analysis are focused on student outcomes. Hence, our findings from the lecturers’ responses to our survey are not easily compared with the literature findings. Nonetheless, Dewan et al. (2019) and Arguel et al.’s (2019) findings, that backchannel systems facilitate better engagement between students and lecturers, was also consistent with our findings (see also Fredrick & Blumenfeld, 2004).

8.2. Managerial implications
For the student evaluations, the first research question RQ1 was addressed by a descriptive analysis. Students expressed positive agreement that the ClasSense backchannel system made their feedback an important part of the class and increased their interactions with the lecturer. Student satisfaction level was high, with most students reporting positive feedback, such as: “I really liked the application”, “This web application is a good idea to get students paying more attention for their class”, “Overall this was an interesting experience and I enjoyed testing it out” and the “ClasSense students web application was a good tool.” As discussed, this was consistent with what is reported in the literature about a student's attitude towards their learning linked to their emotional engagement in the overall learning process. Moreover, it is the ClasSense backchannel that is responsible for making this link. The ability for ClasSense to aggregate the sentiment of students towards their studies in a large class in real-time appears to have supported their engagement in class.

From the second research question RQ2, hypotheses H1 and H2 were proposed. Hypothesis H1 was not rejected, with some students reporting that they want to use the application in future. For example, “Hopefully it will be used across all universities/schools”, “it is a nice tool that can be integrated in the future”, “it is a good idea to run this application with real teaching environment”, “ClasSense web application is easy to use”, and “the ClasSense student web is a very interesting and useful tool for both students and lecturers. It makes it easier to ask questions even when not confident or shy to talk. This program would really help students learn and therefore in turn give them confidence to do well in the topic. It is a very useful tool for student success”. However, hypothesis H2 was only partially supported. As discussed, only the ATU had an influence on the BIU, at odds with the Davis’ (1983) original TAM model. Nonetheless, for practical purposes, if the BIU is adopted as the new measure then hypothesis H3 is supported by Davis’ (1993) TAM after all. Student satisfaction is influenced by student perceived ease of use and behavioural intention to use the system, rather than perceived usefulness alone, which is consistent with the literature (Arbaugh, 2002; Arbaugh and Duray, 2002; Pituch and Lee, 2006).

Evaluation of the ClasSense lecturer application set out to investigate two research questions RQ3 and RQ4. Due to a very small number of participants, we report only the descriptive statistics. Overall, the lecturers were satisfied with the ClasSense backchannel system. Their satisfaction was expressed as being overall greater with ClasSense when compared to the general user interface of other backchannel systems. Their positive feedback included, “I would absolutely be thrilled to have such a tool at my disposal!”, “The ClasSense interface was much better. It is graphically presented and contained better information as well”, “it would be interesting to see it live and how that would work”. In addition, some of the lecturers requested modification to the user interface. For example, sorting posts on different criteria (e.g., lowest morale first and number of likes), displaying individual morale scores or variance and their responses on each post, buttons for going back to the top of page, buttons for going to the previous and next minute, and the ability to ‘like’ a post.

The lecturers accepted and preferred to see the morale graph in order to capture sentiment trend during the lecture, then browse through related posts at a particular minute to investigate in more detail. The average mean values of perceived usefulness, the perceived ease of use, the attitude toward using and the behavioural intention to use the system were between 3.62 (out of 5) and 4.23 (out of 5). This suggests the lecturers believed that using the ClasSense backchannel system was useful to their work and easy to use. They had positive feelings about using the ClasSense backchannel system, and an above average level of willingness to use the ClasSense backchannel system.

Collectively, these findings suggest the ClasSense backchannel system is not only a useful tool, it has practical application. Moreover, the perceived usefulness of this tool, behavioural intention to use, and attitude towards using it, all suggest it has real implications for improving learning outcomes in class, as indicated by the literature on supporting students’ affective emotions. For example, as Ortigosa et al. (2014) suggests, if lecturers are better at detecting and managing information about their students’ emotions and sentiments in a lecture environment, they are in a better position to understand and address their needs. And, as Dewan et al. (2019), Wang et al. (2015), Im and Kang (2019), Lim and Park (2019) and Kort and Reilly (2002) point out, recognising and responding to students’ emotions may be essential for effective learning and teaching in a classroom. Thus, a tool like ClasSense is essential for linking students’ attitude towards their learning to their emotional engagement in the overall learning process.

8.3. Limitations and future research
While clearly the ClasSense backchannel system was well received, by both students and lecturers alike, not all of its aspects were recorded as providing a positive experience. In response to question 4 of the student questionnaire, less than half (45.7%) of the student participants responded positively that they were receiving emotional support from the lecturer. This was despite them being able to express their emotions using the system, as reflected by the high overall mean satisfaction score towards Principle 1. Only slightly more than half (54.2%) felt it helped them know their performance in relation to their peers, and have clearer thoughts (51.4%). Less than half felt it helped them understand better (45.7%) or develop new skills from their peers. And only slightly more than half felt it helped them maintain concentration or feel confident in class (57.1%). Less than a third (31.4%) felt it helped them get a higher grade. Collectively, these findings suggest the ClasSense system, while effective in some respects – interaction, awareness and feedback –, cannot completely overcome the isolation some students experience in large or online educational settings.

Other concerns reported by students included: “students in the class should use this web in the right objective such as to ask questions and share opinions. Otherwise, it can interrupt other students’ concentration on lessons in the class”. “Using ClasSense was clunky and distracted from the lecture. This could be improved via some minor tweaks to the interface”. “I suggest that ClasSense is more suitable with a lab class or tutorial class than lecture class. In lecture class, students should concentrate on content from the lecturer. Listening and interacting with lectures in normal way should be good” and, “students might get distracted and stop paying attention to classes.”

Clearly the ClasSense backchannel system cannot support every aspect of a student's affective emotional state in their learning experiences. Whether refinements to the system and further evaluations will ameliorate some of these negative findings remains to be tested. Indeed, as Baron et al. (2016, p99) found, a backchannel system can be a distraction for students. Moreover, an aspect of the ClasSense backchannel system used here that was not investigated was how it was received by students in relation to different cultural backgrounds. For example, Chan et al. (2019) found that

…cultural differences in open learning and problem-solving learning approaches… between university students studying in Western countries and studying in Hong Kong…. Students in… Hong Kong are less likely than their Western counterparts to participate in class discussion (see also Bista, 2015; Wong, 2016).

While the ClasSense system supported many elements of Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) seven principles for better learning experiences, it would be interesting as future research study to construct a survey based on Kort and Reilly's (2002) learning cycle. This may provide a better understand of the role of ClasSense to support a more contiguous learning experience. This and the other limiting findings in our study, and that reported in the literature, provide impetus for further study and refinement of the ClasSense system.

9. Conclusion
The suite of tools used to support the ClasSense backchannel system have wide application. By customising SentiStrength's lexicon-based sentiment detection package, almost any context can be supported by ClasSense. In this proof-of-concept study, an educational context was evaluated. It shows how the ClasSense tool can help performance evaluation for a presenter to promptly process an audiences’ feedback with little cognitive effort. Similar evaluation studies in other contexts are also possible.

In this study we evaluated the use of the ClasSense backchannel system to provide real-time feedback on student sentiment during class time. It included a morale graph that afforded a quick overview allowing the lecturer to respond to sentiment state as it arose. Based on a review of existing backchannel systems, and in the educational context of this study, the design of the ClasSense tool followed Chickering and Gamson's (1987a) Seven Principles. The various types of student sentiment captured in the seven principles led to the proposal of a series of research questions and hypotheses. These were subsequently analysed in relation to Davis’ (1993) Technology Acceptance Model using Brooke et al.’s (1996) SUS scores. Based on the results of these analyses and comments from lecturers and students alike, we conclude that the ClasSense tool achieved the goal of capturing and displaying student sentiment in a manner that could be acted upon in real-time. This was further supported by the Markov model analysis that also suggest a high probability that, if deployed, the tool would be adopted by students and lecturers alike – the subject of a future study.

The significance of this study is its demonstration of effectiveness in a live in-lecture and online teaching and learning environment. However, the tool's features are not restricted to this format. The general applicability of the tool, as underpinned by the Seven Principles, lends itself to many other types of contexts. For example, it is not difficult to conceptualise this same tool being used to capture audience sentiment in a conference setting or other types of collaborative online environments. Similarly, the implications for its use in different environments is transferable – the ability to respond to the information provided by the tool to address issues as they arise. Thus, the tool can be used to improve delivery performance and confidence that the audience's expectations and interests are being met in many contexts. In order to test the ClasSense tool's potential flexibility, the next phase of this project will be to engage in its large scale longitudinal evaluation in multiple contexts. This will include a larger sample population and cross-discipline application in both live delivery and online contexts