Abstract— For decades, Moore’s Law has delivered the ability
to integrate an exponentially increasing number of devices in the
same silicon area at a roughly constant cost. This has enabled
tremendous levels of integration, where the capabilities of computer systems that previously occupied entire rooms can now fit
on a single integrated circuit.
In recent times, the steady drum beat of Moore’s Law has
started to slow down. Whereas device density historically doubled every 18-24 months, the rate of recent silicon process advancements has declined. While improvements in device scaling
continue, albeit at a reduced pace, the industry is simultaneously
observing increases in manufacturing costs.
In response, the industry is now seeing a trend toward reversing direction on the traditional march toward more integration.
Instead, multiple industry and academic groups are advocating
that systems on chips (SoCs) be “disintegrated” into multiple
smaller “chiplets.” This paper details the technology challenges
that motivated AMD to use chiplets, the technical solutions we
developed for our products, and how we expanded the use of
chiplets from individual processors to multiple product families.
Keywords: Chiplets, Moore’s Law, Processors, Modular, Industry
I. INTRODUCTION
Moore’s Law had set the pace for the semiconductor industry for decades with a reliable generation-upon-generation increase in transistor density and a corresponding reduction in
cost per transistor [18]. One direct consequence of Moore’s
Law was the steady miniaturization and integration of complex computer systems into fewer components, from roomsized computers in the first half of last century to today’s mobile and wearable devices.
In recent years, the pace of Moore’s Law has slowed.
While new silicon process nodes continue to be introduced,
the cadence has decreased compared to historical rates. However, the challenges for the semiconductor industry span
much more than having to wait a little longer for more transistors. Some of these challenges include rising manufacturing costs for upfront expenses like mask sets as well as cost
per chip, increased complexity of design rules in leadingedge nodes, and the architectural challenges of meeting the
relentless demand for more and more computational power.
We will discuss these trends and challenges in greater detail
in Section II, but it is the simultaneous combination of all
these challenges that compelled the reassessment of the traditional integration story.
Over the last several years, AMD has been writing a new
post-Moore’s Law story that revises the historical trend of integrating more functionality per silicon chip and instead is
disintegrating the traditional monolithic silicon chip into
multiple smaller “chiplets.” Section III explains the AMD
chiplet approach and in particular how it addresses the challenges of a post-Moore’s Law world.
While there has been a range of activities and research in
partitioning systems of chips (SoCs) into multiple silicon die
over the years [4][5][8][19][30], and the concept of multichip modules (MCMs) dates back even further
[7][22][26][31], AMD is taking the theory of chiplet-based
architectures and applying it to design real, high-volume,
commercially-successful products. In Section IV, we explain
how we started deploying the chiplet approach in the highperformance CPU server space. However, the post-Moore’s
Law challenges are not limited to the server market, and Sections V and VI discuss how coordinated chiplet designs enable significant reuse to effectively deliver solutions across a
range of markets. Section VII reflects on some of the key
learnings regarding what has made the chiplet approach such
a success for AMD.
II. CHIPLETS MOTIVATION
A. The Insatiable Demand for More Compute
The world’s computational demands have been increasing
exponentially over time. Figure 1 shows historical performance trends both at the component level [28] and the system
level (using the world’s fastest supercomputers as a representative example) [29]. The performance growth of the top
supercomputers has been increasing at a rate faster than
Moore’s Law, approximately doubling in peak floating-point
operations per second (FLOPS) every 1.2 years. With the
advent of the world’s first exascale supercomputers [13][15],
the global computing ecosystem’s desire for more computational power does not appear to be slowing down.
The recent scramble to understand and find effective mitigations for the SARS-CoV-2019 virus provides a very concrete and societally-relevant example of just how much more
could be accomplished if the world had more, and more powerful, computational resources on hand [1]. The thirst for This paper is part of the Industry Track of ISCA 2021’s program.

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00014
more compute is also clear in other areas such as seen with
the explosion of machine learning (ML) and the massive
computational demands that come with both the training of
and inferencing with the latest algorithms and models. The
number of parameters in the largest ML models over the past
couple of years from GPT-1 [23] to DeepSpeed [24] has
roughly been doubling every 0.2 years, and more recently the
Switch Transformer model has broken the trillion parameter
threshold [10]. Similarly, the amount of computational
power required to train leading-edge ML models appears to
be doubling approximately every 3.4 months, reflecting both
increases in the model sizes and computational changes in the
underlying algorithms [21]. We strongly believe that the
need for more compute will continue for the foreseeable future, but the computing industry faces several challenges that
we now discuss in more detail.
B. Moore’s Law is Breaking Down
The original formulation of Moore’s Law was not about
processor performance but rather an observation about device
density, and in particular that it was doubling approximately
every year [18]. Over the past few decades, the rate has settled to be closer to a doubling every 18-24 months. However,
for recent process nodes, the rate at which new technologies
are introduced has slowed down. Figure 2 shows AMD internal estimates for the approximate introduction dates of major process nodes over approximately the last fifteen years
[27]. From the 90nm node down to 22nm, the introduction
of new technologies followed a steady cadence of approximately one generation every two years. Starting with the
14nm node, we observed that the inter-node gap extended to
approximately three years, and from there to the next major
node the gap increased again to more than three years. The
exact timing on the availability of future nodes is not yet entirely known, but it is unlikely that the industry will return to
the predictable pace of yesterday’s Moore’s Law in a sustainable manner.
While not explicitly called out in Moore’s original paper
[11], an important economic consequence of Moore’s Law
was that each generation’s device density increase came at
roughly the same cost as the previous generation. Not only
does device density increase exponentially, but the cost-pertransistor similarly exhibited a corresponding exponential decrease. However, over the past decade and more, the cost to
manufacture an integrated chip has steadily been climbing,
with a sharp increase in the latest generations due to reasons
such as increased mask layers (e.g., for multiple patterning),
more challenging and complex manufacturing (e.g., advanced metallurgy, new materials), and more. Figure 3
shows the cost for a yielded 250mm2
 die over time, normalized to the 45nm process node (“yielded” die costs includes
the amortization of the expense for any defective chips) [28].
The 10nm process node in Figure 3 was omitted because
AMD transitioned from 14nm technology directly to 7nm.
So not only are processor manufacturers waiting longer for
each new process node, but they must also pay more when
the technology becomes available.
C. Bigger Chips Will Not Save Us
If the rate of introduction of new, denser silicon technologies is slowing down, one possible approach is to instead
build larger chips to achieve the desired higher overall device
counts. In fact, this approach has already been utilized in
some segments, as Figure 4 shows the die-size trends over
time for GPUs and server CPUs [27]. At the high end of the
market, the higher average selling prices of products can offset the higher manufacturing costs of larger chips. However,
the industry is now running up against the lithographic reticle
Figure 3. Normalized cost per chip versus technology node.
(a) (b)
Figure 1. (a) 2P server Specint®_rate2006 performance trend over time, (b)
world’s fastest supercomputers over time.
Figure 2. Process technology node introduction over time.

limit, which is a practical ceiling on how large silicon die can
be manufactured.
D. The Product Portfolio Multiplier
The above discussions regarding the challenges of leadingedge silicon technologies apply not only to a single chip design, but rather the impacts may be multiplied over a company’s broader portfolio of products. As an example, consider a server CPU lineup that consists of five products with
16, 24, 32, 48, and 64 cores. Each of these products could
represent a separate tapeout, which comes with their own
mask sets, yield and cost profiles, etc. Beyond the silicon
costs, there are many additional upfront costs that must be
accounted for on a per-SoC basis. For example, each unique
chip requires its own physical design (e.g., floorplanning,
power delivery, clocking), test and debug, validation, firmware, power and thermal management optimization, etc.
Given a finite engineering budget, a possible consequence of
rising costs in a post-Moore’s Law world could be the reduction in the number of products that a company could offer at
a time when customer demand for more and differentiated
products continues to grow.
III. CHIPLETS TO EXTEND MOORE’S LAW
The overall problem statement is that semiconductor companies need to continue delivering products with a larger
number of transistors to provide customers with more functionality and computing capability at market-friendly price
points, but the unraveling of Moore’s Law delays the availability of the new process nodes that would deliver the additional devices, and the costs are also increasing.
A. The Chiplet Approach
The overall idea with chiplets is to take what would normally be a monolithic, single-die SoC, and then partition it
into multiple smaller die or “chiplets” and then “reintegrate”
them with some form of in-package interconnect to enable
the collective to operate as a single, logical SoC. The reason
why this approach can economically make sense is that the
cost of silicon is not a linear function of chip area. For
example, a chip with T/2 transistors may cost considerably
less than half the cost of a chip with T transistors. In general,
if an SoC with T transistors can be partitioned into n separate
chiplets, such that the combination of those n chiplets provides the equivalent functionality of the original T-transistor
SoC while the sum of the costs of the individual chiplets plus
any additional costs for reintegration (e.g., additional packaging expenses) still comes in lower than the cost of a monolithic T-transistor SoC, then a chiplet implementation for this
SoC may be worthwhile.
For very large SoCs, for example those approaching the
reticle limit (Figure 4), the yield rates of such large chips can
be economically very challenging. The top of Figure 5 shows
an abstract depiction of a conventional manufacturing flow
using monolithic SoCs. Each chip is constructed on the wafer
using standard lithographic procedures to build the front-end
transistors and the back-end metal layers. After chip construction, each SoC die undergoes a test procedure to determine functionality, also commonly called “known good die”
(KGD) testing. Each unrepairable manufacturing fault can
result in an entire SoC’s worth of silicon being discarded
(thereby burdening the remaining functional parts with the
added costs). The SoC die that are functional can then be
assembled with the final packaging solution, which results in
some number of yielded processors that can now be sold.
With a chiplet-based approach, the lower portion of Figure
5 shows how the same hypothetical SoC has been partitioned
into chiplets where each chiplet has approximately one quarter of the original SoC functionality (e.g., one fourth the core
count). Each chiplet is manufactured using the same standard
lithographic procedures as in the monolithic case to produce
to a larger number of smaller chiplets. The individual
chiplets then undergo KGD testing. Now, for the same fault
distribution as in the monolithic case, each potential defect
results in discarding only approximately one-fourth of the
amount of silicon. The chiplets can be individually tested and
then reassembled and packaged into the complete final SoCs.
The overall result is that each wafer can yield a significantly
larger number of functional SoCs.
Figure 4. Die size increases for large SoCs over time; die sizes are reaching
the reticle limit and further increases are not feasible.
Figure 5. Illustrative construction of processors using (top) monolithic die
and (bottom) reassembled chiplets. The light/yellow chiplets represent
chiplets that can run at higher clock speeds.

Beyond functional testing, individual chiplets can also be
tested for maximum performance (e.g., clock speed) [6][14].
Figure 5 shows a few light-colored/yellow chiplets that indicate samples that can achieve higher frequencies, for example,
due to parametric variations in devices across the wafer.
These faster chiplets can be identified, collected together, and
assembled into premium parts with all fast cores. In contrast,
a monolithic chip may only have a fraction of its cores that
fall within the region of the wafer with faster transistors, and
as such it becomes statistically far less likely to find a monolithic chip with all fast cores. Beyond raw functional yield
rates, chiplet-based assembly can also increase the supply of
higher-performing products.
In addition to the yield and cost argument illustrated in Figure 5, chiplets have other potential benefits. Early in the introduction of a new process technology node, the yield rates
are often lower than compared to a more mature process. As
such, trying to build large SoCs early in the lifetime of a new
technology can be even more economically challenging.
However, by utilizing a collection of smaller chiplets that
yield at substantially higher rates, this can enable one to transition to a new process node earlier than would make sense
with a conventional monolithic design.
Another advantage of chiplets is that the lithographic reticle limit only applies to individual chips, but multiple chiplets
can be assembled such that their cumulative silicon area exceeds that possible with monolithic designs. Commercial examples of these and other advantages will be further illustrated in later sections.
B. Chiplets are Not a Free Lunch
While the chiplet approach to SoC construction has a lot of
potential advantages, it also introduces some new costs and
complexities. A chiplet design requires more engineering
work upfront to appropriately partition the SoC into the right
number and right kinds of chiplets. There are a combinatorial
number of possibilities for partitioning an SoC, but not all
may satisfy cost constraints, performance requirements, ease
of IP and silicon reuse, and more.
Chiplets also require new inter-chiplet communication
paths [6]. Compared to on-chip metal, these interconnects
involve longer routes with potentially higher impedances,
lower available bandwidth, higher power consumption,
and/or higher latency. The interconnect overhead may also
include circuits for crossing voltage and timing domains, protocol conversions, and/or serializer-deserializers (SerDes),
and these circuits all represent additional power and silicon
area overheads that would not have been present in a monolithic design.
In addition to the inter-chip communication interfaces,
other circuits and functionality may also need to be replicated
on a per-chiplet basis. Some examples include test and debug
interfaces (e.g., for testing individual die prior to assembly),
clock generation and distribution, power management, onchip temperature sensors, certain types of I/O (e.g., USB,
SATA), and more. As a result, the total silicon area of a single monolithic T-transistor SoC, Area(SoC(T)), will typically
be less than the total area of n chiplets where each chiplet has
a die area of Area(SoC(T/n)+K), where K represents the additional overheads discussed above (e.g., inter-chip interfaces,
test circuitry). However, using more total silicon area for n
separate chiplets may still result in lower total cost compared
to a monolithic approach (Section III-A).
C. Why Chiplets Now?
The fundamental idea of SoC partitioning is not new, and
multi-chip module (MCM) technologies have been around
for decades [7][9][22][26][31]. However, many past MCM
applications have been sequestered to relatively narrower use
cases and markets. What is now new is that the post-Moore’s
Law challenges discussed in Section II are changing the semiconductor industry landscape and creating pressures toward
adopting chiplet approaches even for mainstream, high-volume markets.
IV. CASE STUDY: AMD EPYC™ PROCESSORS
AMD EPYC™ server CPUs are our first products to utilize
a modern chiplet-based design methodology. In this section,
we discuss two generations of AMD EPYC™ processors to
highlight the evolution in the approach and share some of the
design decisions and benefits.
A. First-generation AMD EPYC™ Processor
AMD market analysis and our product definition process
set a target of 32 cores for our first-generation AMD EPYC™
processors, formerly codenamed “Naples,” to compete in the
server CPU market. In addition to raw core count, we also
targeted an SoC supporting eight DDR4 memory channels
and 128 lanes of PCIe® gen3 I/O to provide industry-leading
memory and I/O bandwidths, both of which are frequently
high priorities for server, cloud, and enterprise use cases.
Figure 6. Hypothetical monolithic 32-core chip compared to an assembly of
four eight-core chiplets.
(a) (b)

Figure 6(a) shows a schematic of a hypothetical monolithic
32-core processor. Based on our internal analysis and product planning exercises, such a processor would have required
777mm2
 of die area in a 14nm process. While still within the
reticle limit and therefore technically manufacturable, such a
large chip would have been very costly and put the product
in a potentially uncompetitive position.
The first-generation AMD EPYC™ processor utilized a
design with four identical chiplets, codenamed “Zeppelin,”
shown in Figure 6(b) [3][6]. Each chiplet provides eight “Zen”
CPU cores, two channels of DDR4 memory, and 32 lanes of
PCIe such that the combination of the four chiplets meets our
product requirements. Additional die area was also required
to implement our Infinity Fabric™ interconnect between
the four chiplets [6] as well as other per-chip circuitry as discussed in Section III-B. As a result, each chiplet had a die
area of 213mm2
 in a 14nm process, for a total aggregate die
area of 4213mm2
 = 852mm2
. This represents a ~10% die
area overhead compared to the hypothetical monolithic 32-
core chip. Based on AMD-internal yield modeling using historical defect density data for a mature process technology,
we estimated that the final cost of the quad-chiplet design is
only approximately 0.59 of the monolithic approach despite
consuming approximately 10% more total silicon.
Beyond the cost savings for the 32-core product, the chiplet
approach also provides a flexible platform for reusing the
chiplets across multiple product offerings. For example, after
testing individual chiplets, some may have four or fewer
cores that have been rendered inoperable due to manufacturing defects [20]. However, these four “harvested” chiplets
(each still with four functional cores) can be assembled into
a 16-core processor. Due to the chiplet-based design, this 16-
core processor can also be “fully featured” with all eight
DDR4 memory channels and 128 PCIe I/O lanes. Network
and storage-oriented use cases may only need a moderate
number of CPU cores to keep the storage and/or networking
fully utilized; any additional cores beyond that represent unnecessary costs for the end user.
Harvesting is highly advantageous for several reasons. The
first is that we can utilize a higher fraction of the total number
of chips per wafer even in the face of some manufacturing
defects. The second is that with just a single chiplet design
(i.e., one mask set, one tapeout), we can deliver multiple different products that traditionally would have required multiple separate unique SoCs. Third, the chiplet approach makes
it more practical to offer products with a full complement of
memory and I/O capabilities. In contrast, a dedicated 16-core
monolithic SoC might not by itself be able to tolerate the cost
burden of the additional die area needed for so many memory
channels and I/O lanes. However, the lower cost of the individual chiplets combined with the ability to amortize the additional memory and I/O interfaces over multiple products
can make this an economically viable approach while enabling valuable product differentiation to meet customer needs.
The multi-chiplet design of the first-generation AMD
EPYC™ processor introduces additional interconnect latency
when chiplets need to communicate across the Infinity Fabric™ on-package (IFOP) interconnect, which are implemented as point-to-point links directly on the organic package substrate [6]. The IFOP links utilize custom high-speed
SerDes circuits. Compared to SerDes for off-package I/O
like PCIe gen3, which consumes approximately 11pJ per bit,
the IFOP SerDes have been carefully optimized for shorter
package substrate route lengths and achieves a power efficiency of ~2pJ per bit. Transmitting data over the IFOP links
still represents a power overhead compared to a monolithic
chip, where on-chip interconnect power is typically much less
than 1pJ per bit, with the exact power cost depending on the
route length and other factors.
For the eight CPU cores on a given chiplet, only two out of
the eight total DDR4 memory channels are resident on the
same chiplet. This means that in the absence of non-uniform
memory access (NUMA) data management and thread pinning, some memory requests must be serviced by “remote”
memory channels, as shown in Figure 7.
Based on AMD internal testing with requests that generate
DRAM page misses, the typical latency for a memory request
to a local memory channel (i.e., on the same chiplet) was
measured to be 90ns, whereas accesses to remote memory
channels (i.e., different chiplet, same socket) incur a latency
of 141ns. The additional latency is due to the round-trip combination of the IFOP links and additional hops through each
chiplet’s local data fabric (also known as a network-on-chip
or NoC). For a memory access pattern uniformly interleaved
across the eight memory channels, this results in an average
memory latency of 128ns. These intra-socket NUMA effects
Figure 7. Connectivity of the four “Zeppelin” chiplets and memory latencies
for local, remote, and average requests.
  
are one of the items (among others) that our second-generation AMD EPYC™ processor addresses.
B. Second-generation AMD EPYC™ Processor
The first-generation AMD EPYC™ processor was very
well received by the market, and we set our sights to be even
more aggressive for our second generation of server CPU
products [20]. The timing of the second-generation AMD
EPYC™ processors also aligned with the dawn of 7nm silicon technology, which provided both benefits and challenges
that required new innovations in our chiplet methodology.
1) 7nm Benefits and Cost Challenges: Compared to the
14nm process technology used for the first-generation AMD
EPYC™ processor, the 7nm process that was becoming
available was very promising from a device perspective.
Based on AMD-internal analysis of a 14nm product ported to
a 7nm node with a similar implementation flow and design
methodology, we projected that we could obtain a doubling
in transistor density for the core logic. The 7nm devices also
delivered significant improvements in transistor speed and
power efficiency. From the same study, we projected that at
the same power consumption, the 7nm version could deliver
over 25% more performance, or for the same performance,
power could be reduced by approximately one half. Starting
from our previous 32-core design point, the increase in device
density with a corresponding power-efficiency improvement
meant that a 64-core product might be within striking distance. However, Figure 3 showed that the transition to the
7nm technology node also comes with increasing die cost,
and so further innovation was required.
2) Hybrid Multi-die Architecture: We initially started by
analyzing the “Zeppelin” chiplet and considered a hypothetical 7nm version of it. We found that such an approach would
be challenging to make work with the higher cost of the latest
silicon technology. In particular, high-performance server
products demand a lot of memory and I/O, which occupy a
significant fraction of the first-generation chiplet. Unfortunately, most of these structures do not scale well with shrinking device geometries either due to the analog devices or
from being limited by the bump pitch of the external I/O connections. As shown in Figure 8, the CPU cores, L3 cache,
and other logic account for approximately 56% of the “Zeppelin” chiplet area. Rather than halving the die size from going to 7nm, we would only achieve approximately a 28% reduction (i.e., 56%/2 + 44%=72%). When considering the relative cost increase of transitioning from 14nm to 7nm, this
28% die size reduction might not be sufficient to even reach
a cost break-even point compared to the original 14nm “Zeppelin” chiplet.
Instead, the second-generation AMD EPYC™ processor,
formerly codenamed “Rome,” utilizes a dual-chiplet approach. The first chiplet, called the I/O die (IOD), was implemented in a mature and cost-effective 12nm process. The
IOD has a size of 416mm2
 with 8.34 billion transistors, and it
contains the full complement of eight DDR4 memory channels, 128 lanes of PCIe gen4 I/O, other I/O such as USB and
SATA, the SoC data fabric, and other system-level functionality. The second chiplet, the core-complex die (CCD), was
implemented in the leading edge 7nm node. Each CCD is
only ~74mm2
 in size, leading to very good yield rates even in
the early days of a new process node. Figure 9(a) shows how
one IOD can be assembled with up to eight CCDs. Each CCD
provides eight “Zen 2” CPU cores, and so all together this
arrangement can enable an impressive 64 cores in a single
socket. The CCD attempts to utilize as much of the highperformance, but more costly, 7nm silicon for the functions
that benefit from the advanced devices, namely the eight CPU
cores and the L3 cache. Only a small portion of the CCD area
is consumed for the IFOP, which is placed centrally on the
chiplet to minimize distance from the L3 cache banks. Figure
9(b) shows how the CCD improves the utilization of the 7nm
chiplet so that the CPU cores and L3 caches now account for
86% of the total chiplet area.
3) Packaging Technology Decisions: AMD was among the
first companies to commercially introduce silicon interposer
technologies starting with the AMD Radeon™ R9 “Fury”
GPUs with high-bandwidth memory (HBM) in 2015 [16]. A
Figure 8. A significant fraction of the “Zeppelin” chiplet area is dominated
by DDR PHYs, SerDes, and other I/O that hardly reduce in size from moving
to a 7nm process.
Figure 9. (a) Second-generation AMD EPYC™ processor consisting of a
12nm IOD die and up to eight 7nm CCDs, (b) CCD detail showing majority
of chiplet area occupied by cores and L3 cache.
(a) (b)

natural question for our chiplet-based products is why we
chose to use package substrate routing rather than the higherdensity interconnects enabled by silicon interposers. There
are several factors that drove the decision to not use silicon
interposers for our chiplet-based processors. The first is the
communication requirements of our chiplets. With eight
CCDs and eight memory channels, on average each chiplet’s
IFOP only needs to handle approximately one DDR4 channel’s worth of bandwidth. Using DDR4-2933 as an example,
a single channel would correspond to ~23.5 GB/s of peak
bandwidth. Even accounting for some load imbalance across
the CCDs, a single CCD’s IFOP would still be expected to
observe no more than a few tens of GB/s of traffic, and in fact
each link can support approximately 55GB/s of effective
bandwidth. Point-to-point links in the package substrate
routing layers are more than sufficient to handle this modest
level of bandwidth. In contrast, a single HBM stack can deliver hundreds of GB/s of memory bandwidth, which far exceeds the capabilities of the organic package substrate, and
this is why HBM-enabled GPU products need a higher-bandwidth solution such as silicon interposers [2][16][17].
The second factor against silicon interposers for our
chiplet-based processors is the reach of the interposer-based
interconnects. While interposers can provide great signal
density for very high bandwidths, the lengths of the signals
are limited and as such constrain the connections to edge-toedge links. The reach of interposer-based interconnects can
in principle be extended using wider metal routes and greater
spacing between routes, but this would decrease the effective
bandwidth per interface because fewer total routes could be
supported for a fixed width of routing tracks. This argument
also applies to silicon bridge technologies [12]. The next subsection describes the challenges of providing sufficient IFOP
bandwidth across the package substrate. Figure 10 illustrates
a hypothetical interposer-based processor design. The edgeconnectivity constraint would limit the architecture to only
four CCDs, which would render the product concept to be far
less compelling. Even if interconnect reach was not a limiting factor, the IOD and the eight CCDs would require so
much area that the underlying interposer would greatly exceed the reticle limit (while a passive interposer does not contain any transistors, the metal layers are still lithographically
created and therefore must stay within the same reticle field
constraints). Figure 10 shows the placement where an additional CCD would have to be, which is both outside the
boundary of a maximum-sized interposer and too far for the
unbuffered interposer routes to reach while supporting required bandwidths. Recent advancements in silicon interposer manufacturing have enabled reticle stitching to create
very large interposers [11], but such an approach would have
been cost prohibitive for this market segment. Last, the silicon interposer itself adds more cost to the overall solution. A
CCD with the twice the core count could have been used, but
that would have resulted in lower yield and decreased configurability. For all these reasons, routing IFOP directly across
the package substrate was chosen for this product family.
The total area consumed by multiple chiplets is typically
greater than a monolithic chip with equivalent functionality.
While this could theoretically cause a corresponding increase
in the overall package size, the size of the SP3 processor
package used by AMD EPYC™ processors is primarily determined by the large number of package pins required to
support the eight DDR memory channels, 128 lanes of PCIe
plus other miscellaneous I/O, and all the power and ground
connections.
4) Chiplet-Package Co-design Challenges: While routing
on the package substrate was the only practical option, that
does not imply that it was simple to do. This section discusses some of the challenges and the solutions related to
package-level routing and power delivery. These are topics
that are often outside the attention of many computer architecture researchers, but we wish to highlight how high-level
architecture decisions can have major downstream impacts
on the rest of the overall design.
The package routing layers are already heavily utilized not
only for IFOP but also for external I/O connections, escaping
out the multiple DDR4 channels, and delivering power and
ground across the entire package. Figure 11(a) shows a schematic view of the first-generation AMD EPYC™ processor’s
package routing for the DDR4 memory buses, PCIe I/O lanes,
and IFOP. Figure 11(b) shows how the package routing resources have already been consumed by the first-generation
AMD EPYC™ processor [3]. To enable the necessary package-level connectivity for our second-generation architecture,
significant co-design was required between our packaging
and silicon teams.
Figure 11(c) shows the package routing for the secondgeneration AMD EPYC™ processor. The overall layout and
floorplan for the CCDs, the IOD, and the package routing had
to be coordinated from the outset. Note that to provide our
customers with the option for seamless upgrades, the first and
Figure 10. Hypothetical silicon interposer-based chiplet architecture. Maximum interposer size and unbuffered interposer routing limits configuration
to four CCDs.

second-generation AMD EPYC™ processors are designed to
be socket compatible. However, that creates a challenge to
providing connectivity to all the CCDs because we cannot increase the package size to make room for more routes. There
are four “inner” CCDs directly adjacent to the central IOD,
and then there are four more “outer” CCDs toward the top
and bottom edges of the package. The enabling co-design
innovation was finding a way to route the IFOP directly underneath the CCDs. Figure 11(c) shows how this opens clear
routing paths between the two columns of CCDs to allow the
PCIe routes to escape to the top and bottom edges of the package. In a similar fashion, the multiple channels of DDR4 can
escape directly from the IOD to the right and left edges of the
package.
Unfortunately, routing underneath the CCDs only works if
there are available routing resources in the package.
Figure 12(a) shows a simplified view of the VDDM power
delivery on the “Zeppelin” chiplet (VDDM is a regulated
power supply rail supporting the L3 cache SRAM arrays)
[25]. The real core supply (RVDD) is not shown for clarity,
but it is also distributed in the package layer as input to the
on-chip regulators. VDDM is delivered by a low-drop out
(LDO) linear regulator, which drives the power down to the
thick copper layers in the package substrate to help distribute
VDDM across the entire area of the L3 cache. The power can
then be delivered back up to power the L3 cache. The lowresistance package layers are very effective for power distribution, but unfortunately this is where we also want to route
IFOP for the second-generation architecture.
Figure 12(b) shows how the package and CCD were jointly
co-designed to simultaneously address power delivery
requirements while freeing up the necessary package routing
resources to enable IFOP to tunnel underneath the CCDs.
The VDDM distribution was brought on to the CCD and it
instead utilizes redistribution layer (RDL) metal. The challenge was that the RDL metal is more resistive than the thick
copper layers in the package, and so the span (power distribution distance) of the LDOs had to be reduced.
Figure 12(b) shows how the LDOs have been reoriented
and distributed along the sides of the L3 cache. The LDOs
drive power down to the RDL, and then only need to fan out
a relatively shorter distance through the resistive RDL routes.
This carefully choreographed chip-package layout kept the
VDDM IR drop to within 10mV while freeing up the package
routing layers (labeled “Signal Routes” at the bottom of Figure 12(b)) for IFOP to pass through.
Another packaging-related challenge was that the chiplets
manufactured in different process nodes normally would
have utilized different bump pitches to connect the chiplets
to the package substrate. In particular, the 12nm IOD bump
pitch is 150m, while the 7nm CCD bump is 130m. The
result would have been that the different types of chiplets
would be at different heights after assembly, which could potentially be problematic for providing a level and uniform interface to the cooling solution. To address this, we engineered a copper pillar-based bump for the IOD, which was
also compatible with the 7nm CCDs, to ensure uniform postassembly chiplet heights. The transition to a copper-pillar
package interface also provided denser bump pitches and enabled higher maximum current (electromigration) limits.
5) Improved Memory Performance: The first-generation
AMD EPYC™ processor’s organization with memory and
Figure 11. (a) Schematic view of first-generation AMD EPYC™ processor package routing for DDR (red), I/O (orange), and Infinity Fabric™ links (cyan),
(b) multi-layer package routing layout of the first-generation AMD EPYC™ processor package, and (c) annotated package routing layout of the secondgeneration AMD EPYC™ processor package.
(a) (b) (c)
  
I/O distributed across the four chiplets provided an architecture that only required a single chiplet design, but it also introduced intra-package NUMA effects as discussed in Section IV-A. Furthermore, IFOP must support demand requests
from the chiplet to the remote memory channels, requests
from the remote cores to the local memory channels, and I/O
in both directions as well.
The overall layout of the second-generation AMD EPYC™
processor’s chiplets resembles a star topology, which provides much more uniform memory access latencies. Each
memory request from a CCD takes a direct hop to the IOD,
and then from there the high-performance data fabric routes
the request to one of the eight targeted memory channels.
Note that some memory channels are still closer or farther
from each of the CCDs and so some NUMA effects remain,
but they are greatly reduced compared to the prior generation
approach. Figure 13 shows the overall IOD data fabric topology. The data fabric utilizes a hybrid ring-ladder topology,
where the demand memory requests are routed along the external ring, and the I/O traffic moves along the interior “ladder” of the data fabric ( IS in the figure is for inter-socket
(IS) traffic for symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) platforms).
Figure 13 also shows the latencies from one of the CCDs to
memory channels in each of the four corners of the IOD
(measured on an AMD EPYC™ 7002 Series processor with
DDR2933 memory with DRAM page-missing traffic at low
load). In contrast to the first-generation organization where
some memory requests could be locally serviced on a given
chiplet without any IFOP hops, in the second-generation approach all requests always require an IFOP hop to get from
the CCD to the IOD. Despite this mandatory IFOP hop, the
“local” memory access latency (labeled  in Figure 13) is
only 4ns slower than the same-chiplet memory access in the
first-generation architecture (i.e., 94ns versus 90ns) due to
intense engineering efforts to squeeze out cycles along the
memory paths. The path to the next-closest pair of memory
channels  incurs approximately 3ns of additional latency
roundtrip, or approximately 4 FCLKs (fabric clocks). In the
worst case to access the memory channels on the opposite
corner of the IOD , the data fabric adds approximately 7
FCLKs in each direction, or approximately 20ns roundtrip assuming a 1.46GHz FCLK. Note that this is a ~30ns improvement over the inter-chiplet memory latency of the first-generation AMD EPYC™ processor. For a memory access pattern uniformly distributed across all eight channels, the average memory latency improves by ~24ns (~19% reduction),
and the difference between nearest and farthest memory
channels improves from ~51ns down to ~20ns, which represents a ~61% reduction in the variance/range of in-socket
NUMA effects of the overall design.
6) Overall Cost and Performance: An objective of the second-generation AMD EPYC™ processor was to enable an
architecture that delivered scalable performance with a cost
structure that also scaled linearly with the capability of the
system (in contrast to monolithic chips where the cost scales
super-linearly with SoC function/die size). Figure 14 shows
the relative cost of five different possible configurations
ranging from 64 cores down to 16 cores. For comparison, we
also show the projected cost for hypothetical monolithic
SoCs with equivalent core counts. Note that no cost is shown
for a monolithic 64-core SoC because the total chip size
would be greater than 1000mm2
, which greatly exceeds the
reticle limit.
The chart illustrates a few important trends that really
demonstrate the power and value of our chiplet methodology.
The first is that across all configurations, the final silicon cost
is significantly lower than any of the monolithic equivalents.
The second is that the cost scales linearly with a gentle slope
Figure 12. (a) “Zen” CPU VDDM distribution via the package plane,
(b) “Zen 2” CPU VDDM distribution via RDL only.
Figure 13. IOD data fabric topology and measured memory latencies
to the four quadrants.
  
as the core count is varied. The bottom portion of Figure 14
also illustrates how the different core counts can be achieved
by simply depopulating CCDs from the package. This visually shows how with only two tapeouts (and only one of those
being in the leading-edge 7nm node), we are able to flexibly
enable an entire server product stack including the 64-core
option that would otherwise be both technologically and economically impractical to manufacture.
Figure 15 shows a comparison between the first-generation
and second-generation AMD EPYC™ processors. The
chiplet approach enabled a doubling in total core count per
socket. The total number of transistors more than doubled,
with a total count of over 38 billion devices, although total
silicon area in the package only increased a modest 18%.
This metric simply counts total mm2
 of silicon and does not
treat the denser 7nm silicon any differently than 14nm, and
so the relatively small increase in total silicon highlights the
density advantage of the 7nm process node. Finally, Figure
15 shows the overall performance as measured on SPECrate® for double-socket (2P) server platforms1
. The performance uplift is a combination of the doubled core count,
higher clock speeds, higher IPC of the newer “Zen 2” microarchitecture, and a higher supported power limit (TDP) for
the second-generation products.
Beyond enabling new levels of performance, another benefit of our combined CCD and IOD approach is that it enables
more flexible inventory management. With conventional
monolithic SoCs, the relatively long lead time of modern silicon manufacturing forces a company to forecast how many
of each part should be ordered. If too few of a popular part
gets ordered, then a company could potentially face shortages
which could potentially lead to missed revenue opportunities
as well as customers potentially buying products from competitors. If too many parts are ordered, then a company may
be faced with excess inventory that might become challenging to move. The second-generation AMD EPYC™ processor enables a later-binding approach, where we can wait until
after the chips have been returned from manufacturing to assemble the chiplets into 16, 24, …, 64-core parts. If market
demands shift and we need to produce more of one part or
another, we have the potential to be agile and assemble more
or fewer chiplets to increase the supply of the desired products.
V. CASE STUDY: AMD RYZEN™ PROCESSORS
The chiplet-based architecture of the second-generation
AMD EPYC™ processor was a significant feat of siliconpackage co-design and proved to be highly effective for addressing the needs of our server, enterprise, and high-performance computing customers. However, AMD also produces
many products to serve a wide range of other target markets.
A. AMD Ryzen™ Processor Organization
The “Zeppelin” chiplet is a complete SoC with cores,
memory, I/O, and all system functionality for standalone operation. For the first-generation AMD Ryzen™ processors,
we were able to take a single “Zeppelin” chiplet and put it in
a client AM4 package to provide a desktop processor with
eight cores, two DDR4 memory channels, and 24 lanes of I/O.
Figure 14. Normalized processor costs as core counts vary compared to
hypothetical monolithic die, and visualization of core-count configuration
by varying the number of CCDs.
Figure 15. Comparison of first- and second-generation AMD EPYC™ processors.
1. Results obtained from the SPEC® website as of January 3, 2020.
(http://www.spec.org/cpu2017)
Figure 16. Construction of the third-generation AMD Ryzen™ processor by reusing CCDs and building a client IOD with extensive IP leverage from the server IOD.

We later used the silicon from the second-generation AMD
EPYC™ processor to create the third-generation AMD
Ryzen™ processor with two CCDs and a “client IOD”
(cIOD), shown in Figure 16. The CCDs directly utilize the
same silicon design as that used by the server products. The
cIOD is a new die, but it heavily leverages the server IOD
design. Figure 16 shows how the 125mm2
, 2.09 billion transistor cIOD is effectively a quarter-sized version of the server
IOD, which features two DDR channels, 32 lanes of PCIe I/O,
and two IFOP ports to the CCDs. The result is an industryleading 16-core high-performance desktop processor without
requiring a new 7nm tapeout and a cost-effective and highlyleveraged cIOD. Analogous to the impracticality of a monolithic 64-core server processor, a 16-core desktop processor
would likely not be economically practical if implemented as
a monolithic die, but chiplets make it possible. Similar to the
server products, the overall architecture of the third-generation AMD Ryzen™ processor enables product definition
flexibility by simply reducing the number of CCDs to one.
B. Overall Cost and Performance
The modular chiplet design approach of the second-generation AMD Ryzen™ processor provides the same types of
cost savings and scalability benefits as we were able to
achieve with the second-generation AMD EPYC™ processors. Figure 17 shows the relative die cost of both 16-core
(two CCDs) and 8-core (one CCD) chiplet implementations
compared to hypothetical monolithic 7nm designs. These results only show the silicon costs and do not reflect the additional engineering benefits from reusing the CCDs and server
IOD IP in terms of amortization of both design and verification efforts, product configurability, and time-to-market.
Figure 18 shows a comparison between first- and secondgeneration AMD Ryzen™ processors. Similar to the comparison of the AMD EPYC™ processors, the chiplet approach and 7nm technology enabled a doubling of core count.
Another similar trend is the doubling in overall transistor
count while total silicon area increases by only 28%. Performance is reported using the Cinebench R20 benchmark. The
single-threaded (1T) performance improvements come
primarily from enhancements to the “Zen 2” core microarchitecture and increased clock speeds (both parts were measured
with the same 105W TDP). Maximum 1T clock frequency is
very difficult to increase, and the “Zen 2” microarchitecture
combined with 7nm enabled a critical 400MHz improvement.
The all-cores (NT) performance results highlight the benefits
of our chiplet approach. The maximum all-cores clock speed
is similar between the two generations of processors2
, but the
doubling in core count is responsible for the majority of the
NT performance gains, with the rest coming from the core
IPC uplift, memory system improvements, power-performance efficiency optimizations, and other enhancements.
C. Additional Chiplet Optimizations
In Section III we discussed how prior to assembly, individual chiplets can be tested to match up parts with similar performance. However, parametric variations still exist within
each individual chiplet, leading to some potential differences
between cores. This effect can be magnified by the higher
core counts that our chiplet design approach enables, and we
have observed up to 200MHz variations in the maximum
clock frequency (Fmax) across cores in the same CCD. While
legacy boost techniques did not take advantage of the faster
cores, we now utilize an algorithm that characterizes each
CCD’s cores at boot time to generate a list of cores in order
of Fmax capabilities. As shown in Figure 19, this list is made
Figure 17. Normalized AMD Ryzen™ processor costs as core counts vary
compared to hypothetical monolithic die.
Figure 18. Comparison of first- and second-generation AMD Ryzen™ processors.
2. Performance results including measured clock speeds were tested by
AMD Performance Labs as of December 13, 2019. Results may vary.
Figure 19. Boot-time characterization of each CCD’s cores and core complexes (CCX) enable better utilization of the many cores in the system.

available to the operating system (OS), so that when the OS
runs a single high-performance thread it can schedule the program to the highest performing core. Each eight-core CCD
consists of a pair of core complexes (CCX) each with an L3
cache and four associated cores. Like the core-level characterization, we also determine the best-performing CCXs,
which allows the OS to schedule threads from a multithreaded workload to the fastest CCX.
The core and CCX characterization processes occur every
time a system is booted. This enables the characterization
processes to adapt to the specific system that the processor is
seated in; for example, systems may be equipped with different cooling solutions or board-level components such as voltage regulators themselves may vary across instances. An additional benefit of boot-time characterization is that as processors age, the preferred core may change over time and so
we can continue to deliver the highest performance possible
for each part by selecting the fastest core under the current
circumstances.
VI. EXPANDING THE CHIPLET APPROACH
The chiplet-based architectures of the second-generation
AMD EPYC™ processor and AMD Ryzen™ processor were
highly effective for addressing the needs of our server and
client offerings. However, chiplets also provided opportunities in a range of other target markets.
A. AMD Ryzen™ Threadripper™ Processors
AMD identified opportunities for extremely high-performance, high-core-count processors for high-end desktops
(HEDT) and workstations. In particular, many professional
content creation tasks such as computer-aided design and
high-resolution video rendering (e.g., for Hollywood feature
movies) require massive CPU resources to, for example, reduce movie rendering times for higher end-user productivity.
Figure 20 shows how AMD leveraged the first-generation
AMD EPYC™ processor by depopulating two of the four
chiplets and replacing them with dummy silicon die to preserve the mechanical integrity of the overall package, combined with some additional customizations to the package,
firmware, BIOS, etc., to create first-generation AMD
Ryzen™ Threadripper™ processors with up to 16 cores. In
subsequent generations, additional chiplets were enabled, and
later we also utilized the chiplet designs from the second-generation AMD EPYC™ processor for 64-core HEDT offerings.
This is another interesting example of how creative co-design
of both silicon chiplets and packaging enabled AMD to
quickly react to emerging market data and new opportunities.
B. AMD EPYC™ Embedded Processors
The high-performance embedded processor market has a
range of applications with requirements for substantial I/O
needs coupled with a range of desired core counts. Example
applications include embedded networking, storage, medical
imaging, and industrial control solutions. Figure 21 shows
how our “Zeppelin” chiplet designs combined with packaging optimized for high-performance embedded use cases can
produce additional products appropriate for this market. The
first generation of AMD EPYC™ Embedded 3000 series processors include single- and dual-chiplet configurations with
up to 16 cores in a package designed to be appropriate for the
target embedded market form factors. Again, a single chiplet
design can enable multiple product options. In a similar fashion, chiplet designs from the second-generation AMD
EPYC™ server processors have been leveraged for the AMD
EPYC™ 7000 series embedded processors.
Figure 22. Reuse of the cIOD chiplet enables a fully-featured PCIe 4.0 chipset for AMD Ryzen™ processor motherboards.
Figure 20. First-generation AMD Ryzen™ Threadripper™ processor created
with two “Zeppelin” chiplets, two dummy die, and new package routes.
Figure 21. AMD EPYC™ 3000 Series embedded processors utilizing one
or two chiplets.

C. The AMD X570 Chipset
Motherboards for high-performance processors such as
those demanded by gamers, content creators, and other enthusiasts typically utilize chipsets to provide a full suite of
I/O capabilities. Features often include additional PCIe lanes,
USB ports, NVMe interfaces, and support for more SATA
drives. To provide chipset support for the third-generation
AMD Ryzen™ processor, we were able to directly leverage
the cIOD without any CCDs in a standalone package. This is
enabled by robust harvesting techniques for the cIOD chiplets,
secure firmware, and other non-silicon support. Figure 22
illustrates the silicon reuse, which provides the platform with
16 PCIe gen4 I/O lanes, up to 12 SATA ports, and twelve
USB ports all in addition to the PCIe, USB, and storage I/O
from the AMD Ryzen™ processor itself.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Chiplet-based design has transformed architecture at AMD.
Figure 23 shows an illustration for how our chiplet-enabled
approach enables a wide variety of products using a few individual chiplet designs. We have been able to creatively
combine chiplets with a range of packaging solutions to produce a rich portfolio of products across a wide range of markets, create solutions that would be infeasible with monolithic designs (e.g., 64-core server), and do so while delivering great performance and value.
This paper aimed to demonstrate to the community how
modular architectures can address a range of challenges in a
post-Moore’s Law world. At the same time, we wanted to
provide a glimpse into how technology and architecture decisions not only consider traditional metrics like performance,
power, and cost, but also how the decisions can help and support the construction of a diverse portfolio of products. Examples of engineering challenges such as the required silicon-package co-design for under-CCD routing are reminders
that one does not simply take disparate pieces of silicon and
“glue” them into a complete system. Significant thought,
planning, collaboration, engineering, and creativity are
needed to successfully bring all the pieces together.
In addition to the technical challenges, implementing such
a widespread chiplet approach across so many market segments requires an incredible amount of partnership and trust
across technology teams, business units, and our external
partners. The product roadmaps across markets must be carefully coordinated and mutually scheduled to ensure that the
right silicon is available at the right time for the launch of
each product. Unexpected challenges and obstacles can arise,
and world-class and highly passionate AMD engineering
teams across the globe have risen to each occasion. The success of the AMD chiplet approach is as much a feat of engineering as it is a testament to the power of teams with diverse
skills and expertise working together toward a shared set of
goals and a common vision.