Abstract—Large-scale distributed deep learning training has
enabled developments of more complex deep neural network
models to learn from larger datasets for sophisticated tasks.
In particular, distributed stochastic gradient descent intensively
invokes all-reduce operations for gradient update, which dominates communication time during iterative training epochs.
In this work, we identify the inefficiency in widely used allreduce algorithms, and the opportunity of algorithm-architecture
co-design. We propose MULTITREE all-reduce algorithm with
topology and resource utilization awareness for efficient and
scalable all-reduce operations, which is applicable to different
interconnect topologies. Moreover, we co-design the network
interface to schedule and coordinate the all-reduce messages
for contention-free communications, working in synergy with
the algorithm. The flow control is also simplified to exploit
the bulk data transfer of big gradient exchange. We evaluate
the co-design using different all-reduce data sizes for synthetic
study, demonstrating its effectiveness on various interconnection
network topologies, in addition to state-of-the-art deep neural
networks for real workload experiments. The results show that
MULTITREE achieves 2.3× and 1.56× communication speedup,
as well as up to 81% and 30% training time reduction compared
to ring all-reduce and state-of-the-art approaches, respectively.
Index Terms—distributed deep learning, data-parallel training,
all-reduce, interconnection network, algorithm-architecture codesign
I. INTRODUCTION
The onset of the big data era and rapid advances of accelerator architectures have enabled deep learning applications
to achieve superhuman accuracy on complex real-world problems, such as image recognition, natural language processing,
and autonomous driving. State-of-the-art DNN models such as
GPT-3 [1] have hundreds of billions of parameters, requiring
trillions of compute operations and hundreds of gigabytes of
storage and massive bandwidth. Recent work projects that
orders of magnitude growth of dataset and model size are
required to exceed human-level accuracy, which can take
weeks to train a single epoch for language modeling [2]. As
data keep exploding and DNNs evolve to be larger and deeper,
it is crucial to provide scalable solutions to fulfill the trend in
computing requirements.
This research was supported in part by NSF Grant #1931078.
To this end, grids of specialized accelerators have been
designed and deployed to train DNN models in a parallel
and distributed manner [3], [4]. In particular, data-parallelism,
as the easiest model of parallel and distributed computing,
has been widely used in large-scale DNN training [5], [6].
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a typical optimization
algorithm to improve DNN accuracy through iterative training,
which intensively invokes all-reduce communication. As the
dominant component of communication, all-reduce can stall
the computations of the next training epoch significantly. Thus,
all-reduce can quickly become a bottleneck for large scale
distributed training [7].
Several communication algorithms have been proposed for
all-reduce operation [8]–[11]. Baidu Research implemented a
bandwidth-optimal ring all-reduce algorithm [9], [12], which
has been later included in NVIDIA Collective Communication Library (NCCL) [13] and other popular deep learning
frameworks [14], [15]. However, ring all-reduce suffers from
long latency and may have low resource utilization in certain
network topologies, for instance, only 25% link utilization rate
in a 4×4 2D Torus network. Several attempts have been made
to improve all-reduce latency by reducing the algorithmic
steps [10], [11], [16]. Halving-doubling reduces the latency
through recursive distance doubling and halving in the reducescatter and all-gather phases, respectively [11]. Double binary
tree (DBTree), which is also implemented in NCCL, improves
the latency through two-tree reduction and broadcast [10],
[16]. These two algorithms perform better than ring all-reduce
for short to medium messages. However, for large messages,
they can lead to significant network congestion since their
communication patterns map poorly on to the physical network
topology, turning out to be worse than rings1 [11], [19]. Therefore, it is crucial to consider the physical network topology for
all-reduce algorithm design with proper message scheduling
to achieve low latency for short to medium messages and
contention-free communication for large data sizes.
1NVIDIA NCCL enables double binary tree when message size is small
while disables it and uses ring all-reduce when message is larger than a
threshold, which requires tuning for different systems [17], [18].

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00023
TABLE I: Comparisons of All-Reduce Algorithms.
Algorithms Small data Large data Applied Well on
Latency Bandwidth Contention Various Topologies
Ring [9], [12] high optimal none
DBTree [10], [16] low optimal high × (Topo-oblivious)
2D-Ring [28] low sub-optimal none × (2D Torus/Mesh)
HDRM [29] low optimal none ×(BiGraph)
MULTITREE low optimal none
Recently, dedicated networks with accelerator pods have
been deployed to accelerate emerging deep learning applications, such as Cloud TPU [4] and Catapult [3]. While computation acceleration has been significantly studied [20]–[27],
communication specialization with architecture-algorithm codesign is still in its infancy [28], [29]. Ying et al. adopted
2D-ring all-reduce for the 2D Torus network in TPU clusters
to fully utilize the links and reduce communication steps [28].
Although achieving full link utilization, its 2D nature increases
the amount of communicated data, which can be double the
optimal communicated data as the network scales out. For a
2D N×N Torus network, 2D-ring transmits 2N(N − 1) data
while flat ring communicates N2 − 1 data. More recently, Alibaba proposed the EFLOPS training platform by co-designing
algorithm and system with a new server architecture [29]. It
extends the halving-doubling algorithm with rank mapping
(HDRM) on a two-stage fully connected BiGraph topology
to avoid contention, showing promising potential for the codesign approach. However, it is not trivial to scale due to
its full connections among switches. These algorithms are
limited to specific topologies (2D Torus and BiGraph) and
do not generalize to other network topologies. With the trend
for larger and deeper DNN models, more accelerator grids
are deployed for large-scale distributed training. Therefore,
more scalable solutions are required to work in synergy with
various topologies that can practically interconnect a large
number of nodes [4]. Moreover, communication acceleration
through specialization is urgently needed to keep up with the
computation throughput. In addition, the lack of hardware
support for coordination and communication scheduling may
miss potential optimization opportunities to further improve
performance. Furthermore, the fine-grained flow control and
arbitration designed for general purpose networks can be
inefficient to support such large gradient exchanges, resulting
in extra performance and significant energy/power overhead.
Table I summarizes the comparisons among these works.
In this work, we co-design an all-reduce communication
algorithm and interconnection architecture to support efficient
and scalable all-reduce operation. We propose MULTITREE, a
scalable topology-aware all-reduce algorithm that is applicable
to various topologies. MULTITREE couples tree construction
and message scheduling with topology and global link utilization awareness to build trees from roots in a top-down fashion.
It leverages the insight that tree levels closer to the roots are
more sparse and tree levels closer to the leaves are denser.
Based on this, MULTITREE moves more communication closer
to the roots to make communication closer to the leaves sparse
so that communications are balanced in all levels of the trees.
Moreover, we co-design the network interface according to
the proposed communication algorithm and to facilitate the
all-reduce schedule management to achieve contention-free
all-reduce. We also simplify the flow control and arbitration
to exploit the characteristics of large gradients in all-reduce
operations. As a result, MULTITREE tackles the limitations in
previous work, as summarized in Table I.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We identify the inefficiency in the state-of-the-art allreduce algorithms, and co-design all-reduce algorithm
and interconnect hardware for large gradient exchange.
• We propose MULTITREE, an all-reduce algorithm that is
applicable to various interconnect topologies and couple
tree construction and communication scheduling, with
topology and global link utilization awareness, to efficiently coordinate concurrent reduction/broadcast trees.
• We augment the network interface to support hardware
based scheduling for MULTITREE and facilitate the lockstep communications in the schedule, while simplifying
the flow control dedicated for large gradient all-reduce.
• Our evaluations using synthetic messages and state-ofthe-art DNNs show that MULTITREE greatly improves
scalability over prior works, and achieves 2.3× and 1.56×
communication speedup, as well as up to 81% and 30%
training time reduction compared to ring all-reduce and
the state-of-the-art approach [28], respectively.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: §II introduces
the background and motivation. §III presents the proposed
MULTITREE all-reduce algorithm followed by the co-designed
architecture detailed in §IV. The methodology is described in
§V and the evaluation is presented in §VI, respectively. Further
discussions are outlined in §VII followed by more related work
in §VIII. Finally, we conclude the paper in §IX.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we first introduce the background of dataparallel deep neural network training followed by all-reduce
communication in distributed stochastic gradient descent synchronization.. Then, we motivate this research by outlining the
limitations of existing all-reduce algorithms.
A. Data-Parallel Deep Neural Network Training
DNN training is usually done using stochastic gradient
descent where each training sample goes through forward
propagation, gradient calculation followed by backward propagation. Backward propagation uses the gradient to update
weights of the DNN model in order to minimize a loss
function. To make training faster, mini-batch is used where
there is one pass of weight update for each mini-batch of
training samples. It is a daunting task to train large DNNs
with huge amounts of data. Thus, distributed training is
performed on multiple compute nodes. Each compute node
may be equipped with GPUs and accelerators. This creates
the challenges regarding resource usage, communication bandwidth provisioning, and trade-off between computation and
  
In[1][0]
In[1][1]
In[1][2]
In[1][3]
In[0][0]
In[0][1]
In[0][2]
In[0][3]
In[3][0]
In[3][1]
In[3][2]
In[3][3]
In[2][0]
In[2][1]
In[2][2]
In[2][3]
Out[1]
Out[0]
Out[3]
Out[2]
Node 0 Node 1 Node 2 Node 3 Node 0 Node 1 Node 2 Node 3 Reduce-Scatter   



Out[i] In[k][i]
Out[0]
Out[1]
Out[2]
Out[3]
Out[0]
Out[1]
Out[2]
Out[3]
Out[0]
Out[1]
Out[2]
Out[3]
Out[0]
Out[1]
Out[2]
Out[3]
Node 0 Node 1 Node 2 Node 3
All-Gather
Fig. 1: Reduce-scatter and all-gather in ring all-reduce.
storage [30], [31]. Different parallel strategies have been used
to enable scalable and efficient distributed training.
Data parallelism is the most common way for distributed
DNN training where a non-overlapping set of training samples are distributed to different compute nodes. Each node
calculates gradients based on its own training set. Gradients
are then aggregated to update weights using either a centralized or a decentralized approach. The centralized approach
relies on a parameter server where each node periodically
reports its computed parameter updates to a (set of) parameter
server(s) [8]. However, parameter servers are not efficient
in terms of bandwidth and latency for larger DNNs. An
alternative is the decentralized approach where compute nodes
exchange parameter updates via an all-reduce operation, where
the all-reduce algorithm plays an important role. A widely
used one is ring all-reduce [9], [12] that only requires a tree
topology to achieve no contention and optimal bandwidth,
where a tree topology is typically embedded in any network
topology. However, it is not latency-optimal [12].
B. All-Reduce for Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent
Baidu popularized ring all-reduce using a sequence of
reduce-scatter followed by all-gather operations [9], [32].
Reduce-scatter and all-gather operations are further optimized
to exploit the hierarchical nature of communication bandwidths of heterogeneous network architecture [33].
Fig. 1 shows an example. Let us assume that each row
represents one segment of tensors with segment 0 being the
top row and segment 3 being the bottom one. Each node forms
a ring with the next node. Reduce-scatter is done on segment
0 starting from Node 1. In the first iteration, segment 0 is
sent from Node 1 to Node 2 where the tensors are aggregated.
Thus, two out of four sets of tensors are aggregated in the
first iteration. In the second iteration, segment 0 is sent from
Node 2 to Node 3 and in the third iteration, segment 0 is sent
from Node 3 to Node 0. Thus, after 3 iterations, all tensors
of segment 0 are aggregated to Node 0. Similarly, segment 1
starts from Node 2 and after 3 iterations, gets reduced to Node
1. Segments 2 and 3 end up getting reduced to Nodes 2 and
3, respectively. Thus, it takes 3 iterations for reduce-scatter.
After the sequence of reduce-scatter operations, all-gather
operations are done similarly. In the first iteration, segment 0
is sent from Node 0 to Node 1. Now, Node 1 has two out of
four segments (namely segments 0 and 1). Similarly, at the end
of the first iteration, other nodes end up having 2 segments.
In the second iteration, segment 0 is sent from Node 1 to
Node 2 and subsequently from Node 2 to Node 3 in the third
iteration. Thus, after 3 iterations, all nodes will end up having
all 4 aggregated segments.
C. Motivation
Widely used ring all-reduce has been proved bandwidthoptimal [12], which makes it suitable for large gradient exchanges [9], [13], [34]. However, it faces link under-utilization
in certain topologies such as Torus and Mesh. Furthermore, it
suffers from long latency as the system scales out. Several
attempts have been made to improve link utilization and
latency [10], [16], [28]. 2D-ring all-reduce utilizes all the
links and reduces the communication steps in 2D Torus and
Mesh networks [28], but it transmits twice the amount of
data compared to bandwidth-optimal algorithms. For instance,
2D-ring communicates 2N(N − 1) data while ring all-reduce
communicates N2 −1 data in a 2D N×N Torus network. On
the other hand, the double binary tree algorithm builds two
logical binary trees to reduce latency for small to medium
messages [10], [16]. It constructs the two trees in a way such
that the leaf nodes in one tree are the internal nodes in the other
tree. Therefore, each tree can take half of the data and all the
nodes can send and receive data simultaneously, outperforming
single-tree all-reduce. It better utilizes the end-node bandwidth
and works well on networks with all-to-all like topology
for small to medium messages. For large messages, it can
experience significant contention since the two trees are not
mapped well on the physical network topology, especially
severe on unfriendly topology such as Torus [19]. The recently
proposed EFLOPS extends halving-doubling by mapping the
ranks to the nodes to achieve contention-free communication
for large datasets [29]. Since each communication pair always
involves one node connected with an upper switch and one
node connected with a lower switch, it never exploits the onehop distance between nodes connected to the same switch,
failing to expedite latency-sensitive communications for small
messages. Furthermore, these algorithms are not general to
apply to different network topologies while achieving good
performance for both latency and bandwidth.
Typical interconnection networks for general-purpose communications use fine-grained flow control that well supports
short messages. However, it can generate many small packets
for large gradients, which can lead to extra bandwidth and arbitration overheads. To mitigate such an overhead, flow control
can be streamlined to take advantage of large gradients. In the
conventional packet-based flow control, a packet consists of a
    
0%
10%
20%
30%
32 128 512 2048
Packet Head Overhead
Packet Payload Size (Bytes)
4-Byte Flit 8-Byte Flit 16-Byte Flit
CMP NoC
Off-Chip
Interconnection Network
Fig. 2: Packet head flit bandwidth overhead.
few flits, including a head flit for metadata and body/tail flits
for payload, where the head flit incurs bandwidth overhead.
For on-chip networks, the payload of a packet is a cache line
whereas, for off-chip networks, payload size varies from 64
to 256 bytes with 16-byte flits, incurring 6%–25% bandwidth
overhead, as shown in Fig. 2. In distributed DNN training,
streams of consecutive large gradients flow from one node
to the other using many small packets, following the same
route with consecutive addresses. So the head flits of these
consecutive packets contain redundant information, leading to
unnecessary bandwidth overhead. Thus, flow control can be
simplified to exploit this distinct characteristic.
III. MULTITREE ALL-REDUCE ALGORITHM
In this section, we first explain the rationales behind the
MULTITREE approach. Then, we illustrate the main idea with
an example followed by its algorithm.
A. Rationales and Insights
1) Spanning Trees Instead of Rings: In reduce-scatter and
all-gather phases of all-reduce, each node leads a reduction
and a broadcast of one chunk of data. In ring all-reduce, each
node communicates a chunk of data in a unidirectional ring,
which takes (n − 1) steps in both phases for n nodes. If each
such communication can take place in a tree structure, it can
reduce the algorithmic steps to 2 logk n with a k-ary tree for
n nodes. Thus, the proposed algorithm is not only bandwidthoptimal but also reduces latency by constructing multiple trees
instead of rings, thereby improving all-reduce scalability.
2) Topology Awareness: If trees are constructed without
considering network topology and link utilization, it may lead
to even worse performance than ring all-reduce, especially
when multiple trees contend for the same link at the same time
without careful scheduling. Furthermore, tree levels closer
to leaves are denser than tree levels closer to roots. Thus,
when reducing from leaves to roots, the reduce-scatter phase
can experience dense to sparse communications, leading to
high contention near leaf nodes. MULTITREE exploits this
insight to combine message scheduling and tree constructions,
with topology and link utilization awareness to schedule more
communication near the roots to sparsify communication near
leaves. In addition, instead of constructing the trees one
0
2
(0)
1 (4)
(2)
3 (6)
(5)
(1)
(7)
(3)
(a) Time step 1
0
2
1 (10)
3 (8)
(11)
(9)
(b) Time step 2
T0-2
T0-3
(8)
T0-1 T1-3
T1-2
(9)
T1-0 T2-0
T2-1
(10)
T2-3 T3-1
T3-0
(11)
T0-0
(0) (4)
T1-1
(1) (5)
T2-2
(2) (6)
T3-3
(3)
T3-2
(7)
(c) Tree construction (link allocation) at levels (time steps) 1 and 2
Time step 1
Time step 2 T0-2
T0-0
T0-1 T1-3
T1-1
T1-0 T2-0
T2-2
T2-3 T3-1
T3-3
T0-3 T1-2 T2-1
T3-2
T3-0
(d) Reduce-scatter schedule trees (reduction)
Time step 3
Time step 4 T0-2
T0-3
T0-0
T0-1
T1-1
T1-3 T1-0
T1-2
T2-2
T2-0 T2-3
T2-1
T3-3
T3-1 T3-2
T3-0
(e) All-gather schedule trees (broadcast)
Fig. 3: MULTITREE construction with link allocation and scheduling
for all-reduce communication of a (2×2) Mesh network. Node n in
tree T is denoted as T-n and label (i) of an edge is the allocation
sequence of that link while label t of an edge is the communication
time step between the two nodes: (a) link allocation sequence of the
topology graph for level 1 (time step 1); (b) when no more links
are available for the predecessor levels 0 and 1, a new link topology
graph is used for allocation for level 2 (time step 2); (c) the tree
construction process indicated by edge labels; (d) the constructed
reduce-scatter schedule trees and (e) all-gather schedule trees.
by one, MULTITREE builds them concurrently, generating
balanced trees with global coordination.
B. Main Idea
Given a network G(V,E) with nodes V and edges E, finally
|V | spanning trees are created. To move more communications
near the roots, MULTITREE builds the trees from roots in
a top-down approach, making the predecessor levels denser
and communications balanced across the tree levels. During
tree construction, for each time step (tree level), a topology
graph is used to allocate links to connect remaining nodes to
the spanning trees, and the allocated links are removed from
the graph. When there are no more available links to connect
remaining nodes to any of the trees, a new topology graph is
used for the next time step (tree level).

R0-0 R0-1 R0-3 R0-2
R3-3 R3-2 R3-0 R3-1
R1-1 R1-3 R1-2 R1-0
R2-2 R2-0 R2-1 R2-3
(a) Ring-based all-gather
T0-0
T0-2
T0-1 T0-3
T1-1
T1-2 T1-0
T1-3
(b) Double binary tree broadcast
Fig. 4: All-gather or broadcast phase of the ring-based and double
binary tree algorithms: (a) Ring-based all-gather with Ri-n for
a node n involving in data chunk i, and (b) double binary tree
broadcast with black/red edge color indicating communication at
even/odd step.
We illustrate the main idea by walking through an example2
that constructs schedule trees for a (2×2) Mesh network as
shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3a and 3b show the topology graphs that
are used to facilitate tree constructions for time steps 1 and 2,
respectively. The edge label (i) in Fig. 3a, 3b and 3c indicates
the global link allocation sequence that connects a node to its
parent during the tree construction. Fig. 3c shows all the trees
and their construction sequences, where the trees take turns to
add one node at a time, sustaining tree balance. At sequence
number 7, after the last edge (3 → 2) is added to connect nodes
2 ( T3-2 ) and 3 ( T3-3 ) in tree 3, the topology graph for
time step 1 in Fig. 3a runs out of all the edges. Then, a new
topology graph in Fig. 3b is used to start time step 2, which
creates a new level for the trees. (lines 4–14 of the Algorithm 1
in §III-C). These newly constructed trees are used to build
the reduce-scatter schedule trees and finally, are adjusted to
generate all-gather schedule trees, as shown in Fig. 3d and
3e, respectively. Note that the trees are well balanced and
symmetric in shape, but not necessarily structurally symmetric.
Structural symmetry requires special representation of each
node with respect to the remaining network and only applies
to specific symmetric networks. Moreover, for networks like
a (4×4) Mesh where the longest distance from a source node
varies depending on its position, the trees are asymmetric with
different heights.
Fig. 4 shows the all-gather and broadcast schedules for
ring and double binary tree (DBTree) on the same network,
respectively. Compared to MULTITREE, ring needs one more
step which leads to longer latency. It also shows rings can
be considered as unary spanning trees. Fig. 4b shows the two
trees in DBTree. Although it has the same logical height as
MULTITREE, its physical height is deeper since the connection
between nodes 1 and 2 crosses two hops due to the mismatch
of tree structure and physical topology. Such a mismatch is
even more severe in larger networks. In addition, DBTree
schedules the communications in even/odd steps (black/red
color) such that a node never receives or sends data simultaneously in both trees, which can lengthen the completion
time. Note that each edge in MULTITREE maps to a physical
link, which is only one-hop distance.
2For demonstration purposes, we use a 2×2 Mesh network that is too small
to show the benefit of MULTITREE. Although a larger network can show the
advantages of MULTITREE, we cannot accommodate it due to page limit.
Algorithm 1: MULTITREE All-Reduce Algorithm.
Input: topology graph G(V,E)
Output: reduce scatter schedule, allgather schedule
// Initialization
1 for each node i ∈ V of graph G(V,E) do
2 Tree Ti adds node i to tree Ti as root;
3 t = 0;
// Compute all-gather schedules
4 while not all trees completed do
// Start a new time step t with a new G
5 t = t + 1;
6 G
(V
, E
) = G(V,E);
// Add new nodes to trees and schedule
// communications for this time step
7 while E has free edges to add new nodes do
// Trees take turns for balancing
8 Select next tree T by root ID in ascending order;
9 for p ∈ T’s nodes added by previous time steps do
10 if there is an edge (p → c) ∈ E then
11 Add node c to T and connect to p;
12 Remove edge p → c from E
;
// Schedule message p → c at t
13 Add (p → c, t) to T’s allgather schedule;
14 break;
15 Calculate total time steps tot t = t;
// Compute reduce-scatter schedule, which
// is the reverse of all-gather
16 for (p → c, t
) ∈ allgather schedule of each tree T do
17 Add (c → p, tot t − t
 + 1) to T’s
reduce scatter schedule;
// Adjust all-gather schedule
18 Replace (p → c, t
) with (p → c, tot t + t

);
C. Algorithm Design
More formally, MULTITREE is presented in Algorithm 1.
For ease of understanding, we describe it for direct networks,
and provide the steps to extend for switch-based networks.
1) Algorithm Description: The algorithm initializes a tree
for each node in the network as the root and the time step t
(lines 1–3). Then it starts to construct the schedule trees for
the all-gather phase (broadcast) instead of reduce-scatter, since
it is more natural for the top-down approach to start from the
root (lines 4–14). For every new time step t, a full topology
graph G
(V
, E
) is used, whose edges are removed while
adding new nodes to the trees. During this time step t, trees
take turns to add one node c to connect to a predecessor node p
added in previous time steps. Then the edge p → c is removed
from the topology graph and scheduled for communication at
the current time step t. Note that trees alternate by root ID in
ascending order for simplicity, which works fine in most cases,
especially for symmetric networks like Torus. For asymmetric
or irregular networks, trees with larger remaining height can
be prioritized so that communication on the longest path is
scheduled earlier. At line 9, nodes are examined breadth-first
             
in their order of adding to the tree by previous time steps
so as to make the predecessor levels denser. For selecting a
neighbor of p (line 10), it first checks the neighbors in Y
dimension then in X dimension for Torus and Mesh networks.
Other structural information can be used for asymmetric and
irregular networks, which we leave for future study. When
the topology graph runs out of edges to connect remaining
nodes to any of the trees, it starts a new time step and
repeats the same link allocation procedure until all the allgather schedule trees are completed. After all-gather schedule
trees are constructed, they are used to construct reduce-scatter
trees and adjusted for communication time step (lines 16–18).
Since reduce-scatter goes in the opposite direction with respect
to all-gather communication, the algorithm simply reverses the
communication pairs of all-gather schedule trees with adjusted
time steps. The all-gather schedules are also adjusted in time
to run after reduce-scatter schedules. In static systems, the
algorithm only needs to run once and can be used for any
DNN workloads. In dynamic and shared systems, it runs every
time a new set of nodes is allocated for the workloads.
2) Complexity Analysis: The most expensive part of the
algorithm is the loop for all-gather schedule tree constructions
(lines 4–14). Let us consider a topology graph G(V,E). The
core part of adding new nodes to schedule trees is from lines
9–14. To add a new node, the algorithm checks whether the
already added nodes of that tree still have edges connected to
a pending node. In the worst case, it may check all the edges
of the graph, which is |E|. In total, we have |V | trees and
each tree has |V | nodes. So the worst case is O(|V |
2|E|).
3) Indirect Networks Support: In switch-based networks,
only some switches are connected to end nodes, other switches
connect with each other to form the indirect network. In
Algorithm 1, the topology graph G(V,E) is the adjacency lists
of switch-to-switch connections in a direct network, where
each switch is attached with a node. In order to support indirect
networks, we extend G(V,E) with additional node-to-switch
and switch-to-node connection lists. To find an available
child c for a node p, it follows breadth-first search on these
three topology components as described in the following steps:
(1) Get p’s attached switch sw0 from its node-to-switch list.
(2) When multiple nodes are attached to the same switch,
check whether sw0’s switch-to-node has connections to
connect with p. If there is an available connection, pick
a node as c and remove one connection (p → sw0) from
p’s node-to-switch list and one connection (sw0 → c)
from sw0’s switch-to-node list, then return. If there is
no available connection, go to step 3.
(3) Get the neighbor switch sw1 from the switch-to-switch
list of sw0. Repeat the same process as step 2 with
sw1 until a node c is found or no connection is available. In this case, if a node is found, besides the connections removed in step 2, connections in traversed
switch-to-switch lists should also be removed for the
allocated links.
Reduce 3 1 nil nil nil nil 1
Reduce 1 1 nil nil nil nil 2
Reduce 2 2 1 nil nil nil 2
Gather 0 nil 1 2 nil nil 3
Gather 2 2 1 nil nil nil 4
Accelerator 0
Reduce 2 0 nil nil nil nil 1
Reduce 0 0 nil nil nil nil 2
Reduce 3 3 0 nil nil nil 2
Gather 1 nil 0 3 nil nil 3
Gather 3 3 0 nil nil nil 4
Accelerator 1
Reduce 1 3 nil nil nil nil 1
Reduce 3 3 nil nil nil nil 2
Reduce 0 0 3 nil nil nil 2
Gather 1 nil 0 3 nil nil 3
Gather 0 0 3 nil nil nil 4
Accelerator 2
Reduce 0 2 nil nil nil nil 1
Reduce 2 2 nil nil nil nil 2
Reduce 1 1 2 nil nil nil 2
Gather 3 nil 1 2 nil nil 3
Gather 1 1 2 nil nil nil 4
Accelerator 3
Op FlowID Parent Children Step Start Addr Size
Op FlowID Parent Children Step Op FlowID Parent Children Step
Op FlowID Parent Children Step Op FlowID Parent Children Step
All-Reduce Schedule Table Entry Op: Reduce, Gather, NOP
FlowID: tree ID
Fig. 5: All-Reduce schedule tables for the example in §III-B (The
Start Addr and Size fields are omitted in the tables for brevity).
IV. ARCHITECTURAL SUPPORTS
In this section, we outline the co-designed communication
architecture and the specialized flow control mechanism for
MULTITREE all-reduce operations.
A. All-Reduce Schedule Management
We co-design the network interface (NI) to facilitate MULTITREE all-reduce scheduling. Algorithm 1 constructs trees for
each data chunk. These tree schedules can be converted into
schedule tables (one table per node). Fig. 5 shows the allreduce schedule tables for the example in §III-B. Each table
entry consists of an Op filed for the opcode, a FlowID field
for the tree flow (tree ID), a Parent and Children fields for
the dependencies in this tree flow3. In addition, the Step field
indicates the time step in which this communication should be
initiated. The Start Addr and Size fields are for the starting
address and the size for the gradient message, respectively.
There are three opcodes for all-reduce, namely, Reduce,
Gather, and NOP. During Reduce operation, communication
happens from the leaf to the root. Each internal node of the
trees must receive Reduce before communicating to its parent.
For example, in Fig. 5, accelerator 0 can send a Reduce to
its parent (accelerator 1) for tree flow 3, because it is the
leaf node at step 0 in tree 3. The last Reduce of accelerator 0
should not be sent to the parent (accelerator 2) until it receives
a dependent Reduce from its child (accelerator 1) in the flow
tree 2. On the other hand, during Gather operation, a node
sends messages to the children after receiving a Gather from
the parent unless the node is the root of the tree.
We also provide a NOP to maintain the communication of
different time steps in a lockstep manner. Link contention
can happen without proper scheduling of messages among
the trees. This is more frequent in topologies that generate
imbalanced trees, such as large-scale Mesh, and can limit
the improvement or even degrade performance by destroying the scheduling. Therefore, a mechanism to maintain the
communication in a lockstep fashion is needed to achieve the
3The size of the Children field is calculated as the bandwidth ratio
between the network interface and a network link bandwidth.

Op FlowID Parent Children Step Start Addr Size
Timestep
Counter
= [nil, nil, nil, nil]
=
[Reduce] Send to Parent
(FlowID, Start Addr, Size)
= nil
[Gather] Send to Children
(FlowID, Start Addr, Size)
Reduce/Gather/NOP

DMA Engine
Lockstep
Down Counter
[NOP] Set Counter
Reduce/Gather
0
Idle
>
Increment
Counter
DMA Req DMA Resp
Reduce/Gather
Message to Network
Data
Step > Timestep



Reduce Message
from Network
=
Reduction
Logic
	
Gather Message
from Network  

Fig. 6: Architecture of all-reduce schedule management.
best performance. One option is to use some simple message
passing scheme but that can introduce additional coordination overhead, which can be very high especially for small
messages. Therefore, we propose a lockstep mechanism for
implicit coordination by exploiting the static communication
patterns in all-reduce. Given the message size, the step time is
estimated as the serialization latency assuming no contention4.
When a NOP is inserted, the all-reduce injection is forced to
stall for the estimated step time. Although NOP may leave links
under-utilized, based on our observations, it only happens in
irregular networks and at the leaves of the trees, while other
time steps can fully utilize the links5. Pruning and adjusting
the trees may help in these cases, we leave it for future
exploration. In addition, the estimated lockstep mechanism
does not require a global synchronization across all the NIs.
When the data size is small, minor variation in the same time
step in different nodes has minimum impact as bandwidth
is not the bottleneck. When the data size is large, the long
serialization latency becomes dominant, making the small
clock variance insignificant.
Fig. 6 depicts the architecture for all-reduce schedule management and injection regulation. It includes an all-reduce
schedule table, a timestep counter, a decoder, a lockstep downcounter and the conventional NI facilities. Upon an all-reduce
operation, the schedule table is initialized; the timestep and
lockstep counters are reset by the processor to configure the
scheduling. During all-reduce, the head entry of the table
4The step time is estimated as the number of flits (num_flits) for the perstep data chunk if the NI buffers can hold it completely. Otherwise, it is
estimated as num_flits subtracting the NI buffer size (translating to flit size). 5Note that even in best-effort utilization, links may be under-utilized as
data size may not be perfectly divisible by the aggregated bandwidth.
is inspected ( 1 ). If the Step is the same as the timestep
counter value and the children (for Reduce) or parent (for
Gather) dependencies are satisfied, the operation is issued to
send the messages. Then, the Op is decoded to decide the
corresponding action ( 2 ). If it is a NOP, the lockstep counter
is set and starts down counting for an estimated time step. If
it is a Reduce/Gather, the Start Addr and Size are used to
request the DMA engine for bulk data transfer. When the data
comes back, the FlowID is encapsulated with other address
information in the data packet to start communication. When
the lockstep counter is zero and the all-reduce units are idle,
the timestep counter is incremented if the next operation in the
schedule table is for the next step ( 3 ). Upon receiving Reduce
messages, it is issued to the reduction logic for aggregation
( 4 ). Once the aggregation for Reduce of the current step is
finished, they are used to clear the dependencies of future
Reduce/Gather ( 5 ). When a Gather is received, it is directed
to the schedule table to clear the parent dependence for the
upcoming Gather ( 6 ).
B. Message-based Flow Control for Big Gradient Exchanges
Unlike general purpose applications, all-reduce communication in data-parallel DNN training has a relatively fixed
traffic pattern. With a specific all-reduce algorithm, the communication pattern is known in advance for a training task.
For example, MULTITREE constructs schedule trees before
training starts. This prior knowledge can be leveraged for simpler control and arbitration in hardware, thereby simplifying
logic and improving energy efficiency. MULTITREE algorithm
aims to coordinate among the trees with a global view, where
less dynamism in interconnection networks helps maintain
the communication schedules, thereby keeping concurrent
communications progressing at a similar rate. In addition, the
long traffic (between a communicating pair) for all-reduce of
large gradients unnecessarily incurs bandwidth overhead of
massive number of packet head flits. To optimize these aspects,
we revisit the traditional flow control techniques and redesign
them specifically for all-reduce communication.
Fig. 7a shows a commonly used packet-based switching
mechanism, where large gradients are divided into many
messages. Each message is partitioned into multiple packets.
Each packet consists of a head flit and body/tail flits. The
highlighted head flits consumes bandwidth and incurs extra
control such as routing and arbitration, causing extra delay
and energy consumption. On the other hand, we adapt a
message-based approach to reduce such overheads, as shown
in Fig. 7b. Instead of having a fixed message size, we take
the whole chunk of gradients as a message, which can be
further converted to many sub-messages starting with a head
sub-message and ending with a tail sub-message. Each submessage is divided into sub-packets, where the first sub-packet
of the head sub-message is a head sub-packet, which behaves
as the head of the large gradient message. The last subpacket of the tail sub-message is the tail sub-packet to end the
gradient message. Similarly, the sub-packets are partitioned
into flits. Unlike conventional packet-based switching, body
  
Message Message … Message
Packet Packet … Packet
Head
Flit
Body
Flit … Tail
Flit
Gradients
n Flits
(a) Original gradient message
Head Sub-Message Body Sub-Message … Tail Sub-Message
Gradients
Body
Sub-Packet
Body
Sub-Packet … Body
Sub-Packet
Head
Flit
Body
Flit … Sub
Tail
Head
Sub-Packet
Body
Sub-Packet … Body
Sub-Packet
Body
Sub-Packet
Body
Sub-Packet … Tail
Sub-Packet
Body
Flit … Sub
Tail
Body
Flit … Tail
Flit
n Flits n-1 Flits n-1 Flits
(b) Big gradient message
Fig. 7: Flow control: (a) original many messages with small packets of gradients and (b) big message with large packet of full gradients.
VC Type Packet Info Header Info
2 3 1 10
(a) Head and head&tail flit
VC Type unused Payload
2 3 3
(b) Body and tail flit
Packet Info  Route Info  Dest Src
4 4 2
(c) Normal packet information in head flit
Packet Info  Route Info Tree Info  Next Eject Tree ID
6 4 3 3 4
(d) Sub-packet information in head flit
Fig. 8: Flit formatting in a (4×4) Torus network for (a) head and
head&tail flit, (b) body and tail flit, (c) packet information in head
flit for normal packet, and (d) sub-packet.
and tail sub-packets start with a body flit, while head and body
sub-packets end with a sub-tail flit to indicate the completion
of a sub-packet. This leads to only one head flit for a large
gradient message, achieving near perfect bandwidth efficiency
to improve performance and energy efficiency. This not only
gains the benefit of circuit switching without setup time, but
also avoids blocking other critical short packets from using
the physical links.
TABLE II: Packet and Flit Types
Normal Packet Flit Code
Head 000
Body 001
Tail 010
Head & Tail 011
Sub-Packet Flit Code
Head 100
Body 101
Sub-Tail 110
Tail 111
Fig. 8a and 8b show the flit formats for head/head&tail
flit and body/tail flit, respectively. The VC field indicates the
allocated virtual channel and the Type field specifies the
packet and flit type, as listed in Table II. The Packet Info
field is encoded differently for normal packets and all-reduce
sub-packets, as shown in Fig. 8c and 8d. For normal packets,
the Packet Info is simply the Route Info, including Dest
and Src that are used by the distributed routing algorithms. For
all-reduce sub-packets, Packet Info includes both Route
Info and Tree Info, where the Tree Info is the Tree
ID that this message belongs to. Since MULTITREE only
communicates between neighbors, we use source routing to
include the next hop output port Next and ejection port
Eject in the head flit. In the network interface, these pieces
of information are pre-computed and stored in Route Info,
which can be directly used in the routers. More specifically,
in the source router, the Next field is used to route to the
neighbor, which will interchange with the Eject field after
the routing computation stage. The Next field is kept toward
the destination in order to identify which child the message is
from to clear dependencies for scheduling purposes.
Since MULTITREE all-reduce only schedules communications between two neighboring nodes, the flits always take one
hop. Therefore, such a design does not increase the possibility
and risk of deadlock. Note that it can still work with wormhole
switching seamlessly to support other types of traffic, such as
control and synchronization traffic. Virtual channels are used
to avoid starvation of other short messages.
V. METHODOLOGY
A. System Modeling and Configuration
We extended SCALE-Sim [35], a DNN inference simulator,
to support back-propagation for training, where output stationary dataflow is applied. We configure a TPU-like accelerator
with 16 processing elements (PEs), where each PE has a
(32×32) systolic array. We assume double buffering and sufficient memory bandwidth (such as high bandwidth memory)
to maintain the peak compute throughput. The accelerator is
also used for aggregation during all-reduce communication.
We use BookSim [36] for interconnect modeling and implemented a python interface between SCALE-Sim and BookSim
so that the accelerator and network can interact through network interface, which implements the co-designed all-reduce
scheduling. The extra hardware overhead includes a schedule
table and two counters, one for the lockstep down counter and
the other for the time step counter. Since each tree needs two
entries in each node, one for reduce-scatter and one for allgather, the number of table entries is double the number of
trees, which is the total number of nodes. So a table needs
2N entries for an N-node system. For a 64-node system,
each table entry needs 200 bits and the table needs only
128 entries, which incurs 3.2 KB overhead. The schedules
are computed once during initialization and loaded to network
interfaces for reuse in the iterative training epochs. Since the
offloading and scheduling of communication are supported
in hardware, protocol and software overhead compared to

TABLE III: System Configurations
Parameter Configuration
PE
MAC array 32×32
Dataflow Output Stationary
Precision 32 bits
Accelerator Number of PEs 16
Clock 1 GHz
Network
Number of Accelerators 16, 32, 64
Topology 2D Torus, Mesh, Fat-Tree, BiGraph
Flow Control Virtual Cut-Through
Router Clock 1 GHz
Number of VCs 4
VC Buffer Depth 318 flits
Data Packet Payload 256 Bytes for Baselines
Link Latency/Bandwidth 150 ns / 16 GB/s
software scheduling can be reduced. Note that this scheduling
mechanism is applied to all the baselines for fair comparison.
We configure the buffer size to cover the credit round-trip loop,
the link to match the targeting bandwidth, and the payload size
that is used in modern training systems [37]. Note that larger
link bandwidth can relax the pressure of all-reduce, but the
benefit of MULTITREE over other approaches still holds.
To demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of MULTITREE, we study several topologies, including 2D Torus, Mesh,
Fat-Tree (similar to NVIDIA DGX-2 [38]) and the recent
BiGraph [29]. For all the networks, we test a smaller scale (16-
node or 32-node) and a larger scale (64-node). We also conduct
a scalability study on Torus by scaling out to 256 accelerators.
The 2D Torus and Mesh direct networks are similar to Google
Cloud TPU [4], whose network interface is integrated on chip.
We also assume the network interface bandwidth matches the
network bandwidth of the attached router in direct networks.
For switch-based networks, each accelerator is connected with
a NIC that connects to a port of the leaf switch. We also use
a 2D 8×8 Torus for DNN benchmark evaluation. The system
configuration parameters are listed in Table III.
B. Workloads
We conduct synthetic study for all-reduce bandwidth on network topology (§VI-A) and for scalability evaluation (§VI-B).
The all-reduce data size is chosen such that good amounts of
communication is created to stress the network and simulations
can finish in reasonable time. To test all-reduce bandwidth on
different network topologies, we vary the all-reduce data size
from 32 KiB to 64 MiB. For scalability study, we use an allreduce size of 375×N KiB, where N is the number of nodes.
We also evaluate the DNN models provided by SCALESim [35] (§VI-C), including AlexNet [39], AlphaGoZero [40],
FasterRCNN [41], GoogLeNet [42], NCF recommendation
(NCF) [43], ResNet50 [44] and Transformer [45], [46]. We
run with a mini-batch size of 16×N for an N-node system (16
samples per accelerator)6 and evaluate the training time for one
6We choose a mini-batch size of 16×N for an N-node system to fully utilize the compute resources, while trade-off between mini-batch size, training
time and model accuracy is out of our scope [47].
iteration for both non-overlap (forward+back-propagation+allreduce) and computation-communication overlap (layer-wise
all-reduce). In layer-wise all-reduce, each layer is queued for
all-reduce once they finish back-propagation. So communication overlaps with computation while SGD is propagating back
to previous layers [48].
VI. EVALUATION
We evaluate the MULTITREE without and MULTITREEMSG
with the message-based flow control enabled, respectively. We
also compare our proposed approach with several state-of-theart all-reduce algorithms as follows.
• RING: ring all-reduce algorithm [9] that can be applied
to all our evaluated topologies.
• DBTREE: double binary tree [10], [16] that is topologyoblivious and can be applied to all network topologies.
• 2D-RING: two-dimensional ring all-reduce that is dedicated to 2D Torus and Mesh networks [28].
• HDRM: halving-doubling with rank mapping that is
dedicated to BiGraph topology in EFLOPS [29].
A. All-Reduce Bandwidth
To show the applicability of MULTITREE on various network topologies, we configure 4×4 and 8×8 Torus networks,
4×4 and 8×8 Mesh networks, a 16-node Fat-Tree network
similar to DGX-2 but with one physical network and a 64-
node 8-ary 2-level Fat-Tree, 32-node 4×8 and 64-node 4×16
BiGraph networks. We applied the extended version of the
algorithm described in §III-C3 to switch-based systems such
as Fat-Tree and BiGraph. We vary the all-reduce data size from
32 KiB to 64 MiB and evaluate the bandwidth by calculating
the all-reduce data size divided by simulation time. The results
are shown in Fig. 9.
As shown in Fig. 9a and 9b, MULTITREE and MULTITREEMSG always achieve better bandwidth than others
regardless of the data size. This is because when data size is
small, MULTITREE can finish the all-reduce with less steps;
when data size is large, MULTITREE exploits the network
topology and increases the link utilization. Particularly for
DBTREE, it is the worst in these two topologies since the tree
nodes map poorly to the network, which causes severe contention. 2D-RING is better than RING in Torus and 4×4 Mesh
but always worse than MULTITREE and MULTITREEMSG
since 2D-RING is not bandwidth-optimal and communicates
much more data than MULTITREE due to its two ring allreduce phases in the two dimensions of the networks. Interestingly, 2D-RING is worse than RING in the larger 8×8 Mesh
network. The reason is twofold. First, there is no perfect ring
topology in a dimension of the Mesh network, the latency is
determined by the slowest pair, which is the two farthest nodes
in the same dimension. Second, 2D-RING is bandwidth suboptimal and can send twice the amount of data compared to
bandwidth-optimal algorithms (RING and MULTITREE).
In both Fat-Tree and BiGraph as shown in Fig. 9c and
9d, MULTITREE and MULTITREEMSG outperform RING with
smaller data size; when data size is large, they achieve

(a) Torus networks (b) Mesh networks (c) Fat-Tree networks (d) BiGraph networks
Fig. 9: All-Reduce bandwidth on different topologies with various data size: (a) 4×4 and 8×8 Torus, (b) 4×4 and 8×8 Mesh, (c) 16-node
(similar to DGX-2) and 64-node 2-level Fat-Tree, (d) 32-node 4×8 and 64-node 4×16 BiGraph in EFLOPS.
Fig. 10: Scalability with 375×N KiB all-reduce data size normalized
to 16-node performance of RING, where N is the number of nodes.
almost the same performance. In these two topologies, both
MULTITREE and RING derive the same number of steps.
In MULTITREE, nodes first communicate with the nodes
that are connected to the same switch and have less link
traversals, which is very critical for reducing latency in offchip interconnection networks. In contrast, RING’s latency
is serialized by the slowest pair of nodes that connect to
different leaf switches, causing more link traversal. Therefore,
MULTITREE is better with a small data size which is latencysensitive. When with large data size, both algorithms fully
utilize the bandwidth and achieve the same performance.
In DBTREE-friendly networks, DBTREE can achieve better
latency compared to RING due to smaller number of steps,
but it suffers from contention when messages get large. For
larger network size such as 64-node systems, their break-even
data size point is shifted right. We also compare MULTITREE
and MULTITREEMSG with HDRM that is co-designed with
the BiGraph network [29]. Although HDRM has a smaller
number of steps than MULTITREE, the extra link traversal
incurred for each communication between the upper and lower
switches offsets its benefit, leading to worse performance with
small data size. When dealing with large data sizes, HDRM
also fully utilizes the bandwidth. MULTITREEMSG increases
the payload bandwidth by another 6%.
B. Scalability
Fig. 10 shows the weak scalability with the all-reduce size
of 375×N KiB for an N-node system, and scaling out N
from 16 to 256. The communication time is normalized to
RING’s 16-node network performance. All the three algorithms
scale linearly to the number of nodes while sustaining different
linear factors, where MULTITREEMSG is the best and RING
is the worst. Although both fully utilize the network links,
MULTITREEMSG is better than 2D-RING because 2D-RING
is bandwidth sub-optimal and can communicate nearly twice
the amount of data compared to MULTITREEMSG. As RING
does not fully utilize the network links, it achieves the least
performance. In summary, MULTITREEMSG achieves 3× and
1.4× speedup over RING and 2D-RING, respectively. We also
experimented with strong scalability with a large problem size
and there is only small variation for each algorithm since
they are all contention-free and serialization latency is more
dominant for large all-reduce size.
C. DNN Benchmark Performance
Fig. 11 shows the training time breakdown on an 8×8 Torus
network normalized to RING, for both non-overlapped training
approach (Fig. 11a) and computation-communication overlap
approach (Fig. 11b). As shown in Fig. 11a, except for AlexNet,

(a) Non-overlapped training time breakdown and all-reduce speedup (b) Overlapped training time breakdown with layer-wise all-reduce
Fig. 11: Training time breakdown of DNN training on an 8×8 Torus network: (a) forward+back-propagation computation and all-reduce
communication breakdown (primary) and all-reduce speedup (secondary) normalized to RING using non-overlapped training approach; (b)
computation and computation-communication overlap as well as communication time breakdown normalized to RING using overlapped
training approach with layer-wise all-reduce.
other DNNs have a considerable amount of time on allreduce communication. CNNs such as AlexNet, FasterRCNN,
GoogLeNet, and ResNet50 are compute-intensive and need to
compute transposed convolution to for input gradients in order
to propagate back to the previous layer. In contrast, NCF and
Transformer have more embedding and attention layers, which
have less computation requirements, making communication
more dominant. In summary, communication time can vary
from 30%–88% in the baseline RING. For compute-intensive
CNNs, MULTITREE improves training performance by up to
34% and 15% compared to RING and 2D-RING, respectively.
For communication-intensive DNNs, MULTITREE improves
training performance by 81% and 30% compared to RING
and 2D-RING, respectively.
Fig. 11a also shows normalized all-reduce speedup over
RING. On average, MULTITREE achieves 2.2× and 1.51×
speedup over RING and 2D-RING, respectively. When applying message-based flow control, all-reduce performance is
further improved by 6%, leading to an average of 2.3× and
1.56× speedup compared to RING and 2D-RING, respectively.
It also shows that double binary tree (DBTREE) is worse
than all other algorithms on 2D Torus. Since DBTREE is
a topology-oblivious algorithm that builds two logical trees,
where the tree nodes map poorly onto the physical network.
As a result, the connected nodes in the trees can cross
multiple hops and cause network contention. Furthermore, the
contention on links of large messages due to large models even
worsen the performance. Note that message-based flow control
can also be applied to other algorithms. The 6% bandwidth
saving on head flits can contribute to nearly the same amount
of improvement for all-reduce communication.
To understand the effect of computation-communication
overlap on reducing all-reduce communication overhead, we
also experimented with an overlapped training approach using
layer-wise all-reduce. The training time breakdown for computation, computation-communication overlap and communication is depicted in Fig. 11b. In general, MULTITREE achieves
the best performance while DBTREE performs the worst. For
computation dominant workloads such as CNNs (AlexNet,
FasterRCNN, GoogLeNet, ResNet50), computation can largely
overlap with most of the all-reduce communication time and
mitigate the communication bottleneck. For these workloads,
MULTITREE improves training performance by up to 10%
compared to RING. And 2D-RING can perform similarly
to MULTITREE but it has a larger portion of computationcommunication overlap due to its longer communication time.
On the contrary, for communication dominant DNNs such as
NCF and Transformer, computation can only overlap a small
amount of communication time. These workloads have large
amounts of embedding and attention computations, which have
less computation requirements, leaving communication still a
bottleneck. In such cases, MULTITREE can still achieve 2×
1.37× speedup compared to RING and 2D-RING, respectively,
in terms of training performance. Recent study shows that most
of the DNN computation cycles are on non-CNN layers [49],
meaning most DNN models in data centers are communication
dominant. Therefore, MULTITREE is promising to drive faster
distributed training at scale.
VII. DISCUSSIONS
A. Bandwidth versus Latency
An ideal algorithm should be optimal for both bandwidth
and latency. Theoretically, MULTITREE aims to build multiple k-ary trees, which have tree height of logk n for n
nodes, where ring and butterfly exchanges [50] are special
cases whose k is 1 and 2, respectively. When the all-reduce
data size is small, butterfly can achieve better latency than
ring due to less number of steps. However, it suffers from
contention for large data size, where serialization latency
plays a more important role [12]. Similar to DBTREE, the
multi-hop communication on butterfly-unfriendly topologies
can further worsen the situation. In cases of multi-phase rings,
the benefit of algorithmic step reduction can be offset by more
communicated data and require more bandwidth for large data
sizes, leading to higher serialization latency similar to 2DRING. In contrast, MULTITREE is not only bandwidth optimal,

but also low-latency by reducing the communication steps and
hops in switch-based networks.
B. Broader Applications
Although MULTITREE is designed for data parallelism,
it can also support hybrid-parallel inference and training.
Reduce-scatter and all-gather are naturally supported. The
message-based flow control can also be used to improve
bandwidth efficiency in both cases. In addition, MULTITREE
can speed up data-parallel components in a hybrid approach.
When the parallelism strategy and DNN workload are determined, MULTITREE runs for the nodes that involve allreduce communication. The all-gather trees can also easily
support all-to-all collective in recent DNN workloads such
as DLRM [51]. MultiTree can also be implemented in software, but the scheduling and synchronization can offset the
benefit. For networks with heterogeneous link bandwidths,
the topology graph can be modeled as a multigraph where
each edge is a unit of bandwidth, and wider links can be
modeled as multiple edges proportional to the link bandwidth,
so MULTITREE applies properly. MULTITREE can also support general purpose cluster networks or public clouds if the
network topology is provided or can be probed. However, it
may not achieve best performance due to interference if the
training job is co-located with other jobs.
C. Opportunities
Although the theoretical number of steps is logarithmic of
the number of nodes for trees, the best number of algorithmic
steps MULTITREE achieves is limited to the network diameter
when considering network topology. Nonetheless, MULTITREE demonstrates the effectiveness of algorithm-architecture
co-design for communication acceleration by exploiting network topology and big message size of all-reduce for distributed deep learning. This study also reveals more co-design
opportunities with topology, such as topology design for dataparallel training [29] or more complex hybrid-parallel deep
learning. In addition, reducing the number of trees by trading
bandwidth and latency as an attempt in recent work [17] can
be further explored. We leave these aspects for future work.
VIII. ADDITIONAL RELATED WORK
A. Collectives Acceleration for DNN Training.
Recent research has also considered topology information
with tree structures to improve all-reduce [52]. However,
the linear programming complexity does not scale well to
larger networks in practice. Another implementation applies a
partitioning optimization algorithm to build trees from leaves,
which only supports a specific network topology [53]. Its
backtracking operation using exhaustive search can take days
to find a single solution even with a small network. Therefore,
it is neither practical nor portable to various network configurations. The recently proposed Blink [17] also generates
multiple directed spanning trees to increase link utilization.
However, spanning trees for DGX-2 is a dedicated design
but not from the main algorithm. In contrast, MULTITREE
is generalized for various topologies and generates the same
trees as Blink’s dedicated DGX-2 design. In addition, Blink
has no control on the usage order among the trees on
the same link, while MULTITREE’s co-design provides finegrained control to schedule link communication earlier for
the critical tree. Blink’s main algorithm first creates trees
stemming from the same root for DGX-1 using approximate
packing and then minimizes the number of trees using integer
linear programming (ILP). Such a flow rate optimization does
not consider the all-reduce computation dependency, while
MULTITREE inherently considers the computation dependency
in tree construction. Since multiple trees swan from the same
root, only one way of the bidirectional links attached to the
root are used for receiving or sending data in the distinct
reduction and broadcast phases, leaving the link bandwidth
under-utilized. In MULTITREE, each node is both a root of
a tree and internal/leaf node(s) in all other trees in order
to utilize all the bidirectional links. Moreover, MULTITREE
scales well to larger network size while Blink may be limited
by the expensive ILP. Recently, Luo et al. designed a library
for the cloud to probe the physical network and schedule a
two-level hierarchical aggregation plan for efficient gradient
update [54]. Li et al. addressed the communication overhead of
DNN training by applying in-network acceleration [55]. More
recently, Klenk et al. proposed an in-network architecture for
in-switch reduction to accelerate all-reduce [56], which targets
shared-memory multiprocessors.
B. Flow Control and Arbitration
General flow control techniques are used to ensure correct
flow of packets from source to destination. In addition to the
basic functionality, Peh et al. extended the flow control to
reserve the path using a control packet ahead of data packet
arrival [57]. It allows them to achieve better buffer usage,
and eliminates latency for routing and arbitration decisions.
With similar motivation, Ahn et al. proposed pseudo-circuit
by exploiting communication temporal locality [58]. Kumar
et al. proposed a token based technique for improving routing
and flow control [59], which also tries to establish a bypass
path to avoid the routing and switching arbitration logic.
IX. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we identify the inefficiency in the widely
used all-reduce algorithms and the opportunity of algorithmarchitecture co-design. We propose MULTITREE all-reduce
algorithm that constructs multiple trees with topology and
link utilization considerations for contention-free all-reduce
scheduling. We augment the network interface to coordinate the communications among the trees by enforcing the
scheduling with a simple lockstep estimation mechanism. The
evaluation shows that the message-based flow control can
achieve 6% bandwidth improvement. Furthermore, the codesign works well on different topologies and achieves 2.3×
and 1.56× communication speedup (up to 81% and 30%
training time reduction) over RING and state-of-the-art 2DRING, respectively