DRAM is the dominant main memory technology used in
modern computing systems. Computing systems implement a
memory controller that interfaces with DRAM via DRAM commands. DRAM executes the given commands using internal
components (e.g., access transistors, sense amplifiers) that are
orchestrated by DRAM internal timings, which are fixed for
each DRAM command. Unfortunately, the use of fixed internal
timings limits the types of operations that DRAM can perform
and hinders the implementation of new functionalities and custom mechanisms that improve DRAM reliability, performance
and energy. To overcome these limitations, we propose enabling programmable DRAM internal timings for controlling
in-DRAM components.
To this end, we design CODIC, a new low-cost DRAM substrate that enables fine-grained control over four previously
fixed internal DRAM timings that are key to many DRAM operations. We implement CODIC with only minimal changes
to the DRAM chip and the DDRx interface. To demonstrate
the potential of CODIC, we propose two new CODIC-based
security mechanisms that outperform state-of-the-art mechanisms in several ways: (1) a new DRAM Physical Unclonable
Function (PUF) that is more robust and has significantly higher
throughput than state-of-the-art DRAM PUFs, and (2) the first
cold boot attack prevention mechanism that does not introduce
any performance or energy overheads at runtime.
1. Introduction
DRAM is the ubiquitous technology employed for main memory across computing systems. System components interact
with DRAM via DRAM commands. These commands trigger
a set of internal DRAM circuit signals that control different
DRAM components in a timely manner to achieve a specific
functionality (e.g., activate a DRAM row). The timing with
which these signals are triggered and the relative order of these
signals determine the functionality, energy consumption, and
latency of the resulting operation. On modern DRAM devices,
the manufacturer fixes these timings at design time for each
command. However, having fixed internal circuit timings for
each DRAM operation limits the operations that the internal
DRAM circuits can perform and hinders their potential for
implementing custom optimizations that adapt to the characteristics of the device (e.g., process variation) and environmental
conditions (e.g., temperature changes, aging).
The lack of control over internal DRAM circuit timings
inhibits at least two research directions. First, prior works
that extend the functionalities of DRAM [27, 38, 56, 58, 75,
77, 125–128] cannot be evaluated or demonstrated reliably on
real DRAM chips due to the lack of control over the DRAM
internal circuit timing [71]. One example of this limitation is
ComputeDRAM [38], which demonstrates computing capabilities in DRAM by triggering a specific sequence of commands
from the memory controller with modified timing parameters.
Although ComputeDRAM shows the potential for extending
functionality by varying standard DRAM operating timings,
the results shown in the paper demonstrate that only a small
fraction of the cells can reliably perform the intended computations; for a vast majority of cells the intended computation
cannot be performed reliably. The reason for this unreliability remains unknown, in part because of the black-box design
of DRAM that completely limits the user’s visibility into and
control over the DRAM internal timing signals.
Second, several works propose DRAM energy and access
latency optimizations by reducing timing parameters of commands issued by the memory controller [23, 56, 76, 82–84, 152,
161]. However, these works are limited to modifications to
memory controller timing parameters, and they do not explore
optimizations of internal in-DRAM timing signals. For example, an activate command might have a very conservative time
interval between (1) the internal in-DRAM signals that activate the access transistors of DRAM cells, and (2) the internal
in-DRAM signals that activate the sense amplifiers (SA) for
sensing and amplifying the content of DRAM cells. Reducing this time interval for the DRAM regions that can reliably
operate with reduced in-DRAM timings can further improve
overall system performance.
In this work, we advocate for a substrate that enables greater
control over DRAM internal circuit timings as an efficient and
low-cost way to enable new functionalities and optimizations
in DRAM. We propose CODIC,1 a low-cost DRAM substrate
that enables fine-grained control of four key signals that orchestrate DRAM internal circuit timings. The circuits controlled
by CODIC perform fundamental operations that (1) connect
DRAM cells to bitlines, (2) trigger sense amplifiers, and (3) trigger the logic to prepare DRAM banks for the next access. The
memory controller can access the substrate with a new CODIC
command, which can be configured with in-DRAM registers
to enable new functionalities and optimizations.
By providing fine-granularity control over DRAM internal
circuit timings, CODIC enables new DRAM functionalities and
optimizations of existing DRAM commands. To demonstrate
this point, we implement and evaluate in detail two configurations of the CODIC substrate that expose two new functionalities: (1) in-place generation of digital signatures, which
depend on process variation and are unique to each DRAM
region and DRAM device (i.e., Physical Unclonable Functions,
PUFs [40,75,90,140]); and (2) in-place generation of deterministic values, which are defined at DRAM design-time. These
two functionalities are key for implementing several security
applications.
1Fine-grained COntrol over DRAM Internal Circuit timings (CODIC).

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00045
Although CODIC can be used for multiple purposes, such
as reducing DRAM latency and energy or improving existing DRAM mechanisms (see Section 5), we find that CODIC
can be very useful for improving the security of two specific
emerging computing platforms. First, low-power systems (e.g.,
Internet of Things or IoT devices) cannot afford sophisticated
security mechanisms adopted by high-end processors (e.g.,
memory encryption [29]) because such mechanisms can consume significant energy and area [162]. Second, ProcessingIn-Memory (PIM) systems (e.g., [3, 4, 17–19, 37, 42–45, 51, 69,
89, 101, 102, 105, 125–128, 130, 131, 139]) implement low-cost
computing units that typically do not have security features
and lack an interface to access the security features of the
host processor. For both types of systems, CODIC enables
implementing security support within DRAM, thereby enabling
suitable applications for improving system security at low-cost.
As a proof of concept, we use CODIC to develop two new
applications for improving system security. First, we propose a
new CODIC-based Physical Unclonable Function (PUF) [40,
75, 90, 140] with greater throughput and reliability than stateof-the-art DRAM PUFs [75, 144]. A PUF generates signatures
unique to a device due to the unique physical variations of
the device (i.e., process variation). PUFs are typically used
to authenticate or uniquely identify a device. Our evaluation
shows that our CODIC-based PUF provides higher throughput,
excellent resilience to temperature changes, and more stable
PUF responses (i.e., the same challenge produces the same
response) than the state-of-the-art DRAM PUFs [75, 144].
Second, we propose a new CODIC-based mechanism to
prevent Cold Boot Attacks [12, 47, 52, 60, 86, 91, 97, 100, 135,
150, 159]. In a Cold Boot Attack, the attacker physically removes the DRAM module from the victim system and places
it in a system under their control to extract secret information. Because data in DRAM is stored in capacitors, the data
can potentially remain in the cells long enough (during physical extraction) for data to be stolen. The key idea of our
CODIC-based mechanism is to automatically overwrite the entire DRAM with values generated by CODIC when the DRAM
chip is first powered-on. Our evaluation shows that our CODICbased mechanism is 2.0× faster than the best prior mechanism.
The potential of CODIC extends beyond the security applications proposed and evaluated in this work. CODIC provides
a low-cost substrate for controlling DRAM internal circuit
timings that enables the implementation of a wide variety of
new functionalities, and custom optimizations that improve
reliability, performance, and energy consumption. Section 5.3
discusses several other potential CODIC use cases.
We make the following major contributions:
• We propose CODIC, a new low-cost DRAM substrate for
controlling DRAM internal circuit timings. CODIC can
be used to implement new functionalities, and custom optimizations that improve reliability, performance, and energy
consumption. To demonstrate the potential of CODIC, we
propose and evaluate two configurations of the CODIC mechanism that enable new security applications.
• We propose a new CODIC-based DRAM PUF that has
1.8× higher throughput than the best state-of-the-art DRAM
PUF, has similar resilience to temperature changes, and provides more repeatable PUF responses than the state-of-the-art
DRAM PUF. We evaluate our CODIC-based DRAM PUF
using 136 real commodity DRAM chips to validate the functionality of our mechanism.
• We propose a new CODIC-based cold boot attack prevention
mechanism that operates only at power-on while ensuring
reliable protection. Our mechanism does not incur any latency or power overhead at runtime, and it is 2.0× lower
latency and 1.7× lower energy than the best state-of-the-art
mechanisms [21, 125] during DRAM power-on.
2. Background
DRAM Organization. A single DRAM chip has limited capacity (e.g., 8Gb) and data width (e.g., 8-bit). DRAM chips are
grouped together in a DRAM module to form a rank, providing
higher capacity (e.g., 8GB) and larger data width (e.g., 64-bit).
Each DRAM rank consists of multiple logical banks striped
across chips. Each bank contains multiple (typically 128 to
512) 2D DRAM cell arrays (i.e., subarrays [22, 81]). Cells are
organized in rows, which are connected to a row buffer (RB).
The RB consists of a set of sense amplifiers that are used to
activate one row at a time in the subarray. Each vertical line
of cells is connected to one sense amplifier via a bitline wire.
Cells within a row share a wordline. Each cell consists of a
capacitor that stores data in form of charge (Vdd or 0V), and
an access transistor controlled by the wordline that connects
the cell to the Sense Amplifier through the bitline.
DRAM Sense Amplifier (SA). The Sense Amplifier (SA) is
used to sense and amplify the small amount of charge in a
DRAM cell capacitor to a CMOS-readable value. A set of
SAs connected to a row of cells is called row buffer. A cell
is connected to an SA via a bitline. In the idle state, bitlines
are driven to Vdd/2. When the SA is enabled, it detects any
voltage deviation from Vdd/2 and amplifies the bitline charge
to 0 or Vdd.
DRAM Operation. The memory controller interacts with
DRAM using three basic commands: Activate (ACT),
Read/Write (RD/WR), Precharge (PRE). Figure 1 details the
steps for reading a DRAM cell using these commands. 1 Initially, the bitline is held at Vdd/2 with the wordline at 0V. 2 To
access data, the memory controller issues an ACT command,
which applies high voltage to the target wordline, connecting
that row’s cells to their respective bitlines. This causes a deviation of the bitline voltage in one direction (i.e., ε in Figure 1,
2 ). This process is called charge sharing. 3 Shortly after, the
sense amplifier is enabled to sense and amplify this deviation
(3Vdd/4 voltage represents an example of a voltage that is not
fully amplified). After sufficient amplification, the memory
controller can issue RD or WR commands to the row buffer
(i.e., sense amplifiers). The time needed to finish the ACT command is specified by the timing parameter tRCD. 4 The sense
amplifier continues to amplify the deviation until the voltage
of the cell is fully restored (i.e., Vdd). 5 Finally, the memory
controller issues a PRE command to lower the wordline voltage
back to 0V and drive the sense amplifier and bitline to Vdd/2.
The time needed to complete a PRE command is specified by
the timing parameter tRP. Once precharged, another row in
the subarray can be activated.
DRAM Internal Circuit Timings. Figure 2a shows a detailed
circuit of a common SA design [71], and the four internal
DRAM signals required to perform the activate and precharge

Wordline
0V
Bitline
Vdd/2
Vdd
0V
1
Precharged
Vh
0V
2
Charge Sharing
Vdd/2+
Vdd/2+
Vh
0V
3
Sensing
3Vdd/4
3Vdd/4
Vh
Vdd
4
Restored
Vdd
0V
Vdd
0V
5
Precharged
Vdd/2
ACT Command RD Command
0V
PRE Command
Figure 1: Activate (ACT), Read (RD), Precharge (PRE) commands.



… …
…
	 …









	

	
 



(a) Detailed SA circuit (b) Precharge and activate commands
Figure 2: (a) Four fundamental DRAM internal signals used to control
the SA and precharge units, and (b) DRAM internal signal timing in regular precharge and activate commands.
commands: (1) wl controls the access transistor that connects
the cell capacitor to the bitline, (2) EQ controls the precharge
unit that sets the bitline to VDD/2, (3) sense_p controls the
PMOS amplifier in the SA, and (4) sense_n controls the NMOS
amplifier in the SA.
Figure 2b shows the SPICE simulation of the four DRAM
internal signals used to implement the precharge and activate
commands, and their effect on the voltage of the bitline and
the cell capacitor. During a PRE command, we observe that
only the EQ signal is triggered for setting the bitline to the
precharge voltage level (Vdd/2). During the ACT command,
we observe that (1) the wordline (wl) is triggered to share the
charge between the cell and the bitline; and (2) after charge
sharing, sense_n and sense_p are triggered to sense and amplify
the small charge in the cell.
3. Motivation and Goal
Many recent works reveal via DRAM characterization that
exploiting the effects of changing timings between DRAM
commands can provide substantial benefits to the overall
system [23, 56, 76, 82–84, 152, 161]. However, prior works
do not discuss the potential of controlling DRAM internal
circuit timings.
Violating Memory Controller DDRx Timing Parameters.
We identify and describe three ways in which prior works exploit the ability to violate memory controller DDRx timing
parameters [67]. First, prior works [23, 56, 76, 82–84, 152, 161]
identify substantial margins in memory controller DDRx timing
parameters (i.e., DRAM latency settings) that can be reduced
to improve overall system performance. For example, Chang
et al. [23] experimentally demonstrate that they can statically
profile DRAM and reduce tRCD while maintaining data correctness. Second, prior works [75, 77, 104, 144] exploit the
characteristics of DRAM failures induced by accesses with
reduced memory controller DDRx timing parameters, to implement security features such as True Random Number Generators (TRNGs) and Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs).
Third, Chang et al. [24] experimentally demonstrate that they
can improve the reliability of DRAM while operating at low
voltages by increasing the memory controller DDRx timing
parameters.
Limitations of Fixed DRAM Internal Circuit Timings.
While characterization of real devices in prior works has lead
to important insights, these works are largely limited by the
amount of control that the memory controller has over DRAM
internal circuit timings. We identify and describe two limitations of current DRAM designs and the DDRx interface.
First, DRAM internal circuit timings (see Section 2) are
chosen at design time and cannot be modified. DRAM manufacturers use very conservative internal circuit timings for implementing commands within DRAM (e.g., activate command)
with the goal of ensuring reliable operation under worst case
conditions. Fixed DRAM internal circuit timings (1) limit the
ability to potentially further optimize DRAM commands when
accounting for environmental conditions (e.g., temperature) or
process variation within a DRAM device to improve DRAM
latency (e.g., [23, 56, 76, 82–84, 152, 161]), and (2) prevent the
modification of these internal circuit timings, which can otherwise enable new functionalities [27,38,56,58,75,77,125–128]
and research directions, as we demonstrate in this paper (see
Section 5).
Second, memory controller DDRx timing parameters can
only control the time between issuing two DRAM commands.
Although the memory controller can issue two DRAM commands with accurate timings, it does not have any knowledge or
control over the internal implementation of DRAM commands,
which limits the control and understanding of the effects of
reducing DDRx timing parameters. For example, if an ACT
command is issued with reduced DDRx timing parameters after
a PRE command, the memory controller does not know the
internal DRAM state of the on-going PRE command, which
might have not finish its execution in DRAM when the ACT
command is issued.
The Potential of Controlling DRAM Internal Circuit Timings. Manufacturers provide a rigid design without any type
of control over the DRAM internal circuit timings. We advocate that having more control over the DRAM internal circuit
timings has a lot of potential for enabling more aggressive
performance, reliability, and energy optimizations, new functionalities, and may open new areas of research.
Goal. Our goal in this paper is two-fold. First, we aim to
provide a low-cost substrate in DRAM (called CODIC) that enables fine-grained control over DRAM internal signal timings,
for enabling new and enhancing existing DRAM commands
and optimizations (Section 4). Second, as a proof of concept,
we design two new security mechanisms using CODIC that
provide stronger security guarantees and higher performance
over state-of-the-art mechanisms (Section 5).
       
4. CODIC Substrate
We propose Fine-Grained Control Over DRAM Internal Circuit
Timings (CODIC), a new DRAM substrate that enables the
control of four fundamental DRAM internal signals that control
specific circuit timings that are otherwise fixed in DRAM.
CODIC allows fine-grained control of these signals, which, in
turn, enables the implementation of new DRAM functionalities
and performance optimizations.
The applications of CODIC are general and many (see Section 5). As a proof of concept, we demonstrate and evaluate
two new variants of the CODIC command that generate (1) deterministic values that are defined at DRAM design-time, or
(2) unique digital signatures that depend on process variation.
We use CODIC to build two new security applications that improve the state-of-the-art, as discussed in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
4.1. Implementing New CODIC Variants
CODIC can control four fundamental signals that control key
internal circuit timings (wl, EQ, sense_p, and sense_n), which
are described in Section 2. CODIC can trigger and disable
these signals within a time window of 25ns, at time steps of
1ns (i.e., a signal can be triggered or disabled at [0ns, 1ns, ...
24ns] within the time window), which provides flexibility for
implementing a wide variety of new commands, features, and
optimizations.
Table 1 shows two existing DRAM commands and two
new CODIC variants and the timings of the four signals. The
third and fourth columns of the table show the signals that are
triggered by the command, and the time (in ns) and direction
(↑↓) that each signal is toggled. The two existing commands
are the activate and precharge commands [67], and the two
new CODIC variants are CODIC-sig, for generating digital
signatures that depend on process variation, and CODIC-det,
for generating deterministic values in-memory.
Table 1: In-DRAM signals used to implement activation and
precharge [67], and two new variants of the CODIC command.
Command Description Signal [init↑↓, end↑↓]
Activation see Section 2 wl [5↑,22↓] sense_p [7↓,22↑]
sense_n [7↑,22↓]
Precharge see Section 2 EQ [5↑,11↓]
CODIC-sig Generate random and
repeatable values in
DRAM
wl [5↑,22↓] EQ [7↑,22↓]
CODIC-det Generate deterministic values in DRAM
wl [5↑,22↓] sense_p [14↓,22↑]
sense_n [7↑,22↓]
4.1.1. CODIC-sig. CODIC-sig generates signature values
that depend on process variation by sensing and amplifying a
DRAM cell that we set to the precharge voltage (Vdd/2). Sense
amplifiers detect minor voltage differences above or below
Vdd/2. For a cell precharged to Vdd/2, the bit value that the
sense amplifier converges to during activation is dependent on
uncontrollable, truly-random manufacturing process variation
that perturbs the sensed voltage on the bitline. We verify this
randomness in Section 6.1.3, by showing that CODIC-sig values generated from 136 real DRAM chips fully pass the NIST
randomness tests [116].
Figure 3a shows the SPICE simulation of CODIC-sig.
CODIC-sig raises the wl signal (at 5 ns) before it raises the EQ
signal (at 7 ns), which drives the cell capacitor towards Vdd/2.
Because the bitline is initially precharged to Vdd/2, it remains
at Vdd/2 during the operation (i.e., the bitline is in precharged
state). Only after the next activation command (not shown in
Figure 3a) the DRAM cell will be amplified to zero or one
depending on process variation. We also propose CODICsig-opt, a CODIC-sig optimization that is based on the key
observation that CODIC-sig can set the voltage of the DRAM
capacitor to Vdd/2 very quickly. Figure 3a shows that the voltage of the capacitor is set to Vdd/2 almost immediately after
CODIC-sig triggers the EQ signal. Based on this observation,
we can terminate the wl and EQ signals much earlier to reduce
the latency of the command, without sacrificing reliability. To
take advantage of this optimization, the memory controller
requires the ability to change the CODIC timing parameters
at runtime (Section 4.2).
Figure 3: Generating values in DRAM using two CODIC variants.
We choose some specific timing values at which the relevant
signals are raised such that the operation performs reliably in
our simulations. However, other timing values can also perform
the same function, e.g., CODIC-sig performs the same function
by raising the wl signal at 4 ns, and the EQ signal at 8 ns.
Our SPICE simulations show that CODIC-sig consumes the
same power independently of the initial value of the cell (as the
final value is always Vdd/2). Section 6.1 evaluates the quality
of CODIC-sig values (i.e., the quality of CODIC-sig PUF) in
real off-the-shelf DRAM chips.
4.1.2. CODIC-det. CODIC-det generates deterministic values.
The key idea is to drive the cell to a deterministic value by activating the two signals that drive the SA (sense_n and sense_p)
with a delay between them. Depending on which of the two
signals triggers first, the generated value is 0 or 1.
Figure 3b shows the SPICE simulation of CODIC-det generating a zero value. CODIC-det triggers the sense_n signal
(7 ns), deviating the bitline voltage towards zero. After some
delay, CODIC-det triggers the sense_p signal (14 ns). When
both signals triggered at the same time, the SA behaves as
a regular activation (see Section 2), sensing and amplifying
the bitline voltage deviation introduced previously. The value
generated with this sequence of signals is deterministic, and
always zero. Similarly, for generating a one value, CODIC-det
triggers the sense_p (7 ns) signal first, and the sense_n later
(14 ns) (not shown in Figure 3b).
4.1.3. Other CODIC Variants. The combination of different timings for triggering/disabling the four control signals
enables the implementation of 3004 different variants of the

CODIC command. For each signal, there is a total of n = 300
valid combinations of timings.2 For a total of r = 4 signals,
there are t = 3004 valid CODIC variants. The large number
of possible combinations provides an enormous design space
for optimizing existing DRAM commands and proposing new
research ideas. For example, we can use the results of errorcharacterization studies to optimize a particular DRAM command. To do so, we can re-implement the command using a
CODIC variant with timing signals optimized for reliability,
performance or energy for a particular DRAM chip.
The number of CODIC variants that result in fundamentally
different functionalities is more limited, as the functionality
of a particular CODIC command is determined by the relative
order in which the internal circuits are triggered and deactivated.
During our exploration of the substrate, we have identified other
CODIC variants with different properties. For example, by
triggering the sense_p and sense_n signals while the bitline is
precharged (i.e., without triggering the wl signal), we can create
signatures that depend on process variation without destroying
the content of the memory cells, unlike CODIC-sig. We do
not include the evaluation of this variant because it requires
changes to commodity DRAM chips, which makes it very
challenging to evaluate in real DRAM chips.
4.2. Implementation Details
Implementing the CODIC substrate in commodity DRAM
chips requires minimal changes to (1) the circuit that generates internal timing signals to control internal components in
DRAM, and (2) the DRAM interface.
4.2.1. CODIC Circuit Design. To implement the fine-grained
configurable control of the timing interval between DRAM
internal circuit control signals, we design a configurable delay
element using a chain of buffers and a multiplexer, as Figure 4
shows.
DDRx Fixed Delay Element
Configurable Delay Element
IS_DDRx?
sense_n
CODIC_DELAY
ACT
Figure 4: Configurable CODIC delay path vs. fixed DDRx ACT command delay path for generating the sense_n internal signal.
We model the delay element using the 22nm PTM transistor
model [6] in SPICE. Each buffer stage has a propagation delay
of approximately 1ns at the output of the 25-to-1 multiplexer.
We estimate the area cost of the circuit by summing up the
area of the transistors used for all the buffers and the multiplexer. Assuming a 6F2 DRAM cell size [113, 121], the area
overhead of a configurable delay circuit of CODIC is about
0.28% per mat (a typical mat is 512 rows by 512 columns). The
total hardware area overhead for controlling all four DRAM
2To calculate the number of variants n, we consider that the time step is
s = 1ns, and the time window of CODIC is w = 25ns. We sum the number of
variants for all signals that start at different timings, i.e., there are 24 variants
that trigger at 0ns (the end time can be at 1ns, 2ns... 24ns), 23 variants that
trigger at 1ns (the end time can be at 2ns, 3ns... 24ns), etc. Therefore, the total
number of different variants is n = ∑w−1 i=1 i, which is 300 when w = 25.
internal control signals (i.e., wl, EQ, sense_n, and sense_p)
is 4×0.28% = 1.12% per mat.3 The energy overhead of the
CODIC circuit design is less than 500fJ, which is negligible
compared to the energy consumption of an activation command
(≈ 17nJ). The 2-to-1 multiplexer introduces a negligible delay
(0.028ns) to the DDRx activate command, but we compensate for this by sizing the buffers such that the total delay of
an activate command is still the same as in the conventional
DDRx interface.
The additional logic required to implement CODIC does
not affect the operation of common DRAM commands for
two reasons: (1) CODIC does not require any changes to the
DRAM array, and (2) DRAM commands still use the same
logic to generate the internal circuit timings as they do in
commodity DRAM chips. For example, as Figure 4 shows,
the IS_DDRx signal selects between the fixed delay element
for an activation command and the CODIC configurable delay
element. A DDRx activate command still uses the conventional
fixed delay element to generate a sense_n signal with proper
delay after the wl signal.
4.2.2. CODIC Interface. We propose adding a new DRAM
command to the DDRx interface to leverage the CODIC substrate using a similar approach to prior academic work [15, 21,
56, 58, 81, 85, 125, 128, 151, 152] and patents [11, 46]. The new
CODIC command has the same format as a regular activation.
We can integrate the new command in the JEDEC standard
specification [67] without extra cost, as there is reserved space
for including new commands. By adding a single CODIC command to the DDRx interface, we can implement many different
variants of the CODIC command by programming 4 dedicated
10-bit mode registers (MRs) in DRAM, which are used to store
the timings of the 4 internal timing signals that CODIC can
modify. CODIC uses the existing mode register set (MRS)
command defined in the DDRx specification to change the
contents of its MR.4 To support more than one CODIC variant at the same time, or to allow independent DRAM internal
circuit timing configurations for different regions of DRAM,
the manufacturer can incorporate more MR registers dedicated
to CODIC.
4.3. CODIC Latency and Energy Evaluation
In this section, we study the latency and energy of different
variants of the CODIC command.
Methodology. We calculate energy consumption by using the
activate and precharge energy consumption described in the
power model of the DRAMPower simulator [20].
Latency and Energy Results. Table 2 shows the latency and
energy of five CODIC variants that can be implemented with
CODIC. We show two CODIC variants that mimic the behavior
of regular activation (CODIC-activate) and precharge (CODICprecharge) commands, our proposed CODIC variants (CODICsig, and CODIC-det), and the optimized CODIC-sig variant
(CODIC-sig-opt) explained in Section 4.1.1.
We make two major observations about the latency results.
First, CODIC-sig-opt is significantly faster than CODIC-sig,
3If needed, we can reduce the area overhead by coarsening the granularity
of time control in a CODIC command. 4JEDEC standard uses mode registers to dynamically change certain
DRAM parameters such as burst length, burst type, CAS latency, or DLL
reset [67].

Table 2: Latency and energy of five CODIC command variants.
Primitive Latency (ns) Energy (nJ)
CODIC-activate 35 17.3
CODIC-precharge 13 17.2
CODIC-sig 35 17.2
CODIC-sig-opt 13 17.2
CODIC-det 35 17.2
and CODIC-det. However, the CODIC-sig-opt and CODIC-sig
latency does not include the additional activation command
needed to amplify the DRAM cells to zero or one depending
on process variation (see Section 4.1.1). Second, the latency
of CODIC-sig and CODIC-det is similar to a standard DDRx
ACT command.
Our main observation about the energy results is that they
are very similar across all CODIC variants we evaluate for
two main reasons. First, all the evaluated variants of CODIC
need to route the address within DRAM, which is one of
the main sources of energy consumption of all commands
(around 40% [20]). Second, the energy consumption of the
sense amplifier (used in CODIC-sig) and the precharge logic
(used in CODIC-sig) are similar across all commands (around
40% [20]).
4.4. Limitations and Challenges
CODIC is a substrate that can potentially enable many applications, which might introduce application-specific implementation challenges. For example, one of the main challenges to
consider when using CODIC PUFs (Section 5.1) is that CODIC
works at the granularity of a DRAM row, which could contain
data from multiple virtual memory pages (e.g., critical data
or data from another process that should not be destroyed).
Previous works [21, 51, 125, 128, 129] propose ideas that have
similar challenges, and they propose solutions that also could
be used with CODIC.
One general concern is that exposing internal signals to users
may pose potential security concerns. To preserve CODIC functionality without exposing the internal signals, we can instead
provide a more controlled and isolated interface. This interface
would provide users with commands to directly invoke the new
CODIC applications, instead of allowing the user to access
the internals of DRAM directly. For example, the memory
controller could provide a direct command for CODIC PUF
(Section 5.1) to the user (as either a software API call or as
a new assembly instruction). Internally, the controller would
keep track of a system-defined memory address range that
is safe to use to generate a PUF response, and the controller
would internally use CODIC to control the DRAM timings
and generate the PUF response. While such an approach prevents user-generated CODIC applications, we can still benefit
from new CODIC-based applications that are implemented and
exposed by memory controller and CPU manufacturers.
5. Applications Enabled by CODIC
CODIC can be used in many applications. As a proof-ofconcept, we design two new applications in the security domain that outperform the best state-of-the-art mechanisms (Section 5.1 and Section 5.2). We also discuss other possible applications that can be implemented with CODIC (Section 5.3).
5.1. Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs)
A PUF [40, 75, 90, 140] is a hardware primitive that maps a
unique input (i.e., challenge) to a unique response. A response
is typically derived from the unique physical characteristics
(resulting from process variation) of an integrated circuit, such
that no two circuits can provide the same response to the same
challenge. A PUF can be used as a building block for implementing low-cost authentication protocols [26, 53, 96, 115],
key generation applications [95,108,160], intellectual property
protection [48, 49, 163], hardware obfuscation [73, 155], prevention of reverse engineering [115, 153], intellectual property
watermarking [16], software metering [31], or prevention of
hardware Trojan embedding [154].
In the specific case of DRAM-based PUFs, one or more
parameters (e.g., address and size of a memory segment) define
a challenge, and the data read from DRAM is the response to
that challenge. Together, they define a Challenge-Response
pair (CR pair). In this work, we use the address and size of a
memory segment as the only parameters that define a challenge.
Limitations of State-of-the-Art DRAM-based PUFs. Prior
DRAM-based PUF proposals exploit variations in DRAM
start-up values [146], DRAM write access latencies [55],
DRAM cell retention failures [72, 142, 157] and reduced
DDRx timing parameters [75, 144]. There are at least four
main limitations with most of these approaches. First, most
DRAM PUFs [55, 72, 142, 146, 157] have long evaluation
times, which may incur significant system interference when
the PUF is evaluated at runtime. Second, most DRAM
PUFs [55, 72, 75, 142, 146, 157] require heavy filtering mechanisms to deal with the inherently noisy nature of the DRAM
responses. Filtering mechanisms increase the reliability of
PUF responses at the cost of increasing evaluation latency.
Third, the responses to the same challenge in most DRAM
PUFs [55,72,75,142,146,157] exhibit high variation with temperature changes, which is an important issue in systems with
a non-controlled environment (e.g., IoT devices in the wild).
Fourth, some DRAM PUFs are data dependent, which may
cause the same challenge to have different responses depending
on the content of the memory [55, 72, 75, 142, 146, 157].
CODIC-based PUFs. CODIC-sig can generate signature values that depend on process variation and thus can be used as
PUF responses (Section 4). CODIC-sig PUF provides four
main advantages compared to the state-of-the-art DRAM PUFs.
First, in contrast to other DRAM PUFs, CODIC-sig does not
require any filtering mechanisms because it provides highly stable output values. This stable output allows computing a valid
PUF response with a simple low-overhead filter, or without any
filter at all (see Section 6.1), depending on the requirements
of the application. Second, CODIC-sig has a fast evaluation
time due to its ability to control internal DRAM timing signals.
The absence of a filtering mechanism combined with the short
latency of CODIC-sig, enables the CODIC-sig PUF to have a
shorter evaluation time than the best state-of-the-art DRAM
PUF [144]. Third, CODIC-sig has state-of-the-art resilience to
temperature changes, i.e., changing the temperature does not
influence much the repeatability of the PUF responses. Fourth,
CODIC-sig responses do not depend on the content of DRAM,
as all DRAM cells are always precharged to Vdd/2 for generating a PUF response, independently of their original value.
5.2. Preventing Cold Boot Attacks
A cold boot attack is a physical attack on DRAM that involves
hot-swapping a DRAM chip and reading out the contents of the

DRAM chip on another system [12, 47, 52, 60, 86, 91, 97, 100,
135,150,159]. The attacker first disables power to the computer
containing the victim DRAM and then transfers the DRAM
to another system that can read its content. Alternatively, the
attacker can also recover the memory contents by booting a
small special purpose program from a cold reset (i.e., reset after
power cycling) [52]. Cold boot attacks are possible because
the data stored in DRAM is not immediately lost when the
chip is powered-off. This is due to the capacitive nature of
DRAM cells that can hold their data up to several seconds [12,
74, 92, 93, 109] or minutes [52]. This data retention effect can
be even more significant if the DRAM module is swapped at
low temperatures. For this reason, protection mechanisms such
as disabling refresh on DRAM for a certain amount of time are
not effective at protecting against cold boot attacks.
There are three classes of mechanisms for preventing cold
boot attacks. First, mechanisms that rely on encrypting memory
either explicitly [7, 35, 59, 70, 114, 141, 158, 159], or implicitly
through some CPU extensions (e.g. Intel SGX [29], AMD
SEV [1]). These mechanisms are effective and secure, but
are complex and expensive (in terms of energy and performance overhead) to be implemented in many low-cost devices.
Second, modern systems scramble the data in the memory
controller, which helps to obscure the DRAM contents. This
mechanism is simple and is also useful for other purposes (e.g.,
improving signal integrity on the DRAM bus), but it has been
shown to be insecure against cold boot attacks [159]. Third,
the mechanism proposed by the Trusted Computing Group
(TCG) [147] resets the DRAM content upon power-off. This
mechanism is implemented on the host platform firmware and
depends on the OS, which makes it vulnerable to attacks [110].
We identify at least two scenarios where a fast and secure
boot is critically important. First, devices that run intermittently
(intermittent computing) [94] extract energy from their environment (e.g., solar energy), and they power-on and execute a
burst of operations only once they have enough energy. These
devices usually rely on volatile memories such as DRAM [94].
Such devices have very limited energy available to them, and
stalling for even a few seconds can reduce the amount of compute possible (and can potentially trigger a greater number of
rollbacks). Security is also critically important, because these
devices are usually in the wild, and are vulnerable to physical
attacks such as cold boot attacks. Second, devices that require
instant-on capabilities [25, 87, 138], such as unattended inthe-wild digital cameras that need to power-on instantly when
detecting a signal for automatically taking a picture [138].
5.2.1. Threat Model. We assume a threat model in which
the attacker has physical access to a live uncompromised machine/device for an unlimited amount of time to steal information stored in the device’s DRAM. In order to successfully
read data from DRAM, the attacker cannot keep the DRAM
powered-off for long, as this would lead to data loss. We
therefore assume that, as part of the attack, the DRAM chip
is powered-off for an arbitrarily short amount of time. This
power loss occurs either (1) when transplanting the DRAM
module to an attacker-controlled machine, or (2) during attacks
that reboot the victim machine to load a malicious OS. Note
that our threat model does not account for: (1) systems with
a warm reboot that never cuts power to DRAM, or (2) hypothetical attacks using a scanning electron microscope (SEM)
to read DRAM content.5
5.2.2. Self-Destruction. We make the observation that it is
possible to protect from cold boot attacks by deleting all memory contents during the DRAM power-on. Based on this observation, we propose self-destruction, a low-cost in-DRAM
mechanism based on CODIC that destroys all DRAM contents without the intervention of the memory controller during
DRAM power-on.
The key idea of self-destruction is to destroy the entire
DRAM memory using CODIC-sig or CODIC-det. Selfdestruction is performed autonomously without the intervention of the memory controller, which could be controlled by
the attacker. During self-destruction, the DRAM chip does not
accept any memory commands to ensure the atomicity of the
process. On a cold boot reset, our mechanism steps through a
sequence of CODIC commands in order to destroy the contents
of the entire chip sequentially (i.e., row-by-row).
Hardware Implementation. We propose two ways to implement self-destruction within DRAM. First, we propose
to add a dedicated circuit that (1) issues CODIC commands
back-to-back to all DRAM rows, (2) parallelizes commands
across banks, and (3) enforces JEDEC timing constraints (e.g.,
t_FAW [67]). We evaluate this implementation in Section 6.2.
Second, we propose to reuse the existing circuits for selfrefresh [66] to issue CODIC commands in our self-destruction
mechanism. This implementation is an optimization for reducing the hardware cost, but the destruction time is the same
as the time that the self-refresh mechanism takes to refresh
the entire memory.
Implementing self-destruction by reusing self-refresh circuits requires two small modifications to the self-refresh circuitry that enhance its default functionality (i.e., self-refresh)
to additionally enable it to destroy the contents of DRAM at
power-on. First, we add configurable delay circuits (see Figure 4) that generate internal DRAM signals (i.e., wl, sense_p,
sense_n, and EQ in Figures 2 and 3) with configurable timings. These newly-generated signals are used to implement the
CODIC operations within the self-refresh circuitry. Second,
for each connection between an internal DRAM signal (i.e.,
wl, sense_p, sense_n, EQ) and the DRAM array, we add a
MUX that selects whether to use (a) the unmodified signals
generated by the self-refresh circuitry for the baseline refresh
operation, and (b) our newly-generated signals for enabling
data destruction using CODIC. The select line of each MUX
is set at power-on (e.g., to 1) to choose the CODIC signals
and destroy the DRAM contents, and the select line’s value
changes (e.g., to 0) immediately after the entire contents of
DRAM are destroyed to enable self-refresh to be used for the
rest of the time.
Any implementation of self-destruction also needs logic to
trigger the self-destruction mechanism at DRAM power-on.
Security Analysis. Our mechanism is automatically triggered
in DRAM when power is detected, without requiring external
action. Therefore, the security of self-destruction depends
on the reliability of the DRAM module’s power-on detection
5Note that to our knowledge, this attack has not been demonstrated to date
on commodity DRAM chips, but only under a controlled environment using
custom DRAM samples [137].

circuit. There are two ways for an attacker to potentially bypass
this circuit. We describe both and explain why, in practice, they
do not pose a security threat.
First, an attacker could operate DRAM at low voltage on
the compromised system using, for instance, Dynamic Voltage
and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) [24, 33, 34, 50], with the goal
of not triggering the power-on detection circuit. The poweron circuit triggers when it detects a voltage ramp up from
0V, but the voltage does not need to reach Vdd (the power-on
circuit triggers as long as a voltage ramp up starting from 0V is
detected). Therefore, operating the DRAM at very low voltage
would not help the attacker.6
Second, an attacker could overheat the DRAM power-on
detection mechanism until it stops functioning. In practice,
however, the FSM that initializes the chip is in the same internal
controller that regulates other functions (i.e., timing signals
for activate, precharge, and other commands). Consequently,
overheating that component would most likely make the whole
DRAM unusable.
5.3. Other Applications
The CODIC substrate enables the implementation of a wide
variety of applications. We identify and classify several potential applications into three broad categories, though we note
that there may be other applications or categories that can also
make use of CODIC.
5.3.1. Security Applications. In Sections 5.1 and 5.2, we propose and evaluate in detail new mitigations mechanisms for
two security applications that improve over state-of-the-art.
First, CODIC can implement two new Physical Unclonable
Functions (PUFs) that improve upon state-of-the-art DRAM
PUFs (Section 5.1). Second, CODIC enables the implementation of a new mechanism called self-destruction to protect
against cold boot attacks (Section 5.2).
CODIC can also be used to accelerate secure deallocation
mechanisms [5,28,39,41,54,132]. Secure deallocation is a technique that sets the data to zero at the moment of deallocation,
or as soon as the data is not needed anymore, which reduces
the time that critical data is exposed to attacks. We evaluate
our mechanism and demonstrate that it performs up to 21%
better and consumes 34% less energy than secure deallocation
techniques implemented in software.
CODIC also enables accurate control of the failure mechanisms used in existing DRAM-based True Random Number
Generators (TRNGs) [77,104,143] and DRAM PUFs [75,144].
These mechanisms are triggered by violating the DRAM standards, but the exact internal failure mechanism is not perfectly
known (e.g., it might vary depending on the DRAM architecture, timings, manufacturer). A substrate such as CODIC would
help to understand and improve the quality and performance of
these existing mechanisms, and enable new TRNGs that exploit
new failure mechanisms for generating random numbers.
CODIC could also potentially be used to reduce the effectiveness of RowHammer attacks [36,78,80,103,122]. Because
CODIC allows finer-granularity control over DRAM timings,
a system designer can potentially adjust the timings of key
internal DRAM signals that govern important parameters that
6The attacker might try to operate the device at a voltage close to 0V such
that the power-on circuit cannot detect the ramp up, however, at such low
voltage the DRAM chip would not be operational.
affect the susceptibility of a chip to RowHammer, e.g., wordline active time [68].
5.3.2. Custom DRAM Latency/Energy Optimizations. Existing DRAM chips are shipped with fixed and conservative
internal circuit timings that guarantee reliable behavior for a
wide range of environmental conditions and process variation.
Using CODIC, the internal circuit timings can be optimized
for a particular DRAM device, based on the device’s current
environmental conditions.
Adapting to Environmental Conditions. CODIC enables
dynamic and practical adaptation of DRAM internal circuit
timings to different environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, voltage, aging), with the goal of optimizing DRAM
performance and energy consumption.
Mitigating Process Variation Effects. CODIC enables practical adaptation of DRAM internal circuit timings to process
variation of a particular DRAM chip. For example, the retention time of DRAM cells depends on process variation [12,
52, 74, 92, 93, 109]. CODIC can easily provide an alternative
activate command for rows with high retention times, which
reduces the time between triggering the wordline and triggering
the sense amplifier. Using this technique, we enable rows with
high retention times to be activated faster during refresh.
Accurate DRAM Characterization. CODIC enables increased precision and opportunities in DRAM characterization.
For example, by modifying the time interval between triggering
the wl and the sense_p and sense_n signals in an activation
command, we can test how fast the cell capacitor shares its
charge with the bitline, and infer the relative capacitance of
each cell. Such observations would enable us to build more
features with a deeper and more accurate understanding of their
underlying mechanisms. They can also enable us to build more
accurate models of DRAM behavior.
Memory Controller Timing Parameters. CODIC can be
used to reliably enforce the usage of reduced memory controller timing parameters (e.g., tRCD), as it enables us to know
and control the precise state of one command when the next
command is issued with reduced timing parameters. This
can better enable prior works [23, 56, 76, 82–84, 152, 161] to
optimize DDRx timing parameters while ensuring robust operation, as the memory controller can make informed decisions
about reducing DDRx timing parameters taking into account
the DRAM internal state, which is known and can be controlled with CODIC.
5.3.3. Processing-in-Memory (PIM). PIM proposals such as
RowClone [125] and Ambit (bitwise AND, OR) [127,128,131]
have been demonstrated in real off-the-shelf DRAM chips via
manipulating DDRx timing parameters [38]. However, the
results shown in [38] demonstrate that many intended computations cannot be performed reliably in a vast majority of
chips and cells because it is not possible to control how DRAM
commands are executed internally within DRAM chips. An
interface like CODIC can more robustly enable RowClone,
Ambit, and other PIM mechanisms [51] on real DRAM chips.
6. Evaluation
We evaluate the quality, latency, and randomness of the CODIC
PUF (Section 6.1), and the latency and energy of our cold boot
attack prevention mechanism (Section 6.2).

6.1. CODIC PUF
We evaluate the quality of the CODIC PUF (i.e., CODIC-sig
PUF) responses with a new methodology that allows us to
recreate the PUF responses of the CODIC-sig PUF in real offthe-shelf DRAM chips. We perform an exhaustive evaluation
using 136 real DDR3 DRAM chips from 15 modules.
Methodology. A CODIC-sig primitive (1) sets a cell to Vdd/2
with the precharge logic, and (2) activates the SA to generate a
signature value from that cell (as explained in Section 4.1.1).
We emulate this behavior in real DRAM chips in two steps.
First, based on the observation that a DRAM cell leaks towards
Vdd/2, we disable DRAM refresh for 48 hours with the goal
of setting the cell to Vdd/2. Second, we activate this cell to
obtain the PUF response. This methodology allows us to reproduce the responses that would produce a real CODIC-sig PUF
implementation. Recall that discharging the cells with CODICsig PUF would take a few nanoseconds (not 48h) in a real
implementation (Section 4.3). We perform our experiments
with a customized memory controller built with SoftMC [57]
and a Xilinx ML605 FPGA on 136 different DDR3 DRAM
chips from three major vendors. Table 3 shows the main characteristics of the 136 DRAM chips that we evaluate. [107]
has more details.
Table 3: Characteristics of the 136 evaluated DDR3 DRAM chips.
Vendor #Chips Capacity/chip Frequency Voltage
A 32 4Gb 1600 1.35V (DDR3L)
A 32 4Gb 1600 1.5V (DDR3)
B 32 2Gb 1333 1.5V (DDR3)
B 8 4Gb 1600 1.35V (DDR3L)
C 32 4Gb 1600 1.35V (DDR3L)
Evaluating the CODIC-sig PUF functional behavior with our
methodology is challenging, because DRAM cells can retain
their content for a long time [74, 92, 93, 109, 149], i.e., not
refreshing the DRAM does not guarantee that a cell will end up
with the precharge voltage (Vdd/2), even after a long period.
To deal with this issue, we tailor a custom test to determine
if a cell is set to the precharge voltage. As discussed in Section 4.1.1, when a cell is set to the precharge voltage, the value
that CODIC-sig generates should always be the same regardless of the initial value of the cell. Based on this observation,
our test analyzes the final value of a DRAM cell after 48 hours
without refresh, in two different scenarios: (1) all initial values
are zero, and (2) all initial values are one. The test has two
possible outcomes. First, the test passes if the final value is
the same regardless of the initial value. Thus, we can conclude
that the cell is set to the precharge voltage. In this case, the
final value is the same as the value that a real CODIC-sig implementation would generate. Second, the test fails if the final
value is different from the initial value. In that case, we cannot
conclude that the cell is set to the precharge voltage (and thus
we cannot infer the value generated by applying CODIC-sig to
the cell), so we do not consider that cell in our results.
Following this methodology, we obtain CODIC values for
34% to 99% of all cells in the 136 DDR3 DRAM chips we
tested. Most of these cells are always amplified to a particular value (e.g., 0), and the remaining cells (between 0.01%
and 0.22% of all cells7), which are randomly spread across
7We observe that these results are in line with the results obtained in our
SPICE simulations (see Section 7.2.1 in [106]).
DRAM, are amplified to the opposite value (e.g., 1). We use
the addresses of the latter type of cells as PUF responses.
6.1.1. Quality Evaluation. This section evaluates the quality
of CODIC PUF responses compared to two state-of-the-art
DRAM PUFs [75, 144].
Metrics. To measure the uniqueness and similarity of a PUF,
we apply Jaccard indices [65] as suggested by prior works [9,
75, 120, 157]. We determine the Jaccard indices by taking two
sets of PUF responses from two memory segments (u1,u2),
and calculating the ratio of their shared values over the full set
of the two PUF responses |u1∩u2|
|u1∪u2|
. A ratio close to 1 represents
high similarity, and a ratio close to 0 represents uniqueness.
We use the term Intra-Jaccard for representing the similarity
of two responses from the same memory segment, and InterJaccard for representing the uniqueness of two responses from
different memory segments. An ideal PUF should have an
Intra-Jaccard index close to 1 (a unique challenge has a unique
response), and an Inter-Jaccard index close to 0 (different challenges have different and random responses).
Methodology. We compute the distribution of Intra- and InterJaccard indices obtained by running experiments on 136 different DRAM chips with segments of 8KB (this size is used
by prior work [75]). We calculate the Intra-Jaccard indices
for 10,000 random pairs of memory segments (each pair composed of two responses from the same memory segment), and
the Inter-Jaccard indices for 10,000 random pairs of memory
segments (each pair composed of two responses from different
memory segments) from all DRAM chips.
We compare CODIC-sig PUF with the DRAM latency
PUF [75] and PreLatPUF [144]. The DRAM Latency PUF
accesses DRAM with tRCD = 2.5ns. For improving the repeatability of the responses, the DRAM latency PUF implements a filtering mechanism that removes cells with low failure
probability from the PUF response. To this end, the mechanism
reads the memory segment 100 times, and it composes a response that contains only the failures that repeat more than 90
times [75]. PreLatPUF generates PUF responses by reducing
the precharge latency (tRP = 2.5ns in our evaluation). The
authors of PreLatPUF improve their results by selecting the
DRAM cells that are more suitable for PUFs via DRAM characterization. In our evaluation, we do not apply this selection
mechanism, as our goal is to compare the quality of the failure
mechanisms under the same conditions. Note that the selection mechanism used by the authors of PreLatPUF can be also
applied to the DRAM Latency PUF and the CODIC PUF.
The PUF responses generated by CODIC-sig/PreLatPUF are
less noisy than the values obtained by DRAM Latency PUF
(i.e., the Intra-Jaccard indices are close to one, as we will show
in Figure 5 soon), so CODIC-sig/PreLatPUF need a much more
lightweight filtering mechanism. Although we experimentally
observe that one challenge is enough to get a robust CODICsig/PreLatPUF response in most cases (99.72%/96.92% of all
challenges have the same response for the worst DRAM module we tested), we apply a conservative filter of 5 challenges
for generating always the same response, such that CODICsig/PreLatPUF are robust even under worst-case conditions.
While a DRAM Latency PUF with a lightweight filtering mechanism (e.g., 1-10 reads) could be as fast as the CODIC PUF,
the PUF quality would decrease significantly.

Results. Figure 5 shows the Intra- and Inter-Jaccard indices for
the DRAM Latency PUF [75], PreLatPUF [144], and CODICsig PUF for 64 DDR3 chips operating at 1.5V and 72 DDR3L
chips operating at 1.35V.
Figure 5: Jaccard indices obtained with the the DRAM latency PUF,
PreLatPUF, and the CODIC-sig PUF, on 136 DDR3 and DDR3L chips.
We make four main observations. First, the CODIC-sig
PUF shows excellent Intra-Jaccard indices (the indices in red,
which accumulate close to 1 on the x-axis), and very good InterJaccard indices (the indices in blue, which accumulate close to
0 on the x-axis). Second, the DRAM latency PUF has IntraJaccard indices distributed towards 1.0, but the distribution is
still very dispersed. The Inter-Jaccard indices of the DRAM
Latency PUF are very good; all values are highly concentrated
around the zero value (the blue bars). Third, PreLaTPUF shows
very good Intra-Jaccard indices (the red bars near 1 on the xaxis), but Inter-Jaccard indices are very dispersed and far from
the zero value. Fourth, the results from DDR3L chips are
generally better than those from DDR3 chips, especially for
the CODIC-sig PUF. We conclude that the CODIC-sig PUF is
very effective at providing very similar responses to the same
challenge, while maintaining uniqueness across responses to
different challenges.
Based on our results, a naive challenge-response authentication mechanism implemented with CODIC-sig that correctly
authenticates only when the response is exactly as expected
(i.e., no filtering mechanism), has an average false rejection
rate of 0.64% and false acceptance rate of 0.00%.
Temperature and Aging Effects. To demonstrate how temperature affects the similarity of different responses to the same
challenge. We use the experimental setup from the previous
experiment in Figure 5, and the same 136 DDR3 DRAM chips.
To control the temperature, we use DRAM heaters on both sides
of the DDR3 module, and a fine-grained temperature controller
that can control the temperature with a precision of ± 0.1◦C.
We evaluate 4 different temperatures from 30◦C to 85◦C. For
this experiment, we wait for only 4 hours (instead of 48), since
cells discharge faster at high temperatures [74,92,93,109,149].
Figure 6 shows the Intra-Jaccard indices between the same
segments under different temperatures across 136 chips.
We make three observations. First, the CODIC-sig PUF is
very robust to temperature changes, as the responses to the
same challenge are very similar even for extreme temperature
changes (55◦C). Second, PreLatPUF has the best robustness
against temperature changes, but this comes with the tradeoff of having poor uniqueness properties, as the Inter-Jaccard
indices show in Figure 5. Third, the responses of the DRAM
latency PUF are much more sensitive to temperature changes,
Figure 6: Intra-Jaccard indices vs. temperature.
confirming the results of the original paper [75]. We conclude
that the CODIC-sig PUF (1) performs much better than the
DRAM Latency PUF under changing temperature conditions,
and (2) performs very close to PreLatPUF, which is the most
robust PUF against temperature changes.
To demonstrate how aging affects the similarity of different
responses to the same challenge, we use accelerated aging
techniques to artificially age our DRAM chips [111, 117, 119,
136, 145]. We artificially age the DRAM chips by operating
them at 125◦C degrees running stress tests for 8 hours. We
observe from our experiments that CODIC-sig PUF is very
robust to aging, as most of the Intra-Jaccard indices are 1
(not plotted).
6.1.2. PUF Response Time. Table 4 summarizes the total
evaluation time of the three DRAM PUFs. We make two
observations. First, the CODIC-sig PUF with/without filter
has 20x/100x lower evaluation latency than the DRAM Latency PUF. Second, the CODIC-sig PUF with/without filter is
1.8×/1.8× faster than the PreLatPUF. In our evaluation setup,
although the filtering mechanism increases CODIC-sig PUF
and PreLatPUF evaluation latency, it also avoids other issues
related to the no-filter mechanism such as initial profiling to
select robust DRAM cells, or metadata accesses required for
managing the selected DRAM cells [144]. We conclude that
the evaluation time of the CODIC-sig PUF is lower than the
best state-of-the-art DRAM PUF (see [107] for full results).
Table 4: Evaluation time of DRAM Latency PUF, PreLatPUF, and
CODIC-sig PUF, using 8KB memory segments.
Latency PUF PreLatPUF CODIC-sig PUF
w/(w/o) filter w/(w/o) filter
88.2 ms 7.95 (1.59) ms 4.41 (0.88) ms
6.1.3. Randomness Analysis. A secure key or seed should
have high-entropy. Although we already demonstrated the
uniqueness of the responses between different memory segments (Section 6.1), this does not guarantee that they have
high-entropy, and hence that they are suitable to be used as
cryptographic keys.
Methodology. We analyze the randomness of the values generated by CODIC-sig with real DRAM chips (Table 3), with
the experimental setup of Section 6.1. We use the NIST statistical test suite [116] to analyze the numbers generated by
CODIC-sig.
Results. We run the NIST test suite with 250KB random
streams composed of responses to different challenges from all
tested DRAM chips. We use a Von Neumann extractor [134]
for whitening the random stream. Our results show that the
numbers generated by CODIC-sig pass all 15 NIST tests, which

demonstrates that our PUF is able to generate high-quality
random numbers.
6.2. Preventing Cold Boot Attacks
We compare our new CODIC-based self-destruction mechanism (introduced in Section 5.2) to (1) a mechanism that resets
the DRAM’s contents by issuing write commands from the
memory controller to every single row in a DRAM chip, as
described in the TCG specification [147]; (2) a self-destruction
mechanism that uses RowClone [125] to copy rows initialized
to zero into all other rows in a DRAM chip; and (3) a selfdestruction mechanism that uses LISA-clone [21] to copy rows
initialized to zero into all other rows in a DRAM chip.
Methodology. We customize Ramulator [79, 118] to support
our CODIC implementation, RowClone and LISA-clone. Table 5 shows the summary of the CPU, memory controller, and
DRAM parameters used in our evaluation.
Table 5: Major Ramulator parameters.
CPU in-order core, 32KB L1 D&I, 512KB L2
Mem. Ctr. 64/64-entry read/write queue, FR-FCFS [112, 165]
DRAM 1 channel, DDR3-1600 x8 11/11/11
Our baseline is the firmware-based TCG cold boot attack
prevention mechanism. We evaluate TCG by simulating the
firmware that overwrites the memory with zeros by issuing regular write requests. To force writing back the data to memory
from cache, we use an instruction that invalidates the data in
cache (i.e., the CLFLUSH instruction in x86 [64]). TCG does
not require any hardware changes.
We implement three self-destruction mechanisms (using
CODIC, RowClone, and LISA-clone) that perform backto-back CODIC/RowClone/LISA-clone commands to each
DRAM row (parallelized across banks) while meeting the
JEDEC timing specifications (e.g., tRCD, tFAW). Note that
our CODIC self-destruction mechanism could be further
(1) highly-optimized for performance by DRAM vendors, as
they know the exact internal DRAM internal power restrictions,
or (2) highly-optimized for cost, by reusing the self-refresh circuits, as we describe in Section 5.2.2.8 We use the energy and
latency of CODIC reported in Table 2 (Section 4). We calculate
the energy to destroy contents of the entire DRAM using a customized version of DRAMPower [20]. We calculate the latency
to destroy the entire content of DRAM using Ramulator.
Latency Results. Figure 7 shows the destruction time of
a TCG software implementation, and three self-destruction
mechanisms that respectively use LISA-clone, RowClone, and
CODIC to destroy all data in a DRAM module.
Figure 7: Time to destroy all DRAM data in a DRAM module.
8We do not evaluate a self-destruction implementation that reuses the selfrefresh circuitry because DRAM vendors do not release details about the
implementation of self-refresh.
We test different DRAM module sizes, from 64MB, used in
memories specifically designed for low cost devices [30], to a
hypothetical single-rank 64GB.9 Our simulator takes into account all timing parameters defined by the DDRx standard [67].
The timing parameters for each size are taken from public
datasheets released by vendors [98]. For the memories that we
do not have enough information about timing parameters (e.g.,
64MB, 64GB), we extrapolate the parameters from existing
memory modules.
We make two major observations. First, self-destruction
using CODIC performs 552.7×/2.5×/2.0× faster than
TCG/LISA-clone/RowClone for an 8 GB DRAM module. Second, the TCG provides lower latency for small memory sizes
(e.g., 64MB, 256MB), but the latency for 1GB and larger sizes
is prohibitively large.
We conclude that self-destruction using CODIC destroys
the entire content of DRAM significantly faster than the best
state-of-the-art mechanisms.
Energy Results. Our results show that self-destruction using CODIC consumes 41.7×/2.5×/1.7× less energy than
TCG/LISA-clone/RowClone, for an 8 GB DRAM module.
Comparison with Other State-of-the-Art Mechanisms.
There exist other mechanisms that protect against cold boot
attacks that are fundamentally different from our approach.
This is the case with memory encryption, which provides
strong security guarantees at the cost of additional energy consumption and complexity. Table 6 shows the performance,
power, and area overhead of our self-destruction mechanism
compared to ChaCha-8 [13, 159] and AES-128 [32, 159], two
low-cost ciphers that can be used to prevent cold boot attacks
efficiently [159].
Table 6: Overhead of CODIC self-destruction vs. two other mechanisms
to prevent cold boot attacks on an Intel Atom N280 processor.
CODIC Self-Dest. ChaCha-8 AES-128
Runtime Performance Overhead ∼0% ∼0% ∼0%1
Runtime Power Overhead2 ∼0% ∼17% ∼12%
Area Overhead (Processor/DRAM) ∼(0.0/1.1)% ∼(0.9/0.0)% ∼(1.3/0.0)%
1 Assuming that the maximum number of back-to-back row hits is 16.
2 At peak memory bandwidth utilization.
We make three main observations. First, our self-destruction
mechanism has zero performance and power overhead at runtime. Second, although ChaCha-8 and AES-8 can be implemented for hiding the encryption latency in the common
case [159], the power overhead is very significant (17% for
ChaCha-8 and 12% for AES-128) in low-cost processors such
as the Intel Atom N280 [63]. Third, the processor area overhead
is low for ChaCha-8 (0.9%) and AES-128 (1.3%), whereas
CODIC does not require processor changes, and the DRAM
area overhead is low for CODIC (1.1%), whereas ChaCha-8
and AES-128 do not require DRAM changes. We conclude that
our zero-runtime-overhead proposal is a very power- and areaefficient way to protect against cold boot attacks in systems
where encryption is expensive or otherwise undesirable.10
9Existing 64GB DRAM modules today have 4 ranks of 16GB each [99] to
avoid excessive refresh overheads [92]. 10While AES-128 and ChaCha-8 provide additional security features, we
evaluate their ability to prevent cold boot attacks, as studied in recent literature [159].

7. Related Work
To our knowledge, this is the first paper to propose a low-cost
substrate to control DRAM internal circuit timings, thereby
enabling the implementation of a variety of new features, and
custom reliability, performance and energy optimizations in
DRAM. We demonstrate CODIC’s flexibility with two CODIC
configurations that enable the implementation of two security
applications that improve the state-of-the-art: (1) PUF-based
authentication, and (2) cold boot attack prevention.
PUFs. PUFs have been proposed using different substrates
(e.g., SRAM [10, 14, 61, 62, 156, 164], ASIC logic [90, 148],
DRAM [75, 142, 144, 146, 157], or FPGA [40]). We focus
our comparison against DRAM-based PUFs as DRAM has a
large address space and is a widely-used technology in systems
today. Section 5.1 already extensively compares the CODICbased PUF against two state-of-the-art DRAM-based PUFs:
the DRAM Latency PUF [75] and PreLatPUF [144]. We show
that our CODIC-based PUF provides (1) robust responses,
(2) lower evaluation time, and (3) resiliency to temperature
changes, characteristics that other DRAM PUFs do not provide
all together.
Cold Boot Attacks. We have already discussed several cold
boot attack prevention mechanisms [7, 29, 35, 59, 70, 114, 141,
158, 159], and compared against [147, 159] in Section 5.2. A
previous work on data lifetime management [88] proposes to
disable access of untrusted programs to data in DRAM using a
new flag in the DRAM decoder, controlled by a DRAM command. However, this mechanism does not prevent an attacker
who has physical access to the device from reading data freely.
Seol et al. [123] propose a mechanism to initialize DRAM with
a reset operation based on connecting/disconnecting power
lines. This reset operation has a larger latency than CODIC, as
it requires a precharge and an activate command to each row,
while CODIC requires only one command to destroy the contents of a row. Our mechanism for protecting against cold boot
attacks improves upon the state-of-the-art by proposing a very
simple mechanism with no performance or energy overhead
at runtime (Section 5.2).
Amnesiac DRAM [124], published after our preprint version
of CODIC [106], proposes a mechanism similar to our method
for protecting against cold boot attacks (Section 5.2). Our
cold boot attack prevention mechanism is only one use case
of CODIC, which can enable many other applications, as we
discuss in Section 5.
Processing-in-Memory (PIM) Security Mechanisms. Previous works propose to obfuscate memory access patterns
in (1) 3D/2.5D memories with logic capabilities [2, 8], and
(2) commodity DRAM modules with an additional secure
chip [133]. These approaches are orthogonal to CODIC. Thus,
they can be combined with CODIC to enhance the overall
security capabilities of main memory, especially PIM systems.
8. Conclusion
We propose CODIC, a low-cost DRAM substrate that enables fine-grained control over DRAM internal circuit timings.
CODIC can be used to enable important existing and novel
mechanisms and DRAM optimization techniques at low-cost
on any device that uses DRAM. To demonstrate the potential of CODIC, we implement (1) a new Physical Unclonable
Function (PUF), and (2) a new cold boot attack prevention
mechanism. We perform a thorough evaluation that shows that
our two new mechanisms perform better than the best stateof-the-art mechanisms. We conclude that the CODIC can be
used for implementing very efficient security applications at
low cost. We hope and believe that CODIC will inspire and
enable (1) other new DRAM functionalities that enhance the
applications and functionalities of DRAM, and (2) new DRAM
reliability, performance and energy optimizations.