Abstract—Energy harvesting systems support the deployment
of low-power microcontrollers untethered by constant power
sources or batteries, enabling long-lived deployments in a variety
of applications previously limited by power or size constraints.
However, the limitations of harvested energy mean that even the
lowest-power microcontrollers operate intermittently—waiting
for the harvester to slowly charge a buffer capacitor and rapidly
discharging the capacitor to support a brief burst of computation.
The challenges of the intermittent operation brought on by
harvested energy drive a variety of hardware and software
techniques that first enabled long-running computation, then
focused on improving performance. Many of the most promising
systems demand dynamic updates of available energy to inform
checkpointing and mode decisions.
Unfortunately, existing energy monitoring solutions based on
analog circuits (e.g., analog-to-digital converters) are ill-matched
for the task because their signal processing focus sacrifices power
efficiency for increased performance—performance not required
by current or future intermittent computation systems. This
results in existing solutions consuming as much energy as the
microcontroller, stealing energy from useful computation. To
create a low-power energy monitoring solution that provides
just enough performance for intermittent computation use cases,
we design and implement Failure Sentinels, an on-chip, fullydigital energy monitor. Failure Sentinels leverages the predictable
propagation delay response of digital logic gates to supply
voltage fluctuations to measure available energy. Our design
space exploration shows that Failure Sentinels provides 30–50mV
of resolution at sample rates up to 10kHz, while consuming less
than 2μA of current. Experiments show that Failure Sentinels
increases the energy available for software computation by up
to 77%, compared to current solutions. We also implement a
RISC-V-based FPGA prototype that validates our design space
exploration and shows the overheads of incorporating Failure
Sentinels into a system-on-chip.
I. INTRODUCTION
Continuous advances in the design and manufacture of tiny,
low-power computing devices have opened the door for microcontrollers in applications previously limited by size, power, or
cost constraints. Today’s microcontroller-based sensor motes
are small enough to monitor cellular temperature [1] and cheap
enough to be deployed in high volumes inside of groceries [2]
or with consumer goods to secure supply chains [3]. These
advances have also enabled the use of sensor motes in more
extreme and inaccessible environments such as space [4],
deep underwater [5], or even embedded in concrete [6]. The
challenge for today’s designers is to build systems that best
leverage this rapid down-scaling of computing hardware.
One major hurdle for the widespread deployment of tiny
computing platforms is batteries, which have not experienced
the same level of continual scaling as transistors. A typical
lithium battery measuring 1 cm3 can supply a low-power microcontroller drawing 300 μW for less than 4 months [7], after
which the device is useless without a battery replacement—
which is at best costly and at worst infeasible. Batteries also
carry a risk of fire or explosion, limiting their use in sensitive
applications such as medical implants, space deployments,
or aircraft. The limitations of batteries are driving work in
a new direction: energy harvesting platforms, which replace
the battery with a transducer to capture energy from the
environment and a buffer capacitor to store the gathered energy
until it is sufficient to power the on-board devices. The source
and amount of available energy depends on the operating
environment: many deployed systems are powered by RFID
readers [2], [8], while other promising energy harvesters
leverage thermal [9], photovoltaic [10] or piezoelectric [11]
effects.
While energy harvesting opens up new opportunities for
self-sufficient devices, it also poses challenges for the system designer. The unpredictable nature of harvested energy,
low power output of transducer circuits, and energy buffer
size limitations mean that a microcontroller running on harvested energy may maintain operation for a few hundred
milliseconds—too short for many useful software applications
to complete before power fails and program state is lost.
Past work proposes a variety of techniques to support longrunning program execution across numerous and frequent
power failures, the most promising approach being just-in-time
checkpointing: saving a snapshot of the program state to nonvolatile memory when power failure is imminent [12]–[16].
Unfortunately, the requirement of a voltage monitor limits
just-in-time checkpointing approaches. To know when power
failure is imminent, just-in-time approaches track the voltage

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00058
across the buffer capacitor (voltage is a surrogate for energy)
using an Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) [12] to measured the voltage then comparing the measurement to a userdefined voltage threshold. However, ADCs are among the most
power-intensive peripherals available on modern low-power
microcontrollers: integrated ADCs typically consume as much
or more power than the processor core itself (see Table I),
reducing useful computation time by over 50% even before
considering the software overhead introduced by checkpoints.
Recent just-in-time approaches replace ADCs with their lighter
weight cousins, the analog voltage comparator [13]–[15], [17].
This decision trades lower voltage resolution for marginally
decreased current consumption. No matter the mechanism to
monitor voltage, recent advancements in just-in-time checkpointing have exposed the voltage monitor as the primary
source of run-time overhead—over an order of magnitude
more than checkpointing [16].
The key issue is that ADCs and analog comparators are not
optimized to support intermittent computation. For intermittent
computation use cases, energy efficiency is paramount as long
as resolution and sample rate are sufficient. Existing voltage
monitors have been optimized in the opposite direction: performance first, then energy. The key to unlocking the promise
of just-in-time approaches is a low-power, all-digital, on-chip
supply-voltage monitor with just enough resolution and sample
rate to meet the demands of current and future intermittent
computation use cases. With such a voltage monitor, it is
practical to make energy availability a first-class abstraction
provided by the hardware, improving existing intermittent
computation systems (Section II-C) and enabling future ones.
In order to enable efficient voltage monitoring on energy
harvesting systems, we develop Failure Sentinels—a low
power, all digital, reference-free, on-chip voltage monitor
designed to scale with the rest of the system. Failure Sentinels
leverages the predictable gate-delay response of digital circuits
to a changing supply voltage to inform software decisions
about available energy; Failure Sentinels works by counting
the number of times a signal traverses a self-oscillating
feedback loop during a fixed time period as a referencefree indicator of buffer capacitor voltage, which itself indicates available energy. We design Failure Sentinels using
only CMOS (Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor, the
technology of choice for digital integrated circuits) logic,
ensuring that it scales along with the rest of the system’s digital
logic and take advantage of the corresponding price, power,
and size benefits. Failure Sentinels exposes a broad design
space to system designers to allow them to tune a variety of
performance parameters such as resolution and sample rate to
find the balance of performance and energy consumption that
is just-right for their use case.
We implement and evaluate Failure Sentinels in SPICE and
on a RISC-V-based system-on-chip running on an Artix-7
Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) [18]. We use the
SPICE implementation to explore Failure Sentinels’s trade
space across process nodes and voltages. We use the FPGA
implementation to validate the SPICE results and to provide a
real-world demonstration of Failure Sentinels’s performance.
Finally, we evaluate Failure Sentinels against analog alternatives on energy harvesting power traces to explore the systemlevel impact. Our evaluation indicates that Failure Sentinels
reduces runtime overhead by 24%–70% compared to existing
solutions, provides a flexible and scalable design space, and
enables a variety of system designs previously limited by
voltage monitor options.
This paper makes the following three contributions:
• We evaluate existing voltage monitors and identify the
power and scalability as the primary hurdles for their use
in current and future intermittent computation systems
(Section II-B).
• We design Failure Sentinels, an on-chip voltage monitor (Section III). Failure Sentinels leverages the power
and space scaling of wholly-digital circuits and enables
designers to build in just enough resolution and sample
rate to meet at near-zero additional power and area
(Section IV-B).
• We build Failure Sentinels in simulation and on FPGA
hardware to explore the power/accuracy trade space that
different Failure Sentinels implementations expose to
designers (Section IV). Our results show that Failure
Sentinels improves intermittent system performance by
up to 77% by eliminating a major source of power
consumption, freeing up energy for useful computation
(Section V).
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Although the size and power consumption of modern devices continue to decrease, harvested energy is typically too
weak and unreliable to guarantee enough power to continuously support current microcontrollers [10], [12], [15], [16].
Instead, energy harvesting circuits slowly feed power into a
buffer capacitor until enough energy is available to support
a short burst of computation. Once computation starts, the
microcontroller and peripherals rapidly drain the capacitor
until the system reaches the minimum operating voltage, and
the charge-discharge cycle repeats. The limitations of the
harvesting circuit mean that devices running on harvested
energy can restart dozens of times per second [12], [19]. Given
that programs and programmers alike are not prepared for
such operating conditions, previous work proposes a variety of
strategies to stretch long-running computation across frequent
power cycles, referred to as intermittent computation.
A. Supporting Intermittent Computation
Most current systems to support software on intermittentlypowered platforms fall broadly into one of two categories;
while each commits some portion of volatile memory (typically architectural registers, main memory, and any peripheral
registers) to non-volatile memory, they can do so just-in-time
before power failure [12]–[17] by measuring available energy
or continuously [20]–[24] throughout execution. The choice
of checkpointing strategy is the primary determinant of system performance. Just-in-time systems theoretically maximize

Platform MSP430FR5969 [25] PIC16LF15386 [26]
Core Iin (μA/MHz) 110 90
ADC Iin (μA) 265 295
Comp. Iin (μA) 35 75
Core Vmin (V) 1.8 1.8
Ref. Vmin (V) 1.8 2.5
TABLE I: Core versus ADC/comparator power requirements of sensormote-class microcontrollers, including voltage reference draw.
performance by only recording one checkpoint per power
cycle and simplify software’s interface as existing software is
supported by linking against a library-level interrupt handler,
but they depend on a voltage monitor attached to the buffer
capacitor that interrupts computation to store a checkpoint
when voltage falls below a threshold value (indicating imminent power loss). Unfortunately, practical considerations limit
the applicability and performance of just-in-time approaches
as existing voltage monitoring solutions are ill-suited for the
voltage monitoring use case. The key to unlocking the promise
of just-in-time approaches is a low power, scalable, on-chip
supply-voltage monitor with just enough resolution and sample
rate.
B. Monitoring Supply Voltage
Modern low-power microcontrollers include two components suitable for supply voltage monitoring: an Analog-toDigital Converter (ADC) and an analog comparator. Unfortunately, the signal-processing focus on resolution and sample
rates driving ADC design makes them unsuitable for supporting intermittent computation because of their relatively
high power consumption: Table I shows that each component
(and supporting circuitry)1 requires current on-par with the
processor itself.2 This means that over half of the energy harvested is wasted on checking for imminent power failure—as
opposed to computation. The wasted energy will only increase
for future systems due to the discrepancy in scaling between
digital logic and ADCs: performance/Watt for processors tends
to scale at 2x every 1.57 years [30], while performance/Watt
scales at 2x approximately every 2.6 years [31].
To avoid the power-hungry nature of full-fledged ADCs,
recent intermittent computation systems employ single-bit
analog comparators [13], [14], [17]. While single-bit analog
comparators improve on ADCs, they still waste 21%–45%
of harvested energy on reference voltage generation. Singlebit solutions also limit utility as many current and emerging
intermittent computation systems demand dynamic, fine-grain,
and poll-able voltage monitoring; essentially, the ideal solution
is making available energy a first-class abstraction provided by
the hardware to software at near-zero energy cost.
1Both components require a reference voltage to compare against the
measured signal, typically provided by a diode [27] or internal bandgap
reference generator [25], [28]. 2While discrete low-power ADCs exist [29], their cost is on par with the
microcontroller itself and their standalone nature adds size and complexity to
the system.
C. Enabling Future Intermittent Systems with Practical Voltage Monitoring
The first systems to address intermittent computing on small
batteryless devices focus on enabling long-running intermittent
programs [12], [16], [20], [21], [23]; more recent ones focus
on optimizing it [14], [24], [32], [33]. Since checkpoints are
one of the drivers of run time overhead (on-par with voltage
monitoring), one way to improve performance is to eliminate
superfluous checkpoints. Chinchilla [32] is a timer-augmented
continuous checkpointing system that improves performance
through energy-guided checkpointing. Chinchilla dynamically
tunes a timer to the expected on time and skips checkpoints
that occur before the timer expires. Despite the challenges
of representing energy in a timer value, Chinchilla yields a
2x–4x performance boost over similar checkpointing systems.
Chinchilla must be overly pessimistic on available energy and
energy usage to maintain correctness. With a practical voltage
monitoring solution, Chinchilla is able dynamically query
available energy and remove its guard bands; this increases
performance, while also increasing system reliability.
Work beyond checkpointing presents a variety of
energy-efficient techniques tailored for energy harvesting.
PHASE [34] makes the case for single-workload
heterogeneous architectures, switching between highperformance and high-efficiency systems for the same
workload depending on the availability of ambient power.
HarvOS [35] profiles the energy requirements of each section
of code and schedules software execution or non-volatile
checkpoints accordingly. Dewdrop [19] similarly balances
task execution and sleeping depending on available energy
to make the most of changing ambient energy conditions.
These systems all promise significant performance boosts but
depend principally on low cost, on-demand measurements
of remaining energy. While ADCs can fulfill this role, their
high resolution and high sample rate are overkill and steal up
to 50% of energy from software. The goal of this paper is to
enable these and other technologies through a low power, all
digital (i.e., scalable), on-chip voltage monitor that provides
just enough resolution and sample rate; in doing so, we make
energy availability a first-class hardware abstraction.
III. Failure Sentinels DESIGN
We design Failure Sentinels: a low power, fully digital,
software-programmable voltage monitor optimized to minimize power consumption while meeting the resolution and
sample rate needs of current and future intermittent computation systems. Two intermittent-computation-focused design
goals drive our approach:
• Failure Sentinels must minimize power consumption
and provide just enough resolution and sample rate to
serve software’s needs. Section II shows that existing
voltage monitors fail at this, whereas Failure Sentinels
provides enough resolution to support frequent, voltage
measurements, while avoiding the design and power
concerns associated with DSP-focused ADCs.

• Failure Sentinels must be compact and fully-digital to
enable ubiquity and scalability: As energy harvesters
find their way into micro-healthcare and smart dust applications, miniaturization of every component in the system
is a primary concern. Implementing Failure Sentinels with
solely the CMOS gates used for digital logic ensures that
it can be incorporated into any device and scales with
process technology.
A. Ring Oscillators
Digital systems operate correctly at a wide range of voltages
using well-chosen clock frequency guard bands, which hide
the extreme sensitivity of the underlying circuits to voltage
changes. Removing these guard bands from an otherwise
digital circuit reveals analog-domain latency changes, which
in turn reveal the system voltage. Desktop-class systems use
this effect by measuring the propagation of a signal through
lines of digital delay elements to support dynamic voltage
and frequency scaling [36]–[38], but their narrow voltage
range—beyond which the input either propagates entirely or
not at all—makes them ill-matched for the voltage monitoring
required by intermittent systems. Feeding the output of the
delay line into the input such that that the output changes
each time it passes through the entire delay line (i.e., it is
self-oscillating) forms a Ring Oscillator (RO) with an output
frequency that is primarily a function of supply voltage and a
dynamic range covering nearly the entire voltage at which the
RO oscillates. This paper leverages the voltage-dependent
nature of RO frequency to measure supply voltage.
The RO is a common circuit with applications in clock
generation [39], process tuning and characterization [40]–
[42], and performance monitoring [43]. Ring oscillators are
attractive options for these applications for their ease of integration into IC designs, low power consumption, and electrical
tunability [44]. The basic RO structure is an odd-numbered
ring of digital inverters as shown at the bottom of Figure 2.
Because the output of an odd-numbered chain of inverters
is the inverse of the input, feeding the chain output back to
the input produces a circuit that oscillates as long as power
is applied. RO length is largely application-dependent, but is
typically prime to reduce potential harmonic oscillations [45].
The frequency of oscillation depends on the length n of
the chain and the gate delay of each inverter τ d as shown in
Equation 1 [44].
fo = 1
2nτ d
(1)
With a constant chain length, the RO output frequency is
entirely dependent on average gate delay. Several factors affect
the gate delay: the designer tunes gate delay by changing the
transistor size or supply voltage, while temperature and manufacturing variations also play a role. Among these, voltage is
the dominant factor [46], [47].3
3Ring oscillators also have potential as fully-fledged ADCs [48], [49], but
the signal-processing focus of these designs precludes them for efficient supply
monitoring. However, research in this area to linearize the RO frequencyvoltage curve and reduce sensitivity to process/temperature variations [50],
[51] has potential to improve Failure Sentinels.
Fig. 1: RO frequency vs. supply voltage at different feature sizes.
B. Voltage-Frequency Relationship
To characterize supply voltage’s effect on RO frequency,
we run a comprehensive set of SPICE simulations on ROs of
varying length, operating at a range of supply voltages using
the Predictive Technology Models [52] for the 130nm, 90nm,
and 65nm technology nodes. We choose these feature sizes
because they are representative of the technology currently
used on energy harvesting platforms [53] as well as the logical
next feature size for future systems. We sweep the supply
voltages from 0.2 V (below which the rings do not oscillate)
in 100 mV steps up to 3.6 V, the maximum supply voltage for
typical energy-harvesting-class devices [25]–[27].
Figure 1 illustrates the results of these simulations using
11- and 21-stage ROs in each technology. We use these results
to make three key observations motivating and informing the
design of Failure Sentinels:
• The high sensitivity of frequency to voltage makes ROs
viable supply voltage sensor, and the sensitivity increase
from moving to smaller processes means that Failure
Sentinels improves as technology scales.
• Decreasing RO chain length magnifies the effects of
supply voltage changes, increasing sensitivity.4
• Regardless of RO length or feature size, the output
frequency becomes less sensitive as supply voltage increases, eventually decreasing at higher supply voltages.
The RO must operate in the low-voltage, high-sensitivity
region to reduce error.
C. System Overview
Figure 2 shows the high-level organization of Failure Sentinels. The voltage divider sets the operating range for the RO,
allowing us to tune the RO to operate in the most-sensitive
voltage region. The level shifter makes the output signal from
the RO compatible with the voltage level used by digital logic,
4Decreasing RO length also increases the frequency and therefore current
consumption of supporting circuitry; we explore the tradeoffs of different RO
lengths in more detail in Section V-A.

Enable
Vsupply
Enable
Counter
Vcore
Rest of System
Voltage Divider
Ring Oscillator
Level Shifter
Fig. 2: Failure Sentinels block diagram with a divide-by-3 voltage divider.
Not shown is a level shifter for interfacing the enable signal to the RO.
reducing power consumption and ensuring reliable operation.
The enable signal drives both an input to the NAND gate
closing the RO loop and an N-type MOS device (NMOS) at
the bottom of the voltage divider, allowing the designer to
change the duty cycle of the RO, reducing dynamic power
consumption. Breaking the RO chain with an enable sets each
gate to a known state before it begins oscillating to prevent
higher harmonic output frequencies [45]. Finally, the counter
makes the output of the RO available to the rest of the system
in the form of an edge count accumulated during the sampling
period. Software maps the resulting counter values to supply
voltage values using enrollment data stored in the NVM.
D. Choosing RO Length
Per Equation 1, Failure Sentinels’s voltage sensitivity scales
proportionally to 1/n where n is the length of the RO—a given
change in supply voltage produces a corresponding frequency
change that is larger in shorter ring oscillators because a
smaller n magnifies the impact of a change in the gate delay
τ d on the oscillation frequency. For ROs implemented in the
same technology a given voltage change produces the same
proportional frequency change regardless of the number of
RO stages, but Failure Sentinels measures the absolute change
in frequency. A higher change in frequency requires a shorter
enable period to detect; a shorter enable period allows Failure
Sentinels to run either at a lower duty cycle (consuming
less power, because the ring spends less time enabled) or at
a higher sampling rate. We distinguish between the enable
period—the amount of time the RO is powered to produce
a single sample—and the sample period—the time between
distinct samples—and discuss their impact on Failure Sentinels
in more detail in Section III-E.
Note that the dynamic power consumed by an RO is
not dependent on its length, as only one inverter is ever
switching at a time.5 Increasing the size of the RO increases
area overhead and static power; however, our evaluation in
5Failure Sentinels’s total dynamic power is weakly dependent on RO size
because the counter and level shifter power draw increase with frequency.
However, the RO consumes the majority of Failure Sentinels’s power (Section V-A).
Fig. 3: Frequency-voltage sensitivity for ROs across length and technology.
Section IV-B shows that Failure Sentinels consumes negligible
power and area compared to the rest of the microcontroller.
However, an RO that oscillates too fast for a given sampling
period will overflow the counter. Thus, the counter bit-width,
sampling period, and RO length are interconnected, a design
space that we explore in Section V. From these constraints,
we analyze the RO length primarily to the extent that it affects
accuracy and power draw by setting a minimum duty cycle.
E. Duty Cycling
The accuracy of Failure Sentinels depends largely on the
sampling rate and duty cycle D = Ten/Tsample ≤ 1, where
Ten is the time per sample during which Failure Sentinels is
enabled and Tsample is the sampling period. A higher Ten
enables Failure Sentinels to discriminate between finer RO
frequency, and thus voltage, changes. The output of Failure
Sentinels is in the form of the count C = fro ∗ Ten; the edgesensitive nature of the counter means that decimal values of C
are effectively truncated. Therefore, the minimum detectable
RO frequency change is 1/Ten. The bit-width n of the counter
limits the maximum value of C to 2n − 1; all possible values
of fro ∗ Ten must be below this maximum to prevent counter
overflow. Increasing Ten increases both accuracy and power
consumption, which scales directly with duty cycle: given that
low-resolution and low-frequency (relative to ADCs) measurements of the supply voltage are sufficient for current and nearfuture energy harvesters, operating Failure Sentinels with a low
duty cycle enables significant power savings at little practical
cost. A sufficiently low duty cycle also reduces counter size
and its power. We evaluate the relationship between duty cycle,
power, and accuracy in more detail in Section V-A.
F. Maximizing Voltage Sensitivity
a) Inverter cell choice: Past work provides a variety
of options for the design of the inverter used to build
the RO. Most ROs used in communications, clock generation, and other applications are current-starved [54]: the

charge/discharge time of each inverter is limited by a voltagecontrolled current source using a separate variable biasing
voltage. An important property of the current-starved RO
for these applications is that the current source isolates the
inverter from supply voltage noise, minimizing uncontrollable
variation and enabling the designer to produce a frequency
output that is primarily a function of only the bias voltage.
The crucial difference in Failure Sentinels is that the change
in the supply voltage is the quantity of interest. Instead,
we maximize sensitivity to changes in the supply voltage
by using the simplest inverter available consisting of single
PMOS and NMOS transistors connected directly to the supply
voltage and ground, respectively. This basic inverter design has
additional benefits, as it reduces the total transistor count and
is implementable using digital-only standard cell libraries.
b) RO operating voltage: Figure 1 shows that the
frequency-voltage curve for each RO is steepest at lower voltages, leveling off around 2.5 V and decreasing at higher voltages. The recommended operating voltage for microcontrollers
used in recent energy harvesting work is 1.8V–3.6V [25], [26],
[55]; for these platforms, connecting the ROs directly to the
supply voltage means that they would operate primarily in
the less-sensitive region. Furthermore, the voltage-frequency
relationship at high voltages is non-monotonic—complicating
the mapping in software from RO frequency back to supply
voltage. To maximize Failure Sentinels’s sensitivity to supply
voltage changes and keep the voltage-frequency relationship
monotonic, the RO operates at a reduced voltage produced by
the transistor-based voltage divider shown in Figure 2. This has
the added benefit of reducing power consumption. The tradeoff is that reducing the RO operating voltage adds complexity
to the design because the output must be integrated back into
the digital system, which Section III-G explores in detail.
Assuming a standard n-well process, which exposes the bulk
connection of PMOS transistors,6 the voltage divider consists
of diode-connected PMOS devices with the bulk terminal
connected to the source to ensure that each device is biased
identically even as the gate voltage with respect to ground of
successive transistors drops. Vgs for each individual transistor
is small, limiting the current draw of the divider. This design
parallels a resistive voltage divider, but the use of transistors
makes it applicable to wholly-digital ICs. The drawback of the
transistor version is that they become non-linear at extremely
low and high voltages, but these voltages are well beyond the
specified operational voltage range of microcontrollers.
The RO draws power from a node n PMOS transistors away
from ground; in a divider consisting of m diode-connected
devices, the RO supply voltage is Vro = Vsupply ∗ n/m. The
best voltage division ratio depends on the sensitivity curve
of the RO, shown in Figure 3 for several RO lengths and
technologies. Reducing the voltage seen by the RO tends
to increase sensitivity; however, it also reduces the voltage
change seen by the RO for a corresponding change at the
6In a p-well process, the voltage divider consists of NMOS devices and
works equally well.
supply rail. We define the sensitivity gain G using Equation 2.
G = Snew
Sold
∗ n
m (2)
The Snew and Sold terms reflect the average sensitivity in the
new and old operating regions, respectively. The best division
ratio is the one that maximizes G and is technology-dependent.
We find that the best ratios implementable in a small number of
transistors are n/m = 1/3 or 1/2; each of these division ratios
produces a sensitivity gain of G ≈ 2. Between division ratios
that produce the same sensitivity gain for a given process,
the smallest one reduces power consumption by reducing the
operating voltage of the RO. Thus, we select n/m = 1/3.
Assuming the transistors are well-matched, the unloaded
output of the voltage divider is a reliable fractional value of the
supply voltage. However, enabling the RO to draw power from
the voltage divider reduces the effective resistance between
the divider output and ground—resulting in a voltage drop
and a Vro below the nominal value. We compensate for this
voltage drop by increasing the width of certain transistors. We
widen the transistors between the voltage divider output and
Vsupply to increase current delivered to the RO and reduce the
magnitude of the voltage drop. Appropriate transistor sizing
reduces, but does not eliminate, the voltage drop seen at Vro
because the proportional error depends on the value of Vsupply.
However, the enrollment process described in Section III-H
accounts for any remaining error, because the voltage offset is
predictable at each supply voltage.
G. Logic Interfacing
Digital CMOS gates depend on well-defined input signals
to achieve high speed and low power: an input must either
be close to the supply voltage or close to ground to fully
and rapidly switch the component transistors. Operating the
RO at a fraction of the system’s supply voltage increases
sensitivity and decreases power consumption, but means that
applying the logical 1 output of the RO directly to the counter
input (operating at the normal supply voltage) violates this
fundamental assumption of digital CMOS logic. The lowvoltage RO logical 1 at best leaves little margin for noise
and at worst is consistently below the core’s logical 1 level,
producing a signal that is unrecognizable to the core. Even if
the RO output is reliably interpreted as a logical 1 by the core,
driving CMOS gates with a low-voltage 1 increases power
consumption due to ohmic losses from partially-on transistors
and current in the low-impedance path to ground. We resolve
the voltage difference using the level shifter shown in Figure 2,
a self-reinforcing circuit leveraging the common ground of
both voltage domains to boost the RO output voltage to the
core voltage.
Ultimately, software needs to measure the frequency of the
RO to make decisions based on supply voltage. We measure
the output of the RO using a digital counter configured as
shown in Figure 2 to increment on every positive edge of the
level shifter output. The measurement is sent to a digital comparator for interrupt generation and made available to software

Fig. 4: Maximum interpolation error for a 21-stage RO in 130nm. The
dashed line indicates minimum error possible using 8-bit calibration table
entries.
by the addition of an instruction to the microcontroller’s ISA,
making energy availability a first-class hardware abstraction.
H. Voltage-Frequency Memoization
The counter maps RO frequency to a count value; the final
step is mapping the count value to supply voltage. While
the slope of the frequency-voltage relationship is predictable
across all ROs, manufacturing-time process variation mean
that identical ROs on different chips produce different frequencies under the same conditions. Microcontroller manufacturers already address process variation in sensitive circuits
such as clock oscillators and sensors [26], [27], [55] using
a post-manufacture enrollment step, testing the device with
known inputs and writing device-specific calibration data to
the Flash/ROM before deployment. We extend this enrollment
process to increase Failure Sentinels’s precision by recording
the RO frequency using several known supply voltages. 7 Once
deployed, software uses these calibration values to determine
supply voltage with reduced error.
The choice of both what and how much data to store is
important. In general, designers can increase run-time performance by increasing memory consumption and enrollment
effort. We identify and evaluate several enrollment strategies
that occupy different points in that trade space:
• Full enrollment: A simple but impractical solution is to
store a voltage value for every possible Failure Sentinels
output; this maximizes accuracy (the voltage-count curve
is fully characterized and stored) and speed (mapping a
count to a voltage is a simple indexing operation). However, it also maximizes memory overhead and enrollment
effort for each device.
• Piecewise-constant interpolation: Instead of storing every possible counter output, we can trade accuracy for
7On devices with ADCs, an alternative to manufacture-time enrollment is
a one-time characterization of the RO frequency-supply voltage relationship
using the ADC for ground truth.
memory overhead by reducing the number of data points
stored in NVM. When the counter produces a value not
stored in the lookup table, Failure Sentinels pessimistically assumes the supply voltage is at whatever level is
associated with the closest stored count value below the
measured value. Designers can tune Failure Sentinels’s
accuracy by changing the number of stored data points,
while a runtime count-voltage conversion in this case
is slightly slower than with a full table (requiring a
comparison followed by indexing).
• Piecewise-linear interpolation: Piecewise-linear interpolation enables the same accuracy-memory tradeoff as
the piecewise-constant design but instead calculates a
linear interpolation between the nearest two points when
a count value is not stored. This increases accuracy for the
same memory footprint at the cost of increased runtime
overhead evaluating the interpolation function.
• Polynomial interpolation: To minimize memory overhead, the enrollment system can characterize Failure Sentinels at a few supply voltage points and place coefficients
for an arbitrary-degree polynomial regression function
in the device’s memory. This makes space overhead
negligible at the cost of runtime performance—evaluating
the polynomial function requires numerous floating-point
multiplication operations, which can be both time- and
energy-intensive on typical energy harvesting hardware.
We explore the piecewise-constant and piecewise-linear
interpolation designs in more detail because they are the most
flexible and best suited to the performance and NVM constraints of current energy harvesters. For a continuous function
f(x) with lower and upper bounds a and b, respectively,
Equations 3 and 4 describe the respective maximum error for
piecewise-linear and piecewise-constant interpolation [56].
Econst ≤ h ∗ max
x∈[a,b]




df(x)
dx




(3)
Elin ≤
h2
8 ∗ max
x∈[a,b]




d2f(x)
dx2




(4)
f(x) is the mapping from frequency to voltage for a given RO,
the inverse of the relationship shown in Figure 1. h is the distance between known frequency datapoints and decreases with
higher NVM consumption; for the frequency-voltage transfer
function with minimum frequency L, maximum frequency H,
and c evenly-spaced datapoints8, h = (H − L)/c.
Figure 4 shows the maximum error introduced by both
types of interpolation as a function of NVM overhead, assuming that each voltage entry in the table is stored in a
single byte. By operating the RO at a low voltage using the
divider described in Section III-F, we maximize the linearity
of the voltage-frequency transfer function and enable highly
accurate interpolation with a relatively small NVM footprint.
Linear interpolation scales better than constant interpolation
8One way to increase interpolation accuracy is to locally reduce h by taking
more data points in areas where



df(x)
dx


 or



d2f(x)
dx2


 are highest, but for
simplicity we use evenly spaced points.
                            
with increasing NVM overhead, but both eventually achieve
diminishing returns as other sources of error such as temperature begin to dominate Failure Sentinels’s total error. The
precision of the recorded data points also limits interpolation
accuracy, as shown in Figure 4: assuming a 1.8 V supply range,
interpolating between 8-bit values cannot reduce the total error
below 1.8V
28 ≈ 7mV .
IV. Failure Sentinels IMPLEMENTATION
We evaluate Failure Sentinels using two implementations,
each targeting different aspects of the design: (1) a SPICE
implementation and (2) a FPGA implementation. We use
SPICE to drive our design space exploration and evaluate the
effects of supply voltage, feature size, and the analog circuit
components on Failure Sentinels’s performance. To explore
the effects of run time variation such as temperature and to
demonstrate Failure Sentinels on real hardware, we integrate
Failure Sentinels into a RISC-V processor running on a FPGA.
A. SPICE Modeling
We model Failure Sentinels using LTspice [57] to explore its
behavior at a wide variety of supply voltages across different
feature sizes. This enables us to practically explore Failure
Sentinels’s design space. To match deployed and near-future
real-world energy harvesting microcontrollers, we implement
each RO using the 130nm, 90nm, and 65nm process Predictive
Technology Model (PTM) SPICE cards [52]. We also include
the provided parasitic resistance and capacitance estimates for
local interconnects in those technologies between components.
These SPICE simulations also offer insight into the effects of
the analog circuitry (the voltage divider and level shifters),
which is not available on the FPGA. Finally, SPICE includes
power consumption information for each component of the
design—enabling a direct comparison between Failure Sentinels and currently available alternatives such as ADCs.
B. FPGA Implementation
While the SPICE PTM models make it possible to perform
a design-space exploration across process nodes and voltages,
they do not accurately model the effects of thermal variation [58] and do not capture the ability to incorporate Failure
Sentinels into a full system. To validate the SPICE-based
design space exploration, understand temperature’s impact on
Failure Sentinels, and to show how architects can add Failure
Sentinels to an existing System-on-Chip (SoC) to make energy
availability a first-class hardware abstraction, we implement
Failure Sentinels inside a RISC-V RocketChip SoC [59] on
top of a Xilinx Artix-7 FPGA [60]. On top of this SoC, we run
software that communicates with Failure Sentinels via two instructions added to the ISA: (1) an instruction that stores a 64-
bit value representing the available energy to a user-specified
destination register and (2) an instruction that the library-level
recovery routine uses to enable Failure Sentinels as well as
set the energy interrupt threshold. Similar to previous work
that requires ADC support [16], we link unmodified software
area (LUTs) timing (MHz) power (W)
Base SoC 53664 30 1.105
+Failure Sentinels 53687 (+0.04%) 30 (+0.0%) 1.104 (-.09%)
TABLE II: Failure Sentinels hardware overheads when added to a RISC-V
SoC [59]. Note that power is within the noise margin of the tools.
Design Performance
Parameter Min. Max. Parameter Min. Max.
RO Length 3 73 Mean Current (μA) 0 5
Fs (kHz) 1 10 Fs (kHz) 1 10
Counter Size (bits) 1 16 Granularity (mV) 0 50
Enable Time 1 μs 1 ms NVM Overhead (B) 0 128
NVM Entries 1 128 Transistor Count 0 1000
Entry Size (bits) 1 16
TABLE III: Failure Sentinels design and performance parameters bounding
our exploration.
against a library-level interrupt handler that saves software
state as a checkpoint when Failure Sentinels’s interrupt fires.
Following the design goals of the ideal voltage monitor, Table II shows that adding Failure Sentinels to an existing SoC is
low cost: Failure Sentinels maintains the maximum frequency
of the SoC, minimally increases area, and, in accordance
with the SPICE evaluation (Section V-A), steals very little
energy from software computation. The implemented variant
of Failure Sentinels has a 21-stage RO and an 8-bit counter.
The fixed nature of the FPGA fabric precludes implementing
the transistor-based voltage divider and level shifter, but those
minimally contribute to Failure Sentinels area and removing
them actually increases Failure Sentinels’s power.
V. EVALUATION
We take a two-level approach in evaluating Failure Sentinels in order to support comparison to currently available
alternatives. We first perform a comprehensive evaluation of
the Failure Sentinels design space using SPICE simulations to
explore the trade space between different design parameters
and their effect on Failure Sentinels. Then we demonstrate
Failure Sentinels on real hardware and evaluate the impact of
thermal variation by implementing Failure Sentinels as part of
a RISC-V System-on-Chip using a FPGA. The results of this
evaluation answer the following questions:
1) How does building Failure Sentinels to satisfy certain
design constraints impact its performance in other areas?
2) How do typical sources of run-time variation such as
temperature affect Failure Sentinels?
3) How well does Failure Sentinels fit the needs of energy
harvesting applications compared to existing alternatives?
A. Failure Sentinels Design Space
Failure Sentinels is designed for flexibility; each application
places unique demands on the system in terms of power consumption, resolution, and other parameters. Rather than handdesign and evaluate one Failure Sentinels implementation for
a given deployment, we explore the Failure Sentinels design
space by finding a set of Pareto-optimal implementations

Fig. 5: Objective space exploration for Failure Sentinels in 90nm.
within performance constraints suitable for a range of energyharvester deployments. We model Failure Sentinels design as
an optimization problem mapping six design parameters to five
performance parameters as shown in Table III. We set the design parameter bounds to ease integration with today’s energy
harvesters—for example, we limit the counter size to 16 bits
to improve performance on the 16-bit architectures common
to currently deployed energy harvesters [25]. Similarly, the 1
μs minimum enable-time stems from the minimum period of
the fastest (1 MHz) clock available on similar systems without
increasing current consumption [25].
We explore the resulting design space using Pymoo [61], a
Python optimization library. We implement Failure Sentinels
in LTspice [57] at several design points spanning the limits
shown in Table III in each of the process nodes described
in Section III-B and evaluate each implementation across the
typical 1.8V–3.6V operating range, in 100 mV steps. The
results from these simulations form the basis for an analytical
model of Failure Sentinels’s performance that we use to drive
the optimization function. However, the SPICE simulations do
not fully reflect several design choices beyond the core Failure
Sentinels hardware. In order to accurately represent a real
Failure Sentinels implementation, we augment the analytical
model with several elements beyond the SPICE results:
• We model the number and size of NVM lookup table
entries to fulfill the NVM overhead constraint, and factor
in their effect on Failure Sentinels’s accuracy using
the piecewise-linear interpolation strategy described in
Section III-H.
• We include temperature as another limiting factor on
Failure Sentinels’s accuracy and assume a maximum
temperature-induced RO frequency deviation of 2% according to the FPGA-based experiments in Section V-C.
• We add a rejection filter to ensure the resulting configuration is realizable and correct (e.g., the RO is never
enabled long enough to overflow the counter).
In general, the resulting Pareto frontier is five-dimensional
in each of the performance parameters. Given that NVM and
die space consumption have minimal impact on operational
performance (as long as the code/calibration data still fit in the
NVM and Failure Sentinels fits on the chip), we expect typical
Failure Sentinels deployments to be constrained primarily by
sampling frequency, power, or resolution. For visualization,
we reduce the dimensionality of the frontier by only plotting
the first three performance parameters in Table III with the
knowledge that each solution satisfies the limit on NVM
overhead and transistor count. Figure 5 shows the trade space
for Failure Sentinels in 90nm technology; each point denotes
the performance of a different Pareto-optimal configuration.
Failure Sentinels’s flexibility enables designers to precisely
tune performance to the needs of their specific application
by compromising on each of the three performance parameters shown. Sampling frequency is the primary driver of
current consumption in the design space we explore because
temperature variations rather than current consumption set
the limit on Failure Sentinels’s resolution (see Section V-C).
Figure 5 shows the current-resolution-sample rate trade space
accounting for the temperature-induced limit; reducing sampling granularity (e.g., from 38 mV to 48 mV) reduces mean
current consumption by 14% at the highest sampling rate
of 10 kHz. This tradeoff becomes more favorable at both
lower sampling rates and smaller process nodes; at a 10 kHz
sample rate, there is an 8% difference in current consumption
between the finest (27 mV) and coarsest (50 mV) granularities
for the 65nm implementation of Failure Sentinels. For all
configurations and all technologies, the RO represents over
90% of Failure Sentinels’s total current consumption. Given
that RO length only affects the power consumption of the
supporting components (see Section III-D), this indicates that
duty cycle—a function of sampling frequency and enabletime—is the primary determinant of current consumption.
In each case, Failure Sentinels dramatically reduces the
power budget required for voltage monitoring hardware and
provides the resolution and speed performance needed to
enable the most sophisticated energy harvesting runtimes
available. Assuming a 1.8V dynamic range, Figure 6 shows
that Failure Sentinels offers between 5 and 6 bits of resolution
depending on feature size while consuming, in total, less
than 1 μA—enabling sophisticated energy harvesting systems
with negligible power overhead. Failure Sentinels eliminates
between 59%–77% of the system’s energy overhead while enabling the same power-based intermittent runtimes as an ADC.
Even compared to single-bit analog comparators supporting
a simple just-in-time checkpointing system, Failure Sentinels
increases energy available to software by 24%–45%.
B. Failure Sentinels Scales with Technology
Failure Sentinels’s fully-digital design enables it to scale
down with the rest of the processor to maximize performance.
First, smaller process nodes enable lower-power operation,
all other parameters being equal: switching from 130nm to
the 90nm process, we observe a 14% reduction in power
consumption—with a similar reduction from 90nm to 65nm.

Fig. 6: Pareto-optimal configurations for each technology with Fs = 5 kHz.
Fig. 7: RO frequency variation with temperature on Xilinx Virtex-7 FPGA.
Second, transistor delays in smaller technologies are also more
sensitive to supply voltage variations [62]: our experiments
show that RO frequency in the 65nm process is approximately
2% more sensitive to supply voltage than in the 90nm process
and 14% more sensitive than the 130nm process.
To predict Failure Sentinels’s performance trends from
current energy harvester feature sizes to near-future ones,
we explore the trade space in each technology discussed in
Section III-B around the Fs = 5kHz operating point. Figure 6
shows that at the same sample rate, smaller feature sizes
enable both lower current and finer resolution operation for
Failure Sentinels. These results indicate that Failure Sentinels
effectively removes the power/size bottleneck of highly-analog
circuits and enables energy harvesters to better leverage the
advantages of transistor scaling.
C. Temperature Variation
To build a picture of how operational conditions affect Failure Sentinels’s performance, we need to examine the impact of
thermal fluctuations on RO frequency. Environments where the
temperature changes dramatically have the potential to reduce
the system’s accuracy because Failure Sentinels misinterprets
Monitor Sys. Current (μA) Res. (mV) Fs (kHz) Vckpt (V)
Ideal 112.3 Infinite Infinite 1.82
FS (LP) 112.5 50 1 1.87
FS (HP) 113.6 38 10 1.86
Comparator 147.3 30 3030* 1.86
ADC 377.3 0.293 200 1.87
TABLE IV: Voltage monitors we evaluate within a full system. FS (LP)
uses a 67-stage RO with a 49-entry LUT of 8-bit values, while FS (HP) uses
a 7-stage RO with a 52-entry LUT of 10-bit values. Both versions uses a 6-bit
counter and a 1 μs enable time. *Comparator response time is 330 ns.
temperature-induced frequency changes as voltage changes.
Temperature affects digital circuits by changing gate delay,9
which in turn affects the frequency of the RO. For Failure Sentinels, the circuitry supporting the RO is largely temperatureindependent: the voltage divider depends only on the relative
differences between each device, and temperature affects each
device equally. Temperature changes the maximum operating
frequency of the level shifter by changing transistor drive
strength, but our results indicate that RO frequency is always
well below the level shifter’s maximum.
Given that the RO is the primary factor in Failure Sentinels’s
temperature sensitivity, we implement a range of RO sizes on
a Xilinx Artix-7 FPGA. Using a TestEquity 123H temperature
chamber [64], we vary the operating environment from room
temperature (25°C) up to 75°C to encompass the typical
operating range of energy harvesting devices. We let the
device stabilize at the target temperature for an hour before
measurements. For each configuration and temperature, we
report the average of 1000 RO count measurements. Figure 7
illustrates the relative change in frequency across temperatures
for all implemented ROs. We consider the temperature-induced
error to be the largest frequency change between any two
frequencies. Much like voltage-induced changes, temperatureinduced changes are similar across RO sizes, because only
one gate switches at a time. We double the 1% maximum
effect shown in Figure 7 to create a conservative, worst-case
2% thermal error. This error fits past work measuring RO and
delay line sensitivity to temperature [43], [65].
This thermal error serves as an upper bound on Failure
Sentinels’s resolution. Our analytical model indicates that
temperature-induced frequency changes approximately double
Failure Sentinels’s error, motivating future work reducing
Failure Sentinels’s temperature sensitivity. One potential approach is to increase the interconnect length between each
inverter; because transistors are significantly more sensitive
than interconnects to temperature changes [66], increasing
the RO delay due to interconnect reduces Failure Sentinels’s
overall temperature sensitivity. Because longer interconnects
may affect Failure Sentinels’s voltage sensitivity, we leave a
detailed exploration of this area for future work.

Fig. 8: Reduction in available time to process application code, normalized
to ideal monitoring.
D. System-level Impact
In order to determine the impact Failure Sentinels has on a
typical intermittent system in an energy-scarce environment,
we compare it to existing solutions in the context of a
simulated solar-powered energy harvester using the EnHANTs
irradiance dataset [67] for a pedestrian in New York City
at night. Similar to past energy harvesting architectural exploration [34], we use this simulation framework to explore
the effect of different Failure Sentinels configurations on
system performance, measured in time available for executing
application code.
a) Evaluation Parameters: We compare Failure Sentinels
to the analog alternatives on the MSP430FR5969 [25] detailed in Table I. We evaluate one 90nm Failure Sentinels
implementation optimized for high performance (HP) and one
for low power (LP), taken from opposite extremes of the
objective space exploration in Figure 5. We model a typical
energy harvesting sensor using a 5 cm2, 15% efficient solar
panel to charge a 47 μF storage capacitor; when the capacitor
reaches the enable voltage of 3.5V, the microcontroller and
a peripheral accelerometer [68] begin consuming power. Both
devices operate until the supply capacitor reaches a checkpoint
voltage detailed below, at which point the microcontroller
stops application code and stores a checkpoint in NVM.
We model the current consumption of the microcontroller
core, accelerometer, and voltage monitor when the device is
executing, and a leakage current of 0.5 μA at all times.
b) Checkpointing Mechanics: We model the worst-case
checkpoint behavior as writing all volatile data to non-volatile
FRAM, which takes 8.192 ms at a clock frequency of 1
MHz on our microcontroller. This execution time combined
with total current draw and supply capacitance sets the ideal
minimum voltage at which the microcontroller has just enough
9Temperature affects digital gates by reducing carrier mobility (increasing
propagation delay) and reducing threshold voltage (decreasing propagation
delay) [63]; each of these effects dominates in different circumstances.
energy to complete the checkpoint. However, the limited accuracy of each system prevents us from achieving this minimum
voltage. We add the measurement resolution of each device
to the theoretical minimum to ensure the checkpoint will
always complete despite worst-case measurement error and
show the final checkpoint voltage for each system in Table IV.
The similar checkpoint voltages across each monitor, despite
dramatic differences in resolution, show how current monitors
are over-optimized for resolution because the additional energy
drawn from the capacitor is consumed by the monitor itself.
Finally, we consider the effect of monitor sampling frequency
(because capacitor voltage changes over the course of a
sample). The effect of sampling frequency on accuracy is small
for this scenario—2mV in the worst case using FS (LP)—
showing that reducing sampling frequency is an effective way
to reduce power consumption without sacrificing performance.
c) Performance Comparison: Table IV and Figure 8
illustrate the performance improvement of Failure Sentinels
over analog-based alternatives for our checkpointing system.
We normalize all runtime results to performance using the
ideal voltage monitor, representing perfect sampling and zero
overhead from monitoring hardware. Both implementations of
Failure Sentinels achieve near-ideal runtime, compared to the
24% and 70% runtime penalties of the analog solutions—
illustrating Failure Sentinels’s ability to maximize the time
and energy available for application code.
d) Discussion: While we evaluate Failure Sentinels here
based on a typical batteryless sensor mote, different systemlevel design choices place different demands on the voltage
monitoring hardware. Systems with smaller supply capacitors
require a monitor with a higher sampling frequency because
the supply capacitor discharges more per unit of time, but
designers must balance higher sampling frequency with the
corresponding current draw. Conversely, monitor resolution
becomes more important as the size of the supply capacitor
increases because the voltage offset represents increasingly
more energy that could have otherwise been used for computation. Broadly, we expect small sensor motes to favor a lowcurrent, low-resolution implementation of Failure Sentinels
while platforms with comparatively large supply capacitors
and active power draws (e.g., energy harvesting satellites [4])
benefit more from a high-resolution implementation of Failure Sentinels when the additional energy extracted from the
capacitor outweighs the increased draw of the monitor itself.
Emerging energy-aware systems beyond checkpointing (Section II-C) will further exercise the voltage monitoring trade
space we explore, highlighting the value of Failure Sentinels’s
flexibility.
VI. CONCLUSION
Failure Sentinels leverages the voltage-dependent gate delay
of CMOS devices to eliminate the need for ill-suited, highpower analog hardware to monitor available energy. We design
Failure Sentinels to provide just enough performance using
only the lowest power, most scalable hardware available to designers: the transistor. A focus of our design is identifying and

operating at the sweet spot of the transistor delay and voltage
relationship, where dynamic power is reduced and sensitivity
is most linear. We incorporate Failure Sentinels into a RISCV system-on-chip and provide a software-queriable register
for energy availability, making energy availability a first-class
abstraction of the hardware. Our evaluation shows that Failure
Sentinels reduces power consumption by between 59% and
77% compared to conventional analog-to-digital converters—
without compromising system performance. Replacing onebit voltage comparators with Failure Sentinels reduces power
consumption by between 24% and 45%, while also enabling a
myriad of new power-responsive techniques to improve wholesystem efficiency and performance.
These results show that enabling sophisticated intermittent
computing support on even the smallest, lowest-power devices
is possible without a substantial increase in price or power consumption. Failure Sentinels’s low power and space overhead
implies that it could even be integrated onto devices smaller
than microcontrollers to support sophisticated intermittently
operated peripherals, expanding the horizons for future energy
harvesting designs and deployments.