Abstract—Modern data center applications exhibit deep software stacks, resulting in large instruction footprints that frequently cause instruction cache misses degrading performance,
cost, and energy efficiency. Although numerous mechanisms have
been proposed to mitigate instruction cache misses, they still
fall short of ideal cache behavior, and furthermore, introduce
significant hardware overheads. We first investigate why existing
I-cache miss mitigation mechanisms achieve sub-optimal performance for data center applications. We find that widely-studied
instruction prefetchers fall short due to wasteful prefetch-induced
cache line evictions that are not handled by existing replacement
policies. Existing replacement policies are unable to mitigate
wasteful evictions since they lack complete knowledge of a data
center application’s complex program behavior.
To make existing replacement policies aware of these evictioninducing program behaviors, we propose Ripple, a novel softwareonly technique that profiles programs and uses program context
to inform the underlying replacement policy about efficient
replacement decisions. Ripple carefully identifies program contexts that lead to I-cache misses and sparingly injects “cache line
eviction” instructions in suitable program locations at link time.
We evaluate Ripple using nine popular data center applications
and demonstrate that Ripple enables any replacement policy to
achieve speedup that is closer to that of an ideal I-cache. Specifically, Ripple achieves an average performance improvement of
1.6% (up to 2.13%) over prior work due to a mean 19% (up to
28.6%) I-cache miss reduction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern data center applications are becoming increasingly
complex. These applications are composed of deep and complex
software stacks that include various kernel and networking
modules, compression elements, serialization code, and remote
procedure call libraries. Such complex code stacks often
have intricate inter-dependencies, causing millions of unique
instructions to be executed to serve a single user request.
As a result, modern data center applications face instruction
working set sizes that are several orders of magnitude larger
than the instruction cache (I-cache) sizes supported by today’s
processors [13, 46].
Large instruction working sets precipitate frequent I-cache
misses that cannot be effectively hidden by modern out-oforder mechanisms, manifesting as glaring stalls in the critical
path of execution [60]. Such stalls deteriorate application
performance at scale, costing millions of dollars and consuming
significant energy [13, 95]. Hence, eliminating instruction
misses to achieve even single-digit percent speedups can yield
immense performance-per-watt benefits [95].
I-cache miss reduction mechanisms have been extensively studied in the past. Several prior works proposed
next-line [9, 89, 92], branch-predictor-guided [60, 61, 82], or
history-based [25, 26, 31, 51, 59, 70, 77, 83] hardware instruction
prefetchers and others designed software mechanisms to
perform code layout optimizations for improving instruction
locality [17, 64, 67, 74–76]. Although these techniques are
promising, they (1) require additional hardware support to
be implemented on existing processors and (2) fall short of
the ideal I-cache behavior, i.e., an I-cache that incurs no
misses. To completely eliminate I-cache misses, it is critical
to first understand: why do existing I-cache miss mitigation
mechanisms achieve sub-optimal performance for data center
applications? How can we further close the performance gap
to achieve near-ideal application speedup?
To this end, we comprehensively investigate why existing
I-cache miss mitigation techniques fall short of an ideal Icache, and precipitate significant I-cache Misses Per Kilo
Instruction (MPKI) in data center applications (§II). Our
investigation finds that the most widely-studied I-cache miss
mitigation technique, instruction prefetching, still falls short
of ideal I-cache behavior. In particular, existing prefetchers
perform many unnecessary prefetches, polluting the I-cache,
causing wasteful evictions. Since wasteful evictions can be
avoided by effective cache replacement policies, we study
previous proposals such as the Global History Reuse Predictor
(GHRP) [7] (the only replacement policy specifically targeting
the I-cache, to the best of our knowledge) as well as additional
techniques that were originally proposed for data caches, such
as Hawkeye [40]/Harmony [41], SRRIP [43], and DRRIP [43].
Driven by our investigation results, we propose Ripple, a
profile-guided technique to optimize I-cache replacement policy
decisions for data center applications. Ripple first performs an
offline analysis of the basic blocks (i.e., sequence of instructions
without a branch) executed by a data center application,
recorded via efficient hardware tracing (e.g., Intel’s Processor
Trace [19, 58]). For each basic block, Ripple then determines
the cache line that an ideal replacement policy would evict
based on the recorded basic block trace. Ripple computes
basic blocks whose executions likely signal a future eviction

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00063
for an ideal replacement policy. If this likelihood is above a
certain threshold (which we explore and determine empirically
in §III), Ripple injects an invalidation instruction to evict the
victim cache line. Intel recently introduced such an invalidation
instruction — CLDemote, and hence Ripple can readily be
implemented on upcoming processors.
We evaluate Ripple in combination with I-cache prefetching
mechanisms, and show that Ripple yields on average 1.6%
(up to 2.13%) improvement over prior work as it reduces Icache misses by on average 19% (up to 28.6%). As Ripple is
primarily a software-based technique, it can be implemented on
top of any replacement policy that already exists in hardware.
In particular, we evaluate two variants of Ripple. Ripple-Least
Recently Used (LRU) is optimized for highest performance and
reduces I-cache MPKI by up to 28.6% over previous proposals,
including Hawkeye/Harmony, DRRIP, SRRIP, and GHRP. On
the other hand, Ripple-Random is optimized for lowest storage
overhead, eliminating all meta data storage overheads, while
outperforming prior work by up to 19%. Ripple executes only
2.2% extra dynamic instructions and inserts only 3.4% new
static instructions on average. In summary, we show that Ripple
provides significant performance gains compared to the state-ofthe-art I-cache miss mitigation mechanisms while minimizing
the meta data storage overheads of the replacement policy.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• A detailed analysis of why existing I-cache miss mitigation
mechanisms fall short for data center applications
• Profile-guided replacement: A software mechanism that uses
program behavior to inform replacement decisions
• Ripple: A novel profile-guided instruction cache miss mitigation mechanism that can readily work on any existing
replacement policy
• An evaluation demonstrating Ripple’s efficacy at achieving
near-ideal application speedup.
II. WHY DO EXISTING I-CACHE MISS MITIGATION
TECHNIQUES FALL SHORT?
In this section, we analyze why existing techniques to
mitigate I-cache misses fall short, precipitating high miss
rates in data center applications. We first present background
information on the data center applications we study (§II-A).
We then perform a limit study to determine the maximum
speedup that can be obtained with an ideal I-cache for
applications with large instruction footprints (§II-B). Next,
we evaluate existing prefetching mechanisms, including nextline prefetcher and FDIP [82], to analyze why these techniques
achieve sub-optimal performance (§II-C). Finally, we analyze
existing cache replacement policies, including LRU, Harmony,
DRRIP, SRRIP, and GHRP, to quantify their performance gap
with the optimal replacement policy (§II-D). This analysis
provides the foundation for Ripple, a novel prefetch-aware Icache replacement policy that achieves high performance with
minimal hardware overheads.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
0
20
40
Speedup (%) Fig. 1: Ideal I-cache speedup over an LRU baseline without
any prefetching: These data center applications can gain on
average 17.7% speedup with an ideal I-cache with no misses.
A. Background on evaluated applications
We study nine widely-used real-world data center applications that suffer from substantial I-cache misses [55]—
these applications lose 23-80% of their pipeline slots due
to frequent I-cache misses. We study three HHVM applications from Facebook’s OSS-performance benchmark suite [5],
including drupal [103] (a PHP content management system),
mediawiki [104] (a wiki engine), and wordpress [105] (a
popular content management system). We investigate three
Java applications from the DaCapo benchmark suite [16],
including cassandra [1] (a NoSQL database used by companies like Netflix), kafka [102] (a stream processing system
used by companies like Uber), and tomcat [2] (Apache’s
implementation of Java Servlet and Websocket). From the Java
Renaissance [79] benchmark suite, we analyze Finagle-Chirper
(Twitter’s microblogging service) and Finagle-HTTP [3] (Twitter’s HTTP server). We also study Verilator [4, 10] (used by
cloud companies for hardware simulation). We describe our
complete experimental setup and simulation parameters in §IV.
B. Ideal I-cache: The theoretical upper bound
An out-of-order processor’s performance greatly depends on
how effectively it can supply itself with instructions. Therefore,
these processors use fast dedicated I-caches that can typically
be accessed in 3-4 cycles [93]. To maintain a low access
latency, modern processors typically have small I-cache sizes
(e.g., 32KB) that are overwhelmed by data center applications’
multi-megabyte instruction footprints [11, 13, 46, 76] incurring
frequent I-cache misses. To evaluate the true cost of these
I-cache misses as well as the potential gain of I-cache
optimizations, we explore the speedup that can be obtained for
data center applications with an ideal I-cache that incurs no
misses. Similar to prior work [13, 55], we compute the speedup
relative to a baseline cache configuration with no prefetching
and with an LRU replacement policy. As shown in Fig. 1, an
ideal I-cache can provide between 11-47% (average of 17.7%)
speedup over the baseline cache configuration.
C. Why do modern instruction prefetchers fall short?
Prior works [13, 24, 55, 82] have proposed prefetching
techniques to overcome the performance challenge induced
by insufficiently sized I-caches. Fetch Directed Instruction

cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
0
20
40
Speedup (%)
FDIP+LRU FDIP+Ideal
Fig. 2: Fetch directed instruction prefetching (FDIP) speedup
over an LRU baseline without any prefetching: FDIP provides
13.4% mean speedup with LRU replacement policy. However,
with an ideal cache replacement policy FDIP can provide 16.6%
average speedup which is much closer to ideal cache speedup.
Prefetching (FDIP) [82] is the state-of-the art mechanism that is
implemented on multiple real-world processors [32, 78, 85, 97]
due to its performance and moderate implementation complexity. Fig. 2 shows FDIP’s speedup over the baseline I-cache
configuration without any prefetching. Both FDIP and baseline
configurations use the LRU replacement policy. As shown,
FDIP+LRU provides between 8-44% (average of 13.4%)
speedup over the baseline. This represents a 4.3% performance
loss over the ideal cache speedup (17.7%).
To analyze why FDIP falls short of delivering ideal performance, we equip the I-cache with a prefetch-aware ideal
replacement policy. In particular, when leveraging a revised
version of the Demand-MIN prefetch-aware replacement policy [41], we find that the speedup increases to on average 16.6%
falling short of the ideal cache by just 1.14%. In other words,
FDIP with prefetch-aware ideal replacement policy outperforms
FDIP with LRU by 3.16%. This observation highlights the
importance of combining state-of-the-art I-cache prefetching
mechanisms with better replacement policies.
To confirm the generality of our observation, we repeat
the above experiment with a standard Next-Line Prefetcher
(NLP) [92]. We find that the combination of NLP prefetching
with ideal cache replacement results in a 3.87% speedup over
the NLP baseline without a perfect replacement policy.
To understand the key reasons behind the near-ideal speedups
provided by the prefetch-aware ideal replacement policy, we
first briefly describe how the policy works and then summarize
the key reasons for near-ideal speedups [41]. We also quantify
the speedups that an ideal replacement policy can provide for
the data center applications we evaluate.
Prefetch-aware ideal replacement policy. Our ideal prefetchaware replacement policy is based on a revised version of
Demand-MIN [41]. In its revised form, Demand-MIN evicts
the cache line that is prefetched farthest in the future if there
is no earlier demand access to that line. If there exists no such
prefetch for a given cache set, Demand-MIN evicts the line
whose demand access is farthest in the future. We now detail
and quantify two observations that were originally made by
Demand-MIN: (1) evicting inaccurately prefetched cache lines
reduces I-cache misses and (2) not evicting hard-to-prefetch
cache lines reduces I-cache misses.
Observation #1: Early eviction of inaccurately prefetched
cache lines reduces I-cache misses. The ideal replacement
policy can evict inaccurately prefetched cache lines (i.e., ones
that will not be used) early, improving performance. Like most
practical prefetchers, FDIP inaccurately prefetches many cache
lines as its decisions are guided by a branch predictor, which
occasionally mispredicts branch outcomes. However, the ideal
replacement policy has knowledge of all future accesses, so
it can immediately evict inaccurately prefetched cache lines,
minimizing their negative performance impact. Across our nine
data center applications, the ideal cache replacement policy
combined with FDIP, provides 1.35% average speedup (out of
3.16% total speedup of FDIP+ideal over FDIP+LRU) relative
to an LRU-based baseline replacement policy (also combined
with FDIP) due to the early eviction of inaccurately-prefetched
cache lines.
Observation #2: Not evicting hard-to-prefetch cache lines
reduces I-cache misses. An ideal replacement policy can keep
hard-to-prefetch cache lines in the cache while evicting easy-toprefetch lines. Cache lines that cannot be prefetched with good
accuracy or at all, are considered hard-to-prefetch cache lines.
For example, FDIP is guided by the branch predictor. A cache
line that will be prefetched based on the outcome of a branch,
may not be prefetched if the predictor cannot easily predict
the branch outcome (e.g., due to an indirect branch)—in that
case, the line is hard-to-prefetch. Easy-to-prefetch cache lines
are cache lines that the prefetcher is often able to prefetch
accurately. For example, a cache line that FDIP can prefetch
based on the outcome of a direct unconditional branch is
an easy-to-prefetch cache line. Since the ideal replacement
policy has knowledge of all accesses and prefetches, it can (1)
accurately identify hard-to-prefetch and easy-to-prefetch lines
for any given prefetching policy and (2) prioritize the eviction
of easy-to-prefetch lines over hard-to-prefetch lines. Across
our nine data center applications, the ideal cache replacement
policy combined with FDIP, provides 1.81% average speedup
(out of 3.16% total speedup of FDIP+ideal over FDIP+LRU)
relative to an LRU-based baseline replacement policy (also
combined with FDIP) due to not evicting hard-to-prefetch lines.
Summary: Exploiting the above observations for an optimized
prefetch-aware replacement policy requires knowledge about
future instruction sequences that are likely to be executed. We
find that this information can be provided by the static controlflow analysis based on execution profiles and instruction traces.
As described in §IV, Ripple leverages these analysis techniques
and performs well-informed replacement decisions in concert
with the prefetcher, to achieve near-ideal performance.
D. Why do existing replacement policies fall short?
In the previous section, we demonstrated that a prefetchaware ideal cache replacement policy can provide on average
3.16% speedup relative to a baseline LRU replacement policy.
In this section, we explore the extent to which existing
replacement policies close this speedup gap. As there exist

TABLE I: Storage overheads of different replacement policies
for a 32KB, 8-way set associative instruction cache that has
64B cache lines.
Replacement Policy Overhead Notes
LRU 64B 1-bit per line
GHRP 4.13KB 3KB prediction table, 64B prediction bits , 1KB signature, 2B history
register
SRRIP 128B 2-bits× associativity
DRRIP 128B 2-bits× associativity
Hawkeye/Harmony 5.1875KB 1KB sampler (200 entries), 1KB
occupancy vector, 3KB predictor,
192B RRIP counters
only few works on I-cache replacement policies apart from
GHRP [7], we also explore data cache replacement policies
such as LRU [69], Hawkeye [40]/Harmony [41], SRRIP [43],
and DRRIP [43] applied to the I-cache.
GHRP [7] was designed to eliminate I-cache and Branch
Target Buffer (BTB) misses. During execution, GHRP populates
a prediction table indexed by control flow information to predict
whether a given cache line is dead or alive. While making
replacement decisions, GHRP favors evicting lines that are
more likely to be dead. Every time GHRP evicts a cache line,
it uses a counter to update the predictor table that the evicted
cache line is more likely to be dead. Similarly, GHRP updates
the predictor table after each hit in the I-cache to indicate that
that the hit cache line is more likely to be alive. GHRP uses
4.13KB extra on-chip metadata for a 32KB I-cache to primarily
store this prediction table.
Hawkeye/Harmony [40] was designed for the data cache,
specifically for the Last Level Cache (LLC). By simulating the
ideal cache replacement policy [15] on access history, Hawkeye
determines whether a Program Counter (PC) is “cache-friendly”
or “cache-averse”, i.e., whether the data accessed while the
processor executes the instruction corresponding to this PC
follows a cache-friendly access pattern [42] or not. Cache
lines accessed at a cache-friendly PC are maintained using
the LRU cache replacement policy, while lines accessed by
a cache-averse PC are marked to be removed at the earliest
opportunity. Harmony [41] is a state-of-the-art replacement
policy that adds prefetch-awareness to Hawkeye. It simulates
Demand-MIN [41] on the access history in hardware to further
categorize PCs as either prefetch-friendly or prefetch-averse.
SRRIP [43] was mainly designed to eliminate the adverse
effects of the scanning [14] cache access pattern, where a
large number of cache lines are accessed without any temporal
locality (i.e., a sequence of accesses that never repeat). SRRIP
assumes that all newly-accessed cache lines are cache-averse
(i.e., scans). Only when a cache line is accessed for a second
time, SRRIP promotes the status of the line to cache-friendly.
DRRIP [43] improves over SRRIP by considering thrashing
access patterns, i.e., when the working set of the application
exceeds the cache size [20]. DRRIP reserves positions for both
cache-friendly and cache-averse lines via set-dueling [80].
Fig. 3 shows the performance for different cache replacement
policies over the LRU baseline with FDIP. Tab. I shows the
metadata storage overheads induced by each replacement policy.
As shown, none of the existing replacement policies provide
any performance or storage benefits over LRU even though
the ideal cache replacement policy provides 3.16% average
speedup over LRU. We now explain why each of these prior
replacement policies do not provide any significant benefit.
GHRP classifies cache lines into dead or alive based on the
prediction table, to inform eviction decisions. One issue with
GHRP is that it increases the classification confidence in the
prediction table after eviction even if the decision was incorrect
(e.g., evicted a line that was still needed). We modified GHRP
so that it decreases the confidence in the prediction table after
each eviction. With this optimization, GHRP outperforms LRU
by 0.1%.
Hawkeye/Harmony predicts whether a PC is likely to access
a cache-friendly or cache-averse cache line. This insight works
well for D-caches where an instruction at a given PC is
responsible for accessing many D-cache lines that exhibit
similar cache-friendly or cache-averse access patterns. However,
for I-cache, an instruction at a given PC is responsible for
accessing just one cache line that contains the instruction itself.
If the line has multiple cache-friendly accesses followed by a
single cache-averse access, Hawkeye predicts the line as cachefriendly. Therefore, Hawkeye cannot identify that single cacheaverse access and cannot adapt to dynamic I-cache behavior.
For I-cache accesses in data center applications, Hawkeye
predicts almost all PCs (more than 99%) as cache friendly and
hence fails to provide performance benefits over LRU.
SRRIP and DRRIP can provide significant performance
benefits over LRU if the cache accesses follow a scanning
access pattern. Moreover, DRRIP provides further support
for thrashing access patterns [20]. For the I-cache, scanning
access patterns are rare and hence classifying a line as
a scan introduces a penalty over plain LRU. We quantify
the scanning access pattern for our data center applications
by measuring the compulsory MPKI (misses that happen
when a cache line is accessed for the first time [34]). For
these applications, compulsory MPKI is very small (0.1-0.3
and 0.16 on average). Moreover, both SRRIP and DRRIP
arbitrarily assume that all cache lines will have similar access
patterns (either scan or thrash) which further hurts data center
applications’ I-cache performance. Consequently, SRRIP and
DRRIP cannot outperform LRU for I-cache accesses in data
center applications.
We observe that data center applications tend to exhibit
a unique reuse distance behavior, i.e., the number of unique
cache lines accessed in the current associative set between two
consecutive accesses to the same cache line, or the re-reference
interval [43] of a given cache line varies widely across the
program life time. Due to this variance, a single I-cache line
can be both cache-friendly and cache-averse at different stages
of the program execution. Existing works do not adapt to this
dynamic variance and hence fail to improve performance over
LRU. We combine these insights with our observations in §II-C
to design Ripple, a profile-guided replacement policy for data
center applications.

cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−2
0
2
4
Speedup (%)
Harmony DRRIP GHRP SRRIP Ideal
Fig. 3: Speedup for different cache replacement policies over an LRU baseline with FDIP at the L1 I-cache: None of the
existing policies outperform LRU, although an ideal replacement policy provides on average 3.16% speedup.
III. THE RIPPLE REPLACEMENT MECHANISM
As we show in our analysis, an ideal cache replacement
policy provides on average 3.16% speedup over an LRU I-cache
for data center applications. Moreover, we find that existing
instruction and data cache replacement policies [7, 40, 41, 43]
fall short of the LRU baseline, since they are ineffective at
avoiding wasteful evictions due to the complex instruction
access behaviors. Hence, there is a critical need to assist
the underlying replacement policy in making smarter eviction
decisions by informing it about complex instruction accesses.
To this end, we propose augmenting existing replacement
mechanisms with Ripple—a novel profile-guided replacement
technique that carefully identifies program contexts leading to
I-cache misses and strives to evict the cache lines that would
be evicted by the ideal policy. Ripple’s operation is agnostic
of the underlying I-cache replacement policy. It sparingly
injects “cache line eviction” instructions in suitable program
locations at link time to assist an arbitrary replacement policy
implemented in hardware. Ripple introduces no additional
hardware overhead and can be readily implemented on soon-tobe-released processors. Ripple enables an existing replacement
policy to further close the performance gap in achieving the
ideal I-cache performance.
Fig. 4 shows Ripple’s design components. First, at run time
(online), Ripple profiles a program’s basic block execution
sequence using efficient hardware-based control flow tracing
support such as Intel PT [58] or Last Branch Record (LBR) [21]
(step 1 , §III-A). Ripple then analyzes the program trace offline
using the ideal I-cache replacement policy (step 2 , §III-B)
to compute a set of cue blocks. A cue block is a basic block
whose execution almost always leads to the ideal victim cache
line to be evicted. The key idea behind Ripple’s analysis is
to mimic an ideal policy that would evict a line that will be
used farthest in the future. During recompilation, Ripple then
injects an instruction in the cue block that invalidates the victim
line (step 3 §III-C). Consequently, the next time a cache line
needs to be inserted into the cache set that the victim line
belongs to, the victim line will be evicted. In contrast to prior
work [7, 40, 41, 43, 43], Ripple moves the compute-intensive
task of identifying the victim line from the hardware to the
10110
01011
10010
Release binary
Basic block trace
101101
010110
100101
Updated binary
Offline
Eviction
analysis
1
3 2
Online
Invalidation
injection
Data center
Ripple
aware
servers
Runtime
Profiling
T/NT Address
T
T
NT
0x4040
0x5010
-
Fig. 4: High-level design of Ripple
software, thereby reducing hardware overheads. We now detail
Ripple’s components.
A. Runtime Profiling
Ripple profiles data center applications at run time using Intel
PT [58] to collect a trace of the dynamically-executed basic
blocks. As shown in Fig. 4, the collected program trace includes
two pieces of information for each control-flow instruction
in the program. The first bit (T/NT), denotes whether the
branch in question was taken (T) or the fall-through path was
followed (NT). If the program follows the taken path of an
indirect branch, the program trace also includes the address of
the next instruction on the taken path. Ripple leverages this
program execution trace, to perform (1) eviction analysis and
(2) invalidation injection offline at link-time. During eviction
analysis, Ripple identifies the I-cache lines that will be touched
(omitting speculative accesses) in real hardware based on the
execution trace. Ripple’s eviction analysis does not require
recording the I-cache lines that will be evicted in hardware.
Ripple leverages Intel PT [58] to collect the precise basic
block execution order with low runtime performance overhead
(less than 1% [48, 109]). Ripple uses Intel PT since it is efficient
in real-world production scenarios [19, 28, 49, 50].

A
A
A
A
A
A
Eviction
window
Last access
to the
cache line
Eviction by
the ideal
policy
B C B
D E D
D E D
B C B
B C B
B C B
1
2
3
4
5
6
(a) Cache line A’s eviction window includes all basic blocks executed
since A’s last execution until A’s eviction by the ideal cache
replacement policy.
Basic
block
Total
executed
 of eviction windows
where basic block is
executed at least once
P(Eviction |
Basic block)
B 16 4 0.25
C 8 4 0.5
D 6 2 0.33
E 3 2 0.66
(b) How Ripple calculates the conditional probability of the eviction
of the cache line A, given the execution of a particular basic block.
Fig. 5: An example of Ripple’s eviction analysis process
B. Eviction Analysis
The goal of Ripple’s eviction analysis is to mimic an ideal
replacement policy, which would evict cache lines that will
not be accessed for the longest time in the future. The basic
block trace collected at run time allows Ripple to retroactively
determine points in the execution that would benefit from
invalidating certain cache lines to help with cache replacement.
Eviction analysis determines a cue block, whose execution
can identify the eviction of a particular victim cache line with
high probability, if an ideal cache replacement policy were used.
To determine the cue block in the collected runtime profile,
Ripple analyzes all the blocks in the eviction window of each
cache line, i.e., the time window spanning between the last
access to that cache line to the access that would trigger the
eviction of the same line, given an ideal replacement policy.
Fig. 5a shows examples of eviction windows for the cache
line, A. In this example, the cache line A gets evicted six
times by the ideal cache replacement policy over the execution
of the program. To compute each eviction window, Ripple
iterates backward in the basic block trace from each point
where A would be evicted by an ideal replacement policy until
it reaches a basic block containing (even partially) the cache
line A. Ripple identifies the basic blocks across all eviction
windows that can accurately signal the eviction as candidate
cue blocks (described further in Sec. III-C), where it can insert
an invalidation instruction to mimic the ideal cache replacement
behavior. In this example, Ripple identifies basic blocks, B, C,
D, and E as candidate cue blocks.
Next, Ripple calculates the conditional probability of a cache
line eviction given the execution of each candidate cue block.
Fig. 5b shows an example of this probability calculation for the
cache line, A. To calculate this conditional probability, Ripple
calculates two metrics. First, it computes how many times
each candidate cue block was executed during the application’s
lifetime. In this example, the candidate cue blocks B, C, D,
and E are executed 16, 8, 6, and 3 times respectively. Second,
for each candidate cue block, Ripple computes the number
of unique eviction windows which include the corresponding
candidate cue block. In our example, basic blocks B, C, D,
and E are included in 4, 4, 2, and 2 unique eviction windows,
respectively. Ripple calculates the conditional probability as
the ratio of the second value (count of windows containing the
candidate cue block) to the first value (execution count of the
cue block). For instance, P((Eviction, A)|(Execute, B)) = 0.25
denotes that for each execution of B, there is a 25% chance
that the cache line A may be evicted.
Finally, for each eviction window, Ripple selects the cue
block with the highest conditional probability, breaking ties
arbitrarily. In our example, Ripple will select basic blocks C and
E as cue blocks for 4 (windows 1, 4, 5, 6) and 2 (windows 2,
3) eviction windows, respectively. If the conditional probability
of the selected basic block is larger than a threshold, Ripple
will inject an explicit invalidation request in the basic block
during recompilation. Next, we describe the process by which
the invalidation instructions are injected as well as the trade-off
that is associated with this probability threshold.
C. Injection of Invalidation Instructions
Based on the eviction analysis, Ripple selects the cue basic
block for each eviction window. Next, Ripple inserts an explicit
invalidation instruction into the cue block to invalidate the
victim cache line. Ripple’s decision to insert an invalidation
instruction is informed by the conditional probability it
computes for each candidate cue block. Specifically, Ripple
inserts an invalidation instruction into the cue block only if the
conditional probability is higher than the invalidation threshold.
We now describe how Ripple determines the invalidation
threshold and the invalidation granularity (i.e., why Ripple
decides to inject invalidation instructions in a basic block to
evict a cache line). We then give details on the invalidation
instruction that Ripple relies on.
Determining the invalidation threshold. Ripple considers
two key metrics when selecting the value of the invalidation
threshold: replacement coverage and replacement accuracy.
We first define these metrics and then explain the trade-off
between them.
Replacement-Coverage. We define replacement-coverage as
the ratio of the total number of replacement decisions performed
by a given policy divided by the total number of replacement
decisions performed by the ideal replacement policy. A policy
that exhibits less than 100% replacement-coverage omits some

invalidation candidates that the optimal replacement policy
would have chosen for eviction.
Replacement-Accuracy. We define replacement-accuracy as
the ratio of total optimal replacement decisions of a given policy
divided by the replacement decisions performed by the ideal
replacement policy. Therefore, if Ripple induces x invalidations
over a program’s lifetime, and y of those invalidations do not
introduce any new misses over the ideal cache replacement
policy, then Ripple’s accuracy (in percentage) is: 100∗y
x . A policy
that exhibits less than 100% replacement-accuracy will evict
cache lines that the ideal cache replacement policy would not
have evicted.
Coverage-Accuracy Trade-off. Replacement-coverage and
replacement-accuracy represent useful metrics to measure a
cache replacement policy’s optimality. A software-guided policy
with a low replacement-coverage will frequently need to revert
to the underlying hardware policy suffering from its sub-optimal
decisions. On the other hand, a policy with low replacementaccuracy will frequently evict lines that the program could
still use. As shown in Fig. 6, Ripple leverages the invalidationthreshold to control the aggressiveness of its evictions, allowing
to trade-off coverage and accuracy. Although this figure presents
data from a single application (i.e., finagle-http), we
observe similar trends across all the data center applications
that we evaluate.
At a lower threshold (0-20%), Ripple has almost 100%
coverage, because all the replacement decisions are made by
Ripple’s invalidations. At the same time, Ripple’s accuracy
suffers greatly because it invalidates many cache lines that
introduce new misses over the ideal cache replacement policy.
Consequently, at a lower threshold, Ripple does not provide
additional performance over the underlying replacement policy.
Similarly, at a higher threshold (80-100%), Ripple achieves
near-perfect accuracy as cache lines invalidated by Ripple
do not incur extra misses over the ideal replacement policy.
However, Ripple’s coverage drops sharply as more replacement
decisions are not served by Ripple-inserted invalidations.
Therefore, Ripple’s performance benefit over the underlying
hardware replacement policy declines rapidly.
Only at the middle ground, i.e., when the invalidation
threshold ranges from 40-60%, Ripple simultaneously achieves
both high coverage (greater than 50%) and high accuracy
(greater than 80%). As a result, Ripple provides the highest
performance benefit at this invalidation threshold range. For
each application, Ripple chooses the invalidation threshold that
provides the best performance for a given application. Across
9 applications, this invalidation threshold varies from 45-65%.
Invalidation granularity. Ripple injects invalidation instructions at the basic block granularity while invalidation instructions evict cache lines. In practice, we find that Ripple does not
suffer a performance loss due to this mismatch. In particular,
Ripple provides a higher speedup when evicting at the basic
block granularity than when evicting at the cache line or
combination of basic block and cache line granularity.
The Invalidation instruction. We propose a new invalidation
instruction, invalidate that takes the address of a cache line
0 20 40 60 80 100
Invalidation threshold (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage (%)
% of ideal MPKI reduction
Replacement-Coverage (%)
Replacement-Accuracy (%)
Fig. 6: Coverage vs. accuracy trade-off of Ripple for
finagle-http. Other applications also exhibit a similar
trade-off curve. The invalidation threshold providing the best
performance across the 9 data center applications we studied
varies between 45-65%.
as an operand and invalidates it if the cache line resides in the Icache. Our proposed invalidate instruction exhibits one key
difference compared to existing cache line flushing instructions
(e.g., the clflush instruction on Intel processors) in that it
does not invalidate the cache line from other caches in the
cache hierarchy. Instead, our proposed invalidate instruction
invalidates the cache line only in the local I-cache, thereby
avoiding costly cache-coherency transactions and unnecessary
invalidations in remote caches. Furthermore, the invalidate
instruction has low latency as it does not have to wait for the
potentially dirty cache line to be written back to the lower
cache levels. Instead, invalidate can be regarded as a hint
that can be freely reordered with fences and synchronization
instructions. Intel recently introduced [98] such an invalidation
instruction called (cldemote) slated to be supported in its
future servers, and hence Ripple will be readily implementable
on such upcoming processors.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we first describe our experimental methodology and then evaluate Ripple using key performance metrics.
Trace collection. We collect the execution trace of data center
applications using Intel Processor Trace (PT). Specifically, we
record traces for 100 million instructions in the application’s
steady-state containing both user and kernel mode instructions as Intel PT allows to capture both. We find that for
most applications, the percentage of kernel mode instruction
induced I-cache misses is small (< 1%). However, for drupal,
mediawiki, and wordpress, kernel code is responsible for
15% of all I-cache misses.
Simulation. At the time of this writing, no commerciallyavailable processor supports our proposed invalidate instruction, even though future Intel processors will support the
functionally-equivalent cldemote instruction [101]. To simulate this invalidate instruction, we evaluate Ripple using simulation. This also allows us to evaluate additional replacement
policies and their interactions with Ripple. We extend the ZSim
simulator [86] by implementing our proposed invalidate
instruction. We list several important parameters of the trace-

TABLE II: Simulator Parameters
Parameter Value
CPU Intel Xeon Haswell
Number of cores per socket 20
L1 instruction cache 32 KiB, 8-way
L1 data cache 32 KiB, 8-way
L2 unified cache 1 MB, 16-way
L3 unified cache Shared 10 MiB per socket, 20-way
All-core turbo frequency 2.5 GHz
L1 I-cache latency 3 cycles
L1 D-cache latency 4 cycles
L2 cache latency 12 cycles
L3 cache latency 36 cycles
Memory latency 260 cycles
Memory bandwidth 6.25 GB/s
driven out-of-order ZSim simulation in Table II. We implement
Ripple on the L1 I-cache in our experiments.
Data center applications and inputs. We use nine widelyused data center applications described in §II to evaluate Ripple.
We study these applications with different input parameters
offered to the client’s load generator (e.g., number of requests
per second or the number of threads). We evaluate Ripple using
different inputs for training (profile collection) and evaluation.
We now evaluate Ripple using key performance metrics on
all nine data center applications described in Sec. II. First,
we measure how much speedup Ripple provides compared to
ideal and other prior cache replacement policies. Next, we
compare L1 I-cache MPKI reduction (%) for Ripple, ideal, and
other policies for different prefetching configurations. Then,
we evaluate Ripple’s replacement-coverage and replacementaccuracy as described in Sec. III-C. Next, we measure how
much extra static and dynamic instructions Ripple introduces
into the application binary. Finally, we evaluate how Ripple
performs across multiple application inputs.
Speedup. We measure the speedup (i.e., percentage improvement in instructions per cycle [IPC]) provided by Ripple over an
LRU baseline. We also compare Ripple’s speedup to speedups
provided by the prefetch-aware ideal replacement policy as well
as four additional prior cache replacement policies including
Hawkeye/Harmony, DRRIP, SRRIP, and GHRP, whose details
were discussed in §II. To show that Ripple’s speedup is not
primarily due to the underlying hardware replacement policy,
we also provide Ripple’s speedup with two different underlying
hardware replacement policies (random and LRU). Finally, we
measure the speedups for all replacement policies by altering
the underlying I-cache prefetching mechanisms (no prefetching,
NLP, and FDIP).
Fig. 7 shows the speedup results. Ripple, with an underlying
LRU-based hardware replacement policy (i.e., Ripple-LRU in
Fig. 7), always outperforms all prior replacement policies across
all different prefetcher configurations. In particular, Ripple-LRU
provides on average 1.25% (no prefetching), 2.13% (NLP),
1.4% (FDIP) speedups over a pure-LRU replacement policy
baseline. These speedups correspond to 37% (no prefetching),
55% (NLP), and 44% (FDIP) of the speedups of an ideal
cache replacement policy. Notably, even Ripple-Random, which
operates with an underlying random hardware replacement
policy (which itself is on average 1% slower than LRU),
provides 0.86% average speedup over the LRU baseline across
the three different I-cache prefetchers. In combination with
Ripple, Random becomes a feasible replacement policy that
eliminates all meta-data storage overheads in hardware.
The performance gap between Ripple and the ideal cache
replacement policy stems from two primary reasons. First, Ripple cannot cover all eviction windows via software invalidation
as covering all eviction windows requires Ripple to sacrifice
eviction accuracy which hurts performance. Second, software
invalidation instructions inserted by Ripple introduce static and
dynamic code bloat, causing additional cache pressure that
contributes to the performance gap (we quantify this overhead
later in this section).
I-cache MPKI reduction. Fig. 8 shows the L1 I-cache
miss reduction provided by Ripple (with underlying hardware
replacement policies of LRU and Random) and the prior work
policies. As shown, Ripple-LRU reduces I-cache misses over all
prior policies across all applications. Across different prefetching configurations, Ripple can avoid 33% (no prefetching), 53%
(NLP), and 41% (FDIP) of I-cache misses that are avoided
by the ideal replacement policy. Ripple reduces I-cache MPKI
regardless of the underlying replacement policy. Even when
the underlying replacement policy is random (causing 12.71%
more misses in average than LRU), Ripple-Random incurs 9.5%
fewer misses on average than LRU for different applications
and prefetching configurations.
Replacement-Coverage. As described in §III-C, Ripple’s
coverage is the percentage of all replacement decisions (over the
program life time) that were initiated by Ripple’s invalidations.
Fig. 9 shows Ripple’s coverage for all applications. As shown,
Ripple achieves on average more than 50% coverage. Only
for three HHVM applications (i.e., drupal, mediawiki, and
wordpress), Ripple’s coverage is lower than 50%, as for these
applications Ripple does not insert invalidate instructions
on the just-in-time compiled basic blocks. Just-in-time (Jit)
compiled code may reuse the same instruction addresses for
different basic blocks over the course of an execution rendering
compile-time instruction injection techniques challenging. Nevertheless, even for these Jit applications there remains enough
static code that Ripple is able to optimize.
Accuracy. In Fig. 10, we show Ripple’s replacement-accuracy
(as defined in §III-C). As shown, Ripple achieves 92% accuracy
on average (with a minimum improvement of 88%). Ripple’s
accuracy is on average 14% higher than LRU’s average accuracy
(77.8%). Thanks to its higher accuracy, Ripple avoids many
inaccurate replacement decisions due to the underlying LRUbased hardware replacement policy (which has an average
accuracy of 77.8%), and, therefore, the overall replacement
accuracy for Ripple-LRU is on average 86% (8.2% higher than
the LRU baseline).
Instruction overhead. Fig. 11 and 12 quantify the static and
dynamic code footprint increase introduced by the injected
invalidate instructions. The static instruction overhead of Ripple
is less than 4.4% for all cases while the dynamic instruction
overhead is less than 2% in most cases, except for verilator.

cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−2
0
2
4
Speedup (%)
Hawkeye
Random
DRRIP
GHRP
SRRIP
Ripple-random
Ripple-LRU
Ideal
(a) Over no prefetching baseline, Ripple provides 1.25% speedup compared to 3.36% ideal speedup on average.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−2
0
2
4
6
Speedup (%)
Harmony
Random
GHRP
DRRIP
SRRIP
Ripple-random
Ripple-LRU
Ideal
(b) Over next-line prefetching baseline, Ripple provides 2.13% speedup compared to 3.87% ideal speedup on average.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−2
0
2
4
Speedup (%)
Harmony
Random
DRRIP
GHRP
SRRIP
Ripple-random
Ripple-LRU
Ideal
(c) Over fetch directed instruction prefetching baseline, Ripple provides 1.4% speedup compared to 3.16% ideal speedup on average.
Fig. 7: Ripple’s speedup compared to ideal and state-of-the-art replacement policies over an LRU baseline (with different
hardware prefetching): On average, Ripple provides 1.6% speedup compared to 3.47% ideal speedup.
For this application, Ripple executes 10% extra instructions to
invalidate cache lines. This is because for verilator, Ripple
covers almost all replacement policy decisions via software
invalidation (98.7% coverage as shown in Fig. 9). Similarly,
Ripple’s accuracy for verilator is very high (99.9% as shown
in Fig. 10). Therefore, though Ripple executes a relatively
greater number of invalidation instructions for verilator, it
does not execute unnecessary invalidation instructions.
Profiling and offline analysis overhead. Ripple leverages
Intel PT to collect basic block traces from data center
application executions because of its low overhead (less than
1%) and adoption in production settings [19, 28]. While Ripple’s
extraction and analysis on this trace takes longer (up to 10
minutes), we do not expect that this expensive analysis will
be deployed in production servers. Instead, we anticipate the
extraction, analysis, and invalidation injection component of
Ripple will be performed offline, similar to how existing
profile-guided optimizations for data center applications are
performed [17, 30, 54, 75, 76]. Therefore, we consider the
overhead for Ripple’s offline analysis acceptable.
Invalidation vs. reducing LRU priority. When the underlying
hardware cache replacement policy is LRU, moving a cache
line to the bottom of the LRU chain is sufficient to cause
eviction. This LRU-specific optimization improved Ripple’s
IPC speedup from 1.6% to 1.7% (apart from verilator, all
other applications benefited from this optimization). This shows
that Ripple’s profiling mechanism works well independent of
the particular eviction mechanism.
Performance across multiple application inputs. We investigate Ripple’s performance for data center applications with

cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−20
0
20
L1i-MPKI reduction (%)
Hawkeye
Random
DRRIP
GHRP
SRRIP
Ripple-random
Ripple-LRU
Ideal
(a) With no prefetching, Ripple-LRU reduces 9.57% of all I-cache misses compared to 28.88% miss reduction provided by the ideal
replacement policy.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−100
−50
0
50
L1i-MPKI reduction (%)
Harmony
Random
DRRIP
GHRP
SRRIP
Ripple-random
Ripple-LRU
Ideal
(b) With next-line prefetching, Ripple-LRU reduces on average 28.6% of all I-cache misses compared to 53.66% reduction provided
by the ideal replacement policy.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
−20
0
20
40
L1i-MPKI reduction (%)
Random
Harmony
DRRIP
GHRP
SRRIP
Ripple-random
Ripple-LRU
Ideal
(c) With fetch directed instruction prefetching, Ripple-LRU reduces on average 18.61% of all I-cache misses compared to 45%
reduction provided by the ideal replacement policy.
Fig. 8: Ripple’s L1 I-cache miss reduction compared to ideal and state-of-the-art replacement policies over an LRU baseline
(with different hardware prefetching): On average, Ripple reduces 19% of all LRU I-cache misses compared to 42.5% miss
reduction by the ideal replacement policy.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
0
50
100
Coverage (%) Fig. 9: Ripple’s coverage for different applications: On average
50% of replacement requests are processed by evicting cache
lines that Ripple invalidates.
three separate input configurations (‘#1’ to ‘#3’). We vary these
applications’ input configurations by changing the webpage, the
client requests, the number of client requests per second, the
number of server threads, random number seeds, and the size
of input data. We optimize each application using the profile
from input ‘#0’ and measure Ripple’s performance benefits for
different test inputs ‘#1, #2, #3’. For each input, we also
measure the performance improvement when Ripple optimizes
the application with a profile for the same input. As shown
in Fig. 13, Ripple provides 17% more IPC gains with inputspecific profiles compared to profiles that are not input specific.

cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
0
50
100
Accuracy (%)
LRU Ripple Overall
Fig. 10: Ripple’s accuracy for different applications: On average
Ripple provides 92% accuracy which ensures that the overall
accuracy is 86% even though underlying LRU has an accuracy
of 77.8%.
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
0
2
4
Instruction overhead (
%) Fig. 11: Static instruction overhead introduced by Ripple: On
average Ripple inserts 3.4% new static instructions.
For brevity, we only show the results for the FDIP baseline.
Results with the other prefetching baselines are similar.
V. DISCUSSION
Ripple generates optimized binaries for different target
architectures considering the processor’s I-cache size and
associativity. Such a process is common in data centers
deploying profile-guided [17, 62] and post-link-time-based
optimization [75, 76] techniques. Therefore, Ripple can be
conveniently integrated into the existing build and optimization
processes. Moreover, as the I-cache size (32KB) and associativity (8-way) for Intel data center processors has been stable for
the last 10 years, the number of different target architectures
that Ripple needs to support is small.
VI. RELATED WORK
Instruction prefetching. Hardware instruction prefetchers
such as next-line and decoupled fetch directed prefetchers
[18, 39, 82, 84, 92] have been pervasively deployed in commercial designs [32, 78, 85, 97]. While complex techniques [25,
26, 51, 52] employing record and replay prefetchers are highly
effective in reducing I-cache misses, they require impractical
on-chip metadata storage. Branch predictor-guided prefetchers [9, 60, 61], on the other hand, follow the same principle as
FDIP to reduce on-chip metadata storage, however, they also
require a complete overhaul of the underlying branch target
prediction unit. Even recent proposals [8, 29, 31, 33, 70, 72, 83,
89] from 1st Instruction Prefetching Championship (IPC1)
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Avg
0
5
10
Instruction overhead (
%) Fig. 12: Dynamic instruction overhead introduced by Ripple:
On average Ripple executes 2.2% extra dynamic instructions.
#1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3 #1#2#3
0
20
40
60
% of optimal policy performance
Profile-from-training-input
Profile-from-the-same-input
cassandra
drupal
finagle-chirper
finagle-http
kafka
mediawiki
tomcat
verilator
wordpress
Fig. 13: Ripple’s performance for multiple application inputs
with the FDIP baseline: On average Ripple provides 17% more
speedup with input-specific profiles compared to profiles from
different inputs.
require kilobytes of extra on-chip storage to provide nearideal performance even on workloads where FDIP with a
large enough fetch target queue provides most of the potential
performance benefit [38]. Hybrid hardware-software prefetchers
[12, 13, 55, 68, 71] analyze a program’s control flow information
in software and inject dedicated prefetching instructions in code
which does not exist in today’s hardware. In contrast, we show
that instruction prefetchers alone do not close the performance
gap due to wasteful evictions that must be handled by smarter
cache line replacement.
Cache replacement policies. Heuristic-based hardware data
cache replacement policies have been studied for a long time,
including LRU and its variations [47, 63, 73, 91, 106], MRU
[80], re-reference interval prediction [43], reuse prediction
[22, 23, 66] and others [6, 27, 35, 56, 81, 87, 96, 99]. Learningbased data cache replacement policies [40, 41, 53, 107] consider
replacement as a binary classification problem of cache-friendly
or cache-averse. Recent methods introduce machine learning
techniques like perceptrons [45, 100] and genetic algorithms
[44]. Some learning-based policies use information of Belady’s
optimal solution [15], including Hawkeye [40], Glider [90]
and Parrot [65]. However, these policies are mostly designed
for data caches and do not work well for instruction caches
as we show earlier (Sec. II). We also propose a profile-guided
approach that can work on top of any of these policies.

Prefetch-aware replacement policy. Prefetch-aware replacement policies focus on avoiding cache pollution caused by inaccurate prefetches. Some prefetch-aware policies [36, 37, 57] get
feedback from prefetchers to identify inaccurate prefetches, and
need co-design or prefetcher modifications. Others [88, 94, 108]
work independently from the prefetcher and estimate prefetch
accuracy from cache behavior.
With prefetching, Belady’s optimal policy [15] becomes
incomplete as it cannot distinguish easy-to-prefetch cache lines
from hard-to-prefetch cache lines [94, 108]. To address this
limitation, Demand-MIN [41] revised Belady’s optimal policy
to accommodate prefetching and proposed a program counter
(PC) classification based predictor, Harmony to emulate the
ideal performance. In this work, we not only revise DemandMIN to cover an extra corner case, but also show that a PCclassification based predictor performs poorly for I-cache. We
address this imprecision and effectively emulate optimal I-cache
behavior in our work via a profile-guided software technique.
VII. CONCLUSION
Modern data center applications have large instruction footprints, leading to significant I-cache misses. Although numerous
prior proposals aim to mitigate I-cache misses, they still fall
short of an ideal cache. We investigated why existing I-cache
miss mitigation mechanisms achieve sub-optimal speedup, and
found that widely-studied instruction prefetchers incur wasteful
prefetch-induced evictions that existing replacement policies
do not mitigate. To enable smarter evictions, we proposed
Ripple, a novel profile-guided replacement technique that uses
program context to inform the underlying replacement policy
about efficient replacement decisions. Ripple identifies program
contexts that lead to I-cache misses and sparingly injects “cache
line eviction” instructions in suitable program locations at
link time. We evaluated Ripple using nine popular data center
applications and demonstrated that it is replacement policy
agnostic, i.e., it enables any replacement policy to achieve
speedup that is 44% closer to that of an ideal I-cache.