Bitcoin is an innovative technological network, a new, non-governmental currency, and a worldwide group of
users. In other words, Bitcoin is a complex sociotechnical system with a complex set of risks and challenges
for anyone using it. We investigated how everyday users of Bitcoin develop trust in Bitcoin on one of the
largest online communities devoted to Bitcoin: the Reddit.com r/bitcoin forum. Using qualitative content
analysis, we examined how trust in Bitcoin develops based on contributions to this community.
On r/bitcoin, trust in Bitcoin is driven by a pervasive ideology we call the “True Bitcoiner” ideology. This
ideological viewpoint in centered on the interpretation of Bitcoin as functionally “trustless” and risk-free.
Despite widespread evidence of emerging individual and system-level risks with using Bitcoin, participants
continue to maintain this ideological perspective. This ideology consists of three primary beliefs: viewing
Bitcoin’s technology as more trustworthy than its people; rejecting ‘corrupt’ social hierarchies related to
money; and the importance of accumulating or ‘HODLing’ quantities of Bitcoin as a strategy to create an
ideal future.
We conclude that this “True Bitcoiner” ideology is maintained despite contradictory evidence in the world
because it allows participants to more easily interpret Bitcoin and make decisions by reducing perceived
risk and uncertainty in the system. The role of this ideology on r/bitcoin demonstrates an expanded
conceptualization of how trust is created and socially-mediated in socio-technical contexts.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: bitcoin, online communities, sociotechnical systems, Reddit, trust, ideology
1 INTRODUCTION
Socio-technical systems mix together technological elements with human and social relationships
into an inseparable whole system [38]. In everyday life, people engage with numerous sociotechnical systems, ranging from personal laptops to public transportation, online banking, and
everything in between. In many of these systems, the people, institutions, and technologies interact
in ways that are often obscured and difficult to understand. Because socio-technical systems are
complex and difficult to understand, it is critical that people who use and interact with such systems
trust in those systems[19].
Trust is a complex process that is mostly internal to people’s minds. How people make trust
decisions is influenced by perception, personal beliefs, social ties, time, and many other factors.
Trust connects current circumstances to aspirations and predictions for the future. Trust determines
how people imagine the future, and what steps they take to get there. In socio-technical systems,
people trusting the system plays a crucial role in its success.
In 2009, Satoshi Nakamoto (probably not his real name) published a whitepaper describing a new
system he called “Bitcoin” [51], which has grown into a global currency. Bitcoin is simultaneously
an innovative technological network, a new, non-governmental currency, and a worldwide group
of users. In other words, because Bitcoin involves complicated interactions between humans and
technologies, it is a complex socio-technical system.
Bitcoin is a particularly interesting socio-technical system to study right now because it is
very new, complex, and not well understood. Werbach claims that Bitcoin represents a new and
fundamentally different way of structuring trust in technology [66]; Bonneau et al. agree and
claim that Bitcoin is a system where “practice is ahead of theory” [10]. Bitcoin is an especially
interesting socio-technical system to study in the context of trust due to the fact that Bitcoin was
purposefully designed to attempt to eschew some of the forms trust has taken in other sociotechnical systems [51].
In order for Bitcoin to function as a currency that people can use to buy and sell goods and
services, it is important that people trust Bitcoin [2]. But, trusting Bitcoin captures a complex
interplay of entities and relationships. How do people decide who influences the system and how
to trust them, when it is challenging to even use Bitcoin and understand how it works?
We investigate how everyday users of Bitcoin build and develop this trust in Bitcoin through their
participation in an online community. We examine how individuals share their beliefs and intentions
related to trust in one of the largest and most popular online congregation of Bitcoin enthusiasts,
the Reddit r/bitcoin forum. What leads people to trust Bitcoin? Is this trust unconditional? Do
people trust the technological aspects differently than they trust the social aspects? How do social
pressures and individual beliefs change the way people trust and understand Bitcoin?
In our investigation, we found that a large and vocal group of users were regularly promoting
an ideological viewpoint about how Bitcoin should fit into the world in the future. Using Smith’s
functional definition of ideology [58], we argue that this ideological perspective influences how
r/bitcoin participants navigate the risks and possibilities of Bitcoin.
Across discussions on r/bitcoin, participants, when faced with alternative viewpoints, justify
their continued use of Bitcoin by claiming that it is “trustless”. By trustless, they are referring
to their perception that, because Bitcoin eliminates the need for third-party control, there is no
need to depend on any institution to assure it is functioning correctly. They believe the underlying
technology that maintains the Bitcoin network protocol is perfect, and that there is no risk of fraud
or failure. While past work has identified the important role of trust in Bitcoin [44], our approach
connects trust in Bitcoin to the development of a “True Bitcoiner” ideology on r/bitcoin.
We argue that this ideological perspective is founded on three primary sets of beliefs: the belief
that Bitcoin’s technology is more trustworthy than the people using it; that Bitcoin is a means to
escape corrupt human institutions; and that accumulating or “HODLing” Bitcoin no matter what
will lead to Bitcoin’s future widespread success. We assert that these beliefs are strengthened and
reinforced through discussion about how these ideologies exist in tension with Bitcoin’s real world
circumstances, such as privacy concerns and price volatility.
But how do these beliefs persist, despite widespread recognition of Bitcoin’s limitations and
uncertainties, especially since trust is widely recognized as a key component of Bitcoin’s ability to function[12, 64]? We argue that the “True Bitcoiner” ideology has developed as a result
of these tensions in the Bitcoin system that threaten optimism for Bitcoin’s future. By calling
Bitcoin “trustless”, True Bitcoiners can deny the risks posed by socio-technical ties in Bitcoin by
simply stating that trust does not exist in the system. These findings demonstrate the awareness
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:3
r/bitcoin participants have of the significance of trust in Bitcoin’s success, while simultaneously
demonstrating how this desire to mitigate perceived risk has led to an ideological position that
rejects potential risks and views these beliefs as reality.
Additionally, we argue that these findings demonstrate the need for future work on trust in sociotechnical contexts that consider the potential of online communities to influence trust relationships,
especially in the the context of complex, emerging technologies like Bitcoin.
We argue that r/bitcoin demonstrates an ideology founded in Bitcoin’s perception as trustless,
with the operational outcomes of this ideology serving to prioritize a certain way of imagining
Bitcoin’s future while out-grouping those who disagree. These findings demonstrate the conscious
awareness r/bitcoin participants have of the significance of trust in Bitcoin’s success, while
simultaneously demonstrating how this desire to mitigate perceived risk and assure Bitcoin’s future
have led to an ideological position that rejects potential risks and views these beliefs as reality.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 What is Trust
There has been a recent recognition that trust only becomes operationalized in terms of individual
perception [14]. In other words, trust is not an externally verifiable quality, but an internal sensation.
Based on this, a person’s knowledge of the situation and the potential trust partner are important.
Even in a deceptively simple trust relationship, such as between two individual people, there is
still considerable uncertainty about their intentions and outcomes. But consider systems where
the inner-workings of the system are highly complicated, and in order to participate an individual
must place their trust in hundreds of interconnected people and institutions behind the scenes?
Buscher investigated this role of system comprehension for trust through an analysis of adoption
challenges in emerging "Smart Grid" energy systems. They found that, in navigating these complex
systems, people centered their trust locally; they relied on delegating their trust to local politicians
and other decision-makers, and based their confidence in these new implementations on their
success in other real communities [14]. In making trust decisions about new technologies, people
rely heavily on trust in practice as an important source of information. They depend on people they
know and trust in helping them decide how to make decisions about these new socio-technical
possibilities.
Castelfranchi and Ta argue that we need holistic interpretations of trust that consider its many
interacting relationships and influences [17]. Trust is dynamic and constantly changing, both in
terms of an individual’s cognitive state, the external environment, and the consequences of how
the two interact.
While the literature on trust has identified many components, two of the most important are
risk and control. Risk is an inherent quality of trust. Trust can only exist in a situation in which
there is some level of uncertainty about outcomes [57].
The concept of Control is also important in trust decision-making. If risk is a recognition of
future uncertainty, control is the perception of one’s ability to influence that future outcome. In
socio-technical systems, control has been described similarly with the concept of agency, defined
as how people assign responsbility for outcomes to components of the socio-technical systems
[21]. How people interpret human agency as compared to machine agency in the socio-technical
system affects the human-machine trust relationship [21]. People are more motivated to participate
in an socio-technical system when they believe they have some power to make the outcomes of
the system align with their personal goals [21]. It is also important to balance overhead control
with natural trust relationships; too much control can actually damage people’s trust in the entire
system [24].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:4 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
While trust plays a role in virtually all social organizations, trust in sociotechnical systems has
several important considerations. In sociotechnical systems, trust serves as an important bridge
connecting the numerous social and technical components of the overall system [47].
How trust in sociotechnical systems is built through social interaction is not a new topic in
CSCW. Trust serves to reduce perceived complexity of socio-technical interactions, and thus
allow participants to more easily make use decisions [47]. A core component of trust-building
in sociotechnical contexts is uncertainty reduction, and users often take advantage of available
technological features in navigating uncertainty [35]. In dealing with uncertainty, how much
knowledge participants have of the domain in question and how credible they view those with
power in the system also influence trust [37]. Perceptions of righteousness and morality have also
been connected to how trustworthy people view the behavior and outcomes of socio-technical
systems [40].
In considering sociotechnical contexts related specifically to money, Ferreira, Perry, and Subramanian examined social and technical trust in transactions with a new geographically situated
currency [22]. They found that use of this currency fostered stronger social ties between customers
and business owners within the community; the use of this currency itself became a symbol of
trustworthiness to users [22].
How to design socio-technical systems for improved control of trust outcomes is an emerging
area of work [39]. One strategy for improving control over system outcomes is by enlisting a
third-party to enforce the trust tie between two parties [17]. This often leads to the outcome of
trust being transferred to the institution enforcing the outcome, rather than the other party in the
primary trust relationship [17].
This idea is also an important part of Satoshi Nakamoto’s vision for Bitcoin. It is precisely these
third-party enforcers that they view as not trustworthy. It is difficult to predict and control exactly
what outcomes are desired or even possible, especially in innovative, emergent systems like Bitcoin.
2.2 What is Bitcoin?
Bitcoin was never envisioned as a typical currency. When Bitcoin’s creator, Satoshi Nakamoto,
published his or her (or their) white paper introducing Bitcoin to the world [51], they proclaimed
Bitcoin as a solution to fallible existing systems of money, an infrastructure which they claim “...still
suffers from the inherent weaknesses of the trust based model.” [51] Nakamoto argues that current
systems of money are inefficient, costly, and risky due to the fact that people need to trust one
another in order to use them. Whenever you make a transaction, you are relying on some “trusted
third-party” [51] (such as a bank) to guarantee that the exchange is valid; the bank makes sure
you have money to give, and that the other person receives it. A government oversees the bank,
distributes valid currency, and so on.
Nakamoto’s solution to this third-party control is not to build more trustworthy systems, but
replace them with “an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust”
[51]. In other words, a currency that doesn’t need trust: Bitcoin.
Bitcoin was originally designed to be a currency. Bitcoin does not exist in a physical form like
dollar bills; rather, it is purely digital, with Bitcoin balances and transactions recorded electronically.
A currency has three essential properties [2]: (1) It can be used as a medium of exchange. I can give
you it, and you can give it to someone else; (2) It can be used as a store of value. If I have some right
now, it still has value after time has passed; (3) It can be used as a unit of account. We agree upon
how to measure the currency and (mostly) how much value it has. A wide variety of items have
been used as currencies in the past, from polished shell beads called “wampum” by the Iroquois, to
coins made of precious metals, to the currently popular fiat currencies like the US dollar and the
Euro.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:5
Currencies enable people to conduct transactions, but also embed in their design wide variety of
socio-economic consequences. Carroll and Bellotti describe a number of classes of currencies, such as
location-specific currencies, time banks, cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, and the sharing economy.
They argue that the ways these currency designs are embedded and enabled by modern technologies,
and how they try to achieve important group and societal goals, make them appropriate and
interesting objects of study for CSCW [16].
Bitcoin was originally intended to be fully distributed and not rely on any government or
other third party to control or back the currency to give it value [51]. It has three important
technological components [10]: (1) The transaction system enables people to transfer units of the
currency (bitcoin1
). The way Bitcoin is transferred from person to person is typically similar to an
online bank transfer. But, rather than a bank overseeing the transactions, all the users of Bitcoin
take on this important monitoring role in a democratic way. This is accomplished through the
blockchain. (2) The consensus mechanism, or blockchain, allows a distributed network of computers
to come to a consensus agreement about which Bitcoin transactions should be considered valid.
Ideally, this means that every person who uses Bitcoin has an equal say in deciding if transactions
are legitimate or not. (3) The peer-to-peer network broadcast enables this network of computers to
communicate with each other to publicly log all valid transactions in a permanent ledger. This
process can be thought of as each individual that uses Bitcoin has one ‘vote’ to accept or reject the
accuracy of the public ledger [51]. Whatever historical record the majority of Bitcoin users agree is
correct, becomes the main ledger of reference.
A social community has developed that is critical to the functioning of Bitcoin. This community
includes a number of important actors, including [8]: (1) Miners are people who run the computers
that operate the consensus algorithm (the “blockchain”). Miners play a central role in making
new Bitcoin and certifying transactions as valid. (2) Exchanges are financial institutions that will
accept money in one denomination (e.g. US dollar) and return it in another (bitcoin). (3) Merchants
can choose to accept payments for goods and services in bitcoin. Famously, overstock.com began
accepting bitcoin payments in 2014, though thousands of other merchants also accept bitcoin.
(4) And Developers who make Coin Management Tools, often called “wallets”, which are third party
technologies and/or services that enable people to keep track of their bitcoin.
Bitcoin is not backed by any governments or institutions. Instead, it is maintained by the
distributed network of computers and the community of people around it. Because it isn’t backed
by a government, the question of trust in the system is very important [66]. If people don’t trust the
currency, they can’t rely on it to behave in a predictable and expected way and it won’t be useful or
valuable. However, without a clear institution to trust, many users aren’t clear whether it should be
trusted [55], or believe that they need to have a lot of technical knowledge in order to trust it [26].
2.3 Bitcoin Challenges and the Importance of Trust
In order to understand why the Bitcoin system relies on trust, it is valuable to understand the
underlying risks that participants in the system face as they use Bitcoin. We characterize these
risks into two categories: risks to the underlying Bitcoin infrastructure that threaten the system as
a whole, and individual risks that mostly affect a single person as they use Bitcoin. Both categories
of risks are socio-technical in nature, interweaving both technology and people.
2.3.1 Bitcoin Systemic Risks. The biggest systemic risk of Bitcoin is that the system will accept
invalid transactions. Accepting invalid transactions would enable people to double spend money
(spend the same coin twice, effectively doubling the money) [8].
1Following established convention, we refer to the socio-technical system as Bitcoin, and units of the currency using the
lowercase bitcoin or the abbreviation BTC [10]
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:6 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
The Bitcoin design explicitly discourages this problem through the design of its consensus
algorithm, but that algorithm relies on participants in the network following the algorithm correctly.
Bitcoin users need to behave in a way that follows these rules and benefits the whole system, rather
than making decisions that solely benefit themselves.
Additionally, all Bitcoin transactions are publicly visible, and it is believed that this visibility
discourages these kinds of attacks because accepting invalid transactions would undermine public
trust in Bitcoin and reduce the potential benefits from doing so [10].
Another risk is that Bitcoin was intentionally designed to be free from government control [51].
The technology sets monetary policy (amount of currency in circulation and inflation rate) by
hard coding constants into the software such that new coins are created approximately every 10
minutes, and a fixed amount of 21 million bitcoins will ever be produced [8]. It is often contrasted
with “fiat” currency, like the dollar, euro, yen etc., where these policies are set by central bankers in
governments. Governments, especially if they coordinate with each other, still have the ability to
radically alter the way Bitcoin is used and valued. They can accomplish this not through traditional
monetary policy, but by regulating exchanges and other intermediaries, or by outlawing its use.
Government regulation is a significant source of potential risk in the Bitcoin system.
There is also internal governance that is required by the Bitcoin system in order to reach
consensus and thus define what is the ‘correct’, most up-to-date version of the blockchain. For
example, Bonneau et al. describe how the set of validation rules for deciding which transactions
are valid is an important issue [10]. These rules can be altered by making changes that are coded
into the Bitcoin software, necessitating a software update. They have changed a small number of
times in the short history of Bitcoin, and many other changes have been proposed. Depending
on the change, it may require a “hard fork” (when changes would be invalid under prior rules, so
everyone must agree on the changes) or a “soft fork” (when a change is backwards compatible, and
only requires a majority to agree on it). Each fork is simply one version of history that Bitcoin
users can interpret as valid or not.
2.3.2 Individual User Risks. In addition to the infrastructure risks, there are a number of risks that
individuals face as they use Bitcoin.
One of the biggest and most cited risks is the large market fluctuation in price [31]. Most
currencies have a value that is relatively stable over time. For example, the US dollar to Euro
exchange rate has only varied from a low of about $1.05 per Euro to a high of about $1.50 per
Euro in the last 10 years (2009–2019). During that same time period, the value of a bitcoin varied
from a few pennies to over $19,000 [32], settling at about $4,000 per bitcoin in April 2019. This
high variability makes it difficult to price items using bitcoin, or to understand how valuable one’s
bitcoins are [8]. Krombholz et al. found that this fluctuation in price is the largest concern of Bitcoin
users [42]. It does, however, lead people to use bitcoin for speculative investing [28].
Bitcoin is often seen as privacy-preserving; users buying and selling bitcoin do not need to
submit identifying information with their transactions, but instead only need their cryptographic
keys associated with their Bitcoin digital wallet. However, this privacy has very important technical
limitations [10], and participants can often be re-identified [46]. Even when using privacy-preserving
technologies like Tor, it is often possible to identify people using Bitcoin [6]. Indeed, one of the
most famous Bitcoin users, Ross Ulbright (known as the Dread Pirate Roberts) who ran the Silk
Road, a marketplace that transacted mostly in illegal goods, was identified and arrested by the US
FBI. Some users try to use technical means such as coin mixers to increase their anonymity [8], but
those often do not provide strong privacy guarantees.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:7
These are all risks that are well-known aspects of Bitcoin. It is because of these risks and others
like them that trust is an important part of what makes Bitcoin work. Many of these risks will
be mentioned, directly or indirectly, by the participants in r/bitcoin, sometimes accurately and
sometimes inaccurately. Our goal in this paper is not to reveal these risks, which are already known,
but instead to better understand how members of the Bitcoin community talk about and manage
these risks when making decisions about trusting Bitcoin. Trust is an ongoing series of decisions
[17, 57], which makes how users perceive Bitcoin an important part of their trust decisions.
2.4 User Perceptions of Bitcoin
A number of researchers have worked with Bitcoin users, non-users, or trace data of Bitcoin use to
try to understand how people think about and perceive the Bitcoin system. These user perceptions
highlight the major concerns and issues that users have as they move forward with Bitcoin. These
concerns are somewhat different than the system-level and individual-level risks highlighted above
by the research literature.
2.4.1 Technological Knowledge. Studies that include non-users of Bitcoin often find that one of the
biggest barriers to entry is a perception that using Bitcoin requires substantial technical knowledge.
For example, Gao et al. [26] interviewed both users and non-users of Bitcoin. Almost all of their
non-users cited their lack of technical knowledge as one of the biggest barriers preventing them
from using Bitcoin. However, they also found that the users of Bitcoin did not have any more
technical knowledge than the non-users, and often misunderstand numerous technical details about
how Bitcoin works [26]. As compared to the identified risks related to rule violation by other users,
some Bitcoin users appear to internalize their apprehension about Bitcoin as due to short-comings
in their own knowledge and ability. These findings further suggest that level of Bitcoin knowledge
does not actually influence whether a person becomes a Bitcoin user or not. Rather, it is possible
that differences between users and non-users is related to if they use what they know about Bitcoin
to interpret it as trustworthy.
2.4.2 Coin Management. One of the hardest challenge that Bitcoin users face is keeping track
of their currency, especially when they have multiple wallets and store their Bitcoin in several
different places. Ownership in Bitcoin is determined by access to complex crypotgraphic keys
associated with each wallet. A number of Coin Management Technologies (CMTs) have been
developed that allow users to manage their currency, including allowing exchanges and websites
to manage currency [49], “hot” wallets that are connected to the network, and “cold” wallets that
are physical objects disconnected from the network. Krombholz et al. did a large survey of Bitcoin
users and found that coin management was one of the biggest and most confusing challenges faced
by Bitcoin users [42]. In their large sample, almost 22% of users had lost currency due to issues
with coin management, over half of which was due to self-induced error and the other half due to
fraud or mismanagement on exchanges or website-based wallets.
Bitcoin is a complex system to understand and use. Rather than having one clear entity to trust
or seek information from, participation in Bitcoin necessitates trust in a complex web of social
and technical components, in addition to the systemic and individual risks that could have costly
consequences. In light of this complexity, and evidence of financial [53], technical [18], and privacy
[3] risks to users, how do people come to trust Bitcoin? And perhaps more importantly, why do
people continue to trust Bitcoin after experiencing major problems, such as the December 2018
crash where Bitcoin lost over 50% of its peak value [53]?
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:8 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
2.5 Ideology
To understand how people think about issues around Bitcoin, we bring in the concept of ideology.
An ideology is a collective set of beliefs about the world that are held by a group of people [11].
Ideologies usually involve beliefs about social order and how social structures should exist in society.
As a result of this, many ideologies have the function of creating in-groups and out-groups [11], or
of one group repressing another group [58]. In the online communities context ideology is typically
described in relation to political ideology, with a recent emphasis on ideology’s potential role
in online extremist groups [43]. An examination of hate speech on the anonymous, provocative
"Politically Incorrect" 4chan forum suggests that members of this community are intentionally
doing things to promote their collective ideological beliefs, such as "raiding" YouTube with large
amounts of comments reflecting their beliefs [33]. Similarly, researchers who examined a Donald
Trump themed subreddit concluded that active participants of the community frequently expressed
’calls to action’ in their postings. These postings promoted a dominant, widely understood set of
ideological beliefs [25]. But, how members of online communities may be using the technological
features of these spaces to produce certain social outcomes is still a developing area of work [25].
In our work, we use the conceptualization of ideology from the philosopher David Livingstone
Smith [58]. Smith examines a number of ways of theorizing ideology as beliefs or mental representations, but ends up defining beliefs as ideological by their function; if a belief or set of beliefs
has the function of encouraging a specific social order (and therefore enabling repression of other
people), he defines it as ideological.
Ideological beliefs sometimes appear extreme, such as a white supremicist’s statement about
the inferiority of black people. And to outsiders, those statements can appear to be intentionally
deceptive; ideological statements sometimes are seen as lies intended to repress people. However,
this is not necessary to be an ideology, and indeed Smith argues that “those who embrace ideologies
are committed to their truth” and often repress people because of the ideology and not the other
way around [58].
Ideological beliefs are frequenty communicated in statements, images, and other media. Ideological images and statements often get reproduced and repeated in different contexts because they
encourage a social order. Smith argues that ideologies get their function by being reproduced in
various media such as images, drawings, news stories, etc. and thus media play an important role
in enabling ideologies [58].
Online forums like Reddit and the r/bitcoin subreddit are new forms of media that can enable
ideological statements and images to be reproduced and spread quite rapidly. The origins of Bitcoin
are not just about the design of a technology, but came about with the intent to disrupt current
social order [51]. Thus, we suspect that it is possible that ideological beliefs emerge on r/bitcoin,
and we investigate the discussions on the subreddit with an eye toward identifying one or more
ideologies that might appear and how they do or do not influence how people do or do not trust
Bitcoin.
3 METHODS
Our goal was to examine naturally occuring online discussions related to trust in Bitcoin. Since
Bitcoin is a worldwide network, many of the discussions about it are occuring online and leave
publicly available evidence that can be analyzed. This is a common way of examining how people
make sense of new and complicated technologies; for example, Brown and Laurier analyzed videos
posted to YouTube.com to understand perceptions of self-driving cars [13].
We chose to analyze the r/bitcoin subreddit on the website Reddit.com. Reddit.com is a
website consisting of sub-forums, called subreddits, centered around thousands of different topics,
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:9
ranging from news to humor to hobbies and everything in between. Users can subscribe to their
favorite subreddits and receive alerts when new topics and comments are posted on that subreddit.
Participants can like or dislike other users’ topics and comments. Reddit’s demographics, according
to one examination of users in the United States, are primarily young, male, and white [56].
Demographics of Bitcoin users are challenging to estimate due to the anonymity of the system, but
past work has identified Bitcoin enthusiasts as predominantly young and male [9].
We selected Reddit as our field site of interest in understanding trust and ideology in Bitcoin for
several reasons. We were specifically interested in the role of trust in Bitcoin as mediated by online
communities, and r/bitcoin is one of the largest forums (over one million subscribers) focused on
Bitcoin, and averages over 100 posts per day and around 1000 comments per day [1]. Additionally,
Reddit has been identified as a valuable online space in which to understand how online norms
and cultures develop. Work on Reddit has identified how subreddits vary in content and identify
membership based on an ideological viewpoint[20]. Much work on Reddit has also focused on
these communities’ roles in social support-seeking [60], advice-seeking [15], identity formation
[34], and collective knowledge development [62]. Reddit has also been identified as well-suited for
news and political topics [34, 62], which aligns with our goal of understanding how trust in Bitcoin
evolves as the price and other news surrounding Bitcoin continue to change.
3.1 Data
We gathered and examined comments publicly posted on the Bitcoin r/bitcoin subreddit forum
by using the Reddit API to download all new threads posted to r/bitcoin every hour, and then
re-downloaded the threads three days later to capture all of the comments that occurred after the
initial posting. Through manual checking, we found that almost no thread was still active after
three days. We started the scraper on December 6, 2018, and continued to collect data until February
23rd 2019. In this time, we collected 12,625 unique threads. From this corpus, we randomly selected
1,881 threads to examine. After filtering out threads with very little content (no comments or no
on-topic comments) and threads off-topic for the subreddit, we ended up coding 226 of these as
relevant to trust in Bitcoin. In qualitative approaches to understanding social practices on Reddit
there is considerable variety in the corpus size used [15, 20, 27] with emphasis placed on data
saturation in determining an appropriate corpus size [4]. We identified relevant comments based on
the codebook we developed after the initial exploratory analysis of r/bitcoin. For ethical reasons,
if we discovered that comments were deleted by their creator after the initial scraping, we excluded
them from analysis.
3.2 Analysis
We approached our data analysis utilizing grounded theory. We centered our approach based
on Timonen, Foley, and Conlon’s[63] synthesis of the most common and valuable principles of
grounded theory in practice. These authors identified four “core principles” that we followed in
our approach. The first is that the research is actually grounded, meaning that any hypotheses are
derived from the data, with existing knowledge being ’put in dialogue’ with any emergent directions.
Another core principle is identifying social processes and interactions specifically in terms of the
action they have in the context of the field site [63]. Next, is the process of engaging in constant
comparison of the data to other data in order to identify differences, similarities, and patterns across
the corpus [63]. The final principle identified by Timonen et al. is theoretical sampling, where new
theories are derived from concepts in the data that lead to a cycle of more focused questioning and
concept clarification. We followed these principles throughout the research process, as we outline
in detail below.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:10 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
We followed a three-step coding process [63]. We began with “open-coding” in which we
spent time exploring r/bitcoin. The first author spent time getting “a feel for the data”[63] by
following r/bitcoin for several weeks, and reading the most popular threads. During this time,
she openly coded concepts that emerged repeatedly across time and interactions, including trust,
social inclusion/exclusion, defining true bitcoiners, and approximately two dozen other descriptive
codes related to social life on the subreddit. Using this beginning codebook, all three authors began
coding the same threads and comparing their thoughts and analysis at weekly research meetings.
Based on these findings, “selective coding” was implemented to focus on the emergent patterns of
trust and ideology in the data. Following Miles et al. [48], we built a data matrix to summarize our
coding across these topics. This data matrix enabled us to summarize specific issues and isolate
comments about each topic. After creating summaries of each topic we coded for, we looked for
common patterns that linked these topics. Two authors used this second codebook to identify
the following in the data: 1) ways that participants justify trust in Bitcoin; 2) how participants
relate Bitcoin to other groups of people or institutions, and 3) how participants discuss problems
or risks with Bitcoin. All three authors continued to meet weekly to discuss disagreements in
content coding, and to update the codebook with new issues that arose in the content. During
this process, we also actively engaged with Bitcoin news and relevant past work to contextualize
these emerging concepts within existing knowledge. After identifying these concepts and sets of
quotes that illustrate these concepts, we then went back to the data to check to make sure our
description and example quotes accurately represent the original data, and to look for negative cases
that were substantially different than our understanding [52]. Our findings passed our check for
representativeness and we did not find negative cases.
3.3 Ethical Issues
Researchers of public access databases recognize that these spaces have unique potential for
qualitative work in particular, due to how these observational methods allow the researcher to
freely walk the line between outside observer and active participant, thus benefiting from multiple
loci of inquiry [45]. In the context of online forums like Reddit, ethical considerations face unique
challenges. These challenges include the inherent difficulty of collecting consent from millions
of users and determining the authenticity of the data [45]. In Hutchinson’s[36] examination of a
video game forum, she emphasized that although this forum actively recognized itself as public and
prohibited the sharing of personal information, forum participants still framed their contributions in
terms of the audience they imagine will care about and view their posts. Hutchinson’s interpretation
of this ethical issue is to emphasize the importance of interpreting these contributions through the
cultural lens of the contributor. In order to incorporate Hutchinson’s perspective, we considered
questions such as, Why did they offer this contribution?, and What do they hope will come of it?,
when interpreting our participant’s contributions.
Since this was publicly available data, our Institutional Review Board ruled that this study does
not require human subjects approval. Still, there are ethical concerns with reporting on such data.
An examination of how Twitter users interpreted research ethics showed that few typical Twitter
users understood that researchers often use, and have easy, permissionless access to, their Twitter
data [23]. Participants were most positive about their data being used in research when they were
informed the research was taking place, were told the topic of the study, whether their 000profile
information was analyzed, and how their data was presented in the research article [23].
We have taken steps to protect participant privacy by only analyzing and information which is
necessary for our research goals. We are not analyzing any information from these participants
outside of the r/bitcoin subreddit, such as their Reddit profiles and what other subreddits they
may follow. Fiesler et al. found that people’s most salient concerns about privacy in research
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:11
data were related to how identifiable their information was [23], and we do not analyze or report
identifiable information.
3.4 Limitations
There are some limitations with studying Reddit. We did not interview any participants, and thus
it is impossible to discern participant demographics and intentions. Our observational approach
allowed us to examine how trust decisions were made and socially enforced in a naturally occurring
social group that is directly related to Bitcoin. Additionally, we only examined a single subreddit.
Both our corpus size and the amount of activity in our community of interest is comparable to
other qualitative coding approaches in online communities [27].
One important consideration with r/bitcoin in particular is that this forum has been the subject
of some controversy related to moderators censoring posts [7, 54]. r/bitcoin dealt with issues
with moderators beginning as early as 2010 [7]. These issues were centered around one of Bitcoin’s
most major controversies: the ability of the network to handle large amounts of transactions quickly.
One high-ranking moderator on r/bitcoin and several related forums and their followers strictly
censored any discussion that discussed changes to the Bitcoin network which would increase the
transaction speed, especially if these changes were discussed in a positive way. This moderator still
has power on r/bitcoin and several other as of some accounts [54]. Despite these past challenges,
it still remains one of the most popular forums for discussing issues around Bitcoin, and continues
to attract a steady stream of new participants.
4 FINDINGS
We begin by presenting a description of a set of beliefs that appear frequently and vocally in the
r/bitcoin subreddit. We label this set of beliefs the “True Bitcoiner” beliefs, and argue that they
represent an ideology which dominates discourse on r/bitcoin. These ideological perspectives are
built and strengthened through discourse on the subreddit. Even when this ideological perspective
faces alternative viewpoints during these discussions, rather than being weakened, ’True Bitcoiners’
are able to strengthen and further disseminate these ideological beliefs’ dominant position of
r/bitcoin during these discussions. We identify three primary beliefs: interpreting Bitcoin’s
‘technology’ as trustless, Bitcoin as a mechanism of liberation from corrupt people, and the belief
that collective investment and sacrifice will result in an idealized Bitcoin future.
4.1 The Importance of Trust in Bitcoin on r/bitcoin
The “True Bitcoiner” ideology exists in part because r/bitcoin participants actively recognize the
role of trust in Bitcoin. Many users of r/bitcoin recognize that Bitcoin needs people to use it, and
that trust is an important motivator for them. They recognize that participating in Bitcoin can be a
significant investment of effort of money, time, and computing power. Additionally, gaining trust
has become increasingly important as people continue to identify individual and systemic risks
of using Bitcoin. Based on this, r/bitcoin users care about people trusting Bitcoin for reasons
far beyond their personal, ideal conceptions of a Bitcoin future. Rather, they recognize that if
people don’t find Bitcoin valuable, and don’t continue to input their computing power to verify
transactions, that Bitcoin will no longer function. In other words, participants recognize that this
complex socio-technical system depends on the trust of its participants in order to be sustained.
There is no chance of this “radical Bitcoin dream” [61] being realized without widespread trust and
support. User 217A clearly described this widespread perspective:
“User 217A: Bitcoin is the most trusted system by a long shot [...] Bitcoin doesn’t have
to be the fasted, the most coolest, the most hyped/marketed coin. It has to be the most
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:12 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
trustworthy coin. And lets be honest, if bitcoin becomes untrustable the blockchain will
melt faster than our North pole.” (Thread 23)
This quote by User 217A captured the core issue that drives discussions about trust on r/bitcoin.
They argued that trusting Bitcoin is necessary for it to even have a possibility of fulfilling the
dreams of Bitcoin enthusiasts. As a result, users make an effort on r/bitcoin to promote and
justify trusting Bitcoin. As they do this, however, they face opposition and disagreement from other
users. Opposing users provide their own arguments and justifications. This back and forth describes
many of the discussions that occur on r/bitcoin. These disagreements also bolster the need for a
collective understanding of what Bitcoin is and how people should use it. Bitcoin is highly complex,
and there are many different ways to participate in the system. To uphold their visions of a Bitcoin
future, “True Bitcoiners” work on r/bitcoin to distribute their dominant interpretation of what
Bitcoin actually is. These quotes in our findings section serve as vivid examples of ideas repeated
many times over on r/bitcoin. This ideological work is accomplished through the three primary
tenets that across people, place, and time serve as the dominant discourse on r/bitcoin.
4.2 Ideological Tenet 1: Bitcoin’s Technology is the Locus of Trustworthiness in the
System
A core belief of the “True Bitcoiner” ideology is that Bitcoin is functionally “trustless”. However, as
we have argued, participating in Bitcoin necessarily means being embedded in many socio-technical
trust relationships, which participants widely recognize as important in recruiting and maintaining
new Bitcoin enthusiasts. In light of this recognition, how can Bitcoin be interpreted as “trustless"?
That is because trust is delegated to the people using the system. In other words, they argue that
although Bitcoin itself is trustless, people may need some convincing to recognize this. However,
in the face of risk and other Bitcoin challenges, this ‘myth of trustlessness’ is repeatedly used to
shut down opposing arguments related to risk and uncertainty. In User 50A’s argument with User
50B, the way Bitcoin’s “trustlessness” is used as evidence of, ironically, verifiable trustworthiness is
demonstrated.
“User 50A: It’s not really trustless because the trust is in the 51%. If the majority decides
you don’t have any Bitcoin then you don’t have any Bitcoin, even if you still think you do
— and there’s nothing you can do about it.” (Thread 50)
“User 50B: It *is* trustless because you can run your own node. You don’t have to ask
anyone about the state of a network. 51% attack vs the largest network doesn’t make much
sense, especially when to do that you’d need to buy billions in miners, to only sabotage the
reason you bought them.” (Thread 50)
Here, 50A and 50B highlighted different forms of evidence when deciding whether to trust Bitcoin
or not. In this part of the discussion, participants were speculating about what “fundamental flaws”
Bitcoin may have. User 50A argued that one of these flaws is the 51% attack2
. That is, they pointed
out a system-level risk.
User 50B countered that Bitcoin is trustless, because you operate your own node. They highlighted personal control over individual-level risks. User 50B further discredits the system-level
risk of a 51% attack by stating that such an attack “doesn’t make much sense”. Here, they’re highlighting their expectation that even if a 51% attack was possible, it would not benefit the perpetrator,
and thus would be unlikely to happen. User 50B interprets Bitcoin as being trustless due to the
2
51% attack refers to the possibility that, should one person or one institution have control over 51% or more of all the
computers mining Bitcoin, then theoretically they would be able to take control of the entire system, due to the fact that they
would be the majority, and thus able to authenticate any transactions in the ledger that they please, fictional or otherwise
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:13
underlying technology, which they view as mitigating risk. They interpret Bitcoin as affording
individual control over engagement with the system, with the technology guaranteeing equitable
participation. Their expectation that potentially problematic human actors would not behave in a
way that “doesn’t make much sense” strengthens this interpretation. This idea of Bitcoin being
trustless is also based in the belief that people make Bitcoin as a system less trustworthy. When
participants defend Bitcoin’s trustworthiness, they often justify their optimism by highlighting
how Bitcoin does not require trusting in people, as user User 196A describes below.
“User 196A: The issue is that the people in charge of systems that powerful have a God
complex, and I will not put faith in it, nor do I have to. You are trusting human beings
with an immense task, and you should know that power corrupts us. [...] Bitcoin worked
when it was worth pennies, it works now, and it will work 10-100 years from now. Best
part, no one is in control, which is why there is no means to stop it, and no God complex
at the top.” (Thread 196)
Here, User 196A is responding to another user who remarked that Bitcoin has failed due to the
recent volatile price swings. User 196A challenges this perspective by identifying “the best” part
of Bitcoin being that there is “no God complex” controlling it. Based on their comment, User 196A
interpreted existing financial institutions as having too much control over people. They extended
this idea that “power corrupts us” to be a critique of human nature in general. To them, humans
are the source of risk and uncertainty in financial systems. In opposition to human flaws, they
presented Bitcoin as not just a trustless solution, but one that has always worked and will always
work. “True Bitcoiners” interpret Bitcoin as being somehow unchanged and constant over time.
This is an interesting contradiction with the fact that Bitcoin has received numerous software
updates over the course of its existence, and has continuous human involvement due to the core
software development team and all the people who mine and transact on the blockchain. These
ideas, that Bitcoin is a solution to human flaws and that it will always function in this way, are
important ideological positions in r/bitcoin discussions, despite the inherent contradiction. Its
possible that this interpretation of Bitcoin as trustless serves as a risk mitigation strategy in the face
of Bitcoin’s recent problems. In other words, Bitcoin’s human elements are viewed as the source
of all error, as compared to the unchanging, ’perfect’ technical nature of Bitcoin. This allows the
concept of Bitcoin failures to be attributed to external problems rather than Bitcoin itself.
In addition to being unchanging and free of human trust, Bitcoin has also been interpreted as
“permissionless”. User 24A posted these comments as part of an exchange with another member
of the subreddit who expressed skepticism about what value Bitcoin actually provides people for
everyday use, as most of the past use had related to illegal activity.
“User 24A: Both of your notions are better expressed by the notion of “permissionless.”
Bank money requires strong identity, contracts and a system of forceful jurisprudence. We
don’t think about those things but bank money can’t work without that. Bitcoin takes
care of all that in a network protocol. Bitcoin requires no identity, no legal contract and
no court enforcement, yet it has never been fraudulent and has a perfect (error free to 15
decimals) transaction record. [..] Think of the deep sociological impact of a world where
commerce happens without third party consent and little third party knowledge. Most
people are frightened by that, but like it or not, it’s arriving. This is a much deeper impact
than even the Internet. ...” (Thread 24)
Here, User 24A describes Bitcoin as ’permissionless’ due to the fact that technology is what
makes it trustworthy and special. r/bitcoin participants argue that this technology is what sets
Bitcoin apart from other cryptocurrencies and makes it so revolutionary. In this quote, User 24A
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:14 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
identifies ’bank money’ as problematic due to the necessity of identity and contracts. It seems
as though this participant interprets these forceful assurance properties as somehow risky, or at
the very least ineffective. Bitcoin, in contrast, they view as ’perfect’, again capturing this idea of
perfect technology due to the ’network protocol’. It is interesting that User 24A describes Bitcoin
as having “never been fraudulent”, when there has been plenty of fraud associated with Bitcoin,
such as exchange hacking [49]. Bitcoin’s transaction record is only as accurate as the majority of
users deem it. Based on that logic, it seems as though User 24A is interpreting Bitcoin as error-free
due precisely to the fact that the “network protocol” is enforcing the rules of the system. In other
words, they believe this makes it impossible for Bitcoin, and by extension its users, to need laws
and other control. Bitcoin doesn’t need people making sure that transactions are legitimate; they
believe that the technology underlying Bitcoin ensures honesty.
Bitcoin is interpreted as trustless due to the widespread perception that Bitcoin’s underlying
technology is perfect and immune to fraud, while human actors in the system would not have the
power or be incentivized to violate the protocol for personal benefit.
4.3 Ideological Tenet 2: Bitcoin is Liberation from Corruption
A key motivation described by r/bitcoin participants is that Bitcoin is better than existing
governments, economic systems, and other institutions. Centralized power over money and people
is regarded as both evil and inefficient due to their perception of Bitcoin as ensuring equality for
every user. User 209A’s response is a typical example of this perspective:
“User 209A: As long as people, especially the poor, can easily exchange whatever the
hell they have for bitcoin [...] they will be much better off with btc than the rest of the
trash out there. This is not only about getting rich for some people but to exit a corrupt
economical system [...]” (Thread 209)
Here, User 209A is arguing that all people would benefit from transferring their financial
holdings to Bitcoin. They expanded upon this by describing how Bitcoin could especially help
poor people, due to corrupt people with more resources no longer being able to mistreat them.
When identifying Bitcoin’s separation from banks and governments as a benefit, they typically
refer to these institutions as inevitably corrupt or controlling. User 209A also introduced the
widespread idea of Bitcoin’s superiority to other financial institutions and crypyocurrencies with
their reference to “the rest of the trash out there”. In this comment, User 209A also highlights
the tendency of these beliefs to be presented in tandem with moral justifications. User 209A does
through highlighting “the rest of the trash out there” as “corrupt”, in addition to mentioning that
“getting rich” is not their only motivation. Highlighting motivations about improving peoples’ lives
as more important than monetary motivations is commonly used in these ideological arguments
about Bitcoin.
Based on our analysis of r/bitcoin, “True Bitcoiners” perceive a core benefit of Bitcoin as being
the freedom they believe it provides from centralized control. They believe that because Bitcoin
allows people to manage their money without the influence of people in banks and governments, this
will protect Bitcoin users from power centralization and unethical control. But, these perspectives
fail to consider the myriad ways in which banks and governments protect their users, such as
offering recourse from losses in fraud. The following comment by User 134A identifies several
reasons why Bitcoin’s separation from centralized institutions is perceived as so valuable:
“User 134A: Bitcoin was about putting the power back into the hands of the people! To rid
of the Banksters and all their evil deeds! If for one second you have bitcoin on an exchange
and think you own them. Forget it!! Exchanges use your bitcoin value, just like banks lend
your dollars out.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:15
[...]
Time to show yourself responsible for your money, your bitcoins and yourself. Get a
private key and take power! It’s not like you haven’t been warned!” (Thread 134)
User 134A began their comment with a proclamation of what Bitcoin is meant to be used
for: taking power away from the “Banksters and all their evil deeds” and giving it back to “the
people”. This interpretation suggests that Bitcoin is actually viewed as a mechanism of this power
exchange, both through the individual power this affords people and by how it weakens the
centralized institutions themselves. Based on User 134A’s response, a key issue with institutions
like exchanges and banks is their ability to lend out their money. User 134A navigated this threat
to the idea of Bitcoin being trustless by encouraging private key ownership, which they believed
would assure these idealized outcomes. User 134A’s interpretation expressed the common idea
that keeping your private key absolutely private is the only way to truly own your Bitcoin, perhaps
related to recent widespread fraud in relation to Bitcoin exchanges [50]. But, User 134A fails to
recognize the way banks have different assurance features than exchanges. For example, if a bank
crashes or mis-manages your money, there are some legal protections. With these third-party
exchanges, there is no recourse.
In order for this rejection of domineering human influence in Bitcoin to be maintained, what “True
Bitcoiner’s” perceive as the solution, Bitcoin’s underlying technology, must be understood as both
able to consistently fulfill the roles of the human actors and guarantee that these power inequalities
will not be reproduced in the Bitcoin system. User 50A argues that Bitcoin’s technological design
achieves these goals:
“User 50A: math and a decentralized network ...
which is better than > a dozen humans who aren’t elected representatives
Which do you think is going to go corrupt first? Math and equal governance or a small
body of humans that the public doesn’t directly vote in?
If you have no say in the people “managing” how your money is created , you’re most
likely going to see corruption over time.
Because in btc each node is equal, and anyone can run a node, everyone has a voice in
bitcoin. The system is already set up to run via mathematics.” (Thread 50)
User 50A equated “math”, combined with the decentralized network, as being sufficient for
Bitcoin to function without human interference. Again, this interpretation in embedded with
contradiction, due to the fact that Bitcoin is still managed by various human actors, such as the
core development team that facilitates and approves software updates. User 50A interpreted the
“math” underlying Bitcoin as an “automatic” structure that guarantees equality in the system.
This illustrates how many r/bitcoin participants placed extraordinary trust in the technology
of Bitcoin, while simultaneously questioning the human aspects of the system. Additionally, this
moral idea of equality is referenced by their emphasis on Bitcoin permitting everyday people to
have a direct say in the function of the system.
User 50A took further issue with traditional currencies because leaders in these systems are
not directly elected by the public. They viewed the consequence of this lack of input as inevitable
corruption. This illuminates a key idea that directly relates to tensions about human control over
Bitcoin: some users recognized that people will be using the network, and that this could lead to
problems if there are not mechanisms in place to prevent some people from gaining more control
than others. But, they still recognized that people deserve to have direct, communal control of
how the network operates. User 50A believed this aim is fulfilled by “math and a decentralized
network”. In other words, the value (and trustlessness) of Bitcoin is interpreted as ensuring fairness
and equal contribution to governance of the system. Thus, Bitcoin is still perceived as trustless.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:16 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
Bitcoin is also identified as resistant to corruption due to a unique quality of the Bitcoin network
protocol. Miners contribute their computer processing power in order to verify transactions, and
are randomly rewarded with Bitcoin. However, the protocol is designed so that after 21 million
Bitcoins are released, this incentive will end and no more Bitcoin will be produced [51]. User 44A
identifies this property as a valuable defense against manipulation of Bitcoin:
“User 44A: I know how much total can exist within the network, I can verify that myself
by looking at the code. I know that if I hold 1 BTC today I will always own 1/21M of all
bitcoin and that share of ownership will remain fixed indefinitely. No person or entity on
this planet has the power to change that now or ever. Perhaps even more importantly, no
person can use my stake in this currency to fund needless wars or commit violent acts on
my behalf against my will. That alone is reason enough for me to hold and use bitcoin.”
(Thread 44)
Bitcoin has been designed so a maximum of 21 million coins will be all that mining will ever be
able to produce [51]. User 44A’s trust comes from their interpretation that this quality of Bitcoin
will prevent people from manipulating how much money they have. User 44A also praised how
nobody can use their money in a way they disagree with. User 44A clearly identified the “best”
feature of Bitcoin as being purely related to the technology. They justified trusting the technology
because they feel they are able to “verify [the technology] myself [themselves] by looking at the code
completely independently. Additionally, they recognized value in their belief that their ownership
of Bitcoin will remain unchanged “now or ever”. This idea of permanent, assured ownership and
control reflects an important aspect of the “True Bitcoiner” ideology: Bitcoin is valuable not just
because this personal control is possible, but because it is believed to remain this way forever. To
these participants, if there is no risk of failure, then it only makes sense to trust Bitcoin.
Based on these findings, we conclude that the “True Bitcoiner” supports the perception of Bitcoin
as trustless due to valuable features of Bitcoin’s underlying technology that participants perceive
as more trustworthy than corrupt human institutions and imperfect individuals. In addition to trust
in the technology and freedom from corruption, “True Bitcoiners” also believe that by collectively
accumulating Bitcoin, their dreams for Bitcoin’s future will come true.
4.4 Ideological Tenet 3: Making a Better Future by “HODL”ing Bitcoin
Many participants on the subreddit believe that with collective action, the revolutionary future they
envision for Bitcoin will become possible. There is some variety across individuals as to how exactly
they define their personal wishes for this future; most describe the future as Bitcoin becoming a
widespread currency that damages institutional control and improves income inequality. Some
aspire for profit or having Bitcoin to leave for future generations. But, what is common across all
of these imaginings is how True Bitcoiners believe that they can collectively make a positive future
for Bitcoin a reality. While past work has identified challenges wiith Bitcoin participants attempts
to translate these abstract imaginings for the future into reality[41], on r/bitcoin, this shared goal
of a positive future leads to a unified interpretation of what must done to produce this future. They
believe that if they buy a lot of Bitcoin, and don’t sell it in accordance with the volatile fluctuations
of the market, that eventually Bitcoin will become valuable and successful. This approach is also
referred to by the slang term “HODL”.
The concept of “HODLing” originally emerged as a typo on the official Bitcoin forums in 2013. It
caught on as a popular slang term, group identifier, and rallying cry for those who “hold” their
Bitcoin. On a surface level, HODLing means accumulating as much Bitcoin as you can and not
selling your Bitcoin for any other kind of currency, such as other cryptocurrencies or fiat currencies
like US dollars. But, descriptions of HODLing incorporated ideological features beyond just owning
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:17
bitcoin. Participants claimed that they HODL bitcoin because keeping their bitcoin, no matter, will
make Bitcoin successful as money and/or an everyday store of value. This idea is exemplified in
the following comment:
“Thread 217: Still not selling, and still more bullish than a year ago. Let 1MM subscribers
here remind us of what we’ll see USD wise on CMC when our plan to takeover fiat is done.
To all the brave warriors here, let’s aim for 2MM now. HODL.” (User 217A)
User 217A created a thread as a response to the r/bitcoin forum reaching one million subscribers. User 217A’s comment “Still not selling, and still more bullish than a year ago” exemplified
the HODLer principle to not sell even if there is profit to be made. Describing Bitcoin’s successful
future as including “our plan to take over fiat” demonstrated the HODLer idea that HODLing
bitcoin represents more than just making money, but a desire to make their vision for a better
future a reality. For User 217A, this means having Bitcoin replace existing monetary institutions,
a commonly expressed goal. User 217A clearly knew that they could sell immediately and make
money; but, they see this anticipated future as more valuable. HODL also captures an idea of
sacrifice. True Bitcoiners recognize that trusting and holding Bitcoin is challenging, especially in
the face of an uncertain future. This recognition of HODL as an intentional sacrifice is intensified
by the use of the imagery of “brave warriors” to signify resisting hardships. In this comment, User
217A identified how the HODLing ideology is used in this socio-technical system as a strategy for
building trust in Bitcoin’s future despite current financial risk.
User 217A expanded upon the challenges of making these sacrifices, including how they envisioned them paying off in the future. User 217A posted this thread as an open letter of sorts to
their future grandchildren, who they are planning to leave their bitcoin to.
“Thread 32: [...] Hard to hold and not “cash out” during multiple bear markets. [...] Hard
for their grandfather to watch his initial investment multiply tenfold and then lose eight
fold but still hold on because he wasn’t a professional trader. What made it manageable
was knowing that Bitcoin is revolutionary and although hard sometimes their grandfather
saw how it was a game changer from the current (at the time) monetary policy and crooked
fiat schemes. [...]] Remember that In every battle there comes a time when both sides
consider themselves beaten, then he who continues the attack wins.” (User 32A)
User 32A further expresses and justifies the HODL ideology. Their comment exemplifies the
widespread belief that people need to maintain their optimism in Bitcoin no matter the current
circumstances.
“Thread 186: If you believed in Bitcoin at 16.7k, you must love it even more at 3k as you
would be grateful of this opportunity. What has changed in a year (beside the price)? If
you bought because you are a trend follower and out of FOMO, then you would now sell
out of despair and FUD. This is what most people do unfortunately. In my honest opinion,
you should buy more (bitcoin and not altcoin3 as less risky) [...]” (User 186A)
User 186A here emphasized that while Bitcoin is worth less, it needs to be trusted even more
than while it is worth a lot. They also criticized those that buy and sell due to market trends for
“FOMO” (Fear of Missing Out). User 186A described the common strategy of HODLers who, during
price falls, buy more Bitcoin to lower their average buy-in cost. This supports the HODL ideal of
accumulating as much Bitcoin as possible. Participants often shared their current buy-in average
with other participants as a way to brag about their current Bitcoin holdings. User 186A reiterated
these HODLer ideas while also expressing that Bitcoin is valuable because of the human effort
3
“altcoin” refers to other cryptocurrencies that are not part of Bitcoin
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:18 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
that was input into Bitcoin’s development. It was also common to criticize and belittle people who
"cashed out" their Bitcoin or used cryptocurrencies other than Bitcoin.
4.5 The “True Bitcoiner” Ideology
Participants in r/bitcoin repeatedly mentioned three important beliefs that they used to justify a
range of actions: that Bitcoin’s technology is the only thing that needs to be trusted, that Bitcoin
can free people from corrupt social institutions, and that “HODL”ing on to Bitcoin is the way to
achieve this new social order.
These findings demonstrate the development and practice of an ideological viewpoint on
r/bitcoin. These beliefs align with Smith’s conceptualization of ideology. Smith argues that
in his functional conceptualization of ideology, ideologies can exist based on the intent to change
social order or produce oppression, whether they actually do or not [58]. To explain this, Smith
uses the example of KKK members who hold white supremacist views, but live in a society that
prohibits them from acting upon these views. Forum members hold these three beliefs with the
intent of changing the social order of who is important and who is not; these beliefs are ideological
even if they do not actually achieve this change [58].
It is difficult to determine if, based on the conversations on r/bitcoin, this community is actually
influencing oppressive outcomes through Bitcoin use. However, as our findings demonstrate, forum
members, through their statements, explicitly define who is or is not a legitimate and beneficial
participant in Bitcoin. They also assign negative associations to the out-group, including degrading
bankers and individuals who choose to exit the Bitcoin system.
Smith describes how media enables representations of ideological beliefs to be replicated and
spread across groups of people over time [58]. We find that this process is happening on r/bitcoin,
with the True Bitcoiners repeating this set of beliefs in a wide variety of threads and using them to
justify repressing parts of society that they deem corrupt.
Finally, Smith argues that “those who embrace ideological beliefs do so because they consider
them to be true”. “True Bitcoiners”, based on their engagement with r/bitcoin, appear to truly
believe in Bitcoin’s merit to improve the world and people’s lives. They go as far to reject profit
motive and other individualistic approaches to Bitcoin as unimportant or even immoral. Based
on these ideas, interpreting r/bitcoin in terms of Smith’s functional conception of ideology
demonstrates how these three beliefs influence how r/bitcoin participants interpret the reality of
Bitcoin, including who does and does not belong as a “True Bitcoiner”.
5 DISCUSSION
These findings demonstrate how ideology functions on r/bitcoin to support a dominant viewpoint
about the reality of Bitcoin. All three ideological tenets identified in our findings section connect
back to the core conceptualization of Bitcoin as “trustless”. On r/bitcoin, how participants refer
to trustlessness can be described as the perception that the usage and function of Bitcoin is not
influenced by any social ties that imply vulnerability, including human control over the system.
This ideological perspective serves to support the viewpoint that Bitcoin is “trustless”, and thus
merits continued participation and hope, even in the face of mounting risks and failures.
In our inquiry, our goal was not to evaluate Bitcoin or the “True Bitcoiner” ideology as beneficial
or harmful. Rather, our aim was to understand how, in the context of Bitcoin as an innovative
socio-technical system, people decided to trust and use Bitcoin. Our contribution with this approach
is outlining the role trust and ideology play in how people build trust in socio-technical contexts. We
also highlight the potential of online communities as an interesting place where this trust-building
happens.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
“The Most Trustworthy Coin”: How Ideology Builds and Maintains Trust in Bitcoin 36:19
Despite the seeming contradiction, this ideological “trustlessness” is maintained through these
trusting social ties. These allow the ideology to disseminate and resist contradictory viewpoints and
evidence. On r/bitcoin, how participants refer to trustlessness can be described as the perception
that the usage and function of Bitcoin is not influenced by any social ties that imply vulnerability,
including human control over the system. And yet, this definition is embedded with inherent
contradictions. As we described in our examination of Bitcoin’s history, any participation involves
trusting the technology to function as expected, trusting the other people using the system to follow
the rules of the consensus algorithm, and trust in the integrity of the socio-technical relationships,
such as mining, that keep the system functional. Bitcoin functions based on trust, and trust is
inherently social. Rather than recognizing that the blockchain causes trust to metamorphize, not
disappear, participants interpret the nature of Bitcoin overall as trustless.
We use this interpretation of trustlessness to demonstrate that r/bitcoin participants believe
in this “True Bitcoiner” ideology of trustlessness not as a result of misunderstanding or deception,
but as a means to more easily navigate the many uncertainties of Bitcoin. Many of these users
claim to have invested considerable time, money, and effort in Bitcoin. We argue that the “True
Bitcoiner” ideology functions to both legitimize this investment and define what kinds of people
and behaviors need to be permitted into the Bitcoin community. This ideological gate-keeping
functions to insure that this effort will not have been in vain.
Beyond the r/bitcoin context, these findings demonstrate a potential way trust in complex sociotechnical systems develops using ideology that is developed and driven by everyday participants.
There is extensive evidence in the online communities literature demonstrating the power online
communities have to build trusting social ties and a sense of community [59], influence how people
learn and understand complex ideas [30], and produce imagined, collective futures [29]. But, the role
of ideology being formed in online communities for the purpose of socio-technical interpretation
suggests that this type of social process may have a powerful influence in other socio-technical
contexts. Our findings demonstrate that the reality of socio-technical systems is interpreted socially.
This interpretation can become operationalized via this ideology, which serves to spread, maintain,
and strengthen that belief, and, in the perspective of the participants, influence the success of the
socio-technical system itself.
However, this ideological perspective on r/bitcoin does continue face real world challenges.
Recent challenges with Bitcoin’s massive price drops in late 2018 [53], fraudulent exchange services
[65], privacy issues [42], and the difficulty in predicting Bitcoin’s future as an asset, currency, or
investment [5, 28] have led to doubts on r/bitcoin. These issues directly challenge the radical
and hyperpositive aspirations of the “True Bitcoiner” ideology. However, rather than weaken these
beliefs, the tension between these real world issues and the “True Bitcoiner” ideology is actually
what drives much of the discussion on r/bitcoin.
6 CONCLUSION
Bitcoin is a complex socio-technical system [10] that depends on user trust [2] in order to function
properly. By analyzing almost three months of postings on the r/bitcoin subreddit, we described
how people use this online community to build and maintain trust in Bitcoin. We found that
participants have a specific “True Bitcoiner” ideology that they promote. This ideology is founded
on an interlocking set of beliefs that define Bitcoin’s underlying technology as infallible, interpret
existing institutions of money and powerful people as corrupt, and allow the collective imagination
of an idealized Bitcoin future produced by accumulating and “HODLing” Bitcoin.
These beliefs all connect back to the core belief that stems to Bitcoin’s intended purpose: a
“trustless” system of money. Despite ample contradictory interpretations and real-world failings,
this belief in the trustless nature of Bitcoin is maintained by this ideological perspective. Interpreting
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 36. Publication date: November 2019.
36:20 Megan Knittel, Shelby Pitts, and Rick Wash
Bitcoin as trustless reduces interpretive complexity, minimizes the recognition of risk, and supports
the development of community camaraderie to collectively imagine, and work towards, a new
Bitcoin future.
This ideology’s role in socio-technical building has implications for how people understand and
use socio-technical systems broadly. It is difficult to build trust in a complex socio-technical system
like Bitcoin when most people do not fully understand that system. But it is important to do so, or
people won’t use the system. This “True Bitcoiner” ideology that has emerged on r/bitcoin gives
participants in the subreddit ways to justify trusting the system, and the tensions we identified give
the subreddit participants ample opportunity to do so. The role of ideology in other socio-technical
contexts has potentially major implications, as our findings have demonstrated, for how people
interpret the system, build community around it, and develop ideological beliefs.
Ideology in the media has contributed to the rise and fall of empires throughout recorded history
[58]. As socio-technical places continue to become more ingrained in how people learn and connect
with one another, the way ideology influences how people imagine the reality of these systems and
their place within them could have far-reaching consequences. What technology people decide
to trust could shape the landscape of trust in modern socio-technical life. Just like experiences of
trust, the nature of modern socio-technical systems is continuous evolution and change. As our
findings demonstrate, the role everyday people do in trusting, internalizing, and sharing ideological
perspectives on these complex systems has the potential to change the very nature of these systems.