Abstract—Quantum technologies currently struggle to scale
beyond moderate scale prototypes and are unable to execute
even reasonably sized programs due to prohibitive gate error
rates or coherence times. Many software approaches rely on
heavy compiler optimization to squeeze extra value from noisy
machines but are fundamentally limited by hardware. Alone,
these software approaches help to maximize the use of available
hardware but cannot overcome the inherent limitations posed by
the underlying technology.
An alternative approach is to explore the use of new, though
potentially less developed, technology as a path towards scalability. In this work we evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of a Neutral Atom (NA) architecture. NA systems offer
several promising advantages such as long range interactions and
native multiqubit gates which reduce communication overhead,
overall gate count, and depth for compiled programs. Long
range interactions, however, impede parallelism with restriction
zones surrounding interacting qubit pairs. We extend current
compiler methods to maximize the benefit of these advantages
and minimize the cost.
Furthermore, atoms in an NA device have the possibility to
randomly be lost over the course of program execution which
is extremely detrimental to total program execution time as
atom arrays are slow to load. When the compiled program is
no longer compatible with the underlying topology, we need
a fast and efficient coping mechanism. We propose hardware
and compiler methods to increase system resilience to atom loss
dramatically reducing total computation time by circumventing
complete reloads or full recompilation every cycle.
Index Terms—neutral atoms, quantum computing, compiler
This work is funded in part by EPiQC, an NSF Expedition in Computing,
under grants CCF-1730449; in part by STAQ under grant NSF Phy-1818914;
in part by DOE grants DE-SC0020289 and DE-SC0020331; and in part
by NSF OMA-2016136 and the Q-NEXT DOE NQI Center. This research
used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which is
a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC05-
00OR22725. Disclosure: F. Chong is also Chief Scientist at Super.tech and
an advisor to Quantum Circuits, Inc.
(a) Restriction Zone (b) Max Distance 3 (c) Atom Loss
Fig. 1. Examples of interactions on a neutral atom device. (a) Interactions of
various distances are permitted up to a maximum. Gates can occur in parallel
if their zones do not intersect. The interaction marked with green checks can
occur in parallel with the middle interaction. (b) The maximum interaction
distance specifies which physical qubits can interact. Compiler strategies
suited for this variable distance are needed for neutral atom architectures. (c)
Neutral atom systems are prone to sporadic atom loss. Efficient adaptation to
this loss reduces computation overhead.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the past several years, many leading gate-based quantum
computing technologies such as trapped ions and superconducting qubits, have managed to build small-scale systems
containing on the order of tens of qubits [2], [22], [39], [44].
However, each of these systems have unique scalability challenges [9], [26]. For example, IBM devices have continued to
grow in size while error rates have remained high, larger than
what is needed for quantum error correction [17]. Trapped ion
machines, despite many promising results, have fundamental
challenges in controllability [30]. It is unclear whether any of
these platforms in present form will be capable of executing
large-scale quantum computation needed for algorithms with
quantum speedup like Grover’s [38] or Shor’s [18].
These challenges are fundamental to the underlying technology. Consequently, current approaches which aim to reduce
error via software and push the limits of current devices are

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00069
insufficient for long-term scalability. In recent years there has
been a number of improvements to the compilation pipeline
stretching across the hardware-software stack [11], [19], [21],
[29], [31], [33], [40], [42]. Numerous studies have explored
reductions in quantum circuit gate counts, depths, and communication costs via optimizations, but cannot overcome the
fundamental scalability limitations of the technology.
An alternative approach is to consider emerging quantum
technologies and new architectures. In this work, we explore
hardware composed of arrays of individually-trapped, ultracold neutral atoms which have shown great promise and
have unique properties which make them appealing from a
software standpoint [37]. These properties include: potential
for high-fidelity quantum gates, indistinguishable qubits that
enable scaling to many qubits, long-range qubit interactions
that approximate global (or generally high) connectivity, and
the potential to perform multiqubit (≥ 3 operands) operations
without expensive decompositions to native gates [28].
Neutral-atom (NA) architectures also face unique challenges. Long-range interactions induce zones of restriction
around the operating qubits which prevent simultaneous operations on qubits in these zones. Most importantly, the atoms in a
neutral atom device can be lost via random processes during
and between computation. In the worst case, the compiled
program no longer fits on the now sparser grid of qubits,
requiring a reload of the entire array every cycle. This is a
costly operation to repeat for thousands of trials. Coping with
this loss in a time-efficient manner is important to minimizing the run time of input programs while not dramatically
increasing either gate count or depth, both of which will reduce
program success rate. In Figure 1 we show a small piece of
a NA system with many gates of various sizes and distances
being executed in parallel. Restriction zones are highlighted
and importantly no pair of gates have intersecting restriction
zones. When atoms are lost during computation, rather than a
uniform grid we have a much sparser graph and qubits will be
further apart on average. A key to the success of a NA system
is resilience to loss of atoms, avoiding expensive reloads.
In this work, we explore the trade-offs in neutral atom
architectures to assess both current viability and near future
prospects. We extend current compilation methods to directly
account for the unique NA constraints like long-range interactions, areas of restriction, and native implementation of
multiqubit gates. We propose several coping strategies at the
hardware and software level to adapt to loss of atoms during
program execution; we evaluate the tradeoff of execution time
and resilience to atom loss versus program success rate.
The field of quantum computation is still early in development and no clear winner for underlying hardware has
emerged. It is vital to consider new technology and evaluate its
potential early and often to determine viability as it scales. In
this work, we do just that, considering a neutral atom architecture of size comparable to target hardware sizes for competing
technologies. Despite comparably higher gate errors and lack
of large scale demonstration, we determine if the unique
properties offered by this new technology enable more efficient
q0
q1
q2
q0
q1
q2
q0
q1
q2
1-qubit
gate
CNOT
(2 qubits)
Toffoli
(3 qubits)
(a)
(b)
time
Fig. 2. A quantum circuit with a 1, 2, and 3 qubit gate translated to
interactions on a NA device. These systems allow the execution of multiqubit
gates. For 2 and 3 qubit gates the interacting qubits are excited to Rydberg
states. Interactions are possible if all interacting qubits are closer than the
maximum interaction distance.
computation at scale. Perhaps more importantly, this work can
serve as a guide for hardware developers. We demonstrate that
the fundamental problem of atom loss can be mitigated via
software solutions and doesn’t need to be highly optimized at
the hardware level. This allows hardware engineers to focus on
other fundamental problems which cannot easily be mitigated
by software, such as gate error rate.
In this work we introduce a scalable neutral atom architecture based on demonstrated physical implementations which
permit long range interactions and native multiqubit gates. The
specific major contributions of our work are the following:
• Adapt current quantum compiler technology by extending
prior work to explicitly account for interaction distance,
induced restriction zones, and multiqubit gates.
• Evaluate system-wide implications of these properties,
specifically reduced gate counts and depth at the cost
of increased serialization. Our compiler exploits the gain
while mitigating this cost.
• Demonstrate, via simulation based on experimental results and through program error analysis, the ability
of NA systems to quickly surpass competitors in the
intermediate-term despite currently worse gate errors.
• Model sporadic atom loss in NA systems and propose
hardware and compiler solutions to mitigate run time and
program error rate overheads. We explore each strategy’s
resilience to atom loss, the effect on expected program
success rate, and overall run time.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Quantum Computation and the Gate Model
The fundamental unit of quantum computing is the quantum
bit, or qubit, which exists as a linear superposition between
the |0 and the |1 states. Most quantum programs manipulate
a register of N quantum bits where the state of the qubits is
given as a linear superposition of the 2N basis vectors. This
state evolves by the application of operations or gates. For
  
example, the single qubit X gate transforms |ψ = α |0+β |1
into X |ψ = β |0+α |1. Gates can also operate on multiple
qubits at a time. For example, the CNOT gate applies an X
gate to the target qubit if and only if the control qubit is in
the |1 state. These multiqubit operators are able to produce
entanglement between the qubit states. Together, superposition
and entanglement are central to the expected power of quantum
computation. For a complete introduction see [34].
Most quantum programs for gate-based quantum computation are expressed in the quantum circuit model. On most
hardware platforms, only single and two qubit gates are
supported, requiring complex operations like the generalized
Toffoli, a common subcircuit in many quantum algorithms,
to be decomposed into smaller pieces. Furthermore, most
hardware only supports a small highly calibrated universal set
of gates, requiring input programs be rewritten in terms of
these gates. A small piece of a circuit is found in Figure 2a.
Two important metrics for quantum programs are the depth
of the quantum program, given as the length of the longest
critical path from inputs to outputs, and the gate count, that is
how many operations it takes to perform the desired algorithm.
Both are important for near-term quantum computation which
is noise prone. Qubits have limited coherence time, likely
erasing a qubit’s information by a time limit. Gate error rates
are fairly high so computations with many multiqubit gates
are less likely to succeed.
B. The Quantum Compilation Problem
In order to maximize the probability of program success,
quantum circuits often undergo extensive compilation and
optimization. Compilation generally falls into two main categories: circuit optimization to minimize total number of gates,
and translation of input programs to fit the constraints of the
target hardware. The latter is often the focus of near-term
compilation strategies which break the problem into three main
steps: mapping, routing, and scheduling.
In mapping, the program qubits must be assigned to hardware qubits with the goal of minimizing the distance between
interacting qubits over the course of the program. As noted,
most hardware only supports interactions between a limited
set of qubits. Qubits mapped too far from each other must be
moved nearby by inserting SWAPs or other communication
operations before interacting. This communication is often
very expensive and every extra gate needed for communication
contributes to the overall error rate of the final program. It is
common for the mapping and routing steps to occur in tandem
as routing changes the mapping of the qubits over the course
of the program. Finally, scheduling consists of deciding when
to execute which gates and is usually dictated by factors such
as run time or crosstalk where we may delay gates to avoid
crosstalk effects but possibly increase runtime.
C. Neutral Atoms
We want to briefly introduce some background on the
underlying neutral atom technology. A nice introduction can
be found in [20]. Atoms in a NA system are trapped via
reconfigurable, optical tweezer arrays. These atoms can be
arranged in one, two, or even three dimensions [6], [7],
[14], [25]. We consider regular square 2D geometries in
this work, but arbitrary arrangements of atoms are possible.
Historically, one of the major difficulties with scalable neutral
atom systems was the probabilistic nature of atom trapping,
but this challenge has since been overcome and defect-free
arrays of more than 100 atoms [35] have been demonstrated.
The loading of qubits into the array is relatively slow, on the
order of one second, compared to program execution which
usually takes milliseconds.
The single atom qubit states can be manipulated using Raman transitions which implement single qubit gates. In order
to execute gates between qubits, atoms are optically coupled
to highly excited Rydberg states leading to a strong dipoledipole interaction between the atoms [23]. These Rydberg
interactions enable multiple atoms at once to interact strongly
and are used to realize multiqubit gates [28]. Furthermore, due
to the long range of these interactions, gates between qubits
which are not directly adjacent in the atom array are feasible.
Importantly, these interactions induce a zone of restriction as a
function of the distance. Two gates can only occur in parallel
if their restriction zones do not overlap.
III. NEUTRAL ATOM COMPILER AND METHODOLOGY
A. Mapping, Routing, and Scheduling
In this work we focus on adapting currently available and
effective compilation methods [3], [4], [24], [43] to directly
account for the unique properties of neutral atom architectures.
We focus on mapping, routing and scheduling of the quantum
compilation problem. Other optimizations, such as circuit
synthesis, gate optimization, or even pulse optimization, can be
performed as well, but are not the focus of this work. Many of
the primary advantages and disadvantages of the neutral atom
hardware can be reduced to modifications of the hardware
topology or interaction model given to the compiler.
We represent the underlying topology as a graph, where
nodes are hardware qubits and edges are between nodes which
can interact. We model the underlying hardware as a 2D grid
of qubits and, for a given instance, we fix the maximum
interaction distance dmax. Therefore, there is an edge between
nodes u, v if d(u, v) ≤ dmax. We model the restriction zones
as circles of radius r centered at each of the interacting qubits.
In this work we model this radius as f(d) = d/2 where d is
the maximum distance between interacting qubits, pairwise.
We have ensured this generalizes to any number of qubits in
order to support multiqubit gates. In practice, devices may
require a different function of d. The larger this radius the
fewer possible parallel interactions can occur.
For most quantum programs, the entire control flow is
known at compile time making optimal solutions for mapping
and routing possible but exponentially difficult to find. Therefore the dominant solutions are heuristics. We have extended
prior work on lookahead heuristics. Lookahead bases mapping
and routing on the sum of weighted future interactions with
operations further into the future weighted less. The entire
       
circuit is mapped and routed in steps. At each step, we consider
the weighted interaction graph where nodes are program
qubits and edges between nodes are weighted by the lookahead
function:
w(u, v) =
≥c
e−|c−|
where w(u, v) is the weight between program qubits u and v,
 is a layer of the program ,and c is the current layer, i.e. the
frontier of the program DAG. When considering a multiqubit
gate we add this weighting function between all pairs of qubits
in the gate.
For the initial mapping, we begin by placing the qubits
with the greatest interaction weight in the weighted interaction
graph. We place these qubits adjacent in the center of the
device. For every subsequent qubit in this graph we consider
all possible assignments to hardware qubits and choose the
best based on a score:
s(u, h) =
mapped v
d(h, ϕ(v)) × w(u, v)
where h is the potential hardware location, and ϕ is the
mapping from program qubits to hardware qubits. The goal
is to place qubits which interact frequently close to each other
in order to avoid extra SWAPs during routing. We choose the
hardware location h which minimizes this score. We place
qubits ordered by their weight to those previously mapped,
greatest first.
For routing and scheduling, we proceed layer by layer,
considering operations in the frontier as potential gates to
execute. Ideally, we would execute all operations in the frontier
in parallel, however if interacting qubits are not close enough
or the zones of restriction intersect, this isn’t possible. Instead,
we first select to execute operations in the frontier which do
not have intersecting zones. For any remaining long distance
operations in the frontier, we compute the best set of SWAPs
to move qubits within the interaction distance. We want to
select a path of SWAPs with two goals in mind: the shortest
path and the least disruptive to future interactions. This leads
to the following scoring function:
s(u, h) =
v
[d(ϕ(u), ϕ(v)) − d(h, ϕ(v))] × w(u, v)+
[d(h, ϕ(v)) − d(ϕ(u), ϕ(v))] × w(ϕ−1(h), v)
where h is the new location for u after the SWAP. We choose
the h which maximizes this function but is also strictly closer
to the most immediate interaction for u and v. In this function,
moving further away from future interactions or displacing the
qubit in position h by moving it far from its future interactions
is penalized. This guarantees the qubit always moves closer
to its target. The SWAP is executed if it can run parallel with
the other executable operations, otherwise we must wait. We
proceed until all operations have been executed. Our compiler
and evaluation source code is available at [1].
To scale target programs up to hundreds to thousands of
qubits, the heuristics used are fairly simple and fast. One
clear advantage of NA is that simpler and faster heuristics will
suffice in practice because large interaction distances make the
topology densely connected thus saving communication cost.
We validated our compiler by compiling small programs via
IBM’s Qiskit compiler [3] with lookahead enabled against our
compiler with maximum interaction distance (MID) set to 1
and no restriction zones for two benchmarks, one parallel and
one not. In both cases, our compiler closely matched Qiskit
in both gate count and depth.
B. Benchmarks
For this work, we have chosen a set of quantum programs
which are parametrized, the input size can be specified, to allow us to study how the advantages and disadvantages of a NA
system change as the program size increases. Specifically, we
study Bernstein-Vazirani [8], a common quantum benchmark,
with the all 1s oracle to maximize gates, Cuccaro Adder [12],
a ripple carry adder with no parallelism, the CNU gate [5], a
logarithmic depth and highly parallel decomposition of a very
common subcircuit, QFT Adder [36], a circuit with two QFT
components and a highly parallel addition component, and
QAOA for MAX-CUT [15], a promising near-term algorithm,
on random graphs with a fixed edge density of 0.1.
C. Experimental Setup
For most experiments, we compile our benchmarks, with
sizes up to 100, on a 10 × 10 NA device. We have a fixed
radius of restriction but vary max interaction distance from
1 (emulating superconducting systems) up to the maximum
needed for global connectivity (here hypot(9, 9) ≈ 13). In
relevant benchmarks we compile with decomposed multiqubit
gates and without. All experiments were run using on a
machine using Python 3.7 [41], Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4110
2.10GHz, 132 GB of RAM, on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS. All plot
error bars show ±1 standard deviation.
IV. UNIQUE ADVANTAGES OF NEUTRAL ATOM
ARCHITECTURES
In this section, we explore promising architectural advantages provided by the neutral atom technology. We examine
long range interactions where atoms distant on the device can
interact similar to a device with high connectivity. However,
the cost of this longer range interaction is higher serialization
due to the proportional increase in restricted area. Second,
we explore the native execution of multiqubit gates on the
NA platform. Since NA technology is still in its early stages,
it can be unfair to compare expected program success rates
from current gate error rates and coherence times. We analyze
common metrics, gate count and depth, which are good
predictors of a program’s success rate if executed.
A. Long Range Interactions
Trapped ion and superconducting architectures currently
support qubit interaction only between adjacent qubits. In SC
systems this usually corresponds to a 2D grid or some other
sparse connectivity, where each qubit is able to interact with
       
BV CNU Cuccaro QFT-Adder QAOA
0%
50%
100%
reduction in gate count
Gate Count Savings from Interaction Distance
2 3 4 5 8 13
2 4 6 8 10 12
0
500
1,000
1 13
maximum interaction distance
post-compilation gate count
BV Gate Count 99
87
75
63
51
39
27
15
3
Fig. 3. Post-compilation gate count across benchmarks. On the left are percent savings over the distance 1 baseline averaged over program sizes up to 100
qubits. Each color is a max interaction distance. Noticeably, there is less additional improvement as the MID increases, indicating most benefit is gained for
smaller distances. On the right is a sample benchmark (holds in general) with many program sizes compiled for the whole range of MIDs. As the program
size increases, larger MID show benefit before flattening off.
a small number of qubits. One of the important promises of
trapped ions is all-to-all connectivity where each qubit can
interact freely with any other qubit in the same trap. Each
trap however, is currently limited by the number of ions it can
support and expensive interactions across different traps.
In NA architectures, the connectivity lies somewhere between these two extremes. The atoms, while often arranged
in a 2D grid, have all-to-all connectivity beyond immediate
neighbors, i.e. within a fixed radius. This radius is dictated
by the capabilities of the hardware and can theoretically reach
as large as the device. However, current demonstrations have
been more limited, for example up to distance 4. In this work,
our experiments analyze the full sweep of interaction distances
to understand the importantance of long range interactions to
optimizing program success rate predictors.
Long range interactions in NA are not free, we define an
area of restriction imposed by interacting qubits at a distance
d from each other, f(d). Specifically, given this interaction
distance between qubits of the set Q all other qubits q ∈ Q
with distance less than f(d) to any of the interacting qubits
cannot be operated on in parallel. Furthermore, suppose we
have two operations to be performed in parallel. These two
operations can only execute in parallel if their areas of restriction do not overlap. For experiments in this work we explore
the function f(d) = d/2. Intuitively, as this function becomes
more restrictive, i.e. the areas surrounding the interacting
qubits get larger, fewer total operations will be executable in
parallel, affecting the total execution time of the program.
Long range interactions are important for reducing the
total number of gates required for execution on devices with
relatively limited connectivity. Limited connectivity requires
compilers to add in many extra SWAP operations. The lower
the connectivity, the greater the average distance between
qubits on the device therefore more SWAPs are required to
execute multiqubit gates between arbitrary sets of qubits. In
Figure 3, we explore the gate counts of compiled programs for
various sizes over a range of maximum interaction distances
up to the largest possible distance supported on the device. In
each of these experiments, all programs are compiled to 1 and
2 qubit gates only. Intuitively, we might assume having a larger
maximum interaction distance will necessarily be better than
a smaller one since it emulates global connectivity therefore
not requiring any additional SWAP operations. In general,
we find the most benefit in the first few improvements in
max interaction distance with more relative gain for larger
programs. The reduction in gate count is due solely to a
reduction in total SWAPs.
Importantly, the benefit obtained from increasing max interaction distance tapers off with vanishing benefit. The rightmost
points in these figures correspond to an interaction distance the
full width of the device, providing all-to-all connectivity. At
this distance no additional SWAP gates are required, so this
is the minimum possible number of gates to execute the input
program. This distance is not required to obtain the minimum
(or near the minimum). In fact, a smaller interaction distance
is sufficient. This is promising in cases where large interaction
distances cannot be obtained and hardware engineers can focus
on building higher fidelity short to mid range interactions. For
larger devices, the curves will be similar, however, requiring
increasingly larger interaction distances to obtain the minimum. The shape of the curve will be more elongated, related
directly to the average distance between qubits.
A similar trend exists for circuit depth as seen in Figure 4. As interaction distance increases the depth tends to
decrease, with the most benefit found in larger programs.
Again, the rate of benefit declines quickly. We expected
that as the interaction distance increased, the depth would
decrease initially, then increase again due to restriction zones
proportional to the interaction distance. As the maximum
allowed distance increases, the average size of these zones
will increase, limiting parallelism. However, there are several
important factors diminishing the presence of this effect. First,
SWAPs are a dominant cost in both gate count and depth,
often occurring on the critical path. Therefore, reducing the
need for communication typically corresponds to a decrease
in depth. Second, many quantum programs are not especially
parallel and often do not contain many other gates which
need to be executed at the same time limiting the potential
for conflicting restriction zones. In our set of benchmarks,
the circuits with high initial parallelism like CNU and QFT-

BV CNU Cuccaro QFT-Adder QAOA
0%
50%
100%
reduction in depth
Depth Savings from Interaction Distance
2 3 4 5 8 13
2 4 6 8 10 12
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
1 13
maximum interaction distance
post-compilation depth
QFT-Adder Depth
66
58
50
42
34
26
18
10
Fig. 4. Post-compilation depth across all benchmarks. On the left, the reduction in depth over the distance 1 baseline. Each bar is the average over all
benchmark sizes. On the right we see a similar drop off in post-compilation depth for the QFT-Adder. We’ve chosen this specific benchmark to highlight the
effect of restriction zones. Here we show a subset of all sizes run. Depth initially drops but for larger interaction distances some of this benefit is lost. We
expect this to be more dramatic for even larger programs.
BV CNU Cuccaro QFT-Adder QAOA
0%
100%
200%
300%
increase in depth
Depth Increase due to Gate Serialization
2 3 4 5 8 13
2 4 6 8 10 12
0
200
400
1 13
maximum interaction distance
post-compilation depth
QAOA Depth
50
50
40
40
30
30
20
20
Fig. 5. The induced restriction zone from interaction distance increases serialization. In the prior results this is hard to discern because compared to low
interaction distance the amount of gate savings translates to depth reduction. Here we compare benchmarks compiled with our restriction zone and compare
to a program with no restriction zone, to mimic an ideal, highly parallel execution. The existence of a restriction zone most effect on programs which are
parallel to begin with. On the right we directly compare this effect on the QAOA benchmark; solid line is compiled with realistic restriction zone and dashed
is ideal. The separation between the corresponding lines signifies the effect of the restriction zone.
Adder (a long stretch of parallel gates in the middle) do show
increases in depth with increased interaction size but are not
especially dramatic. In cases where gate error is dominant over
coherence times, the reduction in gate count far outweighs the
induced cost of greater depth or run time.
This isn’t to say there is no cost from the presence of a
restriction zone. In Figure 5 we analyze the relative cost of
the restriction zones. In this set of experiments the program is
compiled with the same maximum interaction distance. In the
ideal case it is compiled with no restriction zones, resembling
other architectures which permit simultaneous interactions on
any set of mutually disjoint pairs. These two circuits have the
same number of gates, including SWAPs. When no parallelism
is lost, either from the original circuit or from parallelized
communication, these lines are close. A large gap indicates
the increased interaction distance causes serialization of gates.
One additional side effect, which we do not model here due
to complexity of simulation is the effect of crosstalk. By
limiting which qubits can interact in parallel we can effectively
minimize the effects of crosstalk implicitly. This can be made
more explicit by artificially extending the restriction zone to
reduce crosstalk error by increasing serialization.
B. Native Multiquibit Gates
Long range interactions are not the only unique property
of NA architectures. One of the important promises of NA
hardware is the ability to interact multiple qubits and execute
complex instructions natively. For example, gates like the
three qubit Toffoli could be executed in a single step. This
is important for several reasons.
First, it doesn’t require expensive decompositions to oneand two-qubit gates. Gates like the generalized Toffoli have
expensive decompositions, transforming compact complex instructions into long strings of gates before SWAPs or other
communication is added. The base, 3 qubit Toffoli itself
requires 6 two qubit gates and interactions between every
pair of qubits. If all these Toffoli gates could be executed
natively without decomposition this saves up to 6x in gate
count alone. Toffoli gates are fairly common in quantum
algorithms extended from classical algorithms like arithmetic
since they simulate logical ANDs and ORs. If even larger gates
are supported, this improvement will be even larger.
Second, efficient decomposition of multiqubit gates often
requires large numbers of extra ancilla qubits. For example,
in our CNU benchmark we use the logarithmic depth decomposition which requires O(n) ancilla, where n is the number

5 10
0
1,000
2,000
1 13
maximum interaction distance
post-compilation gate count
CNU Gate Count
91
91
59
59
19
19
5 10
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
1 13
maximum interaction distance
Cuccaro Gate Count
94
94
54
54
14
14
5 10
0
200
400
1 13
maximum interaction distance
post-compilation depth
CNU Depth
91
91
59
59
19
19
5 10
0
500
1,000
1,500
1 13
maximum interaction distance
Cuccaro Depth
94
94
54
54
14
14
Fig. 6. Compiling to programs directly to three qubit gates reduces both gate count and depth. Here we highlight a serial and parallel application written
to three qubit gates. Here dashed lines are compiled to two qubit gates decomposing all Toffoli gates before mapping and routing. Solid lines compile with
native Toffoli gates. With native implementation of three qubit gates we obtain huge reductions in both depth and gate count for both benchmarks.
of controls. When complex gates are executable natively,
additional qubits are typically not needed, reducing space
requirements for efficient implementation of gates.
In the NA architecture, execution of these gates does come
with some constraints. For example, to execute a 3 qubit
Toffoli gate, each interacting qubit needs to be less than
the maximum interacting distance to every other interacting
qubit. Therefore, with only an interaction distance of 1 it is
impossible to execute these gates and instead they must be
decomposed and for larger gates more qubits will need to
be brought into proximity. While not explored explicitly in
this work, larger control gates will require increasingly larger
interaction distances. In general, the more qubits interacting,
the larger the restriction zone, increasing serialization if the
qubits are too spread out.
Our set of benchmarks contains two circuit written explicitly
in terms of Toffoli gates: CNU and Cuccaro. In Figure 6 we analyze the effect of native implementation of these gates rather
than decomposition. The benefit is substantial in both cases
requiring many fewer gates across all maximum interaction
distances. While these gates have been demonstrated, their
fidelity is much lower than the demonstrated fidelity of two
qubit gates. However, a simple estimation given by the product
of the gate errors in the decomposition shows the fidelity of
the Toffoli gate is greater than that of the decomposition. We
give a more precise analysis of this effect in the next section.
Both long range interactions and native implementation of
multiqubit gates prove to be very advantageous, though the
benefit is tempered by a distance-dependent area of restriction
which serializes communication and computation. The importance of these effects is input dependent. Programs written
without multiqubit gates cannot take advantage of native
implementation. Programs which are inherently serial are less
affected by large restriction zones at long interaction distances.
One of the most important observations is that excessively
long interaction distances are not required and most benefit
is obtained in the first few increases. However, as the input
program size increases for larger hardware, we expect more
benefit to be gained from long interaction distances. This trend
is evident here where small programs have almost no benefit
from increasing distance 2 to 3 but large programs nearing the
device size see much more.
V. ERROR ANALYSIS OF NEUTRAL ATOM
ARCHITECTURES
In the previous section we explored the effect on several
key circuit parameters like gate count, depth, and parallelism.
These metrics are often good indicators for the success rate
of programs on near and intermediate term quantum devices
where gate error is relatively high and coherence times relatively low. In the case where gate errors and coherence
times are uniform across the device and comparable between
technologies, these parameters are sufficient for determining
advantage of one architecture over another. However, current
quantum technology is still in development with some more
mature than others. For example, superconducting systems and
trapped ion devices have a several year head start over recently
emerging neutral atoms.
Consequently, physical properties like gate errors and coherence times are lagging a few years behind their counterparts.
It is critical however to evaluate new technologies early and
often to determine practical advantages at the systems level
and to understand if the unique properties offered by some new
technology are able to catapult the co-designed architecture
ahead of its competitors. In this section, we evaluate the
predicted success rate of programs compiled to a uniform
piece of hardware with currently demonstrated error rates and
coherence times. It is important to note the gate fidelities and
T1 times used as a starting point are often measured from small
systems as no large scale NA architecture has been engineered
to date. The average error, or T1, across the hardware may
have variance, as demonstrated in other publicly available
technologies, though neutral atoms promises uniformity and
indistinguishability in their qubits, similar to trapped ions.
Simulating a general quantum system incurs exponential
cost with the size of the system. It is impractical to model all
sources of errors during computation and simplified models
are typically used to predict program success rate. Here we
compute the probability a program will succeed to be the
probability that no gate errors happen times the probability
that no decoherence errors occur. If pgate,i is the probability
an i-qubit gate succeeds and ni is the number of i-qubit
gates then the probability no gate error occurs is given by

i pni
gate,i. Here we consider circuits with up to i = 3.
For neutral atoms, we consider two different coherence times
 
10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
10−1
100
two-qubit gate error
sample error rate
Success Rate Comparison
BV
CNU
Cuccaro
QFT-Adder
QAOA
vs. SC device
Current SC
Fig. 7. Program success rate as a function of two-qubit error rate. Because
current NA error rates are lagging behind competitive technologies we scan
over a range of two-qubit error rates for each of the benchmarks all on 50
qubit programs (49 for CNU) with max interaction distance of 3. Examining
pairs of solid and dashed lines we can compare NA to SC. In the limit of
very low two qubit error rate, systems can support error correction. Both SC
and NA systems scale at roughly the same rate (slope of the line) but the
NA system diverges from the completely random outcome at higher error,
allowing us to run programs on the hardware much sooner.
for the ground state and excited state i.e. T1,g, T1,e and
T2,g, T2,e where the ground state coherence times are often
much longer than excited state coherence times. Qubits exist
in the excited state when they are participating in multiqubit
interactions only. The probability coherence errors occur is
given as e−Δg/T1,g−Δg/T2,g−Δe/T1,e−Δe/T2,e where Δg, Δe
are the durations spent in the ground and excited states,
respectively. Often, gate fidelities already include the effects
of T1 and T2, i.e. pgate,i includes coherence error. Therefore,
we will consider the probability of no coherence error as
e−Δg/T1,g−Δg/T2,g only. These simplifications serve as an
upper bound approximation on the success rate of a program.
In this section we compare against superconducting systems,
specifically, using error values available via IBM for their
Rome device, accessed on 11/19/2020. While we directly
compare using the same simulation techniques we want to
emphasize the purpose of these figures is to indicate the
value gained from decreasing gate count and reducing depth
relative to other available technology and to suggest that these
improvements help overcome current gate error in neutral atom
technology. These are not meant to suggest neutral atoms in
their current stages are superior to superconducting qubits.
Our simulation results are across a large sweep of error
rates from an order of magnitude worse to many orders of
magnitude better, where error rates are expected to progress
to in order to make error correction feasible. The point is to
evaluate different technologies with comparable error rates,
how much is saved by architectural differences rather than the
current status of hardware error rates, especially when neutral
atoms are years behind in development.
In Figure 7 we analyze the potential of NA architectures on
three representative benchmarks. Here we sweep across various physical error rates and extract the predicted error rate with
those parameters; lower is better. In both CNU and Cuccaro
10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
20
40
60
80
100
1
two-qubit gate error
largest runnable size
Program Size Comparison
BV
CNU
Cuccaro
QFT-Adder
QAOA
vs. SC device
Current SC
Fig. 8. Another way to examine the data of Figure 7 is to ask, given a desired
program success rate, what the required two qubit error rate is. Here we sweep
again over two qubit error rates and record the maximum program size to run
with success probability greater than 2/3. Again, examining pairs of solid and
dashed lines we can compare NA to SC. With the reduced gate counts and
depth we expect to be able to run larger programs sooner.
we permit 3 qubit gates while the others contain only oneand two- qubit gates. The superconducting curves correspond
to similar simulations using error rates and coherence times
provided by IBM. At lower physical error rates we expect all
architectures to perform well, at virtually no program error
rate. At this limit, the hardware is below the threshold for
error correction. On the other hand, in the limit of high
physical error rates, we expect no program to succeed with
any likelihood and to produce random results. For near- and
intermediate-term quantum computation, the regions between
the limits are most important and the divergence from this
all-noise outcome determines how quickly a device becomes
viable for practical computation. For comparable error rates
between superconducting and NA architectures, we see great
advantage obtained via long range interactions and native
multiqubit gates, diverging more quickly than the limited
connectivity SC devices.
Alternatively, we might ask what physical error rates are
needed to run programs of a given size with probability of
success above some threshold. In Figure 8, we consider this
question for a threshold success rate of 2/3. Here we sweep
across physical error rates and compute the largest possible
program of each benchmark we can successfully execute.
There are two interpretations. First, for a fixed physical
error rate we can determine what size program is likely to
be successfully executed. Alternatively, suppose we have a
program of a given size we want to execute, we can then
decide what physical error rate do we need to run that program
successfully. For a fixed error rate, we find we can execute a
larger program or, equivalently, require worse physical error
rates than a superconducting system to run a desired program.
VI. UNIQUE CHALLENGE: SPORADIC ATOM LOSS
So far, we’ve focused primarily on properties of a neutral
atom system that are usually advantageous and have analyzed

qc qb qa qc qb qa qc qb qa
1
2 3
76 4 5
spare in use
(a) Circuit Before Loss (b) Virtual Remapping (c) Reroute
Fig. 9. Examples of two different atom loss coping strategies. (a) shows the initial configuration of three qubits, with the spare qubits in a light grey, and in
use qubits black. (b) Represents how the atoms are shifted into the spare qubits to accommodate a lost atom under the virtual remapping strategy. Notice that
the interaction is no longer within interaction distance 1. (c) Demonstrates how the qubits can be swapped to a valid interaction configuration, and returned
for rerouting strategies. Numbers indicate the order of swaps.
that while there are tradeoffs, the gates and depth saved
drastically outweighs any cost. However, neutral atom systems
are not without limitation. The atoms in a NA system are
trapped using optical dipole traps such as optical tweezers.
While this technique offers great flexibility in array geometries
and the prospect of scaling to large atom counts, the trapping
potential per atom is weak when compared to trapped ion
architectures. Consequently, neutral atoms can be lost more
easily during or between computations forming a sparser grid.
Fortunately, this loss can be detected via fluorescence imaging
and remedied with various software and hardware approaches
with different overhead costs analyzed here.
Atom loss has critical implications on program execution.
For near-term computation, we run programs hundreds or
thousands of times to obtain a distribution of answers. Consider running a program, after each trial we evaluate whether
atoms have been lost. If an atom used by the computation has
been lost, then we have an incomplete answer. Upon a loss, we
have no way of knowing if it occurred in computation and must
disregard the run from our distribution and perform another
shot. Furthermore, a program compiled for the original grid of
qubits may no longer be executable. The program must either
be recompiled for the now sparser grid of qubits, the array of
atoms can be reloaded, or the compiled circuit can be adapted
to the atom loss. The first two solutions are costly in terms of
overhead time. The third may provide a faster alternative, and
provide opportunity to perform more executions in the same
time while maintaining a valid program.
We model atom loss from two processes. The first is based
on vacuum limited lifetime where there is a finite chance a
background atom collides with the qubit atom held in the
optical tweezers displacing the qubit. We approximate this
occurs with probability 0.0068 over the course of a program
and is uniform across all qubits [10]. Loss during readout is
much more likely. In some systems readout occurs by ejecting
atoms which are not in a given state, resulting in about 50%
atom loss every cycle [16]. This model is extremely destructive
and coping strategies are only effective if the program is
much smaller than the total size of the hardware. Alternative,
potentially lossless techniques, have been proposed for measurement, but are not perfect with loss approximately 2% [27]
uniformly across all measured atoms. Detecting atom loss is
done via fluorescence which takes on the order of 6ms.
We propose several coping mechanisms to the loss of
atoms and examine their effectiveness in terms of overheads
such as the time to perform array loads, qubit fluorescence,
and potential recompilation. In each of these experiments we
assume the input program is smaller than the total number
of hardware qubits in the original grid, otherwise any loss
of an atom requires a reload. These additional unused qubits
after initial compilation are considered spares, borrowing from
classical work on DRAM sparing [32]. Currently, no program
that executes with reasonably high success will use the entire
grid and these spares will come at no cost. Potentially, as many
atom losses can be sustained as number of spares. However,
an array reload is always possible there is an unlucky set of
holes or no more spares. Below we detail various strategies.
• Always Reload. Every time an atom loss is detected for a
qubit used by the compiled program we reload the entire
array. This naive strategy is efficient when array reloads
are fast since only a single compilation step is needed.
• Always Full Recompile. When an interfering atom loss
is detected we update the hardware topology accordingly
and recompile the input program. This fails when the
topology becomes disconnected, requiring a reload.
• Virtual Remapping. NA architectures support long range
interactions up to a maximum interaction distance. Therefore, shifts in the qubit placement is only detrimental
to execution when the required qubit interactions exceed
this distance. For this strategy, we start with a virtual
mapping of physical qubits to physical qubits where each
qubit maps to itself. When an atom is lost we check if
it is used in the program. If so, we adjust the virtual
mapping by shifting the qubits in a column or row of
the qubit in the cardinal direction with the most unused
qubits starting from the lost atom to the edge of the
device. This process is shown in Figure 9b. In this figure,
addressing qb would now point to the original location of
qc, and addressing qc would point to the qubit to the left
of qc’s original location. If there are no spare qubits, we
perform a full reload. Otherwise, we execute the gates in
order according to the mapping. If two qubits which must
interact are now too far apart, we reload. This strategy is
efficient in terms of overhead since this virtual remapping
can be done on the order of 40 ns in hardware [13] via
a lookup table. However, this strategy can be inefficient
in number of reloads required since it is easy to exceed
the interaction distance. We later explore how many atom

23456
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
maximum interaction distance
# atoms lost/device size
Max Atom Loss Tolerance (CNU)
virtual remapping reroute compile small c. small+reroute recompile
23456
maximum interaction distance
Max Atom Loss Tolerance (Cuccaro)
Fig. 10. Atom loss as a percentage of total device size which can be sustained before a reload of the array is needed. Each program is 30 qubits on a 100
qubit device. As the interaction distance increases most strategies can sustain more atom loss. Strategies like full recompilation can sustain large numbers of
atom loss but as we will see are expensive computationally. Fast, hardware solutions or hybrid solutions can sustain fewer numbers of holes but have lower
overhead. We show two representative benchmarks parallel vs. serial.
losses can be sustained before reload which allows us to
estimate how many reloads will be required on average.
• Minor Rerouting. Here we perform the same shifting
strategy as in Virtual Remapping to occupy available
spares. However, rather than failing when distance between the remapped qubits exceeds the maximum interaction distance, we attempt to find a path over the
usable qubits, and insert SWAP gates along this path. To
simplify computation we SWAP the qubits on the found
path, execute the desired gate, then reverse the process to
maintain the expected mapping. The rerouting is shown in
Figure 9c. Too many additional SWAPs are detrimental to
program success. We may force a reload if the expected
success rate drops, for example by half, from the original
program’s expected success rate.
• Compile to Smaller Than Max Interaction Distance. For
most programs there are diminishing returns to compiling
to larger max interaction distances, but can be sensitive to
atom loss. In this strategy we compile to an interaction
distance less than the max so when qubits get shifted
away from each other it will take more shifts to exceed
the true maximum distance. The overhead is the same as
Virtual Remapping but the compiled program could be
less efficient than one compiled to the true max distance.
• Compile Small and Minor Reroute. This strategy is based
on Compile to Smaller Than Max Interaction Distance
but performs the same rerouting strategy as Minor Rerouting with similar overhead costs.
Excluding the first approach of reloading with any interfering atom loss, we examine how many losses can be sustained
without exceeding the constraints of the architecture in size,
dimension, or needed interaction distances. Figure 10 shows
the maximum number of holes supported by the different
strategies for a 30 qubit Cuccaro adder and a 29 qubit CNU.
The entries for compile small and compile small + reroute are
compiled to one less than the maximum interaction distance.
We do not compile to interaction distance 1, so we do not
have entries for these strategies at interaction distance 2.
As would be expected, recompile is able to support the most
lost atoms since the only failure cases are: disconnected hardware topology, or fewer atoms than required qubits. In fact,
since our example circuits use 30% and 29% of the hardware,
once the interaction distance overcomes any disconnected
pieces, recompiling can sustain 70% atom loss, the ideal case
for sustained loss. The non-rerouting strategies, while a fast
solution, offer limited atom loss recovery. The simple virtual
remapping is only able to support a small amount of atom loss,
but does increase as the max distance increases. As predicted,
compiling to a smaller interaction distance does enable more
resilience to atom loss since more movement can be tolerated
before exceeding the maximum interaction distance. Both
rerouting strategies have a disconnected topology failure case,
but also the additional failure case of not having the space in
any direction to shift the qubits in the event of atom loss. As
a result, both are only able to sustain 50% atom loss at higher
interaction distances.
However, these different strategies add varying numbers of
extra SWAPs to handle atom loss, lowering the success rate.
As more atoms are lost, more SWAPs are needed, and the rate
decreases as seen in Figure 11 for Cuccaro and CNU with the
rerouting and recompiling strategies. With current error rates,
success is very low for 30 qubit circuits. To better demonstrate
how the success rate changes, we use lower error rates so about
2/3 of shots succeed without atom loss. For any strategy, as
the interaction distance increases, fewer SWAPs are needed so
the shot success stays higher. Since the recompilation strategy
is able to schedule and map qubits with full knowledge of the
current state, including missing atoms, it as able to achieve
the best routing and success rate out of all the atom loss
strategies. Both of the rerouting strategies have lower rates
since they tend to add more SWAPs per atom loss. But,
since compiling to a smaller MID before rerouting means the
interaction distance is exceeded less often, it requires fewer
SWAPs, boosting its rate over simply rerouting.
Taking this into account, we examine the estimated overhead
time of each strategy for 500 runs of a given circuit. We
use a 2% chance of atom loss for a measured qubit, and
a 0.0068% chance of atom loss due to atom collision in a

0 5 10 15 20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
number of holes
estimated shot success
Shot Success Rate Drop (CNU)
reroute, MID: 2 3 5 c. small+reroute, MID: 3 5 recompile, MID: 2 3 5
0 5 10 15 20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
number of holes
Shot Success Rate Drop (Cuccaro)
Fig. 11. For strategies which modify the program such as recompilation or rerouting strategies, additional gates could be added leading to a lower overall
success rate. Here we trace the success rate of our three program modifying strategies. The full recompilation strategy (circles) is a rough upper bound which
best accounts for holes as they appear being able to move the entire program to a more appropriate location and route best. The gap between strategies on
the same MID gets smaller as the MID gets larger. Here we’ve chosen the two-qubit error rate corresponding to approximate 0.6 success rate to begin with
(based on Figure 8) in order to best demonstrate the change in shot success probability over a range of atom loss.
23456
0
100
200
maximum interaction distance
overhead time (s)
Overhead Time for 500 Shots (CNU)
virtual remapping compile small always reload
reroute c. small+reroute
Fig. 12. Strategies that are able reduce the number of reloads necessary
greatly reduce the overhead time when running circuits. Here we show the
overhead time for all strategies except recompilation. The proportion of time
dedicated to reloading is shown by the dominate color in each bar, followed by
fluorescence in red, and recompilation in black. Any strategy whose overhead
exceeds that of always reloading, such as full recompilation, should not be
considered.
vacuum. The overhead times for CNU are seen in Figure 12.
For any rerouting strategy that requires extra SWAPs, a reload
is forced once the number of added swaps would decrease the
success rate by 50%. For a 96.5% successful two-qubit gate,
this would be six SWAPs.
Recompilation is not shown in Figure 12 as software compilation exceeds the array reload time, and the overhead time is
larger than simply reloading. Other strategies are always more
time efficient than reloading all of the atoms. Additionally,
since compiling to a small size requires less fixes with swaps,
the overhead time tends to be smaller at lower interaction
10−1 100 101
10−3
10−1
101
100
10−2
102
atom loss rate improvement factor
# successful shots before reload
Successful Shot Rate Sensitivity (CNU)
6
5
4
3
Fig. 13. Sensitivity to the rate of atom loss for the balanced Compile Small
and Reroute strategy. In prior experiments we used a fixed rate of 2% atom
loss. For larger systems this rate could be worse and in the future we might
expect this rate to be much better. For each interaction distance we see as
the rate of atom loss gets better we can run many more trials before we must
perform a reload and reset. Some error bars don’t show on the log axis.
distances. As interaction distances increase, the overhead time
of each strategy converges. A sample timeline of 20 successful
shots using compile small and reroute can be seen in Figure
14. After initial compilation, reloading takes a majority of the
time, so any ability to reduce the number of reloads vastly
reduces the overall run time.
Compile small + reroute is an efficient way to improve loss
resilience, we next examine the sensitivity of the successful
shot count before a reload to the rate of atom loss for this
strategy. Figure 13 shows how the number of successful shots
changes as the rate of atom loss changes. A 10x improvement
offers an expected 10x improvement in the number of successful shots before a reload must occur. This is because the
rate of atom loss decreases as technology improves, reducing
the number of reloads, improving overhead time.

0 1.92
0.57 0.71
35μs 6ms 20+61μs
(a) Entire Trace
(b) Atom-loss resilent execution
(c) Scaled for clarity
time (s)
compile run circuit fluorescence circuit fixup reload atoms
Fig. 14. A timeline of 20 successful shots for Compile Small and Reroute
with reload time of 0.3 s and fluorescing time of 6 ms. A majority of the
overhead time is contributed by the reload time and fluorescence, indicating,
that the duration and count of these actions is crucial to overall runtime.
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Reducing the overhead of running compiled quantum programs is critical to successfully executing useful near- and
intermediate term quantum algorithms. Neutral atoms have
many attractive properties: long-range interactions, native implementation of multiqubit gates, and ease of scalability. These
advantages reduce gate counts and depths dramatically in
compiled circuits by increasing the relative connectivity of
the underlying hardware. While long range interactions induce
larger restriction zones which inhibit some parallelism, the
amount of gate and depth savings far outweighs this cost.
The dominant cost in NA systems is atom loss. Weaker
trapping potential and destructive measurement leads to the
loss of atoms as computation is performed. We explore various
strategies to adapt to this loss including the extremes of full
recompilation and always reloading. Full recompilation is able
to sustain high atom loss but is slow when thousands of
trials are needed. But reloading is also slow and is the dominant hardware cost. Our reroute and compile small strategies
balance atom loss resilience and shot success rate to save
computation time.
Popular competitor qubits have a head start on neutral atoms
in terms of error rate and device sizes. In simulation, we
have demonstrated our large gate count and depth savings
give advantage over superconducting systems. SC systems
are often easy to increase in size, but fabrication variability
and limited connectivity limit their effectiveness. Trappedion systems offer many of the same advantages as neutral
atoms such as global interactions and multiqubit gates but
at the cost of parallelism. Ions also have stronger trapping
potential, mitigating loss. Unfortunately, trapped ion systems
will struggle to scale and maintain these properties. These systems have limited parallelism and are held in one dimensional
traps limited to around 100 qubits. To scale, systems connect
multiple traps with higher inter-trap communication cost [30].
Neutral atom systems are theoretically capable of maintaining
their advantages as they scale.
Even at a small scale, the unique properties of the NA
systems result in compiled circuits which are lower depth and
use fewer communication operations translating to an expected
higher probability of success. These advantages will become
even clearer as devices scale since the device connectivity per
size grows much more favorably than other architectures. Our
algorithms for compilation are scalable heuristics and will be
able to keep up with increasing hardware size well. For atom
loss, some techniques will not be favorable for larger device
and program sizes, such as full recompilation, however we’ve
shown other more clever and faster techniques are better suited
for the problem and will be able to scale. For example, since
the speed to adjusting a hardware mapping is on the order of
nanoseconds, rather than the microseconds required to perform
reloading and fluorescence, we can expect these techniques to
remain viable.
In this work we have focused on software and hardware
techniques to demonstrate neutral atoms, with our methods,
are a viable and scalable alternative to more established
technologies. Long-distance interactions and multiqubit operations dramatically reduce communication and depth overheads
which translates into lower error rate requirements to obtain
successful programs. Like their competitors, there are fundamental drawbacks of a NA system; here we’ve highlighted the
problem of atom loss. This probabilistic loss is inherent in the
trapping process itself and prior hardware studies have focused
hardware solutions to reduce this probability of loss. We
demonstrate that software solutions can effectively mitigate
the problems due to atom loss. This is critical for the overall
development of the platform: by solving fundamental problems
at the systems level, hardware developers can focus on solving
and optimizing other problems and process of co-design which
can accelerate the advancement of the hardware tremendously.