Abstract—The need for speed in modern data-intensive workloads and the rise of “dark silicon” in the semiconductor industry
are pushing for larger, faster, and more energy and areaefficient architectures, such as Reconfigurable Dataflow Accelerators (RDAs). Nevertheless, challenges remain in developing
mechanisms to effectively utilize the compute power of these
large-scale RDAs.
To address these challenges, we present SARA, a compiler
that employs a novel mapping strategy to efficiently utilize largescale RDAs. Starting from a single-threaded imperative abstraction, SARA spatially maps a program onto RDA’s distributed
resources, exploiting dataflow parallelism within and across hyperblocks to saturate the compute throughput of an RDA. SARA
introduces (a) compiler-managed memory consistency (CMMC),
a control paradigm that hierarchically pipelines a nested and
data-dependent control-flow graph onto a dataflow architecture,
and (b) a compilation flow that decomposes the program graph
across distributed heterogeneous resources to hide low-level RDA
constraints from programmers. Our evaluation shows that SARA
achieves close to perfect performance scaling on a recently
proposed RDA—Plasticine. Over a mix of deep-learning, graphprocessing, and streaming applications, SARA achieves a 1.9×
geo-mean speedup over a Tesla V100 GPU using only 12% of
the silicon area.
Index Terms—RDA, CGRA, Plasticine, Scalability, DomainSpecific Compiler
I. INTRODUCTION
With the end of Dennard Scaling and the decline of Moore’s
Law, single-core CPU performance has plateaued [12]. Multicore scaling is also approaching its limit due to the power
wall [14], [21]. Thus, to sustain the economics of process scaling, recent efforts leverage applications’ domain knowledge
to enable performant and power-efficient hardware accelerators [9], [19], [21], [24].
Among these, Reconfigurable Dataflow Accelerators
(RDAs) [41] are an emerging class of large-scale CoarseGrained Reconfigurable Arrays (CGRAs) designed for the
compute intensity of modern analytical workloads. With
reconfigurable datapath, RDAs can exploit multiple-level of
This material is based on research sponsored by Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
under agreement number FA8650-18-2-7865, and National Science Foundation (NSF) under the award CCF-1563078, 1937301, 1563113, and 2028602.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not
be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements,
either expressed or implied, of Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) and
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), National Science
Foundation, or the U.S. Government. This research is also supported in part
by members and other supporters of the Stanford DAWN project.
data and pipeline parallelism, significantly improving their
compute throughput [7], [30]. Moreover, with coarse-grained
reconfigurable blocks, RDAs are more energy-efficient
and resource-dense than Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs) [30]. Unlike classic CGRAs [16], [33], [45] that
often tightly integrate with a general-purpose processor, RDAs
are designed as stand-alone and server-scale accelerators
for data-intensive analytical workloads. With efficiency
comparable to domain-specific accelerators [9], [19], RDAs
have more flexible datapaths that support a wide range of
data-parallel applications across various domains.
At a high level, RDAs are highly distributed on-chip
systems with reconfigurable units. Unlike a multiprocessor
system, RDA’s compute units are statically configured. This
eliminates the dynamic execution overhead in a processor
core and improves compute density. Furthermore, RDAs
use distributed, software-managed scratchpads rather than a
hardware-managed shared memory cache, significantly reducing hardware complexity with better and predictable memory
performance.
While highly efficient, the size of RDAs demands a new
mapping strategy to fully utilize their potential. Since classic
CGRAs are much smaller scale, conventional CGRA mapping
schemes [16], [33], [44] only exploit one-level of dataflow
execution within a hyperblock—a basic block with internally
convergent non-looping control flow [31]. The accelerator
executes one hyperblock at a time and reconfigures across
hyperblock. However, this strategy no longer suffices for
large-scale RDAs, as a single hyperblock provides insufficient instruction-level parallelism (ILP) to saturate RDAs’
compute power. Furthermore, while hierarchical datapaths and
explicitly managed scratchpads make RDAs scalable, they also
incur a number of programmability challenges. Programmers
must account for low-level resource constraints and manually
orchestrate data movement across distributed memory.
To efficiently utilize RDAs while improving their programmability, we introduce SARA, a compiler that generates
highly scalable RDA programs from a single-threaded imperative abstraction. We introduce Compiler-Managed Memory
Consistency (CMMC), a control paradigm that constructs
multiple-level of dataflow execution within and across hyperblocks. This mapping strategy enables SARA to exploit
ILP over a large window of a control-flow graph (CFG)
to saturate RDA’s compute throughput. Furthermore, SARA
systematically handles hardware constraints with resource
virtualization. By automatically partitioning a program to

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) | 978-1-6654-3333-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00085
	 	
	 	
	 	
	
	
	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	
	

	
	 

	

	

	

 


   %
!!
" 
#"


 !"  
  %
  %
 "$ 


  

 



 
 
! "
	
Fig. 1: Compute and memory organization of CGRAs.
satisfy the complex constraints of an RDA with heterogeneous
resources, SARA substantially reduces the programmer burden
to manage RDAs.
We implement the proposed techniques in SARA and target
a recently published RDA—Plasticine [41]. Our evaluation
shows that SARA achieves a perfect performance scaling until
exhausting the on-chip resources for compute-bound applications, or HBM bandwidth for memory-bound applications. We
demonstrate a 4.9× geo-mean speedup over a vanilla Plasticine
compiler [41], and a 1.9× geo-mean speedup against a Tesla
V100 GPU, which is 8× larger than our target RDA.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• A novel mapping strategy that exploits multiple levels
of pipeline and loop-level parallelism, within and across
hyperblocks, in a streaming dataflow fashion, using CMMC.
• A compilation workflow to systematically handle RDA
constraints and algorithms for program partitioning.
• A quantitative evaluation on the scalability of SARA
(§IV-A), the effectiveness of our compiler optimizations
(§IV-B), and a comparison to an existing compiler (§IV-C)
and an accelerator (§IV-D).
Next, we begin with a detailed discussion on the architectural features of RDAs that improve their scalability, and how
these features impact the compilation strategies required to
exploit this scalability.
II. RDA OVERVIEW
A. Types of RDAs
The primary distinction between classic CGRAs and an
RDA is the scale of the architecture. As shown in Fig. 1a, a
classic CGRA [15], [16], [20], [33], [38], [45] comprises a grid
of processing elements (PEs), each containing an ALU and
some local buffers. The PE array can be configured to execute
a block of control-free instructions in a dataflow fashion.
When compiling to a classic CGRA, a compiler inspects the
dataflow graph (DFG) within a hyperblock, and generates
a schedule and a placement to map the DFG onto the PE
array. Most CGRAs are tightly integrated with a co-processor
or a centralized scheduler that manages and reconfigures the
CGRA across hyperblocks at runtime.
An RDA, at a high level, is a hierarchical and distributed
reconfigurable architecture (Fig. 1c). An RDA comprises hundreds of compute and memory units, each containing a set of
processing units and/or scratchpads. Modern RDAs are built
for compute- and data-intensive analytical workloads, where
each unit has compute density comparable to a traditional
CGRA. A modern RDA [36], [41], [50] may contain hundreds
of such units and is 10x–300x more OPS intensive than
a classic CGRA [16], [33], [38]. The scale of RDA thus
motivates a number of innovations in compilation strategies.
a) ILP beyond a hyperblock
First and foremost, RDA demands an effective strategy to
scale performance across hundreds of distributed reconfigurable units. Traditional mapping strategy adopted by most
HLS compilers only exploit SIMD parallelism and one-level
of pipeline parallelism within a hyperblock [34], [56]. Some
techniques statically unroll loop bodies to expand the scope
of the dataflow graph [16], [44]. However, a modern RDA
contains over 10k function units. ILP within a hyperblock
is largely insufficient to saturate the compute capability of a
large-scale RDA.
To effectively utilize an RDA, SARA adopts a novel mapping strategy that spatially pipelines a control-flow graph
(CFG) over RDA’s distributed resources. This is in stark
contrast to Von Neumann-based architectures and classic
CGRAs, which execute hyperblocks of a CFG in time rather
than in space. More concretely, SARA allocates dedicated
compute units for each hyperblock and executes them in
a dataflow fashion. SARA then wires up synchronization
across hyperblocks to ensure the memory access order across
hyperblocks matches the program order expected by the CFG.
By enforcing that the memory order is consistent with a sequentially executed program, SARA can maintain correctness
while exploiting ILP over a large window of the CFG.
b) Nested loop-level parallelism
To maximize the throughput of the overall pipeline, it is
crucial to balance the pipeline stage delays, for each level
of the coarse-grained pipeline. Our front-end language, Spatial [26], captures an independent parallelization factor for
each loop nest in the CFG. When a user parallelizes the
innermost loop, SARA vectorizes the computation along the
SIMD datapath of Plasticine. When parallelizing the outer
loops, SARA spatially unrolls the loop body across distributed
compute units, forming a larger compute graph. By combining
multiple levels of pipeline parallelism and loop-level parallelism in an arbitrarily nested CFG, SARA can effectively
scale the performance of a small compute kernel over a
large number of resources. In contrast to a multiprocessor
that exploits thread-level parallelism across distributed units,
SARA exploits multiple levels of pipeline parallelism across
compute and memory units, which significantly improves the
overall compute throughput.
c) Flexible control constructs
The scale of RDAs comes with the cost of a long reconfiguration overhead. In contrast to 10s of cycles in a
classic CGRA, our target RDA (Plasticine) takes 10s of μs
for each reconfiguration. In classic CGRAs, the accelerator
often relies on the co-processor or the scheduler to handle
complex control flow. In RDAs, the long reconfiguration time
                 
requires the accelerator to operate independently to minimize
host intervention overhead. Hence, our spatially pipelined
CFG must support dynamic control flow, such as loops with
dynamic iterations and branch statements, to ensure the size
of a CFG that can be spatially mapped on an RDA is only
limited by the amount of on-chip resources, rather than by
unsupported control flow constructs.
B. Hierarchical Reconfigurable Fabric and Network On-Chip
a) Distributed control flow
To scale to a large number of units while maintaining a
fast clock frequency, RDAs have an interconnection network
similar to a traditional Network-on-Chip that introduces dynamic network delays on both data and control paths. However, spatially pipelined execution is particularly sensitive to
synchronization overhead, as pipeline bubbles can significantly
impact the overall throughput [55]. Hence, orchestration of
the hierarchical pipeline must adopt a distributed control flow
scheme to minimize control overhead.
b) Composability
Unlike FPGAs with flat reconfigurable fabric, RDAs have
a hierarchical datapath that significantly improves their clock
frequency and scalability. Nevertheless, hierarchy introduces
additional compilation restrictions. Specifically, a hyperblock
may contain more operations that do not fit in a compute unit,
and a data structure may exceed the capacity of individual
MUs. Unlike a hardware synthesis compiler that can freely
size a processing core and allocate block RAMs as needed
when targeting an FPGA, an RDA compiler must address
RDA’s resource constraints, composing and virtualizing these
distributed units to form larger logical resources.
C. Distributed and Streaming Memory Interfaces
RDAs have distributed and explicitly managed scratchpads
to enhance the capacity and bandwidth of on-chip memories.
Most classic CGRAs use a centralized memory interface that
is sometimes shared with a host processor [15], [16], [20],
[33], [38], [45]. Other larger-scale CGRAs attach a shared
memory cache to distributed compute units [5], [15], [20],
shown in Fig. 1b. Both memory organizations do not scale
in performance for a large number of units. RDAs have
distributed scratchpads and DRAM interfaces (DIs), shown in
Fig. 1c. The scratchpads have disjoint address spaces. While
all DIs have access to a global off-chip address space, the hardware provides no ordering across DIs. All memory interfaces
serve requests in a streaming in-order fashion and provide an
acknowledgment for each request for the software to handle
memory order across request streams. While this memory
abstraction substantially improves capacity and bandwidth, it
leaves the burden of memory management to the software;
a user must explicitly manage off/on-chip data transfer and
manually partition data across distributed scratchpads.
a) Consistency
A major difference in RDAs memory abstraction is the lack
of one-to-one correspondence between a compute core and a
memory interface, like in a cache system. RDA compute unit
can directly issue requests to any on-chip memory unit and
DRAM interface. Consequently, a memory interface can no
longer observe the program order across concurrent request
streams from a spatially pipelined CFG. Hence, the software
(in our case, the compiler) must explicitly enforce consistency
across multiple request streams. This is managed by the
hardware in a traditional memory system.
b) Scaling memory bandwidth with parallel computing
When parallelizing the compute of a spatially pipelined
CFG, the memory bandwidth of intermediate data must scale
accordingly to avoid stalling the pipeline. SARA achieves this
by sharding a logical tensor across distributed memory units,
effectively scaling memory bandwidth with parallelization.
This is very different from the conventional shared memory
hierarchy that relies on hardware to manage coherence when
compute is parallelized, which is hard to scale in performance.
III. DESIGN OF SARA
This section details how SARA converts a nested CFG from
a single-threaded imperative abstraction into a hierarchical
DFG that spatially pipelines the CFG across distributed RDA
units. Our front-end language is Spatial [26], a domain-specific
language with a nested loop abstraction primarily targeting FPGAs. We extend Spatial with our back-end compiler, SARA,
to target the Plasticine RDA. Fig. 3 shows SARA’s two-phase
process to target Plasticine: a synthesis phase that generates
a hierarchical dataflow graph (DFG), and a placement and
routing (PnR) phase that maps the DFG onto the physical
network. We omit the discussion on PnR as it is well studied
in previous CGRA mapping work [34], [39], [56].
The synthesis phases generate a two-level hierarchical DFG,
which we refer to as a Virtual Unit Dataflow Graph (VUDFG).
The top-level graph maps across RDA’s distributed physical
units (PUs), and the inner DFG maps to the reconfigurable
fabric within each PU.
SARA synthesizes the dataflow graph in two steps. First,
SARA performs imperative to dataflow lowering (§III-A).
This step allocates a virtual compute unit (VCU) for each
hyperblock and a virtual memory unit (VMU) for each onchip data structure that holds the intermediate results across
hyperblocks (Fig. 2c). Next, SARA allocates control handshakes across virtual units (VUs), such that their execution
order conforms to the schedule of the original CFG. At this
point, the virtual units (VUs) have no notion of the resource
constraints of PUs. Next, SARA takes a specification of PU
constraints and performs abstract resource mapping (§III-B),
subdividing oversized VUs into smaller VUs and merging
small VUs into larger VUs to reduce resource fragmentation.
SARA first assigns each VU to one particular PU type, and
then places and routes them onto the physical network.
Lastly, §III-C enumerates optimizations applied throughout
these steps. These optimizations either reduce the resource cost
of the VUDFG, or alleviate potential performance bottlenecks
in a streaming pipeline.

1 d1,d2,d3,d4,d5 = offchip_arr() 2 m3,m4 = onchip_arr() 3 A: for i in range(A): 4 B: for j in range(B): 5 m1,m2 = onchip_arr() 6 C: for k in range(C): 7 ... = d1[..] 8 m1[k] = ... 9 D: for k in range(D): 10 ... = d2[..] + d3[..] 11 m2[...] = ... 12 E: for k in range(E): 13 ... = m1[..] 14 ... = m2[..] 15 m3[k] = ... # W31
16 F: for j in range(F): 17 m4[..] = ... #W4
18 m3[..] = d4[..] # W32
19 G: for j in range(G): 20 ... = m3[..] # R3
21 ... = m4[..] # R4
22 d5[..] = ...
(a) Pseudocode example.
 
 
 	




#*") 
*'
'',
 $' $
)"%+'&
%'(' $
)"%+$%
 
 



B
A
G
C D E
F
 
 
 	












 



 %$) $( $
%*$)'(%'""$"%( $
"%%&($
)&) %&') %$ 
  $)'
%$)'%""'(
  		 


	
+'
+)



!
')
''




	
 $ )





 



#	&$$,'&

#
&$$,'&
 ($())%!$
+$%*$)'
()*')($ %$(*#())%!$
+$%*$)'
()*')(( # "'",%'
) ' )
' ) $ ) " -()%*
)%%*"*' $#









 



' ) $ ) " -)% )%!$($)+$()*')($
%$(*#+$()*')(
 
 





Fig. 2: (b) a 3-level hierarchical DFG for (a): 1) pipelined DFGs for the innermost loops 2) a second level DFG {C, D, E}
pipelined across iterations of loop B, and 3) the top-level DFG {B, F, G} pipelined across iterations of loop A. (c) VUDFG
with a P2P control scheme. (f) Control hierarchy for (a). (e) Detailed control setup for VMUm3 between VCUF and VCUG.
Synthesis
Placement & Routing
Abstract Resource Mapping (III.B)
A
B
C D
A
B
D C1
C2
C3
A
B
C1
C2
C3+D
A
B
C1
C2
C3+D
Unrolled
Loop Branch
Block Block Block Block
Loop
A. Constraint Resolution
- Compute Partitioning (III.B.1)
- Memory Partitioning (III.B.2)
B. Global Merging (III.B.1)
C. Virtual to Physical Assignment
VUDFG allocation
VU partitioning
VU merging
VU to PU type
assignment
control hierarchy
Imperative to Dataflow Lowering
(CMMC) (III.A)
- Virtual Unit Allocation (III.A)
- Control Allocation (III.A.1)
- Control Reduction (III.A.3)



PaR onto the PU Array


PU
Fig. 3: SARA’s compilation flow.
A. Imperative to Dataflow Lowering
Starting from a nested imperative abstraction, SARA generates a hierarchical dataflow graph that executes the CFG in
a coarse-grained pipelined fashion. This mapping strategy is
inspired by hierarchical pipelining, a concept first introduced
for FPGAs in DHDL [40]. Concretely, Fig. 2a shows a 3-
level nested loop with five basic blocks. At the innermost level,
operations of each loop can execute in a fine-grained pipelined
fashion. Furthermore, with dedicated resources allocated for
each basic block, we can coarse-grained pipeline loop C, D,
and E across iterations of loop B, and pipeline loop B, F,
G across iterations of the outermost loop A. Each loop can
be independently parallelized to balance the stage latency
for each level of the coarse-grained pipeline. A perfectly
balanced pipeline (not always feasible) can execute the entire
CFG concurrently, maximizing the compute utilization. This
execution model effectively scales the performance of a small
kernel over on-chip resources of a reconfigurable accelerator,
and is well suitable for data-analytical workloads that often
contain deeply nested control flow.
The FPGA implementation of hierarchical pipelining, however, can be inefficient on RDAs. The DHDL compiler adopts
a hierarchical finite-state machine (FSM) represented by the
control hierarchy shown in Fig. 2d; each FSM corresponds to
a loop that schedules the inner-loop FSMs using enable and
done handshake signals. While these signals travel in a single
cycle on FPGAs, they take 10s of cycles on an RDA network
due to RDA’s higher clock frequency, incurring significant
pipeline bubbles. Furthermore, unrolling loop B with three
stages by 10x, for example, creates a 30-to-1 synchronization
hotspot, potentially failing PnR due to RDA’s limited routing
resources.
To address these problems, we introduce CompilerManaged Memory Consistency (CMMC), a control paradigm
for hierarchical pipelining in a distributed setting. Instead of
hierarchical handshakes, CMMC adopts a peer-to-peer control
scheme with minimum overhead and thus ensures scalability.
In the rest of this section, we first describe the mechanism
of CMMC in §III-A1. §III-A2 discusses the handling of datadependent control flows, such as branches and do-while loops.
Lastly, §III-A3 presents an analysis that reduces synchronization while preserving correctness.
1) Compiler-managed memory consistency (CMMC)
As a start, SARA maps each hyperblock (C, D, E, F, and
G) to a virtual compute unit (VCU) and maps each on-chip
data structure to a virtual memory unit (VMU) (Fig. 2c).
Each VMU only connects to a set of VCUs that produces
and consumes the data structure stored in the VMU. Next,
SARA allocates control handshakes across VUs to enforce the
schedule of a hierarchical pipeline.
Instead of orchestrating the execution order of VCUs, the
idea of CMMC is to enforce the memory access order for
individual data structures. More concretely, the CFG expects
m1 to be written by VCUC for C times, before being read
by VCUD for D times, repeating A×B times. Hence, SARA
enforces this order between the two request streams from
VCUC and VCUE to VMUm1. This synchronization is localized
                                             
among VCUs that access the same data structure. As long as
we guarantee all individual data structures are updated in a
program-consistent order, the final result will be identical to a
sequentially executed program.
The result of CMMC is that only hyperblocks with data
dependencies are ordered. This is a key improvement over
both von Neumann architectures and other CGRA mapping
techniques, where hyperblocks are executed in time. Prior
work [48] unnecessarily orders independent hyperblocks, and
even techniques like speculative execution only mildly alleviate the ordering between adjacent hyperblocks. As long as
resources permit, CMMC can exploit ILP across the entire
CFG, which is essential to fully utilize an RDA’s compute
capability. Currently, we rely on the user or a higher level
compiler to segment a CFG that is too big to fit on an RDA.
We use VMUm4 to demonstrate how SARA enforces the
memory order between W4 and R4. As shown in Fig. 2c,
SARA maps all enclosing loop counters into each VCU.
VCUF , for example, contains chained counters corresponding
to loops F and A. The innermost counter increments every
cycle when the VCU is enabled, when all of its input streams
and tokens are valid and output streams are ready. To avoid
round-trip latency between the VCU and the VMU, SARA
partitions each memory access into a request and a response
VCU, as shown in Fig. 2e. For read access R4, SARA maps
the address generation in a request VCUG′, streaming addresses
to VMUm4 and streaming data back to the original VCUG.
For write access W4, SARA allocates a response VCUF ′ to
accumulate the write acknowledgments. VCUF ′ only contains
the same set of counters as VCUF with no datapath. In common
cases, SARA maps VCUF ′ and VCUG′ to the same Plasticine
memory unit that maps VMUm4.
A token is just a single-bit pulse treated as a data dependency of the receiver VCU. It can be viewed as a grant passed
among accessors to ensure they are executed in the expected
program order. Concretely, to enable W4 F times before R4,
SARA configures VCUF ′ to send a token to VCUG′ after its
local counter F saturates. On the reader side, VCUG′ consumes
one token when its counter G saturates. When enforcing access
A to happen before B, we always send the token from the
respond VCU of A, to request VCU of B, to ensure that B
observes the memory effect of A in a remote VMU.
To prevent W4 from overriding R4’s data before consumed,
SARA configures a backward token from VCUG to VCUF ,
sent when counter G saturates and consumed when counter F
saturates. The backward token, also known as the credit [11],
is initialized to at least one token at the destination, to break
the cyclic dependency. When the initial credit is set to one, the
memory order would match to a sequentially executed CFG,
and hence guarantees correctness. For certain access patterns,
we can relax the credit to be larger than one (1+) to enable
the first access multiple times before getting back-pressured,
which enables the pipeline execution across accessors. A
1+ initial credit often matches with the VMU’s multibuffer
depth to track the downstream buffer size. For example, we
can double-buffer VMUm3 and set the initial credit to 2, if
1 A: for i in range(A): 2 B: even = i % 2 == 0 3 C: if even: 4 D: for j in range(D): 5 addr1, data1 = ... 6 mem(addr1) = data1 # W 7 else: 8 F: for k in range(F): 9 addr2 = ... 10 data2 = mem(addr2) # R
(a) Input program









	


 
 	

















(b) Dataflow graph
A: addr2 latency
D: data2 latency
C: credit latency






 









 






	
	
	 
 	
 	
 	




 	  	

 
 













D+D’
F+F’
B




D: data1 latency
K: ack1 latency
T: token latency


	
(c) Timing
Fig. 4: An example program with an outer branch statement.
A(R4) ⊂ A(W4), where A is the address span of the accessors
for every iteration of their enclosing loop A, The initial credits
of m3 in Fig. 2c assumes A(R3) ⊂ {A(W31)∪A(W32)}. We
rely on the high-level compiler, Spatial [26], to perform the
address analysis to relax the back-pressure strength.
To determine when the token is released from access W31
and consumed by access R3, for example, SARA first finds
their least common ancestor in the control hierarchy (Fig. 2d),
i.e. loop A, and then uses the done of the immediate child
ancestors, i.e. loop B for W31 and loop G for R3, to drive the
push and pop signals at the source and the destination.
To break the cyclic dependency between a VCU and a
VMU, each hyperblock needs to be partitioned into two VCUs
if the block contains a write access followed by a read access
to the same VMU. In such a scenario, the token is sent and
consumed for every cycle the VCUs are enabled.
2) Data-dependent control flow
To minimize host intervention overhead, SARA supports
flexible data-dependent control constructs on RDAs. It is
worth noting that our goal is not to accelerate general-purpose
applications. Control-heavy workloads with extensive use of
global data structures would perform horribly with CMMC
due to excessive synchronization. RDA’s primary applications
are still data-analytical workloads with relatively static control
flow and abundant nested loop-level parallelism.
a) Dynamic loop bounds
The min, stride, and max of a for loop can be datadependent. SARA maps the computation that generates the
bounds into a separate VCU and streams the bound values as
data dependencies to VCUs enclosed by the loop—a bound
value is consumed every time the loop is completed.
b) Branch
SARA enables spatial pipelining of a control flow graph
with outer branches that enclose loops and hyperblocks, which
none of the prior work support [44], [48]. SARA SARA also
supports branches within a hyperblock using predication [4].
For an outer branch shown in Fig. 4, SARA maps computation under different clauses to different VCUs, which
only execute when enabled by the branch conditions. A
separate VCU evaluates the conditions and passes them as data
                                                         
mem = offchip_arr() A: for i in range(A): B: mem(...) = .. # W0
C: if cond: D: mem(...) = .. # W1
else: E: .. = mem(...) # R0
F: .. = mem(...) # R1
(a)


 
B
C
B
C F
A
A
F
C
C
(b)
mem = onchip_arr() A: for i in range(A): B: mem(...) = ... # W1
C: for j in range(B): D: for k in range(D): .. = mem(...) # R1
E: for k in range(E):
mem(...) = .. # W2
F: .. = mem(...) # R2
(c)
W1
R1
W2
R2
(d)
W1
R1
W2
R2
(e)
mem = offchip_arr() A: for i in range(A): B: mem(...) = .. # W1
C: for j in range(B): .. = mem(...) # R1
.. = mem(...) # R2
D: mem(...) = .. # W2
(f)
W1
R1
R2
W2
(g)
W1
R1
R2
W2
(h)
Fig. 5: (b,d,g) dependency graphs for (a,c,f), and (e,h) reduced dependency graphs for (d,g), respectively. Solid edges indicate
forward dependencies and dashed edges indicate backward loop-carried dependencies (LCDs). Colors of LCD edges in (d,e,g,h)
indicate the associated loops, blue for loop A and red for loop B.
dependencies to VCUs mapping the branch clauses. The input
program (Fig. 4a) writes and reads the memory mem on even
and odd cycles of the outer loop A, respectively. SARA maps
the three hyperblocks in the program to three VCUs, VCUB,
VCUD, and VCUF (Fig. 4b), and splits request and response
VCUs for W and R. B generates the branch conditions and
sends them to VCUs under the if and the else clauses.
Fig. 4c shows the timing of the execution. As VCUB has no
dependencies, VCUB executes the conditions for all iterations
of loop A and broadcasts the conditions to other VCUs. SARA
sets up tokens to order W and R. If branch C is enabled for
the respective clause, VCUD and VCUF send and consume the
tokens when loop D and F are done, respectively. Otherwise,
tokens are immediately released to the downstream consumer.
In this example, VCUD and VCUD′ skip loop D for i=1,3,
and VCUF and VCUF ′ skip loop F for i=0,2. By skipping the
disabled branches, both if and else VCUs only execute half of
A’s iterations. Fig. 4c shows an overlapping execution between
the if and the else clauses. If loop A runs for N iterations
and the latencies for loop D and F are L, the total runtime
is approximately N
2 L, which is half of NL—the latency of
traditional hierarchical pipelining.
c) Do-while loops
The do-while construct is useful to express iterative convergence algorithms or handle an external data stream with a
last-bit signal that terminates the execution of the accelerator.
A do-while loop works similarly to a for loop with dynamic
bounds, except the do-while loop has a much longer initiation
interval (II) [42]. The while condition is a data dependency to
all VCUs enclosed by the do-while loop, and the condition
may also be a function of the VCUs’ output. The earliest
starting time for the second iteration of the loop is when the
while condition is resolved.
3) Control-reduction analysis
Enforcing the order between every pair of accessors is sometimes unnecessary, as synchronizing a subset of the dependencies can preserve the same total ordering. To minimize the
allocated tokens, SARA builds a dependency graph between
accessors per data structure; nodes represent accessors and
edges represent dependencies. Next, SARA removes edges that
do not relax the ordering across accesses. Lastly, SARA inserts
tokens to enforce dependency for every edge in the reduced
dependency graph, using the mechanism explained in §III-A1.
a) Dependency graph construction
For each accessor, SARA checks preceding accesses in the
program order for forward dependencies, and backward loopcarried dependencies (LCDs) if the two accesses are enclosed
by a loop. Because the producer and consumer accessors
are pipelined, we need to enforce write-after-read and writeafter-write dependency to protect the consumer’s data from
being overridden by the producer. In Fig. 2a, for example,
W4,i+1 depends on R4,i because W4,i+1 cannot override R4,i’s
data before it is consumed. For VMU, SARA also enforces
read-after-read since Plasticine’s PMU can only serve one
read request stream at a time. The backward edges in the
dependency graph get converted into credits.
Fig. 5b shows an example dependency graph. W1 and R0
have no forward dependency because their LCA controller is
branch C, i.e. the two accesses cannot execute simultaneously
for the same iteration of loop A. There are, however, LCDs
between R0 and W1, preventing reordering of two streams
across iterations of A. R0 and R1 are independent because the
DRAM interface permits concurrent read streams. R1 and W0
have no LCD as they are not enclosed by a loop.
b) Dependency graph reduction
After graph construction, SARA reduces the dependency
edges in two passes, processing forward and backward dependencies separately.
For forward dependencies, SARA performs a transitive
reduction (TR) [3] on the forward-dependency graph. TR
retains the minimum number of edges in a graph that preserves
the connectivity of the original graph, and thus enforces the
same memory ordering. For example, edge W1-W2 and R1-R2
in Fig. 5d, and W1-W2 in Fig. 5g are removed during this
pass. The forward edges can be reduced with TR because
forward dependencies are transitive, i.e. A depending on B
and B depending on C enforces A depending on C.
Next, SARA processes the backward dependency graph. A
backward edge A-B with X initial tokens can be removed, if
there exists an alternative path from A to B, where the new
path contains a single backward edge representing an LCD
of the same loop with the same amount of initial tokens.
This is because the initial token for A-B enables B X times
before waiting for A, and the alternative path would enforce
the same behavior. For example, edge R2-R1 in Fig. 5d is
pruned because of path R2-W1-R1, and W2-W1 is subsumed by
W2-R2-W1. R2-W1 in Fig. 5d and Fig. 5g cannot be removed
    


 

 
Input Solution 3
Partition 1 2
# op 5 3
# input 0 4
# output 4 0
Partition 1 2
# op 6 2
# input 0 3
# output 3 0


 

 
1
2


 

 
1
2


 

 
1
2
Solution 2
Partition 1 2
# op 6 2
# input 2 1
# output 1 2
Solution 1
Operation
Operation
with live-outs
back edge in a cycle
Fig. 6: Compute partitioning example.






 






Partition 1 2
# op 5 2
# input 1 3
# output 3 1
Partition 1 2
# op 4 3
# input 3 1
# output 1 3


 


Input
Solution 1
1
2
Solution 2
1
2
Fig. 7: Compute partitioning example with a cycle.
Problem Partition the dataflow graph into subgraphs such that all
subgraphs satisfy the constraints of a hardware unit.
Objective Minimize # partitions and connectivity across partitions.
Constraints
Each partition must not exceed the limit on the number of
• live in/out variables (I/O ports)
• operations (pipeline stages),
• live variables across operations (pipeline registers).
No cycles can form across partitions other than the LCD
cycles in the original program.
TABLE I: Formulation of the compute partitioning problem.
because there would be no path from R2 to W1 with a single
backward edge.
B. Abstract Resource Mapping
The output of the imperative to dataflow lowering (§III-A)
is a VUDFG that spatially pipelines the CFG in a streaming
dataflow fashion. The abstract resource mapping phase maps
each VU into a physical unit (PU) based on resource constraint. This section introduces two types of resource partitioning: partitioning of a large dataflow graph within a hyperblock
across distributed CUs, and partitioning of a logical tensor
across distributed MUs due to capacity or bandwidth limits.
Once all VUs in a dataflow graph can fit a PU, SARA
attempts a global merging step that maps multiple VUs into the
same PU to reduce resource fragmentation whenever possible.
These merged VUs still operate independently when sharing
the resources within a single PU.
1) Compute partitioning
The compute-partitioning phase breaks up VUs with large
hyperblocks that do not fit in any PU. We formulate this as a
graph partitioning problem shown in Table I. For a Plasticine
PU, the number of stages in a PU restricts the number of
operations in a hyperblock, the number of I/O ports limits the
number of live-in/out variables, and the number of pipeline
registers constrains the number of live variables between
adjacent operations. Since the Plasticine network is specialized
to handle efficient broadcasts, the in/out-degree of a partition
counts the number of broadcast edges with unique sources
across partitions. Furthermore, the partitioned subgraphs cannot form cycles; VUs wait for all input dependencies. As a
result, cycles across VUs cause deadlock. However, cycles
from LCD (such as accumulation) in the original DFG do
not count; SARA initializes LCD edges with dummy data to
break the cyclic dependency. Fig. 6 shows examples of valid
and invalid partitioning. Solution 2 is better than Solution 1
because of less connectivity across partitions. Solution 3 is
illegal due to the cycle between Partition 1 and 2. Fig. 7 shows
an example with an LCD in the input graph. Solution 2 is
invalid because unlike Solution 1, removing the LCD edge
does not eliminate the cycle between partitions.
a) Retiming
Imbalanced data paths across partitions can cause pipeline
stalls if long-lived paths are not sufficiently buffered [29].
To ensure full-throughput pipelining, SARA inserts retiming
buffers that introduce new partitions, contributing to the cost
in Table I’s objective.
b) Global Merging
We formulate the global merging in Fig. 3 as a very similar
problem as the partitioning problem, except working on the
VUDFG dataflow graph instead of the dataflow graph within
each VU. The merging process essentially assigns VUs into
larger VUs that can still fit in a PU, which is a generalization
of the partitioning problem with more complex constraints.
We extend our algorithms for compute partitioning to handle
merging across VUs.
Next, we present two algorithms to solve the graph partitioning problem described in Table I: a traversal-based algorithm,
and a convex-optimization-based algorithm.
c) Traversal-based solution
To address the cycle constraint, the algorithm performs a
topological sort of the dataflow graph. Starting from one end
of the sorted list, the algorithm iteratively adds nodes into
a partition until it reaches capacity, and then repeats with a
new partition. The topological sort ignores the back edges of
the LCD cycles during traversal and guarantees no new cycle
is introduced. The resultant partitioning is a function of the
traversal order. We evaluate both the depth-first search (DFS)
and breadth-first search (BFS) algorithms with forward and
backward dataflow orders. For DFS, we re-sort the remaining
list each time when starting with a new partition.
d) Solver-based solution
We formulate the graph partitioning as a node-to-partition
assignment problem solved using Mixed Integer Programming
(MIP). Table III shows the detailed formulation. At a high
level, we use a boolean matrix B to track the assignment,
where Bi,j = 1 indicates node i is assigned to partition j.
The values of B are selected by the solver and each node is
restricted to a single partition assignment. Costs and objectives
from Table I are formulated as a function of B, the DFG
structure, and the hardware specification. Constraints such as
the number and the type of operations supported by each type
of PU are relatively simple to formulate with the solver’s builtin functions. Input/Output arity constraints are substantially
more complex due to the broadcast capability of the hardware,
              
Name Type Description Definition / Default
N Constant, Z≥0 Number of nodes in the DFG Input from the compiler
P Constant, Z≥0 Number of partitions to consider min(N, hardware constraint),
or from heuristic
E Constant, {i → j},
i, j ∈ [0, N) Directed edges of the DFG Input from the compiler
cO Constant, Z≥0 Maximum output arity of a partition HW Spec
cI Constant, Z≥0 Maximum input arity of a partition HW Spec
bd Constant, Z≥0 Maximum input buffer depth HW Spec
K Constant, R+ Very large constant, used for constraint activation P ⋅ N
F Constant, BN×P Feasibility matrix, where Fi,p indicates whether node i
can be assigned to partition p. HW Spec
αd Hyperparameter, R+ Retime merging probability multiplier 1
min{cO,cI }
B Variable, BN×P Boolean matrix, where Bi,p = 1 indicates node i
is assigned to partition p
Solver-initialized, or warm started
by the traversal-based algorithm
dn Variable, ZN
≥0 Vector of node delays Solver-initialized
dp Variable, ZP
≥0 Vector of partition delays Solver-initialized
projB(v) Z≥0 → B
Returns a constrained variable E that converts nonnegative integer vector v into a boolean vector. Serves as an
elementwise indicator in a convex formulation.
projB(v) ≔ {E,E = 1 if v ≥ 1,
otherwise unconstrained}
and(a, b) B × B → B Logical AND in a convex formulation and(a, b) ≔ max(a + b − 1, 0)
any(v) Bn → B Returns if any element in vector v is greater than 1 any(v) ≔ projB(Σkvk)
dest(i) [0, N) → {[0, N)} Returns the destination set of the source node i dest(i) ≔ {j∣{i → j} ∈ E}
destP(i) [0, N) → BP Returns a boolean vector x, where xp = 1 if node i has a
destination in partition p, and i is not in p
destP(i) ≔
max{projB(Σj∈dest(i)Bj,∶) − Bi,∶, 0⃗}
apart(i, j) [0, N) × [0, N) → B Returns if node i and j are not in the same partition
in a convex formulation apart(i, j) ≔ maxp{Bi,p − Bj,p, 0}
C [[0, N) → R+, R+,
Rn
+ → R+]
Cost functions, resource limits, and aggregation
functions of a list of resource constraints HW Spec
TABLE II: Names and definitions used in the solver-based algorithms.
Type Description Expression
Cost
Function
(Objective)
# Allocated Partition Σi∈[0,N)projB(ΣpBi,p)
# Retiming Partition αdΣi→j∈EprojB(max{dn(j) − dn(i) − bd, 0})
Partition
Constraint
Partition Assignment1 ∀i ∈ [0, N) ∶ ΣpBi,p = 1
Input Arity Constraint ∀p ∈ [0, P) ∶ Σi∈[0,N) destP(i)p ≤ cI
Output Arity Constraint ∀p ∈ [0, P) ∶ Σi∈[0,N) and(Bi,p, any(destP(i))) ≤ cO
Acyclic Constraint2 ∀i → j ∈ E ∶ dn(i) + apart(i, j) ≤ dn(j)
Delay Consistency3 ∀i ∈ [0, N) ∶ dn(i) ≥ maxp(dp(p) + Bi,p ⋅ K − K)    Convex formulation for dp(p), where Bi,p = 1
, dn(i) ≤ minp(dp(p) + K − Bi,p ⋅ K)    Convex formulation for dp(p), where Bi,p = 1
Constant Validity ∀i ∈ [0, N) ∶ dn(i) ≤ K, ∀i ∈ [0, P) ∶ dp(i) ≤ K
Merge
Constraint
Feasibility Constraint ∀i ∈ [0, N), p ∈ [0, P) ∶ Bi,p ≤ Fi,p
Reducible Constraint4 ∀p ∈ [0, P), ∀ (c(⋅), cv, r(⋅))   Cost function, constraint value, reduction function
∈ C: ri∈[0,N)(c(i) ⋅ Bi,p)  
Example r: sum, max, union, etc.
≤ cv
TABLE III: Solver formulation for compute partitioning in Disciplined Convex Programming ruleset [17], [35].
1. Enforce each node can only be assigned to a single partition. 2. Enforce no cycle across partitions. 3. Ensure dn(i) to match with dp(p) where p is the
partition of node i. 4. Enforce the aggregated resource costs of the partition p do not exceed various resource limits.
    
VCU VMU Datapath
m = array() A: for i in range(A): B: for j in range(B):
m(i,j) = ... # W C: for i in range(C,par=2): D: for j in range(D): ... = m(i,j) # R
(a)
mA mB
MA MB
D’0 D'1
D0 D1
BA0 BO0
BO1
BOA BOB
BA1
DA DB
(b)
D’0 MA0 MA mA D0
MA1
D00
D01
D’1 MB0 MB mB D1
MB1
D10
D11
D’2 MC0 MC mC D2
MC1
D20
D21
D’3 MD0 MD mD D3
MD1
D30
D31
(c)
Fig. 8: Memory partitioning for loop C unrolling by (b) 2x
and (c) 4x. BA is not drawn in (c).
and are separately handled. To handle the acyclic constraint,
we introduce the node and partition delay vectors, dn and
dp, which represent schedules for each node and partition,
respectively. In addition to enforcing the acyclic constraint,
these vectors are also used for calculation where retiming is
required and project the amount of introduced retiming VUs.
Finally, we use the traversal-based solution to warm start the
matrix B and the delay vectors to reduce the solver runtime.
2) Memory partitioning
The memory partitioner maps a logical tensor across distributed MUs either to address capacity limit or to scale onchip memory bandwidth when the computation is parallelized.
The latter is critical to scale performance with parallelization
on an RDA. Fig. 8b shows how SARA handles the read access
R when the user parallelizes loop C by 2x (SARA vectorizes
across SIMD lanes when innermost loops are parallelized). As
discussed in §III-A, SARA allocates a request VCUD′ to generate access R’s read requests and sends the response stream
to VCUD. When loop C is parallelized, SARA duplicates
VCUD and VCUD′ per unrolled lane. To increase the address
bandwidth of VMUm, SARA partitions the memory into two
VMUs. Each request VCU generates a bank address (BA)
stream that indicates which partition the request corresponds
to, and a bank offset (BO) stream that indexes into the
partition. On the request side, SARA allocates a merging VCU
per memory partition to filter requests from all lanes to that
partition. On the receiver side, SARA forwards BA stream to
the receiver VCU, which is used to filter responses from all
partitions to that lane. When highly parallelized, SARA creates
hierarchical merging VCUs to scale network bandwidth, as
shown in Fig. 8c.
This strategy sustains a linear performance scaling with
parallelization at the cost of a worst-case quadratic resource
increase. In the common cases, the crossbar between the VCUs
and VMUs can be optimized away if the BA expression that
selects the partition can be statically resolved.
C. Performance and Resource Optimizations
In this section, we discuss compiler optimizations that
improve the runtime or reduce resource usage in RDAs.
a) Memory strength reduction (msr)
In addition to traditional strength reduction on arithmetic
operations, SARA also replaces expensive on-chip memories with cheaper memories whenever possible. For example,
SARA replaces a scratchpad with PU’s input FIFO if all
accessors of the scratchpad have constant addresses. This
commonly happens when the address of the memory can be
statically computed when a loop is fully unrolled.
b) Route-through elimination (rtelm)
For patterns where the content of a non-indexable memory
(M1) is read and written to another memory (M2), SARA
eliminates the intermediate access if the reader of M1 and the
writer of M2 operate in lock-step.
c) Retiming with scratchpads (retime-m)
By default, SARA uses PU’s input buffers for retiming. This
option enables SARA to use scratchpads as deeper retiming
buffers.
d) Crossbar datapath elimination (xbar-elm)
Although crossbars between VCUs and VMUs (§III-B2)
are very expensive in the general case, the BA often can be
statically resolved when using certain combinations of loop
unrolling factors. In these cases, SARA reduces the crossbar
between VCUs and VMUs into partial crossbars or point-topoint connections.
e) Read address duplication (dupra)
On RDAs, it is sometimes cheaper to perform redundant
computation rather than broadcast results to multiple consumers with very different delays. For example, the BA
forwarding path to VCUD# in Fig. 8b must be sufficiently
retimed to fully pipeline the entire DFG. The retiming cost is
further increased in Fig. 8c. These optimizations duplicate the
BA calculation in VCUD# rather than forwarding them from
VCUD′
#.
IV. EVALUATION
To show the scalability of SARA’s approach, we first
study how performance and allocated resources increase with
parallelization of the program (§IV-A). Next, we quantify the
benefits of our optimizations (§IV-B), and compare against the
vanilla Plasticine compiler [41](§IV-C). Finally, we demonstrate the absolute performance of our target RDA by comparing to a Tesla V100 GPU (§IV-D).
a) Methodology
We configure Plasticine in a 20 × 20 layout, with a total
of 420 PUs. For runtime, we use a cycle-accurate simulator
integrated with Ramulator [25] to model 1 TB/s of HBM2
memory technology, comparable to our baseline GPU. For
solver-based algorithms, we use a commercial optimization
solver—Gurobi [18], with 10 threads.
An application that is too big to fit on an RDA must be segmented into smaller CFGs compiled by SARA independently.
A runtime would execute these CFGs in time by reconfiguring
the RDA. Automatically segmenting a large CFG is future
work. Table IV shows a set of kernels with very different
characteristics to mimic CFGs that can spatially fit on an RDA
in real applications. mlp, lstm, snet, kmeans, logreg, sgd, and
gda are compute-bound kernels that are also on-chip memory
intensive. bs and rp are kernels with massive basic blocks. pr
is a sparse kernel and sort is a memory-bound kernel with
irregular access patterns.

Fig. 9: (a) performance and resource metrics with increasing parallelization factors. (b) performance-resource tradeoff space.
Apps Description Data size/set
mlp Multi-layer Perceptron Inference batch-1 64×32×16×8
pr PageRank delaunay_n20 [43]
bs Black-Scholes 102400 records
rf Random forest 10240 samples, 8 trees, 65 features
max_split_per_node:64, tree_depth:40
lstm LSTM RNN network [22] H:512, time step:8
kmeans∗ K-means clustering 50 iters, 1,536 points, 96 dims, K=20
gda∗ Gaussian gradient descent 3,840,000 points, 96 dims
logreg∗ Logistic regression 5 iters, 1,536 points, 384 dims
sgd∗ Stochastic gradient descent 30 iters, 38,400 points, 768 dims
snet SqueezeNet [23], a CNN network batch-1, v1.0
sort Merge sort 4194304 elements
TABLE IV: Benchmarks in all evaluations. *same size as [41]
We use single-batch mlp in our scalability study to show
that SARA can achieve good scalability without trivial datalevel parallelism. Due to the slow speed of our cycle-accurate
simulator, we could not simulate very large ML models and
scale Plasticine to the same size as the V100 GPU, which is
8x larger than our configuration accounting for the technology
difference [46]. For comparison with the vanilla Plasticine
compiler, we used the same Plasticine configuration as the
original paper [41] tested on the same benchmarks.
A. Scalability of SARA
Fig. 9a shows the trend of performance and resource usage
as we parallelize loops of a kernel. Starting with a fullypipelined program, we incrementally parallelize the pipeline
stage with the longest latency to balance the pipeline stages.
We parallelize a kernel by unrolling multiple levels of nested
loops, and the largest product of the nested parallelization
factors (par factors) is shown on the x-axis. We present the best
performant compiler configuration at each par factor. At a high
level, Fig. 9a shows a perfect performance scaling (•), until
running out of on-chip resources (×) for mlp, pr, and lstm,
or saturating the HBM bandwidth (▴) for bs and rf. While pr
only uses half of the PU, it exhausts all the on-chip memory
PUs, which are half of the total PUs.
The case study in Fig. 10b shows that while performance
linearly scales with increasing par factor for a given configura-
(a) % resource and runtime improvement. (b) MLP case study.
Fig. 10: Optimization effectiveness.
tion, the resource may not monotonically increase, as powerof-two factors enable more optimizations. This explains the
dip in Fig. 9a mlp; the best configuration for mlp did not
fit the resource at par factor at 240, where we presented a
less performant configuration. The best configuration does fit
at 256, hence, restoring the linear scaling. The dip in rf’s
resource (×) is due to the same reason. rf’s performance (•)
saturates at par factor 128 due to DRAM BW (▴).
The linear performance scaling suggests that SARA can
effectively utilize over 400 distributed PUs on Plasticine, and
will extract more performance for on-chip resource-bound
applications on larger Plasticine configurations.
Fig. 9b shows the performance-resource tradeoff space with
different parallelization factors and optimizations. The pink
curve outlines the Pareto frontier. This design space indicates
a large variation in performance and resource usage due to
compiler optimizations; these optimizations push the tradeoff
curves leftward and upward, expanding the Pareto frontiers.
The next section quantifies the effectiveness of individual
optimizations.
B. Effectiveness and Impact of Compiler Optimizations
Fig. 10a shows the performance improvement and resource
reduction enabled by different optimizations (§III-C). merge
and rtelm give a consistent resource improvement for most
applications. dupra and msr reduce the overhead caused by
memory partitioning when applications are heavily parallelized, benefiting compute-bound applications like mlp and

(a) Resource Comparison
Apps bs mlp rf
bfs-bwd 3s <1s 1m37s
bfs-fwd 3s <1s 1m7s
dfs-bwd 2s <1s 29s
dfs-fwd 2s <1s 27s
gurobi 2h4m 4s timeout
(b) Compile time for spltting
Apps bs mlp rf
bfs-bwd 1s 5s 11s
bfs-fwd 2s 5s 10s
dfs-bwd 5s 6s 2m7s
dfs-fwd 3s 11s 1m0s
gurobi 1m4s 31m16s 14h27m
(c) Compile time for merging
Fig. 11: Partitioning and merging algorithm comparisons.
lstm. retime can have a substantial impact on the performance
of the application at the cost of resource increase. Using
scratchpad as a retiming buffer with retime-m can significantly
reduce resource usage.
a) Traversal vs. solver-based algorithms
Fig. 11 shows the comparison between the traversal-based
and solver-based solutions for compute partitioning and global
merging. To speed up convergence, we configure a 15%
optimality gap with Gurobi to stop the solver at a reasonable
solution.
Fig. 11a shows the normalized number of PUs after partitioning and merging. We can see that Gurobi provides almost
the best solution for all applications. The traversal-based
algorithms can sometimes match the solver but can also be
up to 1.7× worse in resource utilization than the best possible
solution. Fig. 11b and Fig. 11c show the compile times using
algorithms. The single-threaded traversal-based algorithm runs
in minutes, significantly faster than the parallelized solver
that can take hours to days. In summary, the solver solution
provides a guaranteed close-to-optimal solution at the expense
of compile time, while the traversal-based solution produces
a decent solution, quickly. The former treats retiming and
partitioning as a joint optimization, leading to a better overall
solution. In practice, the traversal-based solution should be
mostly sufficient and we can only invoke the expensive solver
solution when the alternative yields a low resource utilization.
C. Comparison with the Vanilla Plasticine Compiler
We compare to the vanilla Plasticine compiler using a
set of benchmarks from [41]. SARA improves upon PC in
four aspects. First, SARA formalizes the token-based control flow with CMMC to enable an arbitrary number of
accesses to a VMU, whereas PC only supports a single write
and read access. Additionally, PC employs the hierarchical
synchronization scheme (Fig. 2d) that introduces significant
pipeline bubbles in deeply-nested control hierarchies, whereas
SARA eliminates this overhead using a much more scalable
P2P paradigm (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, SARA supports datadependent control flow, such as branches, that PC does not
support. The last improvement is the addition of memory
partitioner (§III-B2) that partitions a logical memory across
Benchmark SARA PC Speedup PCU PMU BW Par PCU PMU Par
kmeans 100% 80% 12% 128 11% 17% 16 14.4x
gda 77% 98% 15% 192 89% 88% 96 14.9x
logreg 100% 59% 100% 128 52% 69% 128 1.1x
sgd 77% 39% 88% 128 6% 9% 16 2.5x
Geo-mean 4.9x
TABLE V: Comparison with the Plasticine Compiler (PC)
App Unit Latency (ms) Throughput (Unit/s)
SARA GPU Speedup SARA GPU Speedup
snet kFrames 49.1 70.1 1.4x 0.1 (1.0) 0.4 0.3x (2.5x)
lstm kSamples 3.6 6.8 1.9x 8.8 (73.0) 4.7 1.9x (15.5x)
bs GOptions 0.09 0.1 1.1x 88.9 80.0 1.1x
rf MSamples 0.1 0.32 3.3x 1.0 0.3 3.3x
sort GElements 0.6 2.1 3.4x 6.7 2.0 3.4x
pr MEdges 128.3 829.4 6.5x 49.0 7.5 6.5x
Geo-mean 2.4x 1.9x (3.8x)
TABLE VI: Performance comparison of SARA against a Tesla
V100 GPU with area-normalized speedup in parentheses.
distributed memories (to scale capacity or bandwidth). Lack
of a memory partitioner in PC limits the tiling size PC can
support and prevents loops from being independently unrolled,
limiting the application design space that PC can explore.
Table V shows a comparison with benchmarks [41] using
the same Plasticine configuration with a DDR3 DRAM. We
focus on the compute-bound benchmarks as both PC and
SARA can easily saturate DDR3 bandwidth (49 GB/s), resulting in a comparable performance for memory-bound and
sparse benchmarks. We expect an up to 10× speedup when
comparing on the HBM DRAM at 1 TB/s, due to our retiming
optimization that eliminates pipeline bubbles and merging
optimization that enables larger par factors. kmeans and gda
show a 14× speedup due to (a) larger par factors enabled by
SARA and (b) 1.8× and 7.5× speedup from control overhead
reduction with CMMC and other optimizations. logreg and sgd
are less compute-bound; SARA saturates off-chip bandwidth
before exhausting resources, resulting in a lower speedup.
Overall, SARA significantly outperforms PC when mapping
heavily compute-bound applications or targeting a fast offchip memory, and we expect these benefits to grow with a
larger chip size.
D. Comparison with a Tesla V100 GPU
Lastly, Table VI demonstrates the absolute performance
SARA can achieve by comparing to an Nvidia Tesla V100
GPU. For GPU applications, we use TensorFlow [2] powered
by cuDNN [10] for snet and lstm, a GPU graph library—
GunRock [51]—for pr, CUDA libraries for bs and sort, and a
hand-optimized CUDA implementation for rf.
SARA’s lower throughput than GPU for snet is because our
target Plasticine chip is 8.3× smaller than the baseline GPU.
We show an area-normalized throughput for compute-bound
applications, i.e. snet and lstm, in parentheses, where SARA
is consistently faster than V100 when presented with the same
amount of resources [46].

To utilize Plasticine’s compute power for bs and rf, we fully
streamline their program graphs in addition to exploiting datalevel parallelism. Besides an efficient control mechanism that
ensures minimum stalls in these deep pipelines, SARA further
employs resource-reduction optimizations, enabling large par
factors in our implementation that maxes out the HBM bandwidth. On the contrary, GPUs cannot exploit dataflow execution for rf to reduce memory accesses. The tree structures in
rf introduce sparse memory accesses in GPU, leading to poor
memory performance.
Similar to rf, ms also benefits from the dataflow execution model of Plasticine [50]. SARA’s decentralized control
scheme ensures full pipeline rates when reaching 100% utilization, resulting in a 3.4× speedup over the GPU.
Due to the limitation of GPU’s SIMT abstraction, GunRock
only parallelizes across the edge frontier of pr, providing
insufficient parallelism to saturate GPU’s compute capabilities
in sparse graphs like the delaunay_n20 dataset [43]. We
exploit a flexible combination of edge- and node-level parallelism with SARA, leading to much more efficient usage of
memory bandwidth.
V. RELATED WORK
a) High-level Synthesis
Over the past few decades, there was rising interest in
high-level synthesis (HLS) tools as alternatives to hardware
description languages (HDLs) to build customized accelerators
in different disciplines, especially in communication and signal
processing domains [32]. HLS tools enable domain experts
to program their algorithms in a software abstraction, often
in C or C-variants, and output register transfer level (RTL)
descriptions that can target an FPGA or generate an ASIC.
There is a rich body of prior work on HLS techniques and
many successful commercial HLS tools provided by FPGA
vendors [1], [54].
At a high level, HLS bears some similarities to RDA
compilation. Loop unrolling, pipelining, and memory partitioning are common techniques to target a reconfigurable
architecture from a high-level imperative abstraction [26], [32],
[52]. Similar to an RDA compiler, an HLS compiler also takes
a specification of the hardware constraints and generates a
wide design space with different design trade-offs, such as
resource, performance, or energy efficiency.
Despite these similarities, there are fundamental differences
between an HLS tool that generates RTL designs and an RDA
compiler that programs an RDA.
While RDAs also have reconfigurable datapath, they are
much more restrictive than FPGAs and cannot handle arbitrary RTL designs. HLS compilers often pre-build a set of
parameterized RTL templates or soft processor cores that can
be sized and optimized for a particular application [8], [40],
[53]. Taking advantage of domain knowledge, domain-specific
HLS compilers can generate highly customized datapaths for
different application domains [13], [32]. RDAs, on the other
hand, are reconfigured at a much coarser-grained level and
cannot specialize execution engines for different applications.
Hence, techniques like overlaying architectures are less applicable for RDA compilers.
HLS compilers often generate a hierarchical design to
manage the design complexity using a divide-and-conquer
approach [47]. Gluing these hierarchical modules often requires customized control logic at the RTL level that is either
too inefficient or not supported on RDAs. Furthermore, HLS
generated designs are not designed to be distributed. The
control and datapaths cannot tolerate arbitrary network latency
introduced by the RDA’s global network.
b) CGRA Mapping
Prior works have proposed modulo scheduling techniques to
map the dataflow graph within a hyperblock onto the accelerator array [34], [56]. Other works used integer linear programming, and hybrid optimization and heuristic techniques for
CGRA PaR [37], [39]. These works correspond to phase two
of Fig. 3, whereas we focus on the first phase—synthesizing
a hierarchical dataflow graph that spatially pipelines the entire
CFG. While we also optionally use convex optimization in
SARA, we use it on graph partitioning rather than PaR.
Prior works, such as TRIPS [44] and WaveScalar [48], are
hierarchical and distributed CGRAs with a hardware-managed
shared memory system. Nonetheless, they are much smaller
in scale, with tens of distributed units compared to hundreds
of units in RDAs. One major distinction in the compilation
strategy is how to map a program across these distributed units.
The TRIPS compiler uses inlining, loop unrolling, and
control to data dependency conversion to maximize the size of
a hyperblock [44]. The WaveScalar compiler breaks the CFG
into larger blocks than a hyperblock with a single control entry,
and uses speculation to further extend the ILP window [48].
In contrast, the ILP window for SARA is not bounded by any
scope in a CFG, but rather by the resource limits of an RDA.
In these shared memory CGRAs, the compiler still exploits
thread-level parallelism across distributed units. This scaling
strategy would not scale due to the communication overhead
in a shared memory system. On the other hand, SARA
exploits hierarchical pipelined execution and nested loop-level
parallelism across distributed units, where each hyperblock is
a node in the coarse-grained dataflow graph. The pipelined
execution is much more tolerant to network latency [55], and
can effectively scale the performance of a compute-intensive
kernel when presented with more on-chip resources.
Similar to Plasticine, the RAW microprocessor is a tiled
architecture with a similar interconnect and distributed onchip memories [49]. Their compiler Rawcc [27] also explicitly
manages the scratchpads [6] and has a scheduler for tile
placement [28]. Nonetheless, units in RAW are processors
rather than statically configured pipelines like those in Plasticine, which are much more efficient and less flexible. As
a result, our mapping strategies significantly differ. Rawcc
relies on complicated memory disambiguation analysis to split
independent instructions within a basic block into concurrent
blocks mapped across units. In contrast, SARA spatially
pipelines different hyperblocks across units and exploits nested
loop-level parallelism to fully utilize the RDA’s resources.

Additionally, Spatial expresses independent data structures as
disjoint memories so SARA can easily detect independent
memory accesses without complicated pointer analysis as in
Rawcc. Lastly, in contrast to the per-request synchronization in
RAW, SARA synchronizes memory accesses at a stream level,
where each stream corresponds to a set of accessors from a
single location in the program.
VI. CONCLUSION
RDAs are a promising class of reconfigurable accelerators
delivering performance and resource density comparable to
fixed-function accelerators, while capturing a large application
space. However, to sustain these benefits with growing RDA
sizes, the software stack must address the scalability challenges while providing a productive programmable interface
for application developers.
We present SARA, a compiler that exploits multiple levels
of dataflow and loop-level parallelism beyond a hyperblock
to utilize a large-scale RDA using CMMC. Furthermore, our
resource virtualization and composition scheme efficiently
handles the constraints introduced by a hierarchical RDA, and
maximizes resource utilization on an RDA with heterogeneous
resources. Lastly, we show that SARA achieves a geo-mean
speedup of 4.9× over the vanilla Plasticine compiler and 1.9×
over a Tesla V100 GPU with a much smaller chip area.