While there is growing concern around justice and equity, they mean different things in different sociopolitical and cultural contexts. Additionally, it can be difficult to make sense of how to incorporate the more
abstract concept of justice into our research practices. This paper discusses prefigurative design as a
framework for more just research practices to challenge inequity, particularly in community-based
collaborations. I draw from past fieldwork with activist organizations and radical organizing literature to
explore opportunities for how to engage with justice as academics, identifying three main opportunities for
intervention through research: social relationships, resource distribution, and counter-institutions. I offer these
contributions in the spirit of generative critique, in hopes that other researchers with similar concerns will
iterate on these practices to commit to more just and equitable scholarly impacts.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social computing →
Collaborative and social computing design and evaluation methods → Ethnographic studies
KEYWORDS
Research justice; transformative justice; civic engagement; anarchism; equity. 
1 INTRODUCTION
There is growing scholarship in the CSCW community addressing various concerns around justice
and equity. These concerns are so imbued into our professional responsibilities that they have
recently been more strongly incorporated into the Association for Computing Machinery Code of
Ethics [1]. Because of the breadth and richness of community-based computing research, we have
unique opportunities to incorporate justice and equity into our work and are able to do so from a
variety of perspectives. For example, existing research has examined concerns around justice as
they take place across different levels of scale, from interpersonal relationships and smaller scale
interactions [3, 65] to larger and more historical issues taken up by broader community efforts or
legal institutions [76, 82]. In addition to different levels of scale, justice and equity mean different
things in different sociopolitical and cultural contexts. When looking at equity concerns in
industry, for example, concerns may look at access to opportunity in professional development
[23, 60] or transphobic system design [19, 43, 57]. There are calls for us to be reflective about the
impact of our work, both as they actively exclude and oppress our more vulnerable communities,
but also—and perhaps more insidiously—how we might unwittingly perpetuate existing forms of
systemic violence by ignoring oppressive histories and sustained impacts in contemporary work
practices, culture, and norms [19, 51, 84, 53, 33, 78]. These concerns and conversations all make
extremely valuable contributions to our research and scholarly communities.
This paper humbly builds on these ongoing efforts by offering some structure for how we
might better engage in justice-based collaborative research. This work draws from years of
fieldwork with activist and advocacy communities and radical organizing literature, both of which
are interested in how to incorporate justice into our work, both as a more abstract value and as
material practice. This work asks the research question: how might academics engage with justice
through community-based research and intervention across multiple issues? I anchor this work in
justice and equity because they are concepts that are at the heart of many of the discourses and
frameworks across HCI, from historically disenfranchised research sites [35, 23, 83] to oppressive
biases in algorithms [19, 42] to communities and practices around sustainability [27, 56].
Moreover, they are at the core of many of our professional concerns, such as the historical
concern with service and equity in participatory research methods [17, 63, 73, 74] and just
representation in industry and knowledge production [32, 60]. Within CSCW, much of this work
takes place through community collaborations, like co-designing and producing digital artifacts
[14, 35] or more accountable organizational and civic processes [6, 30, 80].
I explore this question by focusing on three concepts: research justice, prefigurative politics,
and transformative justice. Each of these spaces offer more nuanced understandings of what
justice looks like in practice. Together, they form the foundation for prefigurative design, which is
a framework for more just approaches to community-based research and collaborations across
different issues and concerns. Prefigurative design is meant to frame conversations and negotiate
boundaries around what kind of work needs to be done and to set goals and expectations across
researchers and partners for the outcomes and impact of the collaborative work. The goal is to
create counter-structures to uplift and sustainably support the justice work of community partners
while minimizing harm. While I focus here on digital interventions, prefigurative design also
acknowledges the potential for technology to impose harm, so it is important to consider nondigital approaches, as well [10]. Ultimately, prefigurative design tries to articulate opportunities
for researchers to engage with and support justice work in three ways: through social
relationships, distribution of resources, and by building counter-structures.
Prefigurative design is also a way to acknowledge both the pluralities and the difficulties of
incorporating justice into scholarship, particularly through the lens of computing. There are a
variety of ways that already do address justice through our work, such as service, narrative, or
pedagogy [19, 45, 56]; prefigurative design explores how to do this work through research,
specifically by building on more interventionist methods like community-based research, design
research, and/or ethnography. Moreover, it is important to acknowledge the difficulty of engaging
with justice in the academy: it imposes additional levels of labor, from operational to
administrative to emotional [46]. There are challenges to understanding the impact of this work,
particularly when the stakes are often experienced by our community partners and do not
(typically) directly impact us as researchers. This paper does not assume to have adequate
solutions to these complex and longstanding concerns, though the hope is that prefigurative
design can offer some pragmatic and accessible starting points.
Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice 200:3
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
This work makes three contributions: the first is to make more concrete what the abstract
value of justice might look like through different kinds of practices; the second is prefigurative
design, a framework for more just community-based research, which I explore through a survey of
existing research projects; and finally, I conclude with opportunities and challenges that emerge
when we more closely interrogate our roles in enacting justice as academics. I acknowledge the
various approaches to justice in the computing community more broadly, and within the
discipline of human-computer interaction (HCI), as well as the various impacts and outcomes that
each initiative strives for. Thus, I offer these contributions in the spirit of generative critique, in
hopes that other researchers with similar concerns will iterate on these practices to commit to
more just and equitable scholarly impacts.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW
This work first aims to offer some clarity around how justice might be put into practice. What is
notable is the emphasis of justice as it is practiced outside of institutions (e.g. criminal justice) and
instead practiced in smaller scale or more local settings. This orientation largely draws from the
researchers’ roots in community-based research, particularly with activist and advocacy
communities. However, I also wish to emphasis more community-centric practices of justice given
that this is the scale at which much of the interventionist research is done in the discipline of HCI
[e.g. 4, 36]. I briefly discuss three concepts of community-based justice below: research justice,
prefigurative politics, and transformative justice. I identify how each of these engages with justice,
both as a set of values and how they are put into practice. These practices are then discussed as
opportunities for us to learn from and build on existing CSCW work concerned with justice,
community collaboration, and interventionist research.
2.1 Research Justice and CSCW
I align this work with research justice, acknowledging the long legacy of scholarship by
underrepresented academics, many of whom are BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and People of Color),
Queer*1
, and/or undocumented, and thus have not had the option to ignore concerns of justice
through their experiences both inside and outside the academy [8, 54]. Research justice is a theory
and method developed by DataCenter: Research for Justice, a research organization in Oakland,
California. It emphasizes interventionist strategies for policy reform and embraces
underrepresented forms of knowledge (e.g. experiential, cultural, spiritual) and focuses on
centering community partners as experts in research projects [54]. One of the ways that research
justice conceptualizes justice is through the creation and maintenance of equitable power
relationships across researcher and non-researcher. Another considers justice as access,
specifically academics having more access to influence policy through knowledge production than
those directly impacted by it through lived experience. One of the main goals of research justice is
to move away from hegemonic and oppressive power dynamics reproduced by educational
institutions—particularly within the context of neoliberalism—and to encourage critical
pedagogies and emancipatory ethics [8, 19, 33, 53].
Putting these values into practice, research justice focuses on more just collaborative
relationships and distribution of resources. The former acknowledges that the community-based
research relationships are fundamentally imbalanced, with researchers in a more dominant

1
I use “Queer” here as a shorthand for the full and evolving spectrum of gender identities. 
200:4 Mariam Asad
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
position, extracting knowledge and experiences from community collaborators. Instead, research
justice pushes to acknowledge community partners as experts in their own right, making space in
the relationship to include and build on non-academic forms of knowledge, including local
histories, non-Western epistemologies, and/or the preservation of underrepresented narratives [2,
63, 70]. Additionally, research is reframed to center the various needs of the community as
articulated by members of that community; research becomes a way to respond to and serve
community concerns, positioning academics as mutual participants in research practices alongside
their community collaborators. Here, research questions and outcomes are determined by
members of the research community, determining what social, legal, economic, cultural, and/or
political policies are needed [8, 53].
The concerns articulated by the Research Justice community are oriented towards the social
sciences, but also echo many of the concerns expressed through community-based research work
in the CSCW community and in the field of HCI, more broadly. Certainly, concerns around power
imbalances in research are not new and have been incorporated into community-based research
methods such as participatory design [28, 31] and action research [45], both of which center the
needs and contributions of participants. However, there is a growing body of work that also calls
for these more inclusive modes of knowledge production specifically to challenge structures of
injustice and oppression. For example, recent community-based research with activists reveals
how their grassroots information practices are a way to make visible systemic violations of human
and civil rights [4, 38]. Similarly, other CSCW projects have incorporated the lived experiences
from their research community as a way to highlight forms of violence against underrepresented
populations [25, 63]. In these instances, digital interventions were used to amplify
underrepresented experiences and challenge narratives that normalize forms of injustice and
inequity.
2.2 Prefigurative Politics and Design Research
Much of the literature concerned with justice addresses it through the lens of design: many forms
of justice share in common with design a focus on process. Here, I owe much to the work of Sasha
Costanza-Chock and the Design Justice Network, who both focus on the role of design in matters
of injustice. Specifically, design justice refers to the way that “design reproduces, is reproduced by,
and/or challenges the matrix of domination (white supremacy, heteropatriarchy, capitalism, and
settler colonialism)” [19]. Design justice echoes many of the same values around justice, as well,
specifically the goal for more equitable distribution of access to design, both as an artifact, but
more important as a process. Costanza-Chock argues for better recognition of community
contributions to design practices, as well as more participation in design decisions, drawing
particular attention to whose labor is valued in design, both historically and in contemporary
design settings [19, 51]. Like research justice, design justice is explicit about the exclusion and
erasure of women, BIPOC, LGBTQ folks, folks with different abilities and socioeconomic status
[19]. Design justice emphasizes more just inclusion and representation throughout design
processes to lead to more equitable and diverse design outcomes.
HCI literature offers a wealth of approaches through which justice and design are discussed:
Joanna Boehnert describes these as symbolic violence—originally theorized by sociologist Pierre
Bourdieu—wherein the exploitation of different groups of people is naturalized and obfuscated
through ideas and practices, e.g. patriarchy, racism [13]. Boehnert discusses design specifically as a
powerful tool to reinforce these oppressions through cultural practice, such as software design for
certain cameras that often mischaracterize Asian-American Pacific Islander (AAPI) users as 
Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice 200:5
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
“blinking” or photo algorithms that confuse people with darker skin pigmentation as apes [13]. In
addition to the broader category of symbolic violence, work has been done to identify specific
structures of oppression or forms of violence against particular identities. Postcolonial HCI, for
example, focuses specifically on the legacy of colonialism to analyze structurally unjust power
relationships in technology and development [52, 84]. Here, design labor and practice is
considered on racial, cultural, and economic grounds to challenge norms on what counts as
design, who gets to design, and where design is produced globally [2]. There are also strong
traditions of feminist HCI, which entails a variety of perspectives, including but not limited to
reproductive justice, sex work, and sexuality [56, 77].
These critical lenses are invaluable for researchers to be critical of assumptions and hierarchies
that are entrenched in various design practices, and their focus on particular identities and
frameworks are rich and generative, rightfully advocating for the specific and unique challenges
faced by different identities and communities. This work is indebted to these discussions, and
humbly hopes to build on them by addressing the broader underlying concerns of power and
autonomy. For this, I turn to more recent literature design research that focuses specifically on
anarchism as an approach that—like design justice—challenges all forms of violence, oppression,
and injustice.
Anarchism has a fraught history, which is beyond the scope of this paper (but is elegantly
discussed in [57]), but is underpinned by concerns of justice that extend beyond any single system
of oppression. One of the main goals of anarchism is autonomy, which emphasizes smaller scale
models of governance where all participants actively negotiate and decide on outcomes that best
represent their needs [20]. Cindy Milstein describes anarchism as an alternative to the violent and
oppressive structures of contemporary Western democracy, including white supremacy,
colonialism, capitalism, and—more broadly—”coercive, hierarchical social relations” [67]. While
anarchism is a rich site to conceptualize justice, recent work points to the value of anarchism as a
mode to practice justice, as well. Os Keyes, Josephine Hoy, and Margaret Drouhard outline a
potential framework for practicing anarchist HCI, which makes explicit its political agenda to
eliminate oppression in order to better hold ourselves accountable to the impact of our work [57].
Specifically, this work identifies core anarchist principles—such as anti-oppression, liberation, and
dignity—which would reshape our relationships to our world, our research communities and
collaborators, and with other researchers [57].
Anarchist HCI is among many other anarchist resources that identify prefigurative politics as
one of the main implementations of anarchist ideals. Here, I also focus on prefigurative politics,
which refers to work that expresses the ‘ends’ of its politics through its ‘means’ [20, 41]. As a
practice, it both envisions a more just and equitable future, and simultaneously puts into action
practices in the present to more actively move towards that future. Anarchist literature discusses
prefigurative politics as an approach that emphasizes process [41, 75]: by practicing more just
social relationships and organizational models now, we actually enact those envisioned, liberatory
ideals [16, 20, 67]. Ultimately, prefigurative politics aims to produce counter-power, or counterstructures [16, 20], where smaller scale interactions and relationships scale up to eventually
replace oppressive systems and institutions and realize the visions of liberation and solidarity.
It is this dual emphasis on envisioning and process that scholars are beginning to identify as
rich sources for design work. For example, prefigurative politics would be well positioned
alongside many speculative design projects, which also orient their design processes towards
radically different futures [74]. There are also parallels to participatory design as prefigurative
politics similarly focuses its outcomes on the underrepresented and often vulnerable stakeholders 
200:6 Mariam Asad
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
that are most affected by current practices and processes [28]. Carl DiSalvo identifies two
opportunities for incorporating prefigurative politics into design work: the first is to leverage
design skills “in direct material support of a prefigurative political endeavor” [26]. Through this
approach, prefigurative politics become a way for design to produce or support the production of
these alternate conditions or values. The second is to leverage prefigurative politics as a mode of
inquiry “experimenting with new forms and configurations of artifacts, systems, and
environments in order to discover, if only in abbreviated ways, the desired conditions of a
prefigurative politics” [26]. Additionally, some of my earlier work (with Le Dantec, Nielsen, and
Diedrick in [6]) can be seen as early experiments with prefigurative politics and design: through
their workshops, participants articulated what they envisioned to be ‘good’ community
engagement—like ownership, accountability, and transparency, not unlike other articulations of
justice mentioned above. Our research team then explicitly incorporated these value into their
design processes and practices [6]. This work hopes to build on these early experiments with
prefigurative politics and design by formalizing approaches to collaborative research practices that
are better oriented towards justice and equity.
2.3 Transformative Justice and Intervention
Like research justice, prefigurative politics seeks to directly address the needs of people directly
affected by injustice; counter-institutions are meant to create more sustainable structures for the
community to be autonomous and have more control over issues that impact them. Here, I focus
on transformative justice as one kind of counter-institution specifically for concerns around
justice. Transformative justice is a diverse framework, but broadly encompasses modes of
community intervention to repair harm. It is meant to be an alternative to the punitive and
carceral measures on which the contemporary Western criminal justice system is based, and
which disproportionately harm certain communities, [15, 22, 39]. Like research justice and
prefigurative politics, it is based on community-level practices, sometimes used interchangeably
with the concept of community accountability [40, 44, 58].
Transformative justice enacts—or prefigures—more equitable social relationships by imagining
and practicing care and healing as alternatives to incarceration and prosecution. Participants first
identify what harm has been done; who is involved and impacted; what their resulting needs are;
and what future actions are needed to heal the traumas resulting from an act of harm and address
the needs of those affected [40, 81]. Transformative justice focuses on harm to recontextualize
crime not as an individual transgression or inherent deficiency, but rather as the product of other
forms of oppression and existing systems of violence [40, 44]. As such, an offender is understood
to also be a victim, who may be perpetuating harm as a result of past trauma from harm done to
them [40]. Transformative justice focuses its practices more locally on the victim, the offender,
and other impacted individuals within a community, rather than larger legal or criminal justice
institutions, such as police, courts, and prisons, which can reproduce similar or other forms of
harm to an individual and related communities, e.g. the prison industrial complex [39, 47].
Ultimately, the goal is to transform the underlying conditions and structures that made harm
possible to begin with, from misogyny and transphobia to state-sanctioned violence like
colonialism and the prison industrial complex [11, 47].
There are a variety of models for practicing transformative justice, which vary depending on
the setting, the impacted community, and the kind of harm that needs healing. In instances of
juvenile offenses, for example, family group conferences are led by a facilitator who mediates
dialogue across the offender, the victim, and members of impacted communities, such as family 
Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice 200:7
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
members, fellow students, or school administrators [69]. In other instances, for example where a
victim may be too traumatized to encounter their offender, the encounter may instead take place
between the offender and other impacted members of the community. This encounter focuses on
the actions needed in the short term to repair the harm done to the broader group, while the
victim may confront the offender at a later time to address the needs resulting from the
interpersonal harm.
I wish to acknowledge that transformative justice is sometimes conflated with restorative
justice. Figure 1 compares the differences between retributive justice, the current model for the
Western criminal justice system, and restorative justice. While there is literature that delineates
key differences between restorative and transformative justice in practice, for the purposes of this
paper, I refer to them interchangeably, referring to them as two frameworks that share the same
broader goal of social transformation through healing, reconciliation, and reparation [86].
I am interested in transformative justice more specifically as it has been taken up by grassroots
organizations to repair harm being done to their communities, particularly harm caused by the
criminal justice system that disproportionately affects BIPOC, Queer, immigrant, and/or
undocumented communities [11, 40]. Transformative justice is strongly advocated by many
radical communities—some of whom are explicitly anarchist—particularly around the issue of
prison abolition. The Transformative Justice Law Project of Illinois (TJLP) advocates for
transformative justice models to “ultimately replace State systems of control with community
empowerment in matters of conflict resolution” [79]. Through this lens, transformative justice
identifies the source of harm—and thus, injustice—with the State; there is overwhelming evidence
of identifies existing criminal justice practices that cause harm, including but not limited to racial
profiling, broken windows policing, and the prison industrial complex [47, 79]. Transformative
justice thus functions as a counter-structure for communities to maintain autonomy from existing
harmful institutions.
Like research justice, prefigurative politics seeks to directly address the needs of people
directly affected by injustice; counter-institutions are meant to create more sustainable structures
for the community to be autonomous and have more control over issues that impact them. Here, I
focus on transformative justice as one kind of counter-institution specifically for concerns around
justice. Transformative justice is a diverse framework, but broadly encompasses modes of
community intervention to repair harm. It is meant to be an alternative to the punitive and
carceral measures on which the contemporary Western criminal justice system is based, and
which disproportionately harm certain communities, [15, 22, 39]. Like research justice and
prefigurative politics, it is based on community-level practices, sometimes used interchangeably
with the concept of community accountability [40, 44, 58].
Transformative justice enacts—or prefigures—more equitable social relationships by imagining
and practicing care and healing as alternatives to incarceration and prosecution. Participants first
identify what harm has been done; who is involved and impacted; what their resulting needs are;
and what future actions are needed to heal the traumas resulting from an act of harm and address
the needs of those affected [40, 81]. Transformative justice focuses on harm to recontextualize
crime not as an individual transgression or inherent deficiency, but rather as the product of other
forms of oppression and existing systems of violence [40, 44]. As such, an offender is understood
to also be a victim, who may be perpetuating harm as a result of past trauma from harm done to
them [40]. Transformative justice focuses its practices more locally on the victim, the offender,
and other impacted individuals within a community, rather than larger legal or criminal justice
institutions, such as police, courts, and prisons, which can reproduce similar or other forms of 
200:8 Mariam Asad
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
harm to an individual and related communities, e.g. the prison industrial complex [39, 47].
Ultimately, the goal is to transform the underlying conditions and structures that made harm
possible to begin with, from misogyny and transphobia to state-sanctioned violence like
colonialism and the prison industrial complex [11, 47].
There are a variety of models for practicing transformative justice, which vary depending on
the setting, the impacted community, and the kind of harm that needs healing. In instances of
juvenile offenses, for example, family group conferences are led by a facilitator who mediates
dialogue across the offender, the victim, and members of impacted communities, such as family
members, fellow students, or school administrators [69]. In other instances, for example where a
victim may be too traumatized to encounter their offender, the encounter may instead take place
between the offender and other impacted members of the community. This encounter focuses on
the actions needed in the short term to repair the harm done to the broader group, while the
victim may confront the offender at a later time to address the needs resulting from the
interpersonal harm.
I wish to acknowledge that transformative justice is sometimes conflated with restorative
justice. Figure 1 compares the differences between retributive justice, the current model for the
Western criminal justice system, and restorative justice. While there is literature that delineates
key differences between restorative and transformative justice in practice, for the purposes of this
paper, I refer to them interchangeably, referring to them as two frameworks that share the same
broader goal of social transformation through healing, reconciliation, and reparation [86].
I am interested in transformative justice more specifically as it has been taken up by grassroots
organizations to repair harm being done to their communities, particularly harm caused by the
criminal justice system that disproportionately affects BIPOC, Queer, immigrant, and/or
undocumented communities [11, 40]. Transformative justice is strongly advocated by many
radical communities—some of whom are explicitly anarchist—particularly around the issue of
prison abolition. The Transformative Justice Law Project of Illinois (TJLP) advocates for
transformative justice models to “ultimately replace State systems of control with community
empowerment in matters of conflict resolution” [79]. Through this lens, transformative justice
identifies the source of harm—and thus, injustice—with the State; there is overwhelming evidence
of identifies existing criminal justice practices that cause harm, including but not limited to racial
profiling, broken windows policing, and the prison industrial complex [47, 79]. Transformative
justice thus functions as a counter-structure for communities to maintain autonomy from existing
harmful institutions.
Across the three concepts above—research justice, prefigurative politics, and transformative
justice—we can draw parallels across how justice is conceptualized as a set of values (e.g.
autonomy, anti-oppressive, inclusive) and implemented as practices across different issues and
levels of scale (e.g. prison abolition, colonialism, labor). Below, I synthesize these concepts and
practices to describe prefigurative design, a framework for negotiating and articulating more just
collaborations between researchers and community collaborators.
Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice 200:9
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
Retributive lens Restorative lens
Crime defined by violation of rules (i.e. broken
rules)
Crime defined by harm to people and
relationships (i.e. broken relationships)
Harms defined abstractly Harms defined concretely
Crime seen as categorically different harms
from other
Crimes recognized as related to other harms
and conflicts
State as victim People and relationships as victims
State and offender seen as primary parties Victim and offender seen as primary parties
Victims’ needs and rights ignored Victims’ needs and rights central
Interpersonal dimensions irrelevant Interpersonal dimensions central
Conflictual nature of crime obscured Conflictual nature of crime recognized
Wounds of offender peripheral Wounds of offender important
Offence defined in technical, legal terms Offence understood in full context: moral,
social, economic, political
Fig. 1. The differences between retributive and transformative/restorative justice.
3 PREFIGURATIVE DESIGN
I build on my earlier work on prefigurative design, which my co-authors and I described as
“design work that is explicitly oriented in service of political or civic goals” to both “articulate
these goals as design objects” and “structure design processes to actualize them” [6]. We reflect on
a specific research project to identify accountability, sustainability, and ownership as qualities that
were articulated to them as important by their community collaborators that they then actualized
and incorporated into their design work. Through this early work, we see the relevance of
prefigurative design to other design-based methodologies: for example, it borrows from
speculative design an emphasis on visioning as a mode of inquiry and critical reflection.
Prefigurative design can also be seen as a response to value-sensitive design as it makes explicit a
set of values to incorporate and negotiate throughout the research process, while additionally
creating space for other, more specific concerns to emerge through collaboration.
I extend this work to be more generalizable beyond this specific research project, and to better
incorporate principles of research justice and transformative justice. Additionally, I hope that the
more applied framework described below becomes a way for prefigurative design to more
explicitly build on and extend the contributions and impact of other design-based methodologies.
In [6], we introduced prefigurative design as a more theoretical approach to work; I hope here to
make those arguments more material by grounding them in research practices common to
interventionist and/or design-based methodologies, such as participatory design, co-design, or
action research. Additionally, this work adds to prefigurative design a specific focus on healing via
transformative justice. This framing more explicitly moves away from more product- or
consumer-based concerns in HCI to better understand collective practices and sociopolitical
concerns within broader communities, specifically concerns around injustice, oppression, and 
200:10 Mariam Asad
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
trauma [15, 40]. I first describe the prefigurative design framework, then discuss some anticipated
opportunities through these categories of justice work.
3.1 Prefigurative Design in Practice
Prefigurative design is not meant to be a totalizing framework, but rather a tool to articulate a
vision with community partners to better identify opportunities to leverage existing justice work
through research intervention. Here, I wish to acknowledge the potential for prefigurative design
to stifle healing, rather than enable it. Drawing back to its political roots, it is important to note
that prefigurative work emerges from anarchism, which is at its core against all forms of
oppression, and thus centers in its practices equity and collective liberation [67]. Given these
goals, prefigurative design asks:
1. Who is being harmed and by whom?
2. What does healing look like?
3. Which needs should be addressed first?
4. Where can resources be marshalled to support the healing?
5. How can interventions support healing while minimizing harm?
When asking who is being harmed and by whom, this first and foremost provokes a discussion of
what the harm is—or the multiple kinds of harm—which is vital for communities to articulate what
their needs are and for researchers to begin negotiating what their contributions might be. This
also begins a conversation to identify the communities, individuals, and/or entities affected by the
harm. Together, these set the foundation to envision more just, alternative futures that the
community wants to work towards and that the researcher(s) can help support.
The community partners then take the lead with the envisioning step by imagining what
healing looks like for them. This step focuses the work on healing, rather than the harm, which
emphasizes generative alternatives, which is especially important if the harm is not something
accessible. Here, I draw from the work of transformative justice as focusing on undoing harm
might lead to even more difficult challenges: what happens to a community if you are unable to
change—or heal—the police? Thus I focus on healing for the envisioning step to focus on
possibilities and emphasize the autonomy of the community by identifying what they can or might
be able to do. Relatedly, this step is important to consider the sustainability of the project. While
communities may envision a wide variety of healing practices, naming them all is a way to
identify with the researcher what scope or scale of intervention might be appropriate for the
partnership. It may be that the researcher supports the community to achieve a very small piece of
their envisioned healing work, but it ensures the community has ownership over the process—
especially after the researcher leaves—as it will have been guided by their visions.
The next question is meant to address the scope of the shared work as well by asking which
needs should be addressed first. This is important to prioritize the tasks and actions necessary to
move towards the community’s vision, which can guide the researcher in making responsible and
reasonable commitments for the partnership. This step is also crucial for researchers to articulate
to their community partners the role of research, more broadly, especially if the community is
unfamiliar with academic practices or scholarship. This step can be a source of friction, as well: it
may be that the most immediate needs of the community cannot be addressed through a research
collaboration, or that there is any place for a research intervention of any kind. In this case, it
would be pragmatic to have a discussion about this to avoid wasting resources and efforts. 
Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice 200:11
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
Echoing Baumer and Silberman, technologies are not always appropriate for various contexts or
practices, in which case the researcher should look to non-technical artifacts, practices, or
processes [10]. If it is the case that the community and/or the researcher decides that it would not
be appropriate to continue the partnership, ideally the community would be left with the
outcomes of the first two steps, which can guide their work independent of a research
intervention. The researcher will also have benefitted by identifying the limitations or boundaries
of their current approach to their research, which they might adapt for later collaborations, grants,
etc.
If the partnership continues, the next step will be to identify where resources can be marshalled
to support the collaboration. The first two steps outline the various roles and commitments of
researchers and community, while the third prioritizes and structures the shared work. This step
is meant to build accountability into the partnership as the actors involved and invested in this
work identify what resources are needed to do the work. I use “resources” in a broader sense here,
identifying the myriad ways in which different kinds of capital and materials can leverage
different outcomes. This is a particularly important step for the researcher to reflect on their
position and how they can leverage that in serve of justice and local impact. For example, many
researchers—particularly in computational disciplines, like HCI—might carry with them a degree
of legitimacy, which might be valuable to build or amplify public support for the community’s
cause, e.g. with local press, policymakers, elected officials.
The final step of prefigurative design asks how interventions might support healing while
minimizing harm. I refer to “interventions” to refer to a variety of things, including digital artifacts
and systems, but also to processes, organizational models, and non-digital artifacts. This step
reiterates the importance of centering community needs and autonomy, which may ultimately call
for non-digital interventions as a way to support their work. These interventions are also an
avenue to build counter-structures: if the intervention is not a counter-structure itself (as was the
case with our earlier work in [6]), the intervention could build towards a counter-structure. This
ensures that the partnership with the community results in something that contributes to their
work, be it a deliverable like a digital tool or documentation, or something that otherwise builds
their capacity to continue doing the work after the researcher has left. This negotiation process is
also a way to better incorporate community concerns into the research project as the shared work
becomes a way to uplift and work alongside the community as an accomplice [7, 49], rather than
the intervention as a mode of extraction that only benefits the researcher.
It will be key to document the discussion produced by the above questions, which will serve an
artifact for all parties to commit to being accountable through their respective work, not unlike
practices already used in community-based research, such as memoranda of understanding
(known as MOUs). This artifact will guide researchers as they acclimate to the practices and
norms of their community collaborators and reflect on their progress, adjusting and iterating on
their research practices as necessary to better align with the work articulated through the
prefigurative design framework. Co-creating this artifact with the community is crucial to
minimize further harm on the part of the researcher, especially as they necessarily bring with
them the politics, agendas, and power of their academic institution [52].
3.2 Opportunities for CSCW
The prefigurative design process described above is far from complete, but the hope is that it is a
concrete and practical tool through which community-based researchers can forge just and
equitable relationships with their collaborators. Given the growing concern within our academic 
200:12 Mariam Asad
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
communities around justice and equity, it behooves us to better understand justice as it is
practiced by folks who do the work full-time [49], as well as the broader impacts of the
interventions we deploy on those who already experience precarity and vulnerability [52]. This
framing is especially important for us as HCI scholars and practitioners, given that we are in
unique positions to work with and within the systems, infrastructures, and artifacts that very
materially impact exploitative and extractive structures of access and power [32]. If we are
concerned with justice and equity but do not explicitly address them through our research, we
must attend to the very real possibility that our work will in fact further entrench and reproduce
the very injustices and inequities we claim to critique [33, 50].
Through the lens of prefigurative design, I discuss three opportunities to leverage communitybased research practices to better support justice work. These opportunities speak to ongoing
concerns within the CSCW community, especially as we draw from design-based or
interventionist research methods to better embed ourselves within our research communities. As
described above, in addition to common concepts of justice, I also highlight three categories of
practices common to research justice, transformative justice, and prefigurative politics, which
directly inform our prefigurative design framework. These are: transforming social relationships,
redistribution of resources, and building counter-structures. Below, I briefly describe these
practices within the context of technology design, infrastructure, and professional commitments
in hopes of provoking more reflexive and reflective interrogations of our research practices and
their impacts on our partners and collaborators.
3.2.1 Transforming Social Relationships. Through prefigurative design, we see the opportunity
to challenge norms and assumptions around different kinds of social relationships in research.
Here, I return to Anarchist HCI to focus on two relationships in particular, inter-community
relations and intra-community relations. The former refers to connections across communities;
here, I focus on researchers and community partners, but we might imagine how prefigurative
design might prompt reflections on other relationships across different levels of scale, such as
industry and academia, advisor and advisee, or reviewer and author. With the focus on practicing
justice and reducing harm, I anticipate the more engaged role of community partners to lead to
richer research projects and insights as we stand to learn from other sources of knowledge,
experiences, and insights not typically prioritized in scholarship.
From the perspective of CSCW researchers and the role of computing, this alone introduces
new avenues for the design and implementation of digital systems. There are already examples of
the kind of innovative research we anticipate from more just research partnerships: one is called
Contratados, a “Yelp for migrant workers” [21] to share information about potential employers,
exploitative practices, and migrant worker rights. Here, the ‘healing’ is in the form of autonomy
and self-education as the tool prefigures more just relationships between workers and employers
as an alternative to the wage theft and violence that is so prevalent in these structures today.
Rather than revisit the “Yelp” model (i.e. peer reviews) solely for consumer and retail interactions,
Contratados leverages the digital tool as an intervention for fairer working conditions, to make
transparent the economic exploitation of migrant communities, and to leverage the autonomy and
agency of workers to better advocate for themselves through legal policies and local legislation. In
reimagining these social relationships, however, we also come up against the complexities that
underlie them: in the case of Contratados, as a counter-structure, it is an intervention around
worker/employer relationships that relies on other, potentially unjust institutions, such as the
criminal justice system. Revisiting the project through prefigurative design could reveal other 
Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice 200:13
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
opportunities for justice, however, for example by discussing what other, non-legal resources
might be available to support the same issue (e.g. unions, solidarity networks).
3.2.2 Redistribution of Resources. The redistribution of resources is an opportunity to further
examine intra-community relations as we reflect on ourselves, as academics, researchers, and
practitioners and the potential roles that we might play in imparting harm. Through prefigurative
design, we might instead focus on the roles that we might play to heal: what are opportunities and
resources we have access to that can support the justice work of our community collaborators?
This spans the spectrum of material resources (e.g. digital devices, software licenses, grant money)
to professional training (e.g. as educators, as designers, as facilitators, as administrators) to our
networks (e.g. developers, legislators, politicians). While this work focuses prefigurative design on
research practices, there are opportunities to explore other academic spaces, like classrooms,
where we have the unique opportunity to teach future designers and developers about other
potential uses for their training.
Above, I discuss the role of the researcher to contribute to the community in more
comprehensive ways, but that might not be the most impactful or supportive decision for either
the researcher or the community, especially given how taxing and laborious interventionist modes
of research can be. Here, I refer to the work of Max Liboiron, who calls for care and intervention
as necessary for the researcher [64]. I wish to revisit and emphasize something from the
introduction of this work, which is the very real difficulty and exhaustion that comes from doing
interventionist research, especially since it often requires additional work on top of the demands
of an academic. Liboiron rightly argues for the need for greater infrastructures to support
interventionist researchers across the various kinds of labor put into their community-based work,
from the emotional to the administrative and bureaucratic to the ethical. I enthusiastically endorse
these asks, and hope that prefigurative design can also be a way to mitigate these efforts by
articulating what additional efforts we put in and by attending to healing and harm within our
own work and practices, as well.
3.2.2 Building Counter-structures. As stated above, I envision the ultimate goal of prefigurative
design to be the co-creation of counter-structures that replace the harmful institutions, policies,
and practices that impact our community collaborators and the broader social structures in which
we live. I do not wish to suggest that prefigurative design is a solution to large, complex issues like
racism, colonialism, or capitalism. Rather, I find it valuable as a way to articulate, both to ourselves
and with our collaborators, what the goals are of our work and to draw attention to the larger
structures and institutions of violence and oppression in which our digital designs and systems
might be complicit. By doing this, we can better commit to modes of intervention or research to
resist or challenge these impacts. In the same way that we aspire to support our collaborators as
they work towards their envisioned ideals, we hope to provoke the envisioning of more ideal
structures and institutions within academic research, starting with smaller scale goals—like
offering dinner or childcare for our design workshops—to larger, more ambitious and imaginative
ones to build towards the more inclusive, compassionate, and liberatory worlds that our ancestors
always dreamed of and fought for.
4 CONCLUSIONS
The framework described above is meant to scaffold research collaborations between academics
and community partners; it is far from complete, but instead offers a framework to structure
iteration and adjustments, creating guidelines for the “constant mapping” [57] necessary to align
present practices with future visions to ultimately building the counter-structures to enact more 
200:14 Mariam Asad
PACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 3, No. CSCW, Article 200, Publication date: November 2019.
just and equitable conditions. I hope researchers will use prefigurative design to initiate more
nuanced discussions with partners: the questions are meant to be generative, creating space to
identify mutual boundaries, commitments, goals, and expectations, both from the research
community and the researcher(s). Prefigurative design works to center the needs of the research
partners and set up the scaffolding for them to take ownership of the work, both as it is conducted
and after the researcher has left. It is also a means to help responsibly scope the commitments to
the collaboration, particularly for the researcher, by identifying needs and resources early on,
which will inform what interventions are feasible and reasonable. By starting a project with
transparency, honesty, and generosity, the hope is to create better circumstances for both the
researcher and their community partner, affording both the autonomy and agency to set
reasonable expectations around what work can be done and how each can contribute to the
shared project to build more impactful research to benefit the communities directly involved, and
hopefully also other communities beyond.