Abstract—Warm water cooling has been regarded as a promising method to improve the energy efficiency of water-cooled
datacenters. In warm water-cooling systems, hot spots occur as
a common problem where the hybrid cooling architecture integrating thermoelectric coolers (TECs) emerges as a new remedy.
Equipped with this architecture, the inlet water temperature
can be raised higher, which provides more opportunities for
heat recycling. However, currently, the heat absorbed from the
server components is ejected directly into the water without
being recycled, which leads to energy wasting. In order to
further improve the energy efficiency, we propose Heat to Power
(H2P), an economical and energy-recycling warm water cooling
architecture, where thermoelectric generators (TEGs) harvest
thermal energy from the “used” warm water and generate
electricity for reusing in datacenters. Specifically, we propose
some efficient optimization methods, including an economical
water circulation design, fine-grained adjustments of the cooling setting and dynamic workload scheduling for increasing
the power generated by TEGs. We evaluate H2P based on a
real hardware prototype and cluster traces from Google and
Alibaba. Experiment results show that TEGs equipped with our
optimization methods can averagely generate 4.349 W, 4.203 W,
and 3.979 W (4.177 W averagely) electricity on one CPU under
the drastic, irregular and common workload traces, respectively.
The power reusing efficiency (PRE) can reach 12.8%∼16.2%
(14.23% averagely) and the total cost of ownership (TCO) of
datacenters can be reduced by up to 0.57%.
Index Terms—datacenter energy, warm water cooling, thermal
energy harvesting, energy recycling, thermoelectric generator
I. INTRODUCTION
It is no secret that datacenters are consuming enormous
energy not only for IT equipment but also for other non-IT
equipment (e.g., UPS and cooling system). For instance, electricity consumed by U.S. datacenters was up to 70 billion kWh
in 2014, making up 2% of the national total energy cost [43].
However, nearly 48% of the energy is consumed by non-IT
equipment, while 79% of the non-IT energy consumption can
be attributed to the cooling systems [38]. This trend impels
the revolution of datacenters to improve its energy efficiency
by means of reducing the electricity consumption associated
with the cooling systems.
*Corresponding author: Fangming Liu (fmliu@hust.edu.cn). This work was
supported in part by the NSFC under Grant 61722206 and 61761136014
(and 392046569 of NSFC-DFG) and 61520106005, in part by National Key
Research & Development (R&D) Plan under grant 2017YFB1001703, in
part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant 2017KFKJXX009 and 3004210116, in part by the National Program for
Support of Top-notch Young Professionals in National Program for Special
Support of Eminent Professionals.
Compared with air cooling, water cooling emerges as a
new energy-efficient paradigm for datacenters. By enabling
higher rack densities and improved cooling efficiency, it is
reported that the water cooling system can reduce the cooling
energy consumption by averagely 22% as compared with the
air cooling system [3], [24]. In fact, to prevent hardware
failures in practice, the facility water should be cold enough
to cool down the hottest server, which usually runs at the
highest CPU utilization. Hence, chillers need to frequently
work in the water cooling system to ensure that the facility
water maintains at a low-temperature level (e.g., 7°C∼10°C),
which contributes to a large amount of energy consumption.
However, the servers with lower CPU utilization usually do
not need such “cold” water to take away their heat. In other
words, this over-provision strategy can easily lead to energy
waste [34], [35].
To further improve the energy efficiency of water-cooled
datacenters, the key lies in reducing the energy consumption of the chiller. It is reported that by simply raising the
temperature of facility water from 7°C∼10°C to 18°C∼20°C,
the cooling energy consumption can be saved by as much as
40% [35]. Based on the fact that servers in datacenters are
in low utilization most of the time [31], [32], warm water
(e.g., 40°C∼45°C) cooling strategy is proposed to reduce the
cooling costs [8]. However, when some servers get overload
suddenly, they may exceed the safe operating temperature in
a few seconds, while the chiller needs a relatively long time
(e.g., several minutes) to cool the water and delivers it to the
overheated servers, which can lead to cooling lag/mismatching
and the risk of cooling failure [24].
Even though it is reported that the effect of high temperatures on hardware reliability is not so high [15], the hot spot
issue in warm water cooling systems still needs a feasible
solution. Recently, Jiang et al. [24] propose a hybrid cooling architecture integrating each CPU with a thermoelectric
cooler (TEC) to provide extra cooling for individual servers
dynamically. By fine-grained and adaptive cooling control, it
can economically handle the cooling mismatching according to
workload variations. In this way, warm water cooling becomes
a promising method which can not only cut down the need
for expensive and energy-consuming chillers, but also provide
more possibilities for harvesting and recycling the heat in
the “used” warm water. For example, ASHRAE Thermal
Guidelines [4] “W5” suggests using >45°C water to cool

"$.*&&&UI"OOVBM*OUFSOBUJPOBM4ZNQPTJVNPO$PNQVUFS"SDIJUFDUVSF	*4$"

¥*&&&
%0**4$"
datacenters so that the outlet water is hot enough for heat
recovery and heating buildings [7].
However, heat recovery by district heating has its limitations. For one thing, a huge project is needed to transfer the
heat to the required district (e.g., complex piping arrangement,
urban heating system redesign and planning). For another
thing, heat is not always in great demand from season to
season, from district to district. In fact, district heating is more
common in high-latitude areas suffering from cold winters,
like northern Europe [14]; while tropics like Singapore are
hot all year round, and accordingly have a low requirement on
heating. In addition, most datacenters are located in warm areas, where the peak-hour heat capacity of datacenters exceeds
the heat demand of residential homes from spring to autumn
(e.g., April to October in Washington D.C., San Francisco, and
Huston [7]), leading to a heat mismatching. Last but not least,
thermal energy is difficult to store.
Facing these issues, we wonder if there is another way of
recycling the thermal energy collected from the “used” warm
water. Is it possible to transform the heat into electricity so
as to provide part of the power for datacenters themselves?
The answer lies in a simple but powerful component, i.e., the
thermoelectric generator (TEG), which can generate electricity
under temperature difference between its two sides. For example, a previous work has considered deploying small-scale
TEGs on the chip in smartphones to harvest heat and turn
it into electricity [11]. Motivated by this, in this paper, we
advocate that the heat absorbed from the server components
can be recycled to further improve the energy efficiency of
the warm water-cooled datacenters. Accordingly, we propose
Heat to Power (H2P), an economical and energy-recycling
warm water cooling architecture, where TEGs harvest thermal
energy from the “used” warm water and generate electricity
for reusing in warm water-cooled datacenters. In this context,
the contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We explore the TEG as a new component to recycle
waste heat in warm water-cooled datacenters and present
the characteristics of TEGs. We propose Heat to Power
(H2P), an economical and energy-recycling warm water
cooling architecture, which incorporates TEGs into the
existing water cooling system. We consider the placement
and scale of TEGs and carefully design a thermal energy
harvesting and recycling module.
• We build a hardware prototype to validate the feasibility
of H2P. Empirical measurements are conducted on the
prototype to demonstrate the generation capacity of TEGs
under the influence of different factors, such as the inlet
temperature, flow rate, and CPU utilization.
• Since the electricity generation is limited according to the
measurement results, we propose some efficient optimization methods, including an economical water circulation
design, fine-grained adjustments of the cooling setting
(i.e., the inlet water temperature and the flow rate) and
dynamic workload scheduling (i.e., workload balancing)
for increasing the power generated by TEGs. Experiment
results show that TEGs equipped with our optimization

	







 	
	




Fig. 1: Water cooling system architecture in a datacenter.
methods can averagely generate 4.349 W, 4.203 W,
and 3.979 W (4.177 W averagely) electricity on one
CPU under three types of workload traces (i.e., drastic,
irregular and common) from Google and Alibaba. The
power reusing efficiency (PRE) can reach 12.8%∼16.2%
(14.23% averagely).
• We provide a comprehensive analysis of the total cost
of ownership (TCO) of H2P, which can be reduced by
up to 0.57% (i.e., saving around $410,000 per year for a
datacenter with 100,000 CPUs).
• We also discuss the limitation of using TEGs to provide
electricity for warm water-cooled datacenters. Besides,
we give some suggestions on the potential applications
of the TEG-enabled water cooling system, and explore
the future development of TEGs and warm water-cooled
datacenters.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. II
provides the background and motivation of heat recycling in
warm water-cooled datacenters. Sec. III characterizes TEGs,
proposes our H2P system architecture, and highlights the key
design considerations. Sec. IV presents our hardware prototype
and the measurement results and analyses based on the prototype. Sec. V introduces the policies to increase the generated
electricity. Sec. VI discusses current potential applications and
future development of TEGs. Sec. VII introduces the related
works and Sec. VIII concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we first introduce the water cooling system
architecture for datacenters. Then we illustrate the advantages
of adopting warm water cooling in datacenters. Finally, we
highlight the motivation for heat recycling by TEGs in warm
water-cooled datacenters.
A. Water Cooling System Architecture
Fig. 1 shows a widely-used water cooling system architecture in a datacenter. As plotted, it comprises two liquid
loops. The facility water system (FWS) is separated from the
technology cooling system (TCS) by the coolant distribution
unit (CDU) [5]. This water cooling system has one or more
CDUs, which distribute TCS coolant to servers in a single
rack or several racks and transfer heat from TCS to FWS
                  
by using liquid-to-liquid heat exchangers. In FWS, heat is
removed mainly by the cooling tower via evaporation. If the
ambient air temperature is high, chillers need to further cool
the facility water, which is quite energy-consuming. In TCS,
CDUs regulate the coolant temperature and the flow rate by
using valves and centralized pumps.
B. Warm Water Cooling for Datacenters
Traditional water cooling systems consume a large amount
of energy, especially consumed by the chillers. With advanced
devices like TECs to deal with hot spots, less or even no use
of chillers can be achieved and the temperature of inlet facility
water can be raised higher. However, warm water cooling
brings about the following concerns.
Is warm water cooling safe? Compared with the hard disk,
CPU is more resistant to high temperature and temperature
variation [8]. The previous work [24] shows that for Intel Xeon
E5-2650 V3, using 40°C∼45°C water will not cause CPU temperature to exceed the maximum operating temperature (i.e.,
78.9°C) even under 100% CPU utilization. However, CPU
temperature will exceed the maximum operating temperature
when the facility water is over 50°C and CPU utilization is
over 70%. Due to the averagely low CPU utilization, it is feasible to use 40°C∼50°C water for cooling. In spite of this, warm
water cooling still faces the risk of cooling failure when a hot
spot emerges with sudden high CPU utilization. In this case,
the hot spot servers should be cooled down immediately, while
the facility water needs several minutes to be cooled by the
chiller. To tackle this problem, a hybrid cooling architecture
has been proposed, which integrates TECs to provide extra
and timely fine-grained cooling for each server [24]. Hence,
equipped with this architecture and method, the inlet water
temperature can be raised higher.
What are the benefits of warm water cooling? First,
warm water cooling avoids over-cooling some servers running
at a low utilization and allows less or even no use of the
chiller, which is a kind of active cooling equipment and quite
energy-consuming. The main cooling task can be undertaken
by the cooling tower via evaporation. Second, the difficulty
and challenge of recycling waste heat in the conventional water
cooling system using cold water to cool servers are that the
heat, though plentiful and continuous, is of low-grade [14].
Higher inlet temperature means higher outlet temperature.
After harvesting heat from server components, the “used”
warm water is an available and higher-quality heat source.
Recently, datacenter heat recovery has been attracting growing
attentions. Innovative green datacenters usually cooperate with
the district heating system (DHS), providing heating for urban
facilities such as office buildings, swimming pools, etc. If the
outlet water from datacenters is hot enough, DHSs do not need
to further warm it up, so that more energy can be saved.
C. Heat Recycling in Datacenters
In the past, industry and academia improved the Power
Usage Effectiveness (PUE) [46] mainly by reducing IT costs
and cooling costs. For example, Google has reduced average
PUE values close to 1.1 and represented a highly efficient design [17]. Meanwhile, the limitations of existing technologies
leave not much room for PUE reduction [12]. Hence, Energy
Reuse Effectiveness (ERE) [46] is proposed by Green Grid to
measure the benefit of reuse energy from a datacenter, in the
form of:
ERE = EIT + ECooling + EP ower + ELighting − EReuse
EIT
.
Maximizing energy reuse enables the ratio less than 1, spurring
datacenter practitioners to focus more on reusing waste energy
for higher energy efficiency. Hence, the massive heat from
datacenters will not be viewed as an unwanted byproduct
anymore, it can be turned into an opportunity for energy reuse.
For example, waste heat can be harvested and recycled in the
following three manners.
District heating: One common solution to reuse waste heat
is district heating. Datacenters need to cooperate with DHSs,
which is a huge project involving both hardware (e.g., complex
piping arrangement, urban heating system redesign and planning) and software (e.g., a win-win cooperative mechanism
between datacenters and DHSs) design. This remedy is not
so applicable to middle-latitude and low-latitude countries in
which the heat demand is not all year round, thus they need
to bear a significant cost to construct a mature urban heating
system. Also, the function of heat is limited. If the energy is
in the form of electricity, it can play an even greater role in
datacenters requiring electricity more than heat.
Heat to electricity: Previous works have used the thermoelectric generator (TEG) to turn heat into electricity. Smallscale TEGs are placed on the chip in the smartphone or on
CPUs of servers to harvest heat [11], [29]. However, TEGs are
made of adiabatic materials. Directly attaching TEGs to the
CPU may decrease the heat dissipation effect of the CPU (will
be shown in Sec. III-B later). Besides, the cold side of TEG
is directly exposed to the air, which will gradually reduce the
temperature difference between the hot side and cold side of
TEG and accordingly degrade its electricity generation.
Combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP): This solution refers to the simultaneous generation of electricity and
useful heating and cooling mostly from the combustion of
gas [39]. In CCHP, the waste heat is typically collected as
steam that can either used for heating, or for generating electricity by delivering steam through a turbine to an absorption
chiller, which is used for cooling.
However, since the construction and maintenance costs of
CCHP are much higher (e.g., CCHP system design, facilities
deployment, and complex piping arrangement), we propose a
TEG-integrated system H2P, which is easy to install in the existing water-cooled datacenters at very low cost. Besides, most
CCHP systems need gas as energy supply with stricter fire and
explosion protection, while H2P does not require additional
energy for electricity generation in existing datacenters. Thus,
either to integrate TEGs at the building/datacenter scale, or
at the server/CPU scale, H2P has its unique advantages that
can not be replaced by CCHP. In H2P, we place TEGs at

	

	
 
Fig. 2: A thermoelectric generator.
the server/CPU scale (which has the highest temperature) to
better reuse waste heat. Notably, CCHP and TEG-integrated
solutions can be combined with each other to further improve
energy efficiency.
III. HEAT TO POWER: KEY CHARACTERIZATION
AND SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we first introduce the basic concept of TEGs.
Then we analyze the feasibility of integrating TEGs into warm
water-cooled datacenters. Finally, we propose Heat to Power
(H2P) system for warm water-cooled datacenters.
A. What is TEG?
The thermoelectric generator (TEG) is a device that can
convert heat into electricity. It consists of several pairs of ntype and p-type semiconductors sandwiched by two ceramic
chips. When there is a temperature difference between the two
chips, TEG generates a voltage. This phenomenon is called the
Seebeck effect [6].
Physical characteristic: The commercially available TEG
(model name: SP 1848-27145) is usually made of Bi2Te3 and
has a size of 4cm × 4cm, as shown in Fig. 2. Such a TEG’s
resistance is about 2∼2.5 Ω. Its appropriate ambient temperature ranges from −60°C∼120°C, which makes it applicable
in the datacenter environment. The open-circuit voltage of a
TEG can be calculated as [11]:
Voc = n × αTEG × ΔTTEG, (1)
where n is the number of n-type and p-type pairs; αTEG is the
Seebeck coefficient of TEGs, and ΔTTEG is the temperature
difference between the hot side and the cold side of a TEG.
As a result, the larger the temperature difference, the higher
the voltage.
Cost analysis: We bought TEGs from Alibaba.com [2] at a
cost of $1 per piece. There are no moving parts and no working
fluids inside the TEG, which means no maintenance and no
extra costs [6]. Moreover, it has a long lifespan of no less than
28∼34 years when working with constant heat sources which
are exactly available and reliable in datacenters [7], [14], [45].











	



     

	 
	 

 	

 	

 	

 	


	



Fig. 3: TEG can hardly conduct heat. Note that a TEG is
sandwiched by CPU0 and its cold plate, while CPU1 is directly
pressed by the cold plate (CPU Type: Intel Xeon E5-2650 V3,
Maximum Operating Temperature: 78.9°C).
B. Where to Place TEGs in Datacenters?
To figure out the feasibility of integrating TEGs into warm
water-cooled datacenters, we first need to notice that there
exists a positive correlation between temperature difference
and the generated electricity. To obtain more electricity, we
need to find out how to make the temperature difference as
large as possible and try to put the TEGs as much close to the
hottest place in the whole cooling system as possible. In the
traditional water-cooling system, the CPU is pressed tightly
by a cold plate, through which the coolant keeps flowing and
absorbs heat. The cold plate is made of metal and has a high
thermal conductivity. However, TEG is almost adiabatic.
To investigate the thermal conductance of TEG, we make
a measurement in a Dell T7910 server equipped with two
CPUs of the same type, i.e., Intel Xeon E5-2650 V3, whose
maximum operating temperature is 78.9°C [10]. The two
CPUs are connected in parallel in the water circulation, hence
the flow rate and the inlet temperature in the two branches
are almost the same. The only difference is that a TEG is
sandwiched by CPU0 and its cold plate, while CPU1 is directly
pressed by the cold plate. We divide fifty minutes into four
phases, in which CPU load is equal to 0%, 10%, 20%, 0%
in sequence. We stress the same load on CPU0 and CPU1
each phase and then record their temperatures, the coolant
temperature and the open-circuit voltage of TEG. As can be
seen in Fig. 3, CPU0’s temperature experiences twists and
turns in the whole process, and is very close to the maximum
operating temperature at a load of 20%, while the temperatures
of coolant and CPU1 are relatively stable which means the
heat from CPU0 is hardly absorbed by coolant. The variation
of voltage accords with CPU0’s temperature.
Hence, considering the CPU’s safety and the electricity
generation capacity, we place the TEG module at the outlet of
each CPU, which is the hottest place in the whole circulation.
                                             
	
 	 	

 	


 	

  

 	

	

 
 	

Fig. 4: Heat to Power (H2P) system architecture.


	

   	



Fig. 5: A thermoelectric generation module.
C. System Architecture of H2P Integrating TEGs
Fig. 4 plots the system architecture of H2P. The TEG
module (details in Fig. 5) consists of several TEGs connected
electrically in series at the outlet of each server. To utilize
the electricity generated by TEGs, the output voltage must
reach a certain value. However, according to our measurement
results (will be shown in Sec. IV-B later), the output voltage of
one TEG is not enough, so we choose a simple and effective
collecting-in-series method to raise the voltage, which is also
the most commonly used scheme in current research [22], [23].
Under this circumstance, the maximum output power occurs
when the load resistance equals the whole TEG module’s
resistance [22].
The TEG module is sandwiched by two cold plates, which
are connected into two separate liquid loops. In particular, on
the hot side of TEGs, the water in the cold plate is the warm
coolant from the servers. This flow of water has been used
to cool down the CPU of servers and reaches over 40°C after
taking away the heat of CPUs. After flowing through the TEG
module, it flows to the heat exchanger and transfers heat to
FWS. On the cold side of TEGs, the natural water source is
the domestic water or the running water from nature, which
is around 20°C.
In fact, the emerging water-cooled datacenters tend to be
located by the sea or the lake, for accessing to natural water
resources. AliCloud Qiandao Lake datacenter is designed to
use deep water from Qiandao Lake, the temperature in which
stabilizes perennially at 15°C∼20°C. This source of water can
be a perfect natural water source for TEGs.
Variable Speed Pump Flowmeter
Variable Speed Pump Flowmeter Thermometer
Heat
Sink
TEG Module
Warm Circulation
Cold Circulation
Cold
Plate
CPU Inlet
Temperature
CPU Outlet
Temperature
Fig. 6: Hardware prototype of Heat to Power (H2P) system
(TEG Model: SP 1848-27145, CPU Type: Intel Xeon E5-2650
V3).
IV. HARDWARE PROTOTYPE AND EMPIRICAL
MEASUREMENT
To evaluate the performance of the H2P system, we build
a hardware prototype on a commonly-used server. Then, to
figure out the power generation capacity of TEGs under the
influence of different factors, such as the inlet temperature,
flow rate, and CPU utilization, we conduct a series of empirical
measurements on this prototype.
A. Hardware Prototype of H2P
To investigate the power generation capacity of TEGs, we
build a hardware prototype of H2P in a Dell T7910 server
equipped with an Intel Xeon E5-2650 V3 CPU. The TEG
module consists of 12 TEGs whose model is SP 1848-27145
as shown in Fig. 6. Six TEGs as a group are sandwiched
by two 4cm × 24cm cold plates. There are two water circulations in this test-bed: the warm circulation filled with
yellow coolant and the cold circulation with blue coolant. The
warm circulation, acting as the TCS loop, includes three cold
plates, a variable speed pump, a flowmeter and temperature
sensors. One 4cm × 4cm cold plate presses the CPU tightly
to transfer heat from CPU to the yellow coolant. The other
two 4cm × 24cm cold plates are respectively attached to
two groups of TEGs’ one side, in order to create a hot
surface for TEGs. Temperature sensors are used to monitor
the inlet and outlet water temperatures of CPU. Note that
CPU outlet temperature can be viewed as the TEG module
inlet temperature of the warm circulation. The cold circulation
comprises two 4cm × 24cm cold plates both to create the
cold surface for TEGs, a variable speed pump, a heat sink
to simulate heat dissipation of the natural water source, a
flowmeter and a temperature sensor to monitor the water
temperature of the cold circulation. We use Fluke 2638A data
acquisition system to record the temperatures and voltages
simultaneously.
                            








	

  
  
 
 
	
 

  
   	
 
   	
 
   	
 
   	
 
   	
 
   	
 
Fig. 7: Open-circuit voltage variation of 6 TEGs connected in
series with temperature difference between warm coolant and
cold coolant at different flow rates (the warm coolant and the
cold coolant are set to the same flow rate).
B. Empirical Measurement on Prototype
We assume that the temperature of natural water in cold
circulation stabilizes at 20°C. Warmer TCS coolant brings
larger temperature difference, accordingly more electricity
generation, but meanwhile a higher risk of cooling failure
in CPU, leading to a trade-off between TEGs’ electricity
generation capacity and CPU’s safety, which are two critical
factors in this system that need to be carefully considered.
1) TEGs’ Electricity Generation Capacity: To evaluate the
performance of TEGs, we need to adjust the temperature difference between the warm circulation and the cold circulation
and measure the open-circuit voltage of the TEG module. We
fix the temperature of the cold circulation Tcold at 20°C, and
then adjust the outlet water temperature of CPU Twarm out
which is also the TEG module’s inlet temperature of the
warm circulation. The temperature difference between warm
circulation and cold circulation ΔT is:
ΔT = Twarm out − Tcold = Twarm out − 20. (2)
First, we test the effect of flow rate on thermoelectric
generation. We divide the twelve TEGs into two groups,
and in each group six TEGs are connected in series. Then
we measure the open-circuit voltage variation of two groups
with temperature difference between warm coolant and cold
coolant at different flow rates, shown in Fig. 7. The warm
coolant and the cold coolant are set to the same flow rate
each time. It is observed that the voltage increases linearly
with the temperature difference between warm coolant and
cold coolant. The larger the flow rate, the higher the voltage.
Yet this improvement may be too little to be worth making,
because a larger flow rate means more power consumption
of the pump and more heat ejection, which will increase the
workload of the cooling equipment.
Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b respectively show the measurement
results of the open-circuit voltage and maximum output power







     
	
	
  
 
	 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)












 	  	  	
 	 
 
	  
 

 

 

 

 

(b)
Fig. 8: The impact of coolant temperature difference and
the number of TEGs connected in series on (a) open-circuit
voltage and (b) maximum output power.
when different numbers of TEGs are connected in series. Because the flow rate has little effect on thermoelectric generation
of TEGs, we fix the flow rate at 200 L/H. We define v as the
open-circuit voltage of one TEG and Voc n as the open-circuit
voltage of n TEGs are connected in series electrically. We
observe that Voc n is nearly n times of v. Then according to
our measurement, we can model Voc n as a linear function of
coolant temperature difference ΔT:
v = 0.0448ΔT − 0.0051, (3)
Voc n = n × v = n × (0.0448ΔT − 0.0051). (4)
The maximum output power occurs when the load resistance
equals the TEG module’s resistance, and the load resistance
of one TEG RTEG is measured as 2 Ω. We define Pmax n as
the maximum output power of a TEG module consisting of n
TEGs and the curve can be modeled as a quadratic function
of coolant temperature difference ΔT:
Pmax 1 = ( 1
2 v)2
RTEG
= 1
8
v2, (5)
Pmax 1 = 0.0003 × ΔT2 − 0.0003 × ΔT + 0.0011, (6)
Pmax n = n×(0.0003×ΔT2 −0.0003×ΔT + 0.0011). (7)
Note that the temperature difference in Fig. 8 ranges from
0°C∼25°C, this is because in our prototype, there is only one
CPU releasing heat. In a real datacenter with thousands of
CPUs, the temperature difference can be higher than 25°C,
and the maximum output power of 12 TEGs can be higher
than 1.8 W.
2) The Outlet Water Temperature of CPU: We define
Twarm in as the inlet water temperature of CPU (i.e., the
temperature of water to cool CPU), and ΔTout−in as the
temperature difference between the outlet water and the inlet
water of CPU. Hence, the outlet water temperature of CPU
Twarm out is
Twarm out = ΔTout−in + Twarm in. (8)
As shown in Fig. 9a and Fig. 9b, ΔTout−in fluctuates within
1°C∼3.5°C, and is mainly affected by CPU utilization, while
the inlet temperature and flow rate have little effect on it.
                                                       





     	

 	 
 	

 
 
 
 
(a)




	
 
 
	 
 

	  
 	




(b)
Fig. 9: Temperature difference between outlet water and inlet
water with (a) varying CPU utilization and flow rate (this is
an average result of four inlet water temperatures), (b) varying
CPU utilization and inlet water temperature (the flow rate is
fixed at 20 L/H).
3) CPU’s Safety: CPU temperature is mainly affected by
three factors: CPU utilization u, the inlet water temperature
of CPU Twarm in, and the flow rate f. We conducted several
measurements on a Dell server equipped with an Intel Xeon
E5 2650 V3 CPU, whose maximum operating temperature is
78.9°C [10].
First, we fix the flow rate at 20 L/H, and investigate the
impact of coolant temperature and CPU utilization on CPU
temperature. As can be seen in Fig. 10 , when CPU utilization
exceeds 50%, the frequency starts to increase slower and
finally settles down at about 2.5 GHz, because the CPU
frequency governor is set to the “powersave” mode. The
variation trend of CPU temperature roughly matches that of
frequency.
Then, we conduct a measurement of CPU temperature
with different coolant temperatures and flow rates when CPU
utilization is 100%. As shown in Fig. 11, at each flow rate,
CPU temperature grows linearly with coolant temperature.
Given a fixed coolant temperature supply, CPU temperature
lessens with increasing flow rate. This is because the faster the
coolant flows, the more heat can be taken away from CPU per
unit time. However, the improvement of the cooling efficiency
is not unlimited, when the flow rate reaches a certain degree
(e.g., above 250 L/H), it has little effect on CPU temperature.
We observe that the flow rate also has an impact on the line’s
slope, which increases as the flow rate decreases.
C. Implications from Measurement Results
Based on the measurement results above, we can see that
the electricity generation capacity of the TEG module in our
proposed H2P is mainly determined by the outlet water temperature of CPU Twarm out. Furthermore, Twarm out is mainly
determined by the inlet water temperature of CPU Twarm in,
since Twarm out is only 1°C∼3.5°C higher than Twarm in.
Hence, the key to raising the generation capacity lies in
raising Twarm in. However, the upper limit of Twarm in is
determined by the hottest server in this circulation. Therefore,
we should identify the optimal number of water circulations
in a datacenter, dynamically adjust the cooling setting and

	

	

	

	
	




 
 
	 
 

	

  	
 
 	
 
 	
 
 	
 
 	
 

 	

	
	
Fig. 10: CPU temperature variation with different coolant temperatures and CPU utilization (CPU Type: Intel Xeon E5-2650
V3, Frequency Governor: powersave, Maximum Operating
Temperature: 78.9°C, Flow Rate: 20 L/H).







  
   
	

  
 	

 
 
 
	 
 
 

 

 	
   
Fig. 11: CPU temperature variation with different coolant
temperatures and flow rates (CPU Type: Intel Xeon E5-2650
V3, Frequency Governor: powersave, Maximum Operating
Temperature: 78.9°C, CPU utilization: 100%).
schedule CPU load so as to optimize the electricity generation
capacity of the TEG module.
V. ELECTRICITY GENERATION OPTIMIZATION
AND TRACE-DRIVEN EVALUATION
Since the electricity generation is limited as shown by
the measurement results, we investigate how to increase the
generated electricity from both hardware-level and softwarelevel. In particular, we first explore how to optimize the water
circulation design for the construction of datacenters. Then,
we investigate how to optimize the cooling control and the
workload scheduling of all water-cooled servers to generate
more electricity. We evaluate the performance of H2P by
comparing two schemes and using different types of traces.
At last, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the total cost
of ownership (TCO).
                                                                                         
A. Water Circulation Design
We consider H2P in a homogeneous datecenter equipped
with a cluster of 1,000 servers. Generally, servers in one or
several racks are controlled by one CDU and share the same
water circulation, equipped with a chiller and a centralized
pump. In this circulation, we assume that the inlet water
temperature and the flow rate of each server are the same. As
we mentioned in Sec. IV-C, the key to raising the generation
capacity lies in raising Twarm in, while the upper limit of
Twarm in is determined by the hottest server in this circulation.
Hence, how many servers are arranged in a water circulation
should be taken into consideration. Obviously, each server
monopolizing one circulation is the most energy-efficient and
can generate most electricity, because in this way we can
adjust Twarm in of each CPU. However, it is not practical
to equip each server with a chiller and a pump, considering
the technical limit and the capital expenses.
In practice, we suppose that a water circulation has n
servers, so that 1,000 servers are divided into 1,000/n water
circulations. In the i-th water circulation, the j-th CPU utilization is ui,j and its temperature is TCP U i,j . The safe temperature of CPU is TSaf e, which can be pre-defined and adjusted
(e.g., 80% of CPU’s maximum operating temperature). Note
that pro-longed operation at close to the maximum temperatures may cause CPU performance degradation and shorten
the CPU lifespan [9]. Hence, TCP U i,j should be reduced by
ΔTi,j = TCP U i,j − TSaf e. According to the measurements in
Fig. 11, TCPU has a linear function of coolant temperature
TCoolant: TCPU = k × TCoolant + b,(k ∈ [1, 1.3]). Twarm in
of the i-th circulation should be reduced by ΔTi, which is k
times of the maximum value in the set {ΔTi,j}, defined by:
ΔTi = k × max{ΔTi,1, ..., ΔTi,n}. (9)
The energy cost of the chiller in the i-th water circulation can
be represented by:
Echiller i = Cwater ∗ ΔTi ∗ n ∗ f ∗ t ∗ ρ/COPchiller. (10)
The total energy cost of all chillers can be represented by:
Echiller =
1000
/n
i=1
Echiller i. (11)
Cwater = 4.2×103 J/(kg·°C) is the heat capacity of water. It
means 4.2 × 103 Joule heat needs to be added to (or removed
from) 1-kilogram water to change the water temperature by
1 °C. n ∗ f ∗ t is the total water volume that flows into heat
exchanger during time t, where n is the number of servers and
f is the flow rate assumed as a constant (e.g., 50 L/H) in that
water circulation. ρ is the density of water. COPchiller (i.e.,
coefficient of performance) describes the energy efficiency of a
chiller [49], which is determined by the ratio between the heat
that chiller removes from water and the energy it consumes
(i.e., COP = Heat removed by chiller / Energy consumed by
chiller). We can assume COPchiller as 3.6 [24].
The optimization problem is to minimize the total cost
containing electricity charge of chillers and the cost of chillers,
represented by:
min{Echiller∗Chargeelectric+(1000/n)∗Costchiller}. (12)
Because the workload of a certain CPU is subject to the
users’ random actions, the CPU temperature that can be
computed from the CPU utilization is a random variable
subjected to normal distribution. We define n random variables
T1, T2, ..., Tn, representing the temperatures of n CPUs and
satisfying the relationship Ti ∼ N(μ, σ2). So we have the
probability density function:
f(x) = √ 1
2πσ exp{−(x−μ)2
2σ2 }, (13)
and the probability distribution function:
F(x) =  +∞
−∞
√ 1
2πσ exp{−(x−μ)2
2σ2 }dx. (14)
T(1) ≤ T(2) ≤ ... ≤ T(n) are order statistics of
T1, T2, ..., Tn. For the maximum value T(n), its probability
distribution function can be represented by:
FT(n) (x) = F n(x), (15)
and then we calculate the derivative to get its probability
density function:
fT(n) (x) = n(F(x))n−1f(x). (16)
Hence, we can calculate the expectation of the highest temperature of n CPUs expressed as E(Tmax):
E(Tmax) = E(T(n)) =  +∞
−∞
xfT(n) (x)dx, (17)
and the expectation of ΔTi:
E(ΔTi) = k × (E(Tmax) − Tsaf e). (18)
In this way, the total cost in Eq. 12 can be expressed as a
function of n. This exploration can give some suggestions on
the design and construction of the future warm water-cooled
datacenters.
B. Software-based Optimization Strategies
According to the measurement results in Sec. IV, the
optimization problem is to optimize the maximum output
power of the TEG module PTEG by maximizing Twarm out,
while limited by CPU’s safe operating temperature Tsaf e. The
measurement results of CPU temperature TCPU are plotted in
Fig. 12. In this 3-D space formed by these discrete points,
the coordinate of each point is (u, f, Twarm in) (i.e., CPU
utilization, flow rate, inlet water temperature), and the color
of each point represents TCPU . The darker the color, the
higher the temperature. Twarm out can also be plotted in
such a 3-D space, because each (TCPU ,f,Twarm in) maps
a Twarm out. Hence, if we know the CPU utilization, and
determine a cooling setting {f,Twarm in}, we can easily get
TCPU and Twarm out from the measurement results, and then
   
Fig. 12: The measurement results of CPU temperature can
form a 3-D discrete space.
 




Fig. 13: Selecting the points whose CPU temperatures are
between 61°C and 63°C (CPU utilization = Umax or Uavg,
Tsaf e = 62°C).
calculate PTEG. Note that although our measurements cannot
cover all the points in the space, TCPU changes continuously
and linearly with its variables (see Fig. 10 and Fig. 11).
Therefore, we can extend our limited measurements to a
general relationship, and the discrete points can be fitted to
a continuous space, which can function as a look-up space in
practical use.
1) Adjusting Water Temperature and Flow Rate: In a water
circulation with n servers, during each time interval t (e.g., 5
minutes), we determine Twarm in and f as below:
• Step1: At the beginning of t, CPU utilization of n servers
are {u1, u2, ..., un}, we find the maximum value Umax
in this set and draw a plane U : u = Umax which is
perpendicular to the CPU Utilization axis.
• Step2: Set the CPU safe operating temperature Tsaf e, and
we search in the space for the points whose TCPU are in
the proximity of Tsaf e (e.g.,within [Tsaf e −1, Tsaf e −1]
°C) to form a new space X.
• Step3: Let the plane Umax and the space X intersect and
then get {f,Twarm in} of each point in the area of this
intersection: Amax = Umax  X. Compute PTEG under
each cooling setting {f,Twarm in} (Eq. 2 and Eq. 7),
and choose the maximum PTEG to determine the optimal
cooling setting.
For example, in Fig. 13, we set Tsaf e as 62°C. TCPU of
the points in the area Amax are between 61°C and 63°C.
2) Balancing Workload: As we mentioned in Sec. IV-C, the
upper limit of Twarm in is determined by the hottest server
in this circulation. If we can balance the workload on all the
servers, their CPU temperature can be close to each other. In
other words, this strategy can flatten the cooling demands of
servers in a loop, so that chillers can work less and Twarm in
can be set higher, which means Twarm out and the power
generated by TEGs will be higher.
Under this workload balancing strategy, when we aim to
determine the cooling setting {f,Twarm in}, the plane we
draw in Step1 will be U : u = Uavg, where Uavg is the average
value of {u1, u2, ..., un}. The intersection of Uavg and X will
be Aavg. In Fig. 13, we can see that Twarm in of the points in
Aavg are generally higher than those in Amax. Hence, power
generation can be optimized in this way.
C. Trace-Driven Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of H2P, we set three types of
traces:
• Drastic: This trace is from Alibaba cluster [1], which
contains the CPU usage of 1,313 servers in 12 hours.
The variation of CPU utilization has drastic and frequent
fluctuations.
• Irregular: Google trace [18] provides the CPU usage of
12.5k servers for a month. We select CPU utilization of
1,000 servers for 24 hours to compose an abnormal workload trace. The variation of CPU utilization is relatively
common, but with occasional high peaks.
• Common: Similarly, we select another 1,000 servers for
24 hours from Google trace. The variation of CPU utilization is relatively common and has very little fluctuations.
We compare the power generation capacity of H2P under
two schemes:
• TEG Original: a baseline that datacenters are equipped
with TEGs and adjust the cooling setting but do not
consider any workload scheduling methods.
• TEG LoadBalance: an optimization of TEG Original by
adding workload balancing strategy.
Fig. 14 shows the workload traces (Drastic, Irregular, Common) and the corresponding power generation capacity of H2P
under three different workloads and two different workload
scheduling methods (TEG Original and TEG LoadBalance).
As plotted in Fig. 14a, when the CPU utilization is high,
the corresponding power generation capacity of H2P is low.
This is because when the CPU utilization of a server is
high, its CPU temperature is also high, while the inlet water
temperature should be low enough to cool down the sever.
Under this low inlet water temperature, the power generation
capacity is consequently low. The generated electricity of
H2P shows the same trend in both Fig. 14b and Fig. 14c.
In particular, the average generated power of TEG Original
under the three workload traces (Drastic, Irregular, Common)
             










 	    

 	
 

	   
   


 !
(a) Drastic

	








 	    

 	
 

	   
   


 !
(b) Irregular

	








 	    

 	
 

	   
   


 !
(c) Common
Fig. 14: The electricity generation under three types of CPU utilization.






	
  	
 	  	

	
	
Fig. 15: Power reusing efficiency of TEG/CPU under three
types of CPU utilization.
are 3.725 W, 3.772 W and 3.586 W, respectively (3.694
W averagely). The peak values of the generated power are
4.210 W, 3.935 W and 4.035 W respectively. After workload balancing optimization, the average generated power of
TEG LoadBalance are 4.349 W, 4.203 W, and 3.979 W for the
three traces, respectively (4.177 W averagely). The peak values
are 4.595 W, 4.554 W, and 4.082 W. Thus, we can conclude
that the workload balancing strategy can effectively improve
the average generated power by approximately 13.08%, (i.e.,
from 3.694 W to 4.177 W).
Power Reusing Efficiency: Because we only focus on
recycling heat from CPU, not target on optimizing energy
consumption in water circulation (e.g., chillers and pumps),
which already exists in water cooling system even without
H2P, we define the power reusing efficiency (PRE) as:
P RE = T EGs P ower Generation
CPUs P ower Consumption. (19)
By our measurement of an Intel Xeon E5-2650 V3 CPU,
CPU’s power consumption can be expressed as a function of
CPU utilization u with root mean square error less than 5 W,
in the form of:
PCPU = 109.71 × log(u + 1.17) − 7.83. (20)
By Eq. 20, we can estimate the power consumption of three
different traces and compare CPU power consumption with
TEGs’ power generation. As shown in Fig. 15, PRE of
TABLE I: Parameters used to model TCO [27].
Description Value Unit
DCInfraCapEx 21.26 $ / (server × month)
ServCapEx 31.25 $ / (server × month)
DCInfraOpEx 7.63 $ / (server × month)
ServOpEx 1.56 $ / (server × month)
TEGCapEx 0.04 $ / (server × month)
TEGRev (TEG Original) 0.34 $ / (server × month)
TEGRev (TEG LoadBalance) 0.39 $ / (server × month)
TEG Original are 12.0%, 13.8%, 11.9% for Drastic, Irregular, Common workloads, respectively. After workload balancing optimization, PRE of TEG LoadBalance are 13.7%,
16.2%, 12.8% for the three trace, and the average PRE is
14.23%.
D. TCO Analysis
To calculate the total savings from TEGs, we analyse the
total cost of ownership (TCO) of datacenters with and without
H2P, respectively. The capital expenses, operating expenses
and the revenue are list in Table. I.
Capital Expenses (CapEx): We have shown in Sec. III-A
that the purchase price of an SP 1848-27145 TEG is $1
per piece with a long lifespan of 28∼34 years. We assume
that a TEG can be used for at least 25 years. In H2P, a
server is equipped with 12 TEGs. Hence, TEGCapEx can be
calculated as 0.04 $/(server×month). Datacenter infrastructure
capital expense (DCInfraCapEx) is the cost of building a
datacenter amortized to each month, including the cost of land,
uninterruptible power supply (UPS) and power infrastructure,
cooling infrastructure and so on [27]. Note that server capital
expense (ServCapEx) is not included in DCInfraCapEx.
Operating Expenses (OpEx): Since TEGs mostly do not
need long-term maintenance, we neglect its operating expense.
The operating expenses of servers and datacenter infrastructures are defined as ServOpEx and DCInfraOpEx.
Revenue (Rev): We define the revenue from the generated
electricity by TEGs is TEGRev. According to the simulation
result in Sec. V-C, average generated electricity under the two
schemes (TEG Original and TEG LoadBalance) are 3.694 W
and 4.177 W respectively. Considering the price of electricity is 13 cents/kwh [16], TEGRev (TEG Original) is 0.34
                                                        
$/(server×month) and TEGRev (TEG LoadBalance) is 0.39
$/(server×month).
TCO: Suppose that there is a cluster with 100,000
CPUs equipped with 1,200,000 TEGs. The TEGRev
(TEG LoadBalance) in 24 hours can be evaluated as 10,024.8
kwh, (i.e., $1,303.2/day). The purchase price for this system
can be evaluated as the total price for TEGs, $1×1,200,000.
As a result, the break-even point of this system will be 920
days.
In order to better illuminate the benefit of integrating H2P
to a datacenter, we calculate the TCO in a datacenter with and
without H2P system respectively, which can be represented as
follows:
TCOnoT EG =(DCInfraCapEx + ServCapEx)
+ (DCInfraOpEx + ServOpEx), (21)
TCOH2P = TCOnoT EG + T EGCapEx − T EGRev. (22)
Consequently, TEG Original and TEG LoadBalance can
respectively reduce TCO by 0.49% and 0.57%. For a datacenter with 100,000 CPUs, TCOH2P can save $350,000 ∼
$410,000 for a year.
VI. DISCUSSION
In this section, we first analyze the limitation of TEGs,
which limits the power generation capacity. Next, we explore
how to store the generated electricity more effectively. Finally,
we present some potential applications of TEG-enabled H2P
in warm water-cooled datacenters and discuss the future development of TEGs and datacenters.
A. Limitation of TEG
Limited by the material and technology, the power generation efficiency of TEG is low at present. Besides, waste heat in
datacenters is low-grade, making it hard to fully utilize TEG’s
advantages. The storage of power generated by TEGs is also
a difficult problem. Hence, exploiting TEGs in datacenters
is not meant to replace other heat recovery solutions (e.g.,
combining TEGs with CCHP). In this paper, we only focus
on optimizing the maximum output electricity generated by
TEGs cost-efficiently.
B. Electricity Storage for TEGs
Since the generated power of the TEG module is fluctuant
and time-varying with the temperature difference, it may
exceed or be lower than power demands if the TEG module is connected with electrical appliances directly. Usually,
during the peak hours (e.g., midday to the evening) the CPU
load is generally high [42], which requires lower inlet water
temperature to cool CPUs, resulting in lower power generated
by TEGs. While during the off hours (e.g., late night and early
morning) when most users are asleep and CPU load is low,
the inlet water temperature can be raised to a relatively high
level, leading to higher power generated by TEGs. The power
demands of different electrical appliances are also different.
Hence, to handle the irregular power mismatches, energy
storage devices (e.g., batteries, super-capacitors) are needed.
Compared with batteries, super-capacitors (SCs) can achieve
a higher energy efficiency of 90%∼95% while have a higher
capital cost. To exploit the merits of both, a hybrid energy
buffering system [31] comprising batteries and SCs has been
proposed to shave peaking power mismatching between power
demands of servers and renewable power sources. Similarly,
a small-scale energy buffering system can be exploited for
TEGs’ electricity storage.
C. Potential Applications of TEGs
1) TEGs for powering TECs: As we mentioned above in
Sec. II-B, in warm water-cooling systems, hot spots occur
as a common problem where a hybrid cooling architecture
integrating thermoelectric coolers (TECs) emerges as a new
remedy [24]. Although this hybrid cooling system reduces the
usage of chillers, its energy consumption still has room for
further reduction. Because TECs bring extra energy consumption into the system; besides, the TEC removes heat from
the CPU to the water quickly, which helps not only cool
the CPU but also heat the water. Hence, compared with not
working, the outlet water temperature of CPU is higher when
TEC is working. It is more advantageous to integrate our H2P
system into this hybrid cooling system than conventional water
cooling systems.
2) TEGs for lighting: Though IT equipment and the cooling
part account for the overwhelming majority of datacenter total
energy consumption, we still cannot ignore other parts. Lighting costs representing 1%, are still a considerable expense. In
fact, lighting in datacenters needs to meet the requirements
of illuminance, lighting uniformity, lighting stability, and
suppression of glare, while light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can
be a perfect lighting solution [33]. The power of an ordinary
LED is generally 0.05W and the working current is 20 mA,
even high-power LEDs work at 1W and 2W [37], which can
save more than 80% of energy than traditional light sources.
Based on the experiment results, TEGs in H2P can generate
3W or more electricity, which is enough for supplying power
for some of the LEDs used in datacenters.
D. Future Development of TEGs and Datacenters
The TEG used in H2P is SP1848-27145 made of Bi2Te3,
which is currently the most widely-used TEG in both academia
and industry [19], [40]. Its maximum ZT (i.e., the figure
of merit, to evaluate whether a given material is a good
thermoelectric material) is around 1 at 300-330 K [6], [36]
and the conversion efficiency is approximately 5%. In recent
years, however, remarkable progress has been made to create
materials of a higher ZT, for example, recent laboratory
results show that ZT of thin-film Heusler alloys based on
Fe2V0.8W0.2Al can reach 6 at around 360 K [20]. However,
this material is still in research, which needs a few years for
commercial use. In addition, nanomaterials are also currently
being developed for commercialization [36]. Once the new
cheap materials of higher ZT are commercially available, a
much wider application of these materials in datacenters is
possible. Since TEGs only require a temperature difference to

generate power, low-grade waste heat can be easily harvested
in this way. Equipped with appropriate energy storage devices,
the TEG can also be a backup power supply.
The centralized and distributed topologies are two primary
energy storage architectures in datacenters currently [31]. To
avoid energy losses resulting from double converting (AC-DCAC) in the centralized UPS system, IT giants such as Google
and Facebook have used decentralized batteries (i.e., 12V or
48V DC power) to supply servers. A cabinet of batteries can
serve one or several racks. Future DC-based power distribution
systems can improve energy utilization and reduce the total
system energy use [13]. Our H2P system is appropriate for
these DC-supplied datacenters.
VII. RELATED WORK
Cooling and energy management in datacenters: To reduce datacenter energy consumption and costs, previous works
have provided energy monitoring and accounting at different
levels (e.g., server-level [44], virtual machine-level [25], nonIT equipment-level [26]), cooling and power management
at both software-level and hardware-level, primarily leveraging the strategy of under-provision or over-subscription.
At software-level, Hsu et al. [21] propose a workload-aware
service placement strategy by grouping services with asynchronous peak times under the profile of each power node to
reduce power fragmentation and improve power utilization.
Manousakis et al. [34] introduce CoolProvision to a freecooling datacenter and handle the cooling mismatching resulted from under-provisioning by workload throttling (e.g.,
DVFS), consolidation and deferral. Such software-based solutions usually do not apply to delay-sensitive or performancesensitive workloads, hardware-based approaches have been
exploited to shave power/thermal peak without performance
degradation. Liu et al. [31] propose hybrid energy buffers,
including batteries and super-capacitors (SCs), and the latter
help to overcome the limitations of the former. Skach et
al. [41] flatten the cooling demand by the phase-change
material (PCM), which absorbs heat by melting during the
peak period and releases heat by solidification at the offpeak time. To actively control the melting of PCM and
further dig the potential cooling capacity, they create a virtual
melting temperature by locating hot jobs together [42]. Jiang et
al. [24] propose a hybrid water cooling system, in which the
thermoelectric coolers (TECs) and the chiller work together
in a fine-grained manner to deal with hot spots under the
strategy of warm water cooling. Different from previous works
above, we view datacenters’ waste heat as a resource that
can be reused rather than be ejected into the environment and
removed by cooling equipment or materials.
Waste heat reuse: Waste heat reuse is a new direction of
energy saving, including heating buildings, converting heat
into electricity by thermoelectric generators (TEGs) and so
on. CloudHeat [7] is an online reverse auction mechanism for
helping datacenters to sell heat to district heating systems.
Liu et al. [30] propose “data furnace” by running servers
in residential buildings and heating buildings locally. Apart
from heating, several promising works on TEGs also have
been conducted. First, Yazawa et al. [48] provide a theoretical
analysis and proof-of-concept experiment on thermoelectricpowered forced convection cooling of a personal computer
microprocessor. Next, Zhou et al. [50] also present a model to
accurately estimate the TEG efficiency and they measure the
generated power under varying processor workloads. Wu et
al. [47] propose a TEG-integrated architecture to harvest waste
heat generated by computing devices and transform it into
electricity so as to be directly used within the system. They
demonstrate that with three TEG modules, the harvested electrical energy is significant enough to power a fan. However,
Jayakumar et al. [22] conclude that using thermoelectrics as
TECs can provide boosts to performance with additional power
consumption (i.e., TEGs increase the processor’s temperature
and leakage power). By taking processor temperature distribution and reliability into consideration, Lee et al. [28], [29]
provide a self-sustaining, fine-grained, microarchitectural-level
hot spot cooling mechanism, which attaches several smallsized TECs and TEGs on CPU and does not require additional
energy to power the TECs for spot cooling. Dai et al. [11] also
use small-scale TEGs to generate energy and further use the
generated power to cool down hot spots and recharge microsupercapacitors in the smartphone.
In summary, most of these works focus on integrating TEGs
into PCs or air-cooled datacenters, where the cold side of TEG
is exposed to air rather than attached to a stable cooling source.
This will gradually reduce the temperature difference between
the two sides of TEG and further degrade its electricity generation, which we have discussed in Sec. III-B with empirical
experiments. Differently, in H2P, we attach the cold side of
TEG to the natural water resource (around 20°C) to ensure its
long-term electricity efficiency. Besides, some current TEGintegrated solutions are customized for certain CPU types,
while H2P suits all types of CPUs.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose Heat to Power (H2P), an economical thermal energy harvesting and recycling architecture
for warm water-cooled datacenters. In H2P, thermoelectric
generators (TEGs) are integrated to harvest thermal energy
from the “used” warm water and generate electricity for
reusing in datacenters. Considering the electricity generation is
limited as shown by the measurement results, we accordingly
propose some efficient optimization methods, including an
economical water circulation design, fine-grained adjustments
of the cooling setting and dynamic workload scheduling for
increasing the power generated by TEGs. Based on a hardware
prototype and real-world traces from Alibaba and Google,
H2P can averagely generate 4.349 W, 4.203 W and 3.979
W (4.177 W averagely) electricity on one CPU under the
drastic, irregular and common workload traces, respectively.
The power reusing efficiency (PRE) can reach 12.8%∼16.2%
(14.23% averagely) and the total cost of ownership (TCO) of
datacenters can be reduced by up to 0.57%.