Transgender individuals in the United States face significant threats to interpersonal safety; however,
there has as yet been relatively little research in the HCI and CSCW communities to document
transgender individuals’ experiences of technology-mediated safety and harm. In this study, we
interviewed 12 transgender and non-binary individuals to understand how they find, create, and navigate
safe spaces using technology. Managing safety was a universal concern for our transgender participants,
and they experienced complex manifestations of harm through technology. We found that harmful
experiences for trans users could arise as targeted or incidental affronts, as sourced from outsiders or
insiders, and as directed against individuals or entire communities. Notably, some violations implicated
technology design, while others tapped broader social dynamics. Reading our findings through the notions
of “space” and “place,” we unpack challenges and opportunities for building safer futures with transfolk,
other vulnerable users, and their allies.
CCS Concepts: • Social and professional topics → Gender
KEYWORDS
Safe space; place; harm; gender identity; transgender; LGBTQ; intersectionality.
1 INTRODUCTION
There are an estimated 1.4 million adults in the United States who identify as transgender
[29]. Transgender (or trans) refers to a person whose gender identity is different from the one
they were assigned at birth.
1
This differs from cisgender (or cis), which refers to a person whose
gender identity aligns with the one they were assigned at birth (e.g., a person who identifies as
a woman and was born with a vagina). There has been growing public attention to the 
marginalized experiences of transgender people through dialogues around popular
entertainment (e.g., trans actress Laverne Cox), government policy (e.g., North Carolina’s
“bathroom bill” [44]), and extreme violence (e.g., the mass murder at the Pulse nightclub
[66,73]), with some arguing that trans people are at the forefront of the modern civil rights
movement [52].
The transgender population has historically experienced, and is still experiencing, high
volumes of harassment and violence [50]. In 2015, the largest survey of transgender people in
the United States––with over 27,000 respondents––found that 46% had experienced verbal
harassment, 47% had been sexually assaulted, and 54% had experienced intimate partner
violence [41]. Similarly, a 2014 study of over 200 trans women found that 53% had suffered
psychological abuse [58]. Trans people occupy a particularly vulnerable position; the National
Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs (NCAVP) reported that half of LGBTQ (Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender, Queer) people killed in hate crimes in the United States in 2009 were
transgender women [81]. Threats to safety are further amplified for transgender people of color
and homeless transgender people [41,81], a demonstration of what black feminist scholar
Kimberlé Crenshaw labeled intersectionality: the compounding effect of interlocking identities
and structures of power. [22].
In response to pervasive violence, LGBTQ individuals and women have been constructing
safe spaces for decades [43]. Safe spaces afford a degree of escape from physical, verbal, and
emotional harm, although true safety for these populations remains an ideal rather than a
reality [43]. Safe spaces are also sites for exchanging ideas and organizing collective activism
[43]. The term safe space may evoke a physical room or location, which is sometimes the case:
neighborhood blocks, community centers, health clinics, etc. [43]. But, safe spaces can also be
decentralized, like the LGBTQ community in the sprawling Los Angeles region and groups that
connect through online communities[43]. Despite the centrality of safe spaces in the ongoing
civil rights movement in the West, there has yet to be an exploration within the HumanComputer Interaction field on (1) how safe spaces manifest in the current digital landscape and
(2) how technology designers might conceptualize safe spaces that better serve populations with
multiple overlapping marginalizations.
To address the two research questions above, we chose to speak directly with some of the
most vulnerable and often overlooked members of the LGBTQ community: transgender people,
transgender people of color, and transgender women of color. We conducted 12 semi-structured
interviews to learn how transgender people experience safety in a digitally connected world.
We found, unsurprisingly, that safety was a universal concern for our participants. The novel
findings arise from the specific types of harm that participants encountered online, from how
these reflected their interlocking identities, and from how abusive users leverage technologies
to perpetrate that harm.
To unpack the ways safe spaces and experiences of harm are situated within HCI, we employ
a space and place framing as developed by Dourish in [25]. Specifically, we examine the concept
of power in space and the way experiences of power embedded in space influence experiences
of harm for transgender individuals. We explore our findings through the lens of the social
construction of both place and space towards demonstrating the role designers can play as
amplifiers of the historical experiences of trans people.
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:3
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Safety and Harm in HCI
Safety, harm, and abuse in online communities are highly situated, subjective concepts that
differ depending on context. Online platforms that attempt to maintain safe communities set
standards that vary greatly from one another, even in the way safety and abuse are defined.
Pater et al. pointed out that some technology platforms categorize the terms “abuse,” “bullying,”
“harassment,” and “hate” under the same umbrella within policy documents [59]. In the context
of this study, “safety” refers to freedom from emotional, physical, and social harm that may be
caused by—but is not always caused by—abusive behavior. This is grounded in definitions
currently used in research of safety of youth (e.g. [64,68,78]) and women (e.g. [40,61,75]) in
online communities. Similarly, this definition is also founded in queer safe space literature,
which aims to provide LGBTQ communities with spaces free of homophobia, transphobia,
queerphobia, and other identity-based discrimination and violence in which to speak and
organize freely [43].
There is ongoing investigation into the role of safety, harassment, and fear [13,14,64,68] both
online and offline within HCI and CSCW for many user populations. Much of the current work
is grounded in the ways abusive online behaviors (like harassment, trolling, bullying, and
cruelty [72]) bring harm to users, such as causing emotional distress (e.g., negative feelings or
mental health triggers [48]) or jeopardizing physical safety (e.g., death or rape threats [18,75]).
HCI researchers have explored the gendered forms of abusive behavior online, particularly as it
is aimed at women. For example, some users appropriate systems to harm others for nefarious
purposes, as demonstrated by an online event on Reddit referred to as “The Fappening,” where
users illegally hacked the iCloud accounts of celebrity women and spread their nude images
online [53]. Researchers have also pointed out the ways this type of online abuse leads to offline
harm. Poland discusses case studies of the abuse of women online and its bearings on women’s
offline lives [61]. We extend this gendered lens of abuse to focus on transgender individuals and
the nuanced ways this population experiences harm relevant to their gender identities.
To address concerns about safety and harmful behaviors, technical solutions have centered
around community awareness [46], providing peer support for harassment [9], diminishing
local crime concerns [49], and empowering victims of targeted and highly gendered violence,
like sex trafficking [74]. Others have looked to researching solutions for mitigating harmful
behavior online, through methods such as participatory design sessions [3] and automatic
detection.
Due to the ubiquity of online abuse and its associated concerns about safety, many
researchers have looked to understand the motivations behind abusive behavior. For example,
Guberman et al. have developed a scale of online aggression for use to analyze online content
such Twitter posts [31]; Cheng et al. conducted a study to identify triggers, such as a user’s
mood and the context of a discussion, that contribute to trolling behavior online [19]; Bruckman
et al. presented a panel on managing “deviant” behavior on social platforms [15]; and Blackwell
et al. ran a workshop aimed at developing a diverse understanding of abusive behavior online
[10]. These efforts have contributed to a more nuanced understanding of what can be
characterized as “abusive” user behavior and why users engage in it. Yet the complexity of
safety and abuse has made mitigating harm difficult. Blackwell et al. have pointed out that
attempts to categorize complex experiences of harm in technological solutions can be
invalidating to victims and reify structural power dynamics and have recommended centering
on vulnerable users through democratic, user-driven processes [9]. Blackwell et al. identified the 
39:4 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
lack of input from transgender-identifying participants a limitation of existing studies, including
their study, of harm and abuse online. Our study seeks to contribute to this literature by
including perspectives of transgender individuals and building on the intersections between
experiences of harm and the complexity of identity for transgender technology users.
2.2 Trans-Positive Safe Spaces and Intersectionality
Safe spaces can be traced back to the women’s liberation movement in the 1960’s United
States [43]. While safe spaces emerged as a conceptual space of resistance to violence and
freedom to organize, the term has become commonly used to denote safety from any emotional
harm or othering (being treated as abnormal or alien). The definition of safe space is fluid and
contextual; the inferred “safety” of the space varies dependent upon an individual’s identity, or
multiple identities, historical context, and geographical location (e.g. city community centers)
[43].
Online communities can also serve as safe spaces for transgender individuals. Research has
also uncovered the benefits of online communities in that they provide support and inspiration
specific to this user groups’ needs [32,33]. Technology and the proliferation of the Internet has
opened new opportunities for transgender individuals and communities to create and join safe
spaces [51]. The activities users engage in relevant to their identities transform digital spaces
into meaningful places to organize and connect with others [38]. Platforms, forums, and other
web-based apps have been adopted by trans users, even if they were not intentionally designed
to support their gender identities [34]. Despite their benefits, safe spaces are not necessarily safe
from outsiders; they can be coopted by outsiders, sometimes even through violent means [23].
Lack of safety can impact transgender individuals with various identity markers in different
ways, demonstrating a need for an intersectional approach to researching safety online.
In addition to HCI’s recent attention to uplifting voices of marginalized and vulnerable
populations, there have been recent calls to start attending to intersections of identity.
Schlesinger et al. provided a framework for approaching intersectionality in HCI research,
which they point out has not been present in much literature in the field thus far [67]. A
concept crafted by black feminist scholars, intersectionality pertains to the relationship
interlocking identities have to overlapping systems of oppression [21]. Research in feminist,
queer, and transgender studies has discussed at length the role of intersectionality in
transgender experiences (e.g. [12,47,76]) and examinations of discrimination and violence (e.g.
[41,71,73,79]). This has included conversations about the way institutions of oppression
disproportionately impact transgender women, particularly transgender women of color (e.g.
[41,73,77]).
Transgender individuals have unique experiences and perspectives as compared to cisgender
and other LGB individuals. The lack of transgender individuals’ perspectives in safety literature
within HCI and CSCW has been acknowledged as a limitation (e.g. [9]). We set out to
understand digital safe spaces for trans people and their experiences with online abuse. In this
paper, we explore trans identity in relation to other interlocking identities (such as race, class,
location, or age) which also contribute to experiences of safety.
2.3 Place-ing and Space-ing Safe Spaces
The cultural and historical production of meaning tied to both physical and virtual safe
spaces can be situated within Dourish’s conceptualization on spatiality [25]. These spaces, or
infrastructures, represent more than the physical construction of a space or artifact. Dourish and
Bell describe infrastructure as the “concrete manifestations of relationships, historical events, 
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:5
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
and institutional memories” [26]. Social context is embedded within the construction of physical
and digital space, weighting space with significant power over the way interactions take place
within and around it. In describing the construction of spatiality, Dourish references power
geometry, the way power is embedded within the architecture of a space [25]. The concept of
power geometry as described by Dourish was adopted from Doreen Massey, who describes
space as being constructed through relationships, context, and power, positioning space not as a
fixed form but as a process tied to historical, interconnected, and social powers [54]. This type
of power is demonstrated by the way categories like gender are embedded into the
organizational structures of a space [27].
Safe spaces can be defined by this perspective of infrastructure, as they are embedded with
cultural and social meaning. In Mapping Gay L.A., Kenney describes the relationship between
the political and the physical construction of space, describing safe space as being embedded
with the context of the women’s movement which developed it [43].The social, political, and
cultural contexts of safe spaces are being constantly negotiated. Safe spaces are experienced
differently by each individual, dependent on the complex nuances of an individual’s identity
and experiences, which too are shaped by the composite of power geometry enmeshed in all
spaces.
Analyzing space from the perspective of power, specifically intersectional manifestations of
power, affords a lens for viewing the way platform infrastructures provided transgender
participants with space for establishing safe spaces, as well as experiencing harm. We employ
this framing to discuss the findings of this study, as well as to delve into the design of safer
digital spaces for transgender individuals.
2.4 (Trans)gender Representation in HCI
Research on transgender identity in HCI is an important and relevant topic as transgender
rights continue to gain traction in public discourse and in the realm of academia. There is an
abundance of trans identity research in other fields, such as communication and media studies
(e.g. [16,20,24]) and feminist studies (e.g. [5,6,42]), but there has been less growth in HCI.
Within both CSCW and CHI, for example, the first publications to substantially document
transgender experiences were published just recently in 2015 [32,33]. A 2016 literature review
of all prior CHI proceedings, specifically, found there were only three papers specifically about
or involving transgender individuals [67]. Other papers in the ACM digital library have
mentioned transgender identity (often compressed into the acronym LGBT/Q) or have recruited
some transgender participants, but they do not center the transgender experience (e.g. [11]). As
lesbian, gay, and bisexual describe sexual orientation, which determines an individual’s sexual
attraction, it is distinct from transgender, which describes gender identity, an individual’s
internal sense of gender [56]. Further, feminist theorists, most notably Judith Butler, have
argued for notions of sex and gender that go beyond the solely physiological, and acknowledge
their socially constructed aspects that are sustained through socially constructed actions that
“sustain discrete and binary categories of man and woman” [16]. Our study focuses solely on
understanding aspects of the transgender experience, to give due attention to a category that is
complex in and of itself.
Many current discussions of gender in CSCW (outside of safety and harm) investigate the
relationships between men and women, including the role and language of women in maledominated online spaces (e.g. [39,60]), explorations of gendered roles in domestic technologies
[65], and designing technological solutions to improve the representation bias of women in
digital media [55]. For example, Seeman et al. describe how hypermasculinity affects the 
39:6 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
disclosure practices of male military veterans, resulting in difficulty opening up about
transitional struggles when integrating back into civilian life [69]. These works contribute to a
better understanding of the way gender is embedded into technologies, operationalized in
society, and experienced by technology users. However, they also limit their scope of examining
gendered experiences to a traditionally cisgender and binary gender categories.
Current research in HCI on the transgender population has explored technological solutions
for well-known transgender rights issues, such as bathroom access [4] or medical transitioning
[30]. There has also been exploration on the ways database constraints inhibit the
representation of complex gender identities, opening the door to more nuanced conversations
about gender categorization [37]. There has been a call to address the ways technologies that
embed gender categorizations might do harm to transgender individuals [36]. Much of the
literature also discusses transgender individuals’ experiences using online communities, like
Facebook [33] and Pinterest [32]. For example, Haimson et al. found that transgender social
media users experience stress in dealing with identity disclosure [33] and managing digital
identity when transitioning genders [34]. Similarly, Bivens et al. explored how social networks
embed gender in platform design for targeted user data collection and marketing, potentially
further shaping culture to inscribe binary conceptions of gender [8]. In addition, Ahmed
recently contributed design insights on “trans competent interaction design” grounded in
findings from a qualitative study exploring transgender individuals’ relationships with voice
and technology [2].
Recent work by Cho in New Media & Society has more directly addressed instances of harm
caused to queer users of social media, specifically due to the affordances of platforms like
Facebook [20]. However, safety online for the transgender, or LGBTQ populations in general,
has yet to be extensively studied within HCI or CSCW. We build on this work by explicitly
analyzing the experiences of physical and emotional safety for transgender users of online
communities, especially in the light of trans individuals’ largely different and specific
experiences regarding safety [41,71] in comparison to other populations.
3 METHODS
3.1 Interview Participants
We first deployed an online recruitment survey aimed at transgender and non-binary
individuals. We used this survey to collect demographic data on potential participants. We
designed the study following an intracategorical approach [67] in which we included
transgender participants across multiple identities. We sought a diverse range of gender
identities, as well as ages, races, and locations. The survey asked participants to define age,
gender identity, racial identity, and city and state, as well as an email address we could reach
them at to schedule interviews. Table 1 summarizes information about the participants.
Recruitment materials were distributed on Facebook and in trans Facebook groups. Fliers with
the survey link were also posted in trans-positive brick-and-mortar locations in [anonymized]
city. The authors also enlisted personal contacts active in the local LGBTQ community to
distribute materials. We then sorted through 40 responses to the initial recruitment survey
recorded over the course of 2 weeks, reading through each participants’ self-identified
demographics. We selected 12 interview participants with the intent to balance the
demographic data collected, focusing primarily on ensuring diversity of gender identity and
racial identity. Each participant was compensated with a $20 Amazon gift card.
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:7
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
 Table. 1. A table summarizing the demographics of participants. All demographics were self-reported by
participants. The six demographical categories are: G (gender), R (race), P (pronouns), L (location), and A
(age). All participants also had a college education or were currently in college. We use participants’ selfidentified gender pronouns throughout this paper.
3.2 Interview Design
We designed an interview protocol aimed at exploring the experiences transgender
individuals have regarding safety in both the physical world and online. We chose to do
qualitative interviews rather than surveys in order to gather detailed and contextual
information from our participants. While previous work related to transgender participants in
HCI has utilized surveys [1,33,34], our choice to do qualitative interviews was modeled after indepth analyses of transgender populations and intersectionality within the trans population in
the social sciences [70,71]. Interviews offer richer insight into the complexities of identity and
safety among our participants and also elevate our participants’ voices in defining their own
experiences [28].

2 we refer to P12 with the pronouns ey/em/eir throughout this paper.
Participants
G P R L A
P1 Non-Binary Trans
Masculine
He/Him Black Suburban 21
P2 Non-Binary Trans Woman She/Her & They/Them White Suburban 19
P3 Non-Binary Male He/Him or They/Them Black Suburban 19
P4 Trans Feminine She/Her & They/Them Black / Mix Urban 19
P5 Genderqueer They/Them Black Jamaican Suburban 22
P6 (Trans) Woman She/Her White Suburban 62
P7 Trans Male He/Him White Rural 20
P8 Non-Binary They/Them White/Latine Urban 28
P9 Trans / Gender NonConforming
They/Them or She/Her White Urban 33
P10 Trans Woman She/Her Turkish / Pakistani Urban 28
P11 (Trans) Female She/Her White Suburban 66
P12 Bigender Ey/Em
2
or They/Them White / Japanese Urban 23
39:8 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
Interview questions were designed to elicit perspectives about safety and practices of
community-building both online and offline. In contrast, we also asked questions that probed
experiences of harm both online and offline, as well as how online experiences of harm affected
offline life. Participants were not asked whether or not they were perpetrators of harm
themselves. At the beginning of the interview, we asked participants to describe facets of their
identities, including and beyond gender. Although we did not ask specifically about if/how
these identities participate in shaping experiences of safety and harm, most all participants
referred back to interlocking identities in their narratives. The protocol also aimed at
discovering what types of technologies participants had these experiences using.
We conducted two pilot interviews; the second pilot later became a participant. We used data
collected during the pilot interviews to iterate on the interview protocol before conducting
phone interviews. We recruited 12 participants the for in-depth phone interviews. The average
length of an interview was approximately 85 minutes. The first author was the primary
interviewer in all interview sessions. All phone interviews were recorded using an app with
participant consent. Some participants referenced specific incidents or websites, which the first
author located in the form of original forum posts and news reports and stored digital copies of
for analysis. Phone interviews were chosen for numerous reasons. Firstly, the participants
selected for interviews were dispersed, with some residing in different areas of the city and
others residing in suburban and rural areas. Transportation was potentially an issue for
participants. Secondly, as demonstrated by the literature above, safety was of a large concern to
this participant population. In considering both participant safety (who might view researchers
as potentially anti-trans) and researcher safety (who may attract anti-trans individuals with
recruitment materials), phone interviews were considered a better method than in-person
interviews. Furthermore, participants who have regular experiences of misgendering may fear
being misgendered in person by researchers. Thirdly, the questions being asked in the
interviews probes deeply emotional and potentially troubling content. Phone interviews were
chosen over video due to easier coordination and flexibility for participants, as some
participants chose to interview while on the go. It also ensured those with slower connection
speeds could still participate in the study. For these reasons, we believed it would be easier for
particularly participants with multiply-marginalized identities to participate fully on the phone,
rather than in person.
3.3 Interview Analysis
Following the completion of the interviews, the first author transcribed each interview. All
authors listened to the interview recordings and took separate notes. We then discussed the
themes that arose in the interviews and recorded high-level thoughts. After completing the
transcriptions and reviewing the data, the first author conducted a round of initial coding of the
concepts that emerged in the data. These concepts were continuously developed through
numerous rounds of independent segmented coding. Codes were grouped through the process
of focused coding as relationships between initial codes emerged. Focused codes represented the
larger themes of the data, while open codes were used to denote instances of these themes. The
codes were then iteratively and collaboratively refined for each research. We conducted
clustering activities using both white boards and sticky notes to draw out similarities between
the codes. The finalized codes were clumped into descriptive categories which encompassed
numerous instances found in the data. 
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:9
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
4 FINDINGS
In organizing the findings, we first present the ways participants describe experiences of
harm and lack of safety in offline contexts. We then present the ways participants found
technology and the Internet to promote safe spaces for expressing their identities and finding
community. These findings reiterate previous work on the benefits online spaces provide
transgender individuals. We then present findings that contrast the Internet as solely a safe
space for transgender individuals. Participants detail the ways that online spaces and
technology augment an already unsafe offline world for transgender technology users. These
findings are organized into six categories of harm participants described experiencing.
4.1 Transgender Safety: “I Feel Unsafe All the Time, Really”
Participants (8 of 12) expressed feeling unsafe on a regular basis in non-technology-mediated
situations and shared the sentiment voiced by P10 in the heading of this section: almost all
spaces are unsafe. Participants described being yelled at and accosted by strangers. For example,
P6 expressed being spat on, being called cruel names, and feeling physically threatened while
she was in her car; she also describes knowing friends who were beaten for being transgender.
Moving through public spaces in a city where gender-based violence is frequent was a
reminder that emotional and physical vulnerability were real. P2, P3, P4, P10, and P12 noted that
being in the city and on the street made them feel particularly vulnerable. This vulnerability
manifested for participants in a multitude of ways. P2 explained feeling unsafe was due to the
high statistics of violence transgender women face. P3 said if they dressed more “femme,” they
get harassed on the street. P12 described the city ey (pronoun) lived in was altogether unsafe,
adding that “any place that’s unsafe in general is going to be more unsafe for trans and queer
people.” P4 explained that she “get[s] coffee a block down from a place where a trans woman was
killed two years ago.” She described this awareness as a reminder of her own susceptibility to
violence as a trans feminine person.
Various identity markers signified people who might be dangerous: neo-Nazis (P2, P4), “antisocial justice warriors” (anti-SJWs; P2, P7), conservatives (P2, P7, P8), “confederate flag bearers”
(P7), the alt-right (P1, P7), “TERFs” (Trans-Exclusionary Radical Feminists; P11), “country people”
(P8), Christians (P11), and “trans chasers” / “fetishists” (P1, P2, P3). Many participants described
being wary of cisgender men as a broader group (P1, P2, P3, P4, P7, P8, P10, P11). P2 said this
was because cisgender men had a tendency to be “more outwardly transphobic.” P7 said men
tended to look at him “weirdly” and that, if he imagined a situation where he’d have “an
imminent level of concern for [his] physical safety,” it would be due to a cisgender man. P4 simply
stated that “women aren’t as evil as men.”
Participants described being aware of the ways intersectional systems of power also
impacted safety (P1, P2, P4, P5, P6, P7, P10, P11, P12). P2, P6, and P10 spoke about the risk of
violence that comes with being a trans woman of color, a trans sex worker, or both. P6
specifically pointed out that trans women of color are being murdered at a high rate; P4
specified she knew of 15 at the time of her interview. P2, P4, and P10 explained that
heterosexual trans women were at a higher risk of violence compared to lesbian trans women
or trans women who refuse to date men. P10 identified “toxic masculinity” and “fragile 
39:10 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
masculinity” as the source of male violence towards trans women, which she stated are upheld
by American legal institutions through “trans panic”3
defense arguments. She discussed the
ways her experiences as a trans woman differed than those hold differing identities:
“I know that based on my social position … I’m from a middle-class family and I’m lightskinned … [I am] more secure than a black trans woman …or trans woman who’s a sex worker,
or a trans woman whose straight and dates men or has to interact with men for her survival.” –
P10
Even identities which our participants did not hold could complicate the way trans people
assess unsafe situations. P4 described the identities strangers project onto her when being
harassed or threatened on the streets of her city:
“Does this person think that I’m a gay man and he's calling me a faggot from across the street?
… Does this person know that I’m trans and think that I’m trying to deceive him personally? Or
is this person a white person who is yelling at me for being black and taking up space? … I’m
always thinking about that as I’m navigating spaces. Like, what could this person hate me for?”
–P4
P4’s anecdote also spoke to the way other identities beyond being a trans woman impacted
her experiences of safety. Being both black and a trans woman compounded the type of
harassment she faced on the street, as well as how she processed harmful situations. These
experiences demonstrate the unique perspectives transgender individuals have on physical
safety, including how feminine trans identity affected perceptions and experiences of safety.
The physical world was a place fraught with unsafe situations, where participants faced a range
of physical and emotional harms. The digital world hosted safe spaces that participants used to
improve this situation.
4.2 Safe Spaces and Technology Mediation: “How Could You Be Trans Before the
Internet?”
Participants articulated the revolutionary role of the Internet in building safe, supportive,
and affirming spaces for transgender individuals, not only in their online lives, but also in
existing offline spaces. Both P6 and P11 came out as transgender before the Internet was widely
used, and faced challenges that are more easily overcome in the digital era. Overall, the most
common platforms participants viewed positively were Facebook (P3, P4, P5, P7, P12) and
Tumblr (P3, P7, P10, P12).
Not only was the Internet considered a provider of safety, but it was also a source of personal
and social liberation: “Undoing years of repression that every single trans person has” (P2). The
Internet was considered so essential to transgender identity that younger adults often asked P6,
now in her 60s, “How could you be trans before the Internet?” Technology has supported trans
users in finding a language for understanding their own identities, connecting with strangers
online, providing platforms for activism, and maintaining safety. Below, we share some of the
ways participants found digital spaces enabled identity exploration and access to peer support.

3
a legal defense employed by a defendant of a violent crime claiming that temporary insanity caused their violent
behavior towards a transgender person
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:11
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
4.2.1 Finding a Language, Finding a Voice
The Internet has helped many participants come to see themselves by helping them
collaboratively develop a vocabulary to describe their identities (P2, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P11). For
P5, this meant finding words that fit the way they saw themselves. Participants also described
disagreements or personal ways of defining language. For example, P8 described the tension
between defining gender-neutral terms for their ethnicity, and their disagreement with the
more common “Latinx” over “Latine.” P10 described how trans language, which is often
negotiated between trans people of differing identities, affects the way trans users adopt
technology:
“People feel like they have to know the cultural language in order to use the hashtags. They have
to understand, and they have to buy into or identify with these labels that already exist, where
the language that’s being used isn’t necessarily static. It’s always changing in the culture.” –P10
In some instances, accessing new vocabulary for identity online provided emotional support
to participants who described experiencing emotional harm offline. For example, P6 recalled a
time when she did not have access to supportive resources or community as she tried to make
sense of her identity:
“When the only info about … you comes out of abnormal psychology books, or little ads in the
back of porno magazines, it’s hard to figure out that this is something natural, normal, part of
life … [Before the Internet] we were lonely, alone, scared.” –P6
Connecting to other trans people online provided affirmation, proof that participants were
not alone, and sounding boards for grappling with identity questions:
“Having Facebook as a global community that I can bounce things, ideas, off of––‘Am I the only
person who’s … this way?’––and then finding out that I’m not.” –P4
In addition to helping trans people see themselves, online spaces also helped to further
empower trans people to make themselves seen. For example, P4 used the Internet to further
engage in local activism crucial to her identity. P12 shares resources about trans terms on eir
Tumblr blog. Other participants post art they have created related to their trans experiences,
such as P7 who writes poetry and P9 who creates comics.). Online safe spaces allowed
participants to further engage in, share, and enjoy their interests relevant to their trans
identities.
3.3.2 Strangers Consoling Each Other
The Internet was often a place where participants could find and curate safe spaces by
surrounding themselves with other trans individuals. Specifically, its ability to create
connections that transcend physical space is significant for building community and personal
support structures for trans users. Participants used various platforms to form and maintain
connections with other trans users. P1 used Twitter to keep in touch with other trans friends;
P2 first met another trans person on a video game called Space Station 13; and P8 described
social media as a “connector for trans people in [my city],” showing that the Internet benefitted
the creation and maintenance of collocated offline relationships as well as distributed ones.. P7 
39:12 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
explained the benefits of being able to separate offline social ties from supportive online social
ties:
“When I wasn’t out yet [offline], I didn’t have to worry about confiding in people that are
already very integrated into [offline] communities where I don’t feel safe. It was nice to have
strangers consoling each other [online].” –P7
P7’s word implicitly denote the safety consequences of confiding in certain people offline,
whereas talking to strangers on the Internet acted as a buffer from offline consequences. The
affordances of the web were particularly useful to trans participants with interlocking
marginalized identities. For example, P5, a black genderqueer person, used Google to search for
other black non-binary people because they could not find these connections offline. These
examples indicate the way the Internet provides space for emotional safety that may not be
available to trans individuals offline.
4.2.2 Using Technology for Activism and Outreach
Participants used the Internet as a means to organize and engage in social justice activism.
For example, P8 described how important Facebook is for organizing in their city by local trans
rights groups. P4 also used social media to participate in social action beyond state lines. She
noted that thousands of people can sign a petition online and described how she could show
solidarity of a protest of a cake shop in North Carolina that denied a wedding cake to a gay
couple. She also talked about using information people post online to promote sensitivity about
transgender issues in the offline world:
“Somebody will say, ‘This place denied me service cuz [sic] I was trans’ and I’ll call that business
or take that back to [anonymous organization] and be like this place was transphobic, what do
we do? Do we get a training, or do we call someone?” –P4
P6 discussed how social media allows activists to “expand [a] live event into a virtual event.”
She hosted a local showing of a transgender documentary on Facebook Live to promote
understanding and a sense of safety for genderqueer youth in her local community:
“The young people who were genderqueer … in the audience, to hear a positive response from
people in their community to this documentary, it must have felt good. It must have felt like, ‘I
can be okay, I feel safe in this community.’” –P6
These examples show the ways participants used technology to augment the ways they
engaged with their communities offline, synthesizing online and offline tactics to promote
safety and community for transgender individuals.
4.2.3 Using Technology for Physical Safety
Participants (P4, P5, P7, P9, P10) used information online to avoid or minimize exposure to
unsafe spaces in the offline world, often by fluidly transitioning between online and offline
spaces to maintain safety. P4 would check public transit online to minimize the risk of street
harassment. P4 also explained that trans people use online crowdfunding platforms, like
Kickstarter, to fundraise for gender affirming surgery or to find safe housing, which help
mitigate exposure to physical and emotional harm. P5 researched “the general demographics of
the area” before going somewhere to avoid unsafe spaces. P7, P9, and P10 all mentioned an app
that helps transgender people find safe, gender neutral bathrooms nearby. P1 used mobile 
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:13
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
technology to connect him with family and friends who could help navigate threats in the
offline world:
“I use Find My Friends, which allows [my family] to see my location, and if I’m out, my friends
might say, ‘Oh, message me when you get home safely.’” –P1
Other participants used technology to disconnect from abusive strangers. For example, P4
relied on mobile technology to filter out street harassment offline:
“Headphones are the greatest weapon against harassment and misgendering for an urban
transgender … I put in headphones and I can’t hear people yell shit at me.” –P4
Participants used the safety of connected mobile technologies to enhance their feelings of
safety in unsafe offline environments. Yet, P4 thought technology could only help so much. She
believed seeking advice from local elders in the community, either offline or online—(who could
tell younger trans people things like: “don’t go to this place, they'll fuck you up’ or ‘don’t speak
with this person, they’ll sexually assault you’” (P4))––was the most effective way of staying safe.
That technology only helped transgender individuals so much reflects the remainder of our
findings. While pervasive technologies offered safe spaces for support and safety, we also found
that they enabled harm to transgender individuals.
4.3 Harm and Technology Mediation: “I Have Been Harmed”
Participants saw the Internet as a tool for safety through connecting with trans-positive
people and insulating themselves from trans-negative people. However, online spaces can also
be appropriated by what P2 called “abusers,” or abusive users. The same affordances that make
the Internet a place for trans organization also enabled abuse by anti-trans people:
“There’s always a loophole or a backdoor for people … who would want to access information
with the intent of harming trans people. The thing on the Internet that I’m most afraid of is …
places that give people who want to hurt us or harm us a place to organize.” –P7
Although considered the most positive platform among our participants, P1, P4, and P10
noted negative aspects of Facebook for trans individuals as well. P1 said “certain portions of
really big social media sites, like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram ... are vehemently transphobic.” He
expressed that abusive anti-trans users occupied much of the space on social media platforms.
P10, despite finding the platform important for organizing as well, also described being upset
with the way Facebook handles the banning of activists.
Abusers made up all or parts of digital platforms—Reddit (P4, P7, P9, P10, P12), YouTube (P9,
P12), Twitter (P1, P9), Facebook (P1), Instagram (P1), 4chan (P1), 8chan (P2), and various dating
apps (P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P7, P9)—unsafe for trans people. Participants describe the different,
multi-faceted, and often overlapping forms of harm experienced online. We describe these
forms of harm as Outsider Harm, Insider Harm, Targeted Harm, Incidental Harm, Individual
Harm, and Collective Harm. In the content below, we present findings representing each of
these.
39:14 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
4.3.1 Outsider Harm
Outsider harm is defined by anti-trans harm perpetrated by individuals outside of
participants’ social circles or the larger transgender population. In a defining example, P11
describes the way the Internet gives abusive users access to transgender “enemies” they can
harass:
“[The Internet] has … given [reactionaries] the power to identify ‘the enemy’. If somebody’s a
right-wing religionist who feels that trans individuals are an abomination, technology has given
them the ability to identify who those abominable people are.” –P11
Affordances of web-based technology and online platforms have allowed outsider to be
appropriate technology and attack transgender users. While some participants used anonymity
as a tool for safety, it also enabled harassment and abuse online. Participants identified websites
that they considered unsafe due to anonymity or polynimity, such as 4chan (P1), 8chan (P2),
Tumblr (P12), Reddit (P12), and YouTube (P12). P1 called this anonymity a “shield people will
hide behind” in order to participate in trans-antagonistic behavior. P9 and P12 break down the
ways a websites’ reputation impacts why they view it as unsafe:
“Reddit has the reputation of being the land of trolls. YouTube, also, though not as bad as Reddit,
but I’d also put it on the list.” –P12
“The thing about Reddit is that there’s all these sub-communities that have very strong opinions.
I think there are very white supremacist communities ... I generally stay away from internet
communities because they’re typically a lot of, even if it’s the vocal minority, you can get a lot of
vitriol.” –P9
P10 explained that on Tumblr, trans people use hashtags like #mtf (male to female) and
#trans to find each other, but there are people who troll these hashtags by using them to
annotate trans-negative posts. Other participants came across anti-trans content on forums that
disturbed them:
“The website 8chan—I stumbled across board called ‘transfags’, which is basically bunch of cis
men talking about how they want to brutally murder or hate crime trans women and
encouraging them to kill themselves.” –P2
Lack of safety on online platforms was also attributed to homogenous online “bubbles” (P9)
of “destructive” (P9) anti-trans communities. P9 described these bubbles as “the tension between
finding [one’s] own community, which has certain homogeneity in a way, … but at same time
[allowing] destructive communities to live in isolation.” P1 described how such homogenous user
demographics of websites determine how unsafe they are to trans users, “like 4chan where alt
right movement is transphobic.” –P1
4.3.2 Insider Harm
Insider harm was committed against participants by individuals who were within participant
social circles, the larger LGBTQ population, or spaces considered otherwise trans-positive or
safe. Some participants (P2, P4, P9, P10) described incidents of harm in spaces they regularly
sought comfort and validation. P2, who enjoys online gaming, feels the need to sacrifice her 
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:15
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
gender identity when using voice chat and “will accept fact everyone will assume [she] is male.”
P9 described using both YouTube and Reddit for education trans-related content, but also
witnessing cruel behavior on those platforms. Similarly, P10 stopped going on Reddit for
information about transgender identity due to the “toxic” content she found.
People within LGBTQ groups and communities can also display anti-trans or anti-nonbinary attitudes, which P4 refers to as “lateral violence” (bias perpetrated from within a
population or community, rather than from those on the outside). This is exemplified when P1
said he had interactions with other trans people in comments sections where he was told “nonbinary is not real” and it “[makes] ‘real’ trans people look bad.” P2 described an online
community of trans women called “Baeddels” who used abusive tactics to harm other trans
individuals.
Awareness that people within your own community or from “inside” your social circle could
be harmful led participants to alter their online behavior to protect themselves. For example, P4
chose not to post some things on social media, and spent time deleting others:
“[I deleted my] old name, and just shit that could be dragged up to disparage me … People will
lurk on my page just to get material to fuel their hate-filled whatever against me.” –P4
Altering behaviors in response to experiences of harm was not limited to insider harm, but
was also discussed in many of the overlapping types of harm participants described.
4.3.3 Targeted Harm
Targeted harm was categorized as abuse, harassment, or cruelty aimed directly at
participants. For example, P12 received hateful anonymous messages on eir trans Tumblr blog,
and anti-trans users invaded eir trans Discord chat servers that ey advertised on eir blog.
“A group of people decided to start invading the servers and they made a huge campaign on the
“aspec” (asexual spectrum) [server]. They were known to have abused and stalked one user and
they were trying to shit on the staff everywhere they could. on Tumblr, on discord. one was
harassing me via discord and … so if they had more personal info about me they would probably
use it in really bad ways.” –P12
Participants (P1, P2, P4) also described being subject to direct objectification online by users
with “toxic fetishizing attitudes” (P2), called “trans chasers” (P2, P3). These users targeted trans
individuals with invasive questioning about their bodies that “invalidate[d]” (P1) their trans
experience. For example, P1 said that people “message [him] on dating apps and ask ‘What's in
your pants, or what really are you?’” P4 said this was a common experience for trans women on
dating apps, and she has also received “jarring” messages that were “unwelcome and unwanted
overly aggressive sexual things.”
“[On dating apps], you either get not many responses—because people don’t see you as attractive
because you’re trans—or you get a lot of messages that are invasive and aggressively sexual in
nature.” –P2
Bridging offline connections with those trans users meet online can also be risky, even if the
other did not necessarily appear abusive. While many users of localized meet-up apps, like 
39:16 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
dating apps, likely take precautions, our trans participants were wary of the dangers of meeting
users offline due to their gender identities. For the trans population, transphobia on localized
meet-up apps have dangerous implications for those who meet others offline. P2 described a
friend who appropriated dating apps in order to do sex work who “was held at knifepoint” (P2)
after going to meet their client. P8 also described taking safety measures when using dating
apps, as well as feeling the need to describe intimate details about their body to avoid negative
reactions from others:
“[When I used Grindr] and I was meeting somebody, I would tell friend and let them know where
I was going … just to be safe, as a safety precaution … I think about, “Do I have to tell people
certain things about my body in order to feel like they’re not going to react a certain way?’” –P8
4.3.4 Incidental Harm
Incidental harm described abusive or harmful content witnessed by participants, but which
was not directed at them specifically. This included observation of comments, conversations,
posts, pictures, ads, and news articles. Participants more commonly experienced incidental harm
than targeted harm; still, participants attributed negative emotional and mental outcomes from
observing this content. Witnessing anti-trans and LGBTQ content resulted in emotional
distress.
In one instance, P8 witnessed an incident on Facebook after the 2016 U.S. presidential
election that made them feel “anxious” on the platform. As a result, they restricted their
Facebook use to direct messaging friends and finding events:
“[My queer friend’s] family members piled on him … saying things like … ‘Why would you want
gay marriage if you’re just gonna get AIDS and we’ll have to pay for your healthcare?’ … His
family has not … no one is speaking to him.” –P8
Some participants felt the way digital technology and social media is designed allowed for
negative experiences. Participants expressed that portrayals of trans people online are often
“starkly cis people’s perspectives, whether it’s well intentioned or not” (P8) and tend to propagate
“misinformation” (P10) about trans people. P4 and P9 attributed the way some platforms bred
unsafe spaces to the lack of consideration or understanding of trans peoples’ needs:
“There’s massive problems in the way that dating apps are structured that make them
unwelcome for trans people … There’s no dating app for me that I can be like ‘You know what, I
don’t wanna see any cis people.’” –P4
“They’re not made with the concerns I would have in mind. Like, the way that Twitter has
really allowed a lot of awful trolling, for example. That’s just a clear demonstration that their
values are different than my values.” –P9
P3 described a specific example of incidental harm caused by platform design: the way
targeted ads on Facebook can “inadvertently out” people by revealing their gender identity to
others who might see their screen. In another instance, Facebook’s auto-play video feature
resulted in P4 unexpectedly witnessing triggering (emotionally distressing) content:
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:17
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
“A video of a Brazilian transgender woman being beaten to death, and it was an autoplay video
on Facebook … Seeing the death of black people recurring over and over again [on social media] got
to be incredibly frustrating and hurtful.” –P4
Participants seeking out positive resources sometimes came across negative ones by accident.
P9 recalls looking for trans resources on Reddit and stumbling across a TERF subreddit (a usercreated forum hosted on the website Reddit) they originally thought was trans affirmative,
while P10 describes the impact this content had on her own self-image.
“When I first found [this group], I was like, ‘Oh cool, a trans group, this’ll be fun, there's a
community for me here’… I didn’t understand all the acronyms at first … then I realized this was
just a group that was really upset about trans people taking away what it means to be like
female.” –P9
“[On Reddit, there were] subreddits for people who believed it was a sexual fetish. … That made
me feel more pathologized, more fucking deviant or abnormal because I was reading this fucked
up shit people were writing.” –P10
P10 also stated that this experience resulted in her no longer seeking out information on
trans identity on Reddit, demonstrating the ways harm, in this case incidental harm, may
impact user behavior on forums and social media.
4.3.5 Individual Harm
Individual harm described harm that impacted a specific individual, rather than a collection
of individuals. This harm could be committed by outsiders or insiders, and in some cases could
be targeted or incidental.
One impact of harmful behavior that was a major concern for participants (P2, P3, P8, P10,
P12) was “outing” (having one’s trans identity disclosed without consent). Participants’ fears of
repercussions from being outed included: being kicked out of one’s home (P12), having trouble
getting hired (P10), being harassed by coworkers (P9, P12), oneself or one’s relatives being fired
from their job (P8, P12), having one’s home vandalized (P8), and being physically or sexually
assaulted (P12). P12 also described the fear of anti-trans abusers finding em offline:
"There are people [online] who … want to rape, or beat up, or kill people who are queer, and so if
they knew where I lived or they found me on the street at night, then they might try that.” –P12
Stalking was a concern for participants (P2, P10, P12). Cyberstalking (also “cyberbullying” or
simply “online harassment”) describes the use of technology to monitor, threaten, and harass
participants; for our participants, this was motivated by their gender identity. This practice was
also often perpetrated by strangers on the web, but also by those close to participants. P11
explained various ways she has been the target of stalking by TERFs and how it affected her
offline life:
“I had one TERF call family members of mine and tell them I was crazy and needed to be
institutionalized and that I have, because I’ve medically transitioned … self-mutilated my body.”
–P11
One participant (P2) was outed due to stalking from an insider, a family member who found
trans content on her Tumblr blog. Despite being careful to make two social media accounts to 
39:18 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
conceal her gender from family, she was unexpectedly confronted by her mother about being
trans:
“I specifically limited my online presence because I knew that my mom sort of stalked my
internet presence to try to figure out stuff about me … I would keep my Tumblr blog in like a
hidden mode … Previously she’d actually physically taken my computer and gone through my
browser or my chat history.” –P2
Cyberstalking can also be accompanied by doxxing, where online abusers publish personal,
identifying information of a person online with the intent to harm. P10 found her name on an
online list and was afraid of the implications it could have offline, including job security:
“There was someone who had a list of trans people. You would go on this thing online—basically,
if you were public in anyway, you could find yourself. I could find myself … I don’t know how
they did it, maybe they scraped Google searches … Honestly it looks like something just used for
doxxing … It was pretty fucking scary ... That person never asked me if I could be on that thing.”
–P10
P10’s fear was enhanced by the non-consensual nature of her identity being posted online by
a stranger and where the data on her identity was taken from. These concerns contrast the web
affording trans people opportunities for safely making themselves seen or participating in
activism.
4.3.6 Collective Harm
Collective harm had implications beyond the individual and could affect larger trans
communities. For example, some participants (P4, P7) talked about local trans safe spaces being
targeted by anti-trans communities online. P4 explained that neo-Nazis identified brick-andmortar DIY (do it yourself) spaces—which often serve as affordable housing and places of free
expression for trans community members—and then mobilized on Reddit and 4chan to shut
them down. Both P4 and P7 stated that their city’s own DIY space was targeted, leaving many
trans people homeless. P4 described the way intersectional systems of power influence these
sorts of tactics:
“Racism and white supremacy is always at play in the suppression of black art and getting black
artists out of housing. It was all incredibly racist. It was all homophobic, transphobic, it was all
of that. It’s classist, it’s all of that.” –P4
P7 provided researchers with screenshots of this online organizing. The researchers then
found the forum on 4chan’s board, /pol/, to discover that the abusers P4 referenced called
themselves the “Safety Squad” and replicated digital iconography of Pepe the Frog4
and the Nazi
party’s stylized “SS”5
to brand their effort. They used the web to find and catalog DIY spaces in

4
a meme appropriated by the alt-right to become a racist hate symbol
5
short for “Schutzstaffel,” the Nazi party’s governmental body, literally meaning “Protection Squadron” 
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:19
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
urban cities around the county. Then, they used social media to coordinate distributed efforts to
alert local officials about these locations and have them closed, under the guise of preventing
another fire like that in Oakland, California’s Ghost Ship DIY space [80].
These stories provided by participants offer insight into the ways malicious online
organizing can impact transgender individuals and their communities. As demonstrated by
these findings, while many transgender technology users find online spaces beneficial, they also
experience harmful and threatening interactions of a type previously unexplored in HCI. These
findings show the complex interactions transgender technology users experience when
engaging in social spaces, and the implications of those interactions for both online and offline
life.
Figure 1. An anonymous post in 4chan's /pol/ ("politically incorrect" forum) discussing the shutdown of the
trans-inclusive DIY space P7 named.
Figure 3. A meme posted on the same /pol/ thread tallying the number of DIY safe spaces for whose
shutdown users claimed responsibility and/or took credit.
5 DISCUSSION
Current research regarding transgender individuals’ experiences with technology addresses
the important issues of digital gender representation [8,34,35] and support for the transition
process [30,33]. Adding to this growing corpus, the present study sought to understand
relationships of transgender individuals to safety with sensitivity to the role played by technical
devices and applications. Much like prior work from the social sciences concerning the LGBTQ
community and safe spaces online [51], we found that the digital technology affords
community-building by facilitating language development, connecting empathetic strangers,
and enabling pro-trans activism. However, unlike prior research from the social sciences or
otherwise, we documented faceted ways in which safe spaces can become stages for interactions
that do harm to transgender and gender non-conforming technology users.
Below, we synthesize the facets of harm identified in this study into a figure that
foregrounds the ways these facets can overlap and interact, with regard for how this format 
39:20 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
contributes to previous work [9]. We then consider how safe space can be read through
Harrison and Dourish’s [25,38] notions of space and place, to demonstrate how the behaviors
we observed are neither new or unpredictable phenomena. We argue that the “technological
structures around which social practices emerge”––for example, the design of the Facebook
wall––“are themselves the outcomes of other forms of social practice – political, organizational,
economic, historical, and more [25].” To demonstrate this, we lay out two examples that help us
see new opportunities for technology design of safer spaces and places.
5.1 Experiences of Harm are Salient and Diverse for Transgender Technology Users
Based on experiences and perspectives shared by our participants, we identified six
intersecting facets of harm (Figure 2). This flat, overlapping representation highlights that
relationships between facets were not hierarchical, and that relationships within facets were not
mutually exclusive: for example, incidents of individual harm may cause collective harm if
observed by other community members. While this model compiles a taxonomy of harm, we
agree with Blackwell et al. [9] that the model may invalidate the feelings of those whose
experiences do not fit within its borders. We therefore see this as one possible lens for
understanding the range of harm experienced by transgender individuals. It is also worth noting
that the circles on the diagram are of equal size solely for convenience; we did not find that
each facet of harm was experienced by every participant, and/or with equal frequency.
Our general findings about harm are not limited to technology-mediated contexts; they
replicate years of prior work in the social sciences. Studies of both technical and non-technical
environments have documented similar phenomena: studies of marginalized communities, like
Figure 2. Visual representation of the six forms of harm identified through qualitative
analysis of interviews. We conceptualize these as three intersecting facets: (1)
Outsider/Insider harm; (2) Targeted/Incidental harm; and (3) Collective/Individual harm.
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:21
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
women and trans youth, have uncovered a range of experiences that illustrate how abusers
incur different forms of targeted, individual harm by intentionally harassing, cyberstalking and
trolling victims [68].
In studying safety, prior research has tended to LGBTQ identities as presenting a unified
front [51], which would suggest that harm comes from the outside (e.g., from neo-Nazis).
However, we document that much of the harm experienced by participants was instead
encountered in interactions within their own social circles: lateral, or “peer-to-peer,” violence.
We call this insider harm, though these phenomena are increasingly reported by journalists
(e.g., [45]).
For technology designers seeking to address issues of safety with technology, it may be
natural to focus on the most visible, easy-to-categorize, or troubling types of harm––for
example, the intentional harm perpetrated by neo-Nazis. However, this fails to recognize the
more normative, incidental, subtle, and mundane violations (e.g., microaggressions)––enacted
even by people who use the system in the ways preferred by design scenarios. These types of
harm, while less “flashy,” may contribute to the “death-by-a-thousand-cuts” experienced by
trans individuals on a daily basis [19].
5.2 Space, Place, and Power Geometries
It might be tempting to infer from the previous section that the challenge we face as
technology researchers and designers is to predict the behaviors of “bad actors” and the tactics
they use to harm others as per Harrison and Dourish [38], the challenge is that bad actors
participate in the cultural construction of harmful spaces. But a focus solely on the cultural
production of abuse and harm via technological platforms erroneously assumes that “safe space”
can only be read as––again, as per Harrison and Dourish––places. It finds fault with people but
not with the tools they use. We wish to reinforce that safe spaces are still spaces, and that leads
us to interesting insights from Dourish [25] regarding the cultural production of space.
Drawing from cultural theorist Michael de Certeau and Doreen Massey, Dourish argues that
space is constructed within specific power relationships that differentially affect how people
can move through it. Namely, those who create the spaces (e.g., designers of Twitter) have
control over the broad narrative and flows within the space, and those who inhabit the space
(e.g., users of Twitter) are in a relative position of weakness. Further, different social groups and
individuals have varying degrees of control over their movement through the space. Dourish
borrows Massey’s terminology, “power geometries,” to capture this notion. An important
implication of this reading of space is that, because it is socially constructed and exerts power, it
can reproduce and sustain extant power structures. In the following two sections, we explore
how our findings provide additional examples of power geometries at work in the context of
transgender experiences of technology-mediated spaces.
Power Geometries Example 1: Redlining and Redditing
Dourish describes how the design of a space can limit how people with marginalized
identities are able to move within it: “the production of space is conditioned by one’s access to
and legitimacy within that space” [25]. Similarly, our participants described how users of digital
platforms like 4chan utilize their modern digital resources to attempt to remove transgender
individuals from their housing. These users appropriate the platforms’ affordances of
anonymity to enable themselves to be effectively untouchable while intervening in the
livelihoods of people with comparatively less spatial access and power. P4 described this social
practice as being heavily linked to racism, transphobia, and classism. Circling back to Dourish
39:22 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
[25], we see how well this example fits Doreen Massey’s notion of power geometries: “Different
social groups have distinct relationships to these anyway-differentiated mobility: some are more
in charge of it than others; some initiate flows and movement, others don’t; some are more on
the receiving end of it than others; some are effectively imprisoned by it.”
This example of technology appropriation in order to run trans people out of safe spaces is
not a new phenomenon at all. Consider, for example, the historical practice of 'redlining': the
class- and racially-motivated practice of financial institutions withholding capital and thereby
locking primarily black neighborhoods into continuous cycles of poverty [57]. Modern DIY
artist spaces described by participants are themselves the result of unaffordable housing,
historical poverty that impacts vulnerable populations, related patterns of gentrification, and
contentious relationships between community members and city officials [62]. We therefore see
the appropriation of 4chan, anonymity, and search engines, to displace trans people from their
safe spaces, to be an extension of a long history of power geometries that restrict spatial access
of marginalized people.
Power Geometries Example 2: Intersectionality and Hate Speech Policies
We found that intersectionality was a salient frame for understanding our participants’
experiences of harm. For example, many of our trans women participants reported being
targeted specifically regarding their identities as trans women, as opposed to their identity as
trans. A recent report from The New York Times revealed that official Facebook training
document for employees hired to spot and flag hate speech do not incorporate an intersectional
perspective. For example, one of the guidelines suggests that the statement “black people should
still sit at the back of the bus” would be considered hate speech, but “poor black people should
still sit at the back of the bus” would not be considered hate speech [17]. The interlocking
identities of class and race negate rather than compound each other, rendering lower-class
people of color effectively invisible and even less protected by the policy.
Again, in this example, we see how the power geometries of the space (the formal rules
governing what speech is possible on Facebook) are echoes of those that have played out for
decades in various contexts. We can compare this example to the one cited in 1989 by Kimberlé
Crenshaw, who coined the term intersectionality [21]. She was inspired by the power structures
in place which rendered black women invisible to antidiscrimination laws—laws that protected
white women and black men separately, but not black women. Again, overlapping marginalized
identity categories further confined a person’s access to space.
Crenshaw’s insight carried forward nearly two decades has led to more nuanced
understandings of interlocking identities. Misogyny aimed at transgender women, for example,
has had its own term since 2007––transmisogyny––and has been well documented in reports
about violence towards the LGBT community [41]; in 2015, we gained transmisogynoir, or
misogyny aimed at transgender women of color [73,79]. Yet, in the year 2017, Facebook hate
speech policies reflect no understanding of intersectionality.
5.3 Design of Safe Spaces and Safe Places
In the previous sections, we have made the case that safe spaces that are digitally mediated
can be understood through the lens of power geometries; designers (of technology or otherwise)
enact power relations on people who inhabit those spaces in ways that reflect their differential
identities. Further, the designs of these spaces are themselves socially constructed, and reify the
political, organizational, economic, and historical contexts in which they were made. It is
therefore no surprise that key observations from our study, in which relatively new 
Safe Spaces and Safe Places 39:23
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
technologies are being put to use, are resonant with patterns of historical oppression that long
predate the 4chans and Facebooks and Tumblrs of our time. What are software engineers to do?
We again turn to Dourish for a hopeful refrain: "recent technological developments provide
opportunities to re-encounter and re-imagine everyday space.” In our current investigation, we
see how lack of awareness of intersectional power structures simply reproduces power
inequities that beget harm. In this case, the “re-encountering” and “re-imagining” is forced on
trans people, in the sense that they experience recurring reminders of their own vulnerability,
not unlike an autoplay video on a Facebook news feed of a trans woman being murdered. The
hopeful message is that each new design can be an opportunity for designers to re-encounter
and re-imagine and break cycles from a position of relative power. We present two
recommendations, made visible by this space-place framing of trans safe spaces.
1. Designers can exercise their space-constructing power to protect against abusive
behavior. CSCW researchers are currently exploring abusive behavior and how best to mitigate
it [9,15], and working with marginalized populations to uncover issues of safety and abuse
perpetrated through technology (e.g. [9,64]). As abusive users commonly appropriate
technologies to harm others, designers can make efforts to understand the methods, intentions,
and motivations of these bad actors. Additionally, they can seek to understand how power is
being enacted and reified on their platforms, beyond intentionally abusive individuals. Rather
than viewing harmful and abusive behavior as “layered” onto technologies after their
conception [25]—and hence offloading all responsibility to users—designers can choose to
examine the very structures of their technological creations and the way they enable harm
against marginalized individuals.
2. Cisgender designers should amplify the voices of marginalized users. Our
transgender participants, just like those involved in prior research [7,36], demonstrated deep
knowledge and thoughtfulness about gender theory, cultural practice, and the deep-rooted
histories of oppression against marginalized communities. Yet participants expressed frustration
with which technologies they felt reflected solely cisgender perspectives. Leveraging
transgender individuals’ expert knowledge of gender may help cisgender designers incorporate
more nuanced, holistic perspectives into gendered technology features that could benefit users
of all genders. Designers should access the rich history of knowledge about intersectional
marginalization that activists and scholars have documented for decades, so they can
understand how to sensitively fold them into new policies, practices, and software encodings.
6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Diversity among participants was sought in order to explore safety with an intersectional
lens. Despite this effort, participants were all college-educated or currently attending college.
Additionally, we asked participants to self-report socioeconomic status without clear ranges.
Self-reporting of participant income was unreliable for determining accurate diversity among
socioeconomic status, thus could not be accurately used to analyze participant data collected
from interviews. The small sample size also limited the diversity of narratives collected during
this study. In the future, we would like to seek out a broader pool of diverse transgender
participants with more clearly defined educational and socioeconomic backgrounds. Analyzing
educational and socioeconomic backgrounds could bring new insights to research on
transgender technology users.
39:24 M. K. Scheuerman et al.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 155, Publication date: November 2018.
7 CONCLUSION
There is increasing interest in understanding how technology design can support transgender
individuals within CSCW and HCI. However, little is known about trans experiences of safety
and abuse as mediated through technology. To address this gap, our study documents how the
high risk of violence and harassment transgender individuals face are amplified through
prevalent digital systems. Many participants felt unsafe due to the intentional exploitation of
unforeseen affordances of mundane technologies by other malicious parties. Additionally, we
found that the same tools that afford safety for trans individuals––search engines, social media
applications, discussion forums, blogging tools, hashtags, etc.––also afford targeting,
infiltrating, and abusing them. We argue that “place” and “space” provide a lens with which we
can motivate technology designers to include marginalized histories in design towards safer
spaces for trans people.