Abstract—Quantum computers have recently made great
strides and are on a long-term path towards useful faulttolerant computation. A dominant overhead in fault-tolerant
quantum computation is the production of high-fidelity encoded
qubits, called magic states, which enable reliable error-corrected
computation. We present the first detailed designs of hardware
functional units that implement space-time optimized magic-state
factories for surface code error-corrected machines.
Interactions among distant qubits require surface code braids
(physical pathways on chip) which must be routed. Magic-state
factories are circuits comprised of a complex set of braids that
is more difficult to route than quantum circuits considered in
previous work [1]. This paper explores the impact of scheduling
techniques, such as gate reordering and qubit renaming, and
we propose two novel mapping techniques: braid repulsion and
dipole moment braid rotation. We combine these techniques with
graph partitioning and community detection algorithms, and
further introduce a stitching algorithm for mapping subgraphs
onto a physical machine. Our results show a factor of 5.64
reduction in space-time volume compared to the best-known
previous designs for magic-state factories.
Index Terms—Quantum Computing, Quantum Error Correction, Surface Code, Magic State Distillation
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computers of intermediate scale are now becoming
a reality. While recent efforts have focused on building Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) computers without error
correction, the long-term goal is to build large-scale faulttolerant machines [2]. In fault-tolerant machines, typical quantum workloads will be dominated by error correction [3]. On
machines implementing surface code error correction, faulttolerant operations known as magic-state distillation will make
up the majority of the overhead. The problem of achieving
effective magic-state distillation is two-fold: 1) useful quantum
applications are dominated by magic-state distillation, and 2)
their support is extremely expensive in both physical area and
latency overhead. The innovations in this paper address the
largest obstacle facing large-scale quantum computation.
Magic-state distillation requires the preparation (i.e. distillation) of high-fidelity logical qubits in a particular state,
which can enable the execution of fault-tolerant instructions.
§These two authors contributed equally.
These states require expensive, iterative refinement in order to
maintain the reliability of the entire device.
This work proposes optimizations for the architectural functional units (i.e. “factories”) to generate magic states. Using a
realistic resource overhead model, we introduce optimization
techniques that exploit both instruction level scheduling as
well as physical qubit mapping algorithms. Our approach
analyzes and optimizes, for the first time, fully mapped and
scheduled instances of resource state generation units known
as multilevel block-code state-distillation circuits. We develop
novel technology-independent heuristics based upon physical
dipole-moment simulation to guide annealing algorithms aiming to discover optimized qubit register mappings. We use
these along with a new combination of conventional compiler
methods to exploit structure in the distillation circuitry. Together, these techniques reduce resource overhead (space-time
volume) by 5.64x. We make use of a novel software toolchain
that performs end-to-end synthesis of quantum programs from
high level expression to an optimized schedule of assembly
gate sequences, followed by intelligent physical qubit register
allocation, and surface code simulation.
Our techniques are based on analysis of circuit interaction
graphs, where nodes represent qubits and edges represent
operations between the endpoints. We show that a combination
of graph partitioning-based mapping procedures and dipolemoment driven annealing techniques work well on structured
surface code circuits. State distillation circuits can be subdivided cleanly into sets of disjoint planar subgraphs. We find
that each of these planar subgraphs can be mapped nearly
optimally. The higher level structure of the distillation circuits introduces non-trivial permutation steps between circuit
subdivisions as well. We present an algorithm that combines
optimized subgraph mappings with a force-directed annealing
technique that optimizes the transition between the levels
of the circuit. This technique is compared to conventional,
global methods that optimize for specific characteristics of the
interaction graph. The planar graph extraction and “stitching”
technique outperforms global methods.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We study the characteristics of two-qubit interactions in
828
2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
978-1-5386-6240-3/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/MICRO.2018.00072
surface code error corrected machines, and show strong
correlation between circuit latency and the number of
edge crossings in the circuit interaction graph.
• We use this information to develop a heuristic inspired
by simulation of molecular dipoles, and show that this
can be used to generate low-latency qubit mappings by
reducing edge crossings.
• We exploit the structure of the state distillation circuits
to optimize individual rounds of distillation separately,
and combine these rounds with optimized permutation
networks to generate the lowest resource-overhead implementation of distillation units to date.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
describes quantum computation, surface code error correction,
and magic state distillation in more detail. Section III describes
related work that aims to optimize state distillation. Section
IV clarifies and summarizes the techniques we use to result
in efficient factory circuits. Sections V and VI specifically
describe the scheduling properties of these circuits and mapping techniques along with heuristics utilized to optimize the
procedures. Section VII describes in greater detail the fully
optimized algorithm for achieving efficient factory circuits.
Section VIII describes the results we obtain. Finally, Sections
IX and X discuss future work and conclude.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Basics of Quantum Computation
Quantum computation involves the manipulation of fragile
quantum states by operating on quantum bits (qubits). Each
qubit is capable of existing in a superposition of two logical
states |0 and |1 written as a linear combination |ψ = α |0+
β |1, for complex coefficients α, β such that |α|
2 + |β|
2 = 1.
Upon measurement, the qubit state “collapses” to either |0 or
|1. |α|
2 and |β|
2 correspond to the probability of obtaining
a |0 or |1 respectively. It is sometimes useful to visualize
the state of a single qubit as a vector on the Bloch sphere
[4, 5], because we can reinterpret the state |ψ in its spherical
coordinates as |ψ = cos (θ/2)|0 + exp (iφ) sin (θ/2)|1.
Any operations (quantum gates) performed on a single qubit
can thus be regarded as rotations by some angle ϕ along some
axis nˆ, denoted as Rnˆ(ϕ). This work focuses on the phase
gate (S ≡ Rz(π/2)), the T gate (T ≡ Rz(π/4)), and the most
common two-qubit gate called controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate.
Quantum computing systems are commonly characterized
by the maximum supportable space-time volume of a computation. This is the product of the number of qubits in the
system with the number of operations (i.e. timesteps) that can
be performed on the system reliably [6]. Reliable machines can
be built in a variety of ways, each of which may result in a
different combination of physical qubit count and computation
time. To capture this, the space time volume of a computation
is a useful metric by which computations and architectural
solutions can be compared.

	


	


	

	



 
	



 
	

Fig. 1: An array of (blue) logical qubits in a quantum processor. Highlighted lines indicate braids implementing two qubit
interactions. These braids must exist spatially and temporally
as pathways between qubits. This introduces communication
congestion that depends upon specific architectural designs.
Braid A and B are crossing braids, which cannot be executed
simultaneously, while braid C is isolated and free to execute.
Bottom-right inset represents a single logical qubit tile comprised of approximately d2 physical qubit.
B. Surface Code Error Correction
Quantum states decohere over time which can result in
performance loss and failure to produce the correct output.
In order to maintain the advantage that quantum computation
offers while balancing the fragility of quantum states, quantum
error correction codes (QECC) are utilized to protect quantum
states undergoing a computation. One of the most prominent
quantum error correcting codes today is the surface code
[7–9]. These codes are a family of quantum error correcting
codes that encode logical qubit states into the collective state
of a lattice of physical qubits utilizing only nearest neighbor
interactions between qubits designated as data and ancilla
qubits. For a comprehensive introduction see an excellent
tutorial in [8].
An important parameter of the surface code is the code
distance d. The surface code can protect a logical state up to a
specific fidelity PL, which scales exponentially with d. More
precisely, PL ∼ d(100	in)
d+1
2 , where 	in is the underlying
physical error rate of a system [8]. Each logical qubit is made
up of approximately d2 physical qubits, as Fig. 1 shows.
C. CNOT Braiding
A braid, as illustrated in Fig. 1, is a path in the surface
code lattice, or an area where the error correction mechanisms
have been temporarily disabled and which no other operations
are allowed to use. In other words, braids are not allowed to
cross. In braiding, a logical qubit is entangled with another
if the pathway encloses both qubits, where enclosing means
extending a pathway from source qubit to target qubit and
then contracting back via a (possibly different) pathway. These
829
paths can extend up to arbitrary length in constant time, by
disabling all area covered by the path in the same cycle.
D. T Gates in Quantum Algorithms
S and T rotation gates are important operations in many
useful quantum algorithms, and their error-corrected execution
requires magic state resources. When the number of T gates
in an application is low, the circuit is in fact able to be
efficiently simulated classically [10]. T gates have been shown
to comprise between 25% and 30% of the instruction stream
of useful quantum applications [3]. Others claim even higher
percentages for specific application sets, of between 40% and
47% [11].
For an estimate of the total number of required T gates in
these applications, take as an example the algorithm to estimate the molecular ground state energy of the molecule Fe2S2.
It requires approximately 104 iteration steps for “sufficient”
accuracy, each comprised of 7.4 × 106 rotations [12]. Each
of these controlled rotations can be decomposed to sufficient
accuracy using approximately 50 T gates per rotation [13]. All
of this combines to yield a total number of T gates of order
1012. As a result, it is crucial to optimize for the resource
overhead required by the execution of T gates at this scale to
ensure the successful execution of many important quantum
algorithms.
E. T Magic States
T and S gates, while necessary to perform universal quantum computation on the surface code, are costly to implement
under surface code. The number of T gates present in an
algorithm is the most common metric for assessing how
difficult the algorithm is to execute [14, 15]. To achieve faulttolerance, an ancillary logical qubit must be first prepared in
a special state, known as the magic state [16]. A distilled
magic-state qubit is interacted with the data to achieve the T
gate operation, via a probabilistic injection circuit involving 2
CNOT braids in expectation. For simplicity, because of their
rotation angle relationship, we assume all S gates will be
decomposed into two T gates.
These ancillary quantum states are called magic states
because they enable universal quantum computation. Magic
states can be prepared using Clifford quantum operations
[16]. Since the task of preparing these states is a repetitive
process, it has been proposed that an efficient design would
dedicate specialized regions of the architecture to their preparation [9, 17]. These magic state factories are responsible for
creating a steady supply of low-error magic states. The error
in each produced state is minimized through a process called
distillation [18].
F. Bravyi-Haah Distillation Protocol
Distillation protocols are circuits that accept as input a
number of potentially faulty raw magic states, use some
ancillary qubits, and output a smaller number of higher fidelity
magic states. The input-output ratio, denoted as n → k,
assesses the efficiency of a protocol. This work focuses on
… … … …
… …
…
…




… …
…


  

 

 

	


Fig. 2: The recursive structure of the block code protocol.
Each block represents a circuit for Bravyi-Haah (3k + 8) → k
protocol. Lines indicate the magic state qubits being distilled,
and dots indicates the extra k+5 ancillary qubits used, totaling
to 5k+13. This figure shows an example of 2-level block code
with k = 2. So this protocol takes as input (3k + 8)2 = 142
states, and outputs k2 = 4 states with higher fidelity. The
qubits (dots) in round 2 are drawn at bigger size, indicating the
larger code distance d required to encode the logical qubits,
since they have lower error rate than in the previous round
[20].
a popular, low-overhead distillation protocol known as the
Bravyi-Haah distillation protocol [18, 19].
To produce k magic states, Bravyi-Haah state distillation
circuits take as input 3k + 8 low-fidelity states, use k + 5
ancillary qubits, and k additional qubits for higher-fidelity
output magic states, thus denoted as the 3k + 8 → k protocol.
The total number of qubits involved in each of such circuit is
then 5k+13, which defines the area cost of the circuit module.
The intuition behind the protocol is to make good magic
states out of bad ones. Given a number of low-fidelity states,
the protocol uses a syndrome measurement technique to verify
quality, and discards states that are bad. Then, the circuit will
convert the subset of good states into a single qubit state. The
output magic states will have a suppression of error, only if
the filtering and conversion follows a particular pattern. This is
specified by the parity-check matrix in the protocol. Notably, if
the input (injected) states are characterized by error rate 	inject,
the output state fidelity is improved with this procedure to
(1+ 3k)	2
inject. Due to the filtering step, the success probability
of the protocol is, to first order, given by 1−(8+3k)	inject+··· .
G. Block Codes
Magic state distillation circuits operate iteratively and hierarchically. Often one iteration of the distillation procedure
is not enough to achieve the desired logical error rate for a
given program. In these cases, squaring the input error rate
will not achieve the required logical error rate to execute the
program. Instead, we can recursively apply the Bravyi-Haah
circuit a number 
 times, in order to achieve the desired error
830
rate [21]. Constructing high fidelity states in this fashion is
known as block code state distillation.
As Fig. 2 illustrates, 
 level implementations of this procedure can be constructed recursively that support k total output
states at fidelity ∼ 	2
inject, while requiring (3k+8) input states.
The structure of the multi-level block code distillation
protocol requires that each module takes in at most one state
from each module from the previous round. This is because
the magic states produced by one module may have correlated
errors. So in order to avoid having correlated error in the inputs
to the next round, each magic state from one module must be
fed into a different module.
At the end of each individual module, error checking is
performed. If the ancillary states show correct measurement results, the procedure was successful. Additional quality checks
were proposed by [20], which inserts a checkpoint at the end
of each level of the factory. This checkpoint discards groups
of modules when it detects failure within any of the modules
in a group.
Within any particular round r of an 
-level magic state
factory, the number of physical qubits required to implement
that round defines the space occupied by the factory during
round r. Because the output error rates drop each round, the
required code distance increases accordingly. By the “balanced
investment” technique shown in [20], each logical qubit in
round r is constructed using ∼ d2
r physical qubits, where
each dr varies with each round. The idea is to use a smaller
code distance to encode a logical qubit in earlier rounds of
distillation to minimize area overhead.
In general, any particular round r may require several
groups of Bravyi-Haah circuit modules. We denote the number
of groups and number of modules per group as gr and mr
respectively. The number of physical qubits qr required to
implement that round scales exponentially with 
 − r as:
qr = mr−1 r g−r r (5k + 13)d2
r. This exponential scaling plays a
key role in our mapping techniques.
III. RELATED WORK
Other work has focused primarily on optimizing the efficiency of the magic state distillation protocol. The original
proposal [22] considered a procedure by which 15 raw input
states would be consumed to produce a single higher fidelity
output state. Later works [18, 21, 23] each explore different
realizations of procedures that distill high fidelity magic states,
with each procedure optimizing for asymptotic output rate
and increasing this rate from the original proposal. These
approaches tend to omit overheads related to actual circuit
implementations.
Several prior works [19, 20] have attempted to reduce the
circuit depth of an explicit implementation of the Bravyi-Haah
distillation circuit, as well as perform a resource estimate by
considering the rates at which these factories fail. Specifically,
the work [19] by Fowler et al. is used as a baseline in this
paper.
Additionally, several efforts have been made to build compilers and tools to be more precise about resource estimation

   




" 

 












	





 

"
 





 
!

!
!!#
!!$
!!%
Fig. 3: Flow chart for the overall approach, along with the
section numbers corresponding to each component.
quantification in topological quantum error corrected systems
[24–26]. These techniques have resulted in tools that are used
to compile and schedule arbitrary quantum circuits to topological assembly, and topological braid compaction techniques are
used to reduce circuit depth expansions.
Systems level analysis has been performed by two related
projects [3,11], in which the former optimizes the structure of
early distillation protocols, and the latter proposes a microarchitectural accelerator to handle large amounts of error
correction instructions that exist in fault tolerant machines.
Surface code braid scheduling costs were analyzed in [1]
using an end-to-end toolflow. The work focused on the resource impact of the choice of different implementation styles
of surface code logical qubits. That work provides a toolchain
upon which we have built in order to optimize scheduling and
mapping procedures, as well as perform circuit simulations.
Our work introduces the complexity of braid scheduling into
the analysis of the structure of the leading state distillation
procedures in an attempt to concretize the procedures into real
space and time resource costs. The new annealing heuristics
(e.g. dipole-moments) developed specifically for this purpose
also generalize well to any circuit executing on a fault tolerant
machine that uses braiding to perform two-qubit gates.
IV. OUR APPROACH
In order to minimize the space-time volume spent on multilevel magic state distillation, our approach takes advantage
of the unique characteristics of the state distillation circuitry.
831
(a) Planar interaction graph of a capacity
8, single level factory
(b) Non-planar interaction graph of a capacity 4, two level factory
(c) Multi-level factory interaction graph
with community structure
Fig. 4: Interaction graphs of single and two level factories, and community structure of a capacity 4 two level factory. Each
vertex represents a distinct logical qubit in the application, and each line represents a required two (or more) qubit operation.
(a) shows that the single level distillation circuit has planar interaction graph, so mapping vertices to physical location in
quantum processor is relatively simple. Each level in a multi-level factories like (b) have these planar substructures, but the
permutation edges between rounds destroy the planarity of the two-level ineraction graph. (c) shows that we can leverage the
planarity within each level by exploring community structure of the interaction graph, as shown in Section VI.
We decompose the problem into two aspects – scheduling gate
operations and mapping qubits into 2-D mesh. These two are
intertwined, as the schedule determines what pairs of qubits
need to interact, and mapping influences which subset of them
can interact in the same cycle. An important tool used to
perform these optimizations is the program interaction graph,
from which circuit structure can be extracted. In particular,
we combine the fact that these state distillation circuits are
characterized by natural subdivisions between levels of the
factory, with the ability of graph partitioning embedding
techniques to nearly-optimally map small planar subgraphs of
the program. We exploit this information to design a procedure
that decomposes state distillation into components that are
independently optimized. The flow chart of the procedure is
illustrated in Fig. 3.
Levels of the factory are joined by a specific permutation of
the output states exiting from previous rounds of distillation,
which appears to impose significant overhead on the whole
distillation process. To address this, a force-directed annealing
algorithm is used in conjunction with ideas inspired by Valiant
intermediate-destination routing for permutation networks [27]
to reduce the latency of these permutation steps between block
code levels.
The next few sections describe the scheduling and mapping
optimizations decoupled from one another, in order to show
the specific strengths and weaknesses of each. Section VII then
synthesizes these optimizations into a single procedure.
V. SCHEDULING
This section describes the impact of instruction level optimizations: gate scheduling and qubit reuse. A schedule of a
quantum program is a sequence of gate operations on logical qubits. The sequence ordering defines data dependencies
between gates, where a gate g1 depends on g0 if they share
a logical qubit and g1 appears later in the schedule sequence
than g0.
A. Gate Scheduling
The impact of gate scheduling can be quite significant in
quantum circuits, and many algorithm implementations rely
upon the execution of gates in parallel in order to achieve
substantial algorithmic speedup. Gate scheduling in quantum
algorithms differs from classical instruction scheduling, as
gate commutativity introduces another degree of freedom for
schedulers to consider. Compared to the field of classical
instruction scheduling, quantum gate scheduling has been
relatively understudied, with only few systematic approaches
being proposed that incorporate these new constraints [28].
In exploring these effects applied to Bravyi-Haah state
distillation circuits, we find that these optimizations are limited
in their effectiveness. While intuitively the modularity of
the block code construction would allow for early execution
of gates arising in late rounds of the distillation procedure,
the checkpoints required to implement module checking as
described in section II-G limit the magnitude of gate mobility.
The structure of the block code circuitry only allows for a
small constant number of gates to by executed early, outside
of the rounds from which they originate. Because of this,
the maximum critical path extension by the introduction of
a barrier preventing gate mobility outside of the originating
round is equal to this small constant multiplied by the number
of block code iterations. The benefit of inserting a barrier at
the end of each round is to create clean divisions between the
rounds. As Fig. 4 shows, the interaction graph for a single
round is a planar graph, while this planarity is destroyed as
rounds are added. Barriers expose this planarity, making the
circuit easier to map. Barriers in these circuits can be inserted
by adding a multi-target CNOT operation into the schedule,
controlled by an ancilla qubit initialized into a logical |0 state,
832
and targeting all of the qubits that the schedule wishes to
constrain.
Additionally, gate scheduling order has significant impacts
on network congestion. Scheduling these small constant number of gates early therefore runs the risk of causing congestion
with previous round activity. This can in fact extend the circuit
latency, even though the circuit has executed gates earlier in
the schedule.
Overall, the insertion of a barrier appears to not significantly
alter the schedule of circuit gates. It does, however, change
the interaction between the schedule and a particular physical
qubit mapping. This relationship will be explored in more
detail in Section VII.
B. Qubit Reuse
We show in this section that an important schedule characteristic of the block protocol to leverage is the hierarchical
structure of the distillation circuit. Between two rounds of
the procedure, all ancillary qubits will be measured for error
checking at the end of the previous round, and reinitialized
at the beginning of the next round. This type of data qubit
sharing (which we call “sharing-after-measurement”) is a false
dependency, because they can be resolved by qubit renaming.
Now this naturally leads to the question: (how) should we
reuse the qubits between multiple rounds?
The first approach we explore is to prevent any false
sharing of the qubits, at the cost of larger area, by always
allocating new data qubits for different rounds. This removes
all dependencies due to ancillary qubits, leaving only true
dependencies on qubits generated in the previous round. This
minimizes execution time at the cost of extra qubits (and
space).
The second approach is to strategically choose which qubits
from the previous round to be reused for the next. This approach directly reduces the area needed for the entire factory,
at the cost of introducing false dependencies.
In order to make intelligent decisions on which set of ancillary qubits to reuse, it requires us to have information about
the topological mapping of the qubits, since mapping and
reuse decisions together significantly influence the congestion
overhead of the circuit. We will discuss the subtleties of the
tradeoff in more detail later in Section VII.
VI. MAPPING
This section describes the impacts of qubit mapping decisions on the overall circuit overhead. Given a schedule we
can define a program interaction graph as a graph G = (V,E)
where V is a set of logical qubits present in the computation,
and E is a set of two-qubit interaction gates contained in
the program (e.g. CNOT gates). By analyzing this graph, we
can perform an optimized mapping, which assigns a physical
location for each logical qubit q ∈ V .
Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b depict a single level and a two level
factory, respectively, and distinct graph properties are available
to analyze for each. The corresponding program that generates
Fig. 4a is shown in Fig. 5. The single level factory is a planar
1 // Bravyi-Haah Distillation Circuit with K=8, L=1
2 #define K 8
3
4 module tail(qbit* raw_states, qbit* anc, qbit* out)
{
5 for (int i = 0; i < K; i++) {
6 CNOT ( out[i] , anc[5 + i] );
7 injectT ( raw_states[2 * i + 8 + i] , anc[5 + i]
);
8 CNOT ( anc[5 + i] , anc[4 + i] );
9 CNOT ( anc[3 + i] , anc[5 + i] );
10 CNOT ( anc[4 + i] , anc[3 + i] );
11 }
12 }
13
14 module BravyiHaahModule(qbit* raw_states, qbit* anc,
qbit* out) {
15 H ( anc[0] );
16 H ( anc[1] );
17 H ( anc[2] );
18 for (int i = 0; i < K; i++)
19 H ( out[i] );
20 CNOT ( anc[1] , anc[3] );
21 CNOT ( anc[2] , anc[4] );
22 CXX ( anc[0] , anc , K );
23 tail( raw_states , anc , out );
24 for (int i = 1; i < K + 5; i++)
25 injectT(raw_states[2 * i - 2], anc[i]);
26 CXX ( anc[0] , anc , K + 4 );
27 for (int i = 1; i < K + 5; i++)
28 injectTdag(raw_states[2 * i - 1], anc[i]);
29 MeasX ( anc );
30 }
31
32 /* Single-level circuit requires a single module.
33 * Multi-level circuits would require more modules
34 * and barriers in this function. */
35 module block_code(qbit* raw, qbit* out, qbit* anc) {
36 BravyiHaahModule( raw , anc , out );
37 }
38
39 module main ( ) {
40 qbit raw_states[3 * K + 8];
41 qbit out[K];
42 qbit anc[K + 5];
43 block_code( raw_states , out , anc );
44 }
Fig. 5: Example implementation [19, 29] of a single-level
Bravyi-Haah distillation circuit generating K = 8 output
magic states, in Scaffold language [30]. The corresponding
interaction graph is illustrated in Fig. 4a. injectT and
injectTdag implement the probabilistic magic state injection
described in II-E. CXX implements a single-control multi-target
CNOT gate.
graph. While the two level factory is constructed using many
instances of the same single level factory, the requirement for
states to be permuted between levels breaks the planarity of the
resulting interaction graph. This has significant consequences,
and we will leverage them in Section VII.
In order to execute state distillation most efficiently, we must
minimize both the area required for the factory as well as the
latency required to execute the circuit. Braid operations, while
latency insensitive, still cannot overlap with one another. If an
overlap is unavoidable, then one operation must stall while the
833
 
 

 







	
 



  	


                  
 



	




   	

  



 
  	

 
	

               
 



	
   	


 


 
  	

 
	

        
		
		
		
		
 		
		

		
			
   	


   
  	

 
	
	 
   
	 
 
  	 
 
Fig. 6: Heuristics (top) and metrics (bottom) used in our mapping algorithms, as described in Section VI-B and VI-A
respectively. From left to right, edge length is minimized by vertex-vertex attraction, edge spacing is minimized by repulsion
forces on the midpoints of edges, and edge crossings are minimized by applying rotational forces to edges emulating a magnetic
dipole moment. For each metric, the correlation coefficient (r-value) is calculated across a series of randomized mappings of a
distillation circuit, and latency is obtained through simulation, shown in bottom figures. The r-values of metrics with latency
are r = 0.601, −0.625, and 0.831, respectively. The underlying intuition is that shorter edge length, larger edge spacing and
fewer edge crossings will result in fewer braid conflicts and shorter overall latency.
other completes. As a consequence, we aim to minimize the
number of these braid “congestions”.
A. Heuristics for Congestion Reduction
Three common heuristics which we analyze for minimizing
network congestion are: edge distance minimization, edge
density uniformity, and edge crossing minimization. We see
that they each correlate in varying degrees with actual circuit
latency overhead for these quantum circuits, as shown in
Fig. 6.
1) Edge Distance Minimization: The edge distance of the
mapping can be defined as the Euclidean distance between the
physical locations of each endpoint of each edge in the interaction graph. Intuitively, in classical systems network latency
correlates strongly with these distances, because longer edges
require longer duration to execute. As discussed in Section
II, for surface code braiding operations, there is no direct
correspondence between single edge distance and single edge
execution latency. However, longer surface code braids are
more likely to overlap than shorter braids simply because they
occupy larger area on the network, so minimizing the average
braid length may reduce the induced network congestion.
2) Edge Density Uniformity: When two edges are very
close to each other, they are more likely to intersect and cause
congestion. Ideally, we would like to maximize the spacing
between the edges and distribute them on the network as
spread-out and uniformly as possible. This edge-edge repulsion heuristic therefore aims to maximize the spacing between
braid operations across the machine.
3) Edge Crossings Minimization: We define an edge crossing in a mapping as two pairs of endpoints that intersect in
their geodesic paths, once their endpoint qubits have been
mapped. These crossings can indicate network congestion,
as the simultaneous execution of two crossing braids could
attempt to utilize the same resources on the network. While
the edge crossing metric is tightly correlated with routing
congestion, minimizing it has been shown to be NP-hard
and computationally expensive [31]. An edge crossing in a
mapping also does not exactly correspond to induced network
congestion, as more sophisticated routing algorithms can in
some instances still perform these braids in parallel [32]. Some
algorithms exist to produce crossing-free mappings of planar
interaction graphs, though these typically pay a high area cost
to do so [33].
Fig. 6 summarizes the correlation of each of these three
metrics to surface code circuit latency.
B. Mapping Algorithms
With these metrics in mind, we explore two procedures
designed to optimize mappings. First, we employ a local,
force-directed annealing optimization technique designed to
transform the optimized mappings of Fowler et al. [19] discussed in Section III, specifically targeting optimization of the
aforementioned metrics. Next, we compare this to a mapping
procedure based upon recursive graph partitioning and grid
bisection embedding.
1) Force-Directed Annealing: The full force-directed (FD)
procedure consists of iteratively calculating cumulative forces
and moving vertices according to these forces. Vertex-vertex
834
attraction, edge-edge repulsion, and magnetic dipole edge
rotation are used to calculate a set of forces incident upon
each vertex of the graph. Once this is complete, the annealing
procedure begins to move vertices through the mapping along
a pathway directed by the net force calculation. A cost metric
determines whether or not to complete a vertex move, as a
function of the combination of average edge length, average
edge spacing, and number of edge crossings. The algorithm iteratively calculates and transforms an input mapping according
to these force calculations, until convergence in a local minima
occurs. At this point, the algorithm alternates between higher
level community structure optimizations that either repulse all
nodes within distinct communities away from one another, or
attract all nodes within a single community together, which
breaks the mapping out of the local minimum that it has
converged to. This procedure is repeated until reaching a prespecified maximum number of iterations.
Within an interaction graph, subsets of qubits may interact
more closely than others. These groups of qubits can be
detected by performing community detection analysis on an
interaction graph, including random walks, edge betweenness,
spectral analysis of graph matrices, and others [34–39]. By detecting these structures, we can find embeddings that preserve
locality for qubits that are members of the same community,
thereby reducing the average edge distance of the mapping
and localizing the congestion caused by subsets of the qubits.
Edge Distance: To minimize the overall edge distance
of the mapping, the procedure calculates the centroid of
each vertex by calculating the effective “center of mass” of
the neighborhood subgraph induced by this vertex, i.e. the
subgraph containing only the vertices that are connected to
this vertex, along with the corresponding edges. The center
location of this set is calculated by averaging the locations
of all of the neighbors, and this is assigned as the centroid
for this vertex. This creates an attractive force on this vertex
that is proportional in magnitude to the distance between the
vertex and the centroid, as shown in the top-left panel in Fig.
6. Forces of this type are standard in graph drawing techniques
[40].
Edge Density: In an attempt to optimize and uniformly
distribute the edge density of the mapping, repulsion forces
are defined between each pair of distinct edges on the graph.
Specifically, for each pair of edges, a repulsion force is created
on the endpoints of magnitude inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between the midpoints of the edges. This
force law is reflected in many typical graph drawing techniques
as well, that aim to uniformly distribute graph vertices and
edges [41, 42].
Edge Crossings: Even though directly minimizing edge
crossings in a graph is in general a difficult task to perform,
we can approximate it by modeling each edge as a magnetic
dipole moment, and the rotational forces applied on each edge
will prefer (anti-)parallel orientations over intersecting ones,
as shown in Fig. 6. North and south poles are assigned to
every vertex in the graph, and attractive forces are created
between opposing poles, while repulsive forces are added
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
Theoretical Lower Bound
2 4 6 8 12 16 20 0
20 000
40 000
60 000
80 000
100 000
Capacity (states)
Latency (cycles) (a) In single-level factories, both
techniques can nearly optimally
execute these circuits, even as
capacity increases.
  	



 
   

 
  	
    



 

  	
   	
(b) In two-level factories, the difference between the theoretical
lower bound and the attained circuit latencies widens.
Fig. 7: Overall circuit latency obtained by graph partitioning
embedding on single and two level distillation factories. Theoretical lower bounds are calculated by the critical path length
of the circuits, and may not be physically achievable.
between identical poles. The assignment of the poles is done
by producing a 2-coloring of the interaction graph. Notice
that the graph is not always 2-colorable, and it usually is
not. However, within each time step in the schedule, a vertex
(qubit) can have degree at most 2, and is always acyclic. This
is because we have a schedule that contains only 2-qubit gates
and single-control multi-target CNOTs. Any two gates cannot
be performed on the same qubit simultaneously, and the multitarget CNOTs will look like a vertex-disjoint path.
Community Structure Optimizations: To respect the proximity of the vertices in a detected community, we break up
our procedure into two parts: firstly, impose a repulsion force
between two communities such that they do not intersect and
are well separated spatially; secondly, if one community has
been broken up into individual components/clusters, we join
the clusters by exerting attracting forces on the clusters. In
particular, we use the KMeans clustering algorithm [43,44] to
pinpoint the centroid of each cluster within a community and
use them determine the scale of attraction force for joining
them.
2) Recursive Graph Partitioning: To compare against the
local force-directed annealing approach, we also analyzed the
performance of a global grid embedding technique based upon
graph partitioning (GP) [45–47]. In particular, we utilized a recursive bisectioning technique that contracts vertices according
to a heavy edge matching on the interaction graph, and makes
a minimum cut on the contracted graph. This is followed by an
expanding procedure in which the cut is adjusted to account
for small discrepancies in the original coarsening [48, 49].
Each bisection made in the interaction graph is matched by a
bisection made on the grid into which logical qubits are being
mapped. The recursive procedure ultimately assigns nodes
to partitions in the grid that correspond to partitions in the
original interaction graph.
The primary difference between these two techniques is
that the former force-directed approach makes a series of
local transformations to a mapping to optimize the metrics,
while the graph partitioning approach can globally optimize
the metrics directly.
835
3) Scalability Analysis: We can now compare the computational complexity of the two graph optimization procedures.
Suppose we have an interaction graph of n vertices and m
edges. Each iteration of the force-directed annealing procedure
consists of three steps, vertex attraction, edge repulsion, and
dipole moment rotation. In the worst case, the attraction
forces are computed along each edge in O(m) time; the
repulsion force computation requires O(m2) time; rotations
are calculated first by a DFS-style graph coloring and then by
forces between vertices with O(n2).
Graph partitioning requires recursively finding minimum
weight cut, and partition the graph along the cut. Specifically,
it requires log2(n) recursive iterations, each of which is a mincut algorithm on partitions of the graph that requires O(n+m)
time, combining to O((n + m) log2(n)) [48].
4) Performance Comparison: Fig. 7a and 7b indicate that,
while both techniques perform well for single level factories,
the global technique is much better at optimizing higher level
factories. This is likely due to the local nature of the forcedirected procedure, which is being used to transform the linear
hand-optimized initial mapping of the factory. For higher level
factories, this hand-optimized mapping incurs high overheads,
and the local optimizations are only able to recover a portion
of the performance proportional to the original mapping.
While the global graph partitioning technique works well
in comparison with the local procedure, there is a widening
performance gap between the resulting mapping and the critical resource volume, as factories grow in capacity and levels.
This likely indicates that while the procedure is able to very
effectively optimize small planar graphs, it has a more difficult
time as the size and complexity of the graphs increase. In fact,
single level factories have planar interaction graphs, and graph
partitioning is able to optimize the mapping of these graphs
nearly up to critical resource volume.
VII. HIERARCHICAL STITCHING METHOD
We here present the outline of the iterative, synthesized
optimization procedure that make use of the scheduling and
mapping techniques we established earlier. To take advantage
of the facts that most global optimization techniques (such as
graph partitioning and force-directed annealing) work well on
small planar graphs and that the circuit modules within each
round form disjoint planar subgraphs, we develop a stitching
scheme, as depicted in Fig. 8, that respects the hierarchical structure and internal symmetry of the multilevel block
protocol while simultaneously optimizing for the previously
discussed congestion heuristics.
As shown in Fig. 3, we perform optimizations iteratively
on the interaction graph. In each iteration, our procedure is
decomposed into two phases: (1) inter-round optimization that
embeds and concatenates each module in the current round,
and (2) intra-round optimization that stitches permutation
edges and arranges modules in the next round.
A. Intra-Round Graph Concatenation
Starting with the first round of a multilevel factory, we use
single-level optimization techniques (such as force-directed

 

 

	
 
Fig. 8: Embedding for a capacity K = 4, level L = 2 factory.
The stitching procedure optimizes for each round to execute at
nearly critical path length in latency, and optimizes for interround permutation step with force-directed optimizations.
annealing or graph partitioning) to nearly optimally embed
the individual planar modules. They are then concatenated
together to form a full mapping of the first round of the factory
circuitry. The concatenation scheme works well due to the
fact that modules in a round do not interact with each other
under block code protocol. Notice that putting barrier between
rounds enables us to isolate and individually optimize for each
round, as discussed in Section V. Because the modules in each
round of the factory are identical in schedule to those in all
other rounds, the optimized graph partitioning embedding does
not need to change for each round.
B. Inter-Round Permutation Optimization
The recursive block code structure requires that the output
from lower levels of the factory be permuted and sent to
new locations for the subsequent rounds. This can create
highly-congested “permutation steps” in the circuit, where
even though each round is scheduled and mapped nearly
optimally, the cost to permute the outputs of one round to the
inputs of the next round are quite high, as illustrated in the
comparison of Fig. 9d with Fig. 10c. We therefore present the
following sequence of procedures that target the inter-round
communication/permutation overhead.
1) Qubit Reuse and Module Arrangement: The permutation
edges in between two rounds are due to communications
between the output qubits from the previous round and the
input qubits in the next round. Given an optimal layout of
the modules/blocks from the previous round, we know where
the output states are located. Since all qubits except for the
outputs are measured, error-checked, and then reinitialized by
the time the next round starts, we can choose which regions
of qubits to be reused for the next round, as long as for
each module the following constraints are satisfied: (1) do not
overlay a module on top of output qubits that are not supposed
to be permuted to this particular module (see details about port
assignment in VII-B2), and (2) allocate enough qubits required
836
(a) Resource ratios comparing
qubit reuse to non-reuse protocols
  	


 

 
	
   

 



 

  	
  		





		 
 

		 
(b) Volume differentials between
qubit reuse and non-reuse protocols.
(c) Red dots show optimized
intermediate destinations.
No Hop
Randomized Hop
Annealed Random Hop
Annealed Midpoint Hop
4 16 36 64 0
500
1000
1500
Factory Capacity (states)
Latency (cycles) (d) Permutation latencies by
no midpoint, Valiant, or annealed midpoints.
Fig. 9: (a)-(b): Sensitivity of achievable quantum volumes by different optimization procedures. Shown is the percentage
difference of the protocol with reusing (R) or without reusing (NR) qubits: (NR−R)/NR. Notably, reuse policy is a better for
both the linear mapping and graph partitioning techniques, while no-reuse offers more flexibility for force-directed procedure to
optimize. (c)-(d): Circuit latency specifically for the inter-round permutation step. Latency is reduced by 1.3x with Valiant-style
intermediate destinations for each interaction, and using force-directed annealing to optimize their locations.
by the code distance as discussed in II-G. Fig. 9a and 9b show
that reusing qubits benefits the linear and graph partitioned
mapping techniques, while force-directed annealing prefers the
flexibility added by not reusing qubits.
2) Port Reassignment: To avoid having correlated error in
the inputs to the next round, each module in the next round
must gather input states from different modules in the previous
round, as shown in II-G. Suppose one module from the next
round wants a magic state from a previous-round module,
when there are multiple outputs produced in that module, it
does not matter which one you choose. Therefore, it leaves the
optimization procedure to decide which output port to use, so
as to minimize congestions in the permutation step.
3) Intermediate Hop Routing: Lastly, we employ a variation of the force-directed annealing algorithm from Section VI.
Specifically, we introduce intermediate destinations between
each output state from a prior round and the input state to
the next round, as depicted in Fig. 9. While Valiant routing
with randomized intermediate destinations does not increase
performance very significantly, we are able to use forcedirected annealing based upon edge distance centroids, edge
repulsion, and edge rotations in order to move the intermediate
destinations into preferable locations.
This synthesized procedure is able to leverage the scheduling techniques of barrier insertion, combined with nearly
optimal planar graph embedding performed by recursive graph
partitioning, and force-directed annealing to obtain a significant resource reduction over any other optimization procedures.
VIII. RESULTS
A. Evaluation Methodology: Simulation Environment
To perform evaluation of our methods, we implemented
each configuration of the full Bravyi-Haah distillation protocol
in the Scaffold programming language, and compiled this to
gate-level instructions (e.g. Fig. 5). These instructions are
fed into a cycle-accurate network simulator [1] that accurately executes the scheduling and routing of braids on a 2-
dimensional surface-code qubit mesh. We extended both of
these tools to support a multi-target CNOT gate. The simulator
first schedules braids in parallel where the interaction graph
allows. If braids intersect on the machine, the simulator inserts
a stall to allow one braid to complete before the other. To
perform scheduling, the simulator treats any data hazard (i.e.
the presence of the same qubit in consecutive instructions)
as a true dependency. This eliminates gate-level optimizations
from being automatically performed, but it simultaneously
allows for the introduction of barrier type gates. These are
implemented by inserting a single gate involving all qubits
of the machine (specifically a multi-target CNOT operation
controlled on an extra qubit set to the zero state, and targeting
all other qubits of the machine). Gate-level optimizations
involving the commutativity relations of specific operations
are performed by hand, independent of scheduling.
B. Single-Level Factory Evaluation
We notice first that the linear mapping procedure [19]
performs well, even as the capacity of the factory increases.
In Fig. 7a, we see that the linear mapping technique actually
is able to approach the theoretical minimum required latency
for each of these circuits. These mappings were specifically
designed to optimize for these single level factories, which
justifes these scaling properties.
Our proposed force-directed mapping approach described
in section VI-B1 is able to improve slightly from the linear
mapping technique in most cases. This is due to the strong
correlation of the metrics that the approach optimizes, to the
realized circuit latency.
Graph partitioning techniques described in VI-B2 underperform the linear mapping and force directed procedures,
although they are still competent with respect to the theoretical
minimum resource requirements. Because of the simplicity of
the circuit and the targeted optimizations that were perform
specifically for these small circuits, the advantage from the
global nature of the graph partitioning method is significantly
diminished.
The realistic circuit latency as executed in simulation,
required circuit area, and corresponding quantum volume for
837
Linear Mapping
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
2 4 6 8 12 16 20 24 0
200
400
600
800
1000
Capacity (states)
Latency (cycles)
(a)
Linear Mapping
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
2 4 6 8 12 16 20 24 0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Capacity (states)
Area (qubits)
(b)
Linear Mapping
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
Hierarchical Stitching
4 16 36 64 100 0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10 000
Capacity (states)
Latency (cycles)
(c)
Linear Mapping
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
Hierarchical Stitching
4 16 36 64 100 0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Capacity (states)
Area (qubits)
(d)
Linear Mapping
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
2 4 6 8 12 16 20 24
5000
1×104
5×104
1×105
Capacity (states)
Quantum Volume (qubits x cycles)
(e)
Linear Mapping
Force Directed
Graph Partitioning
Hierarchical Stitching
4 16 36 64 100
1×105
5×105
1×106
5×106
1×107
Capacity (states)
Quantum Volume (qubits x cycles)
(f)
Fig. 10: One and two level factory resource requirements. For the single level factory, we present latencies (10a), areas (10b),
and achieved space-time volumes (10e). For the two-level factory, the right-hand side shows latencies (10c), areas (10d), and
volumes (10f). All three optimizations are effective for reducing the overhead of single level factories. For two level factories,
each procedure trades off space and time separately, resulting in the lowest achievable volume by that procedure. Hierarchical
stitching is able to reduce space-time volume by 5.64x.
Level 1 Level 2
Procedure K = 2 4 8 10 24 K = 4 16 36 64 100
Random 1.11 × 104 1.82 × 104 5.43 × 104 6.40 × 104 2.70 × 105 −−−−−
Line(NR) 6.53 × 103 1.10 × 104 2.53 × 104 2.94 × 104 1.29 × 105 3.68 × 105 1.19 × 106 4.19 × 106 1.25 × 107 3.34 × 107
Line(R) 6.53 × 103 1.10 × 104 2.53 × 104 2.94 × 104 1.29 × 105 3.55 × 105 1.15 × 106 3.80 × 106 1.22 × 107 2.53 × 107
FD 6.30 × 103 1.08 × 104 2.53 × 104 2.88 × 104 1.21 × 105 3.22 × 105 1.15 × 106 3.72 × 106 9.45 × 106 1.98 × 107
GP 6.73 × 103 1.23 × 104 2.91 × 104 3.33 × 104 1.48 × 105 3.48 × 105 9.41 × 105 2.24 × 106 4.45 × 106 8.17 × 106
HS −−−−− 2.32 × 105 7.93 × 105 1.80 × 106 4.06 × 106 5.93 × 106
Critical 6.28 × 103 1.07 × 104 2.27 × 104 3.03 × 104 1.12 × 105 1.82 × 105 4.48 × 105 8.85 × 105 1.53 × 106 2.43 × 106
TABLE I: Quantum volumes required by factory designs optimized by: randomization (Random), linear mapping (Line) with
and without qubit reuse (R, NR), force-directed (FD), graph partitioning (GP), and hierarchical stitching (HS).
single level magic state distillation factories are shown in Fig.
10a, 10b, and 10e. The best performing approach for each of
the single level factories closely approximates the theoretical
minimum latency and space-time volume required by these
circuits. This is leveraged by our iterative procedure and used
to ultimately achieve the most efficient circuit expression.
C. Multi-Level Factory Evaluation
1) Effects of Qubit Reuse Protocols: As anticipated, by
electing to reuse qubits for later rounds in the distillation
circuits, the overall circuit consumes less area at the cost
of higher latency. Qubit reuse, for both the linear mapping
and graph partitioning optimization methods, results in lower
space-time volume.
The force directed procedure actually achieves a lower
volume when qubits are not reused. This is due to two factors
introduced by qubit reuse. First, the average degree of the
interaction graph has increased due to the introduction of false
dependencies. This restricts the optimization procedure from
being able to minimize the heuristics cleanly, as each qubit
is more tightly connected to others, reducing the degrees of
freedom in the graph. Second, there is more area in the graph,
which widens the search space available for the procedure.
With more possible configurations, the algorithm is more
likely to find more optimized mappings.
2) Optimization Procedure Comparison: Fig. 10 shows the
minimized space-time volumes achieved by each optimization
procedure. While the linear mapping and force-directed procedures were able to nearly optimally map single level factories,
the performance deteriorates significantly when moving to
multi-level factories. In these factories, Hierarchical Stitching
is able to outperform the other optimization strategies, as it
synthesizes the best performing components of each.
We also considered both qubit reuse and non-reuse policies.
The optimal combinations vary slightly for each procedure: the
linear mapping and graph partitioning strategies always perform best with qubit reuse, while the force directed procedure
performs best with qubit reuse for capacity 4 and 16 two level
factories, and without qubit reuse for capacity 36 and beyond.
This is due to the additional degrees of freedom that avoiding
838
qubit reuse injects, as discussed above. The final results plots
show these configurations.
In moving to multi-level factory circuits, even though there
is significant modularity and symmetry in the factory, the
introduction of the output state permutation from one level to
the input states of the next introduces severe latency overheads.
Without taking this into consideration, the linear mapping
procedures suffer from large latency expansions in attempting
to execute multi-level circuits, with the effect compounding
as the size (output capacity) of the factory increases. Fig. 10f
shows that the force-directed approach is able to improve to
a maximum reduction of ∼1.27x from these linear mappings,
but is constrained by how poorly these mappings originally
perform.
The graph partitioning technique is able to simultaneously
optimize for the entirety of the multi-level circuit, including
the inter-round communication steps. With all of this information, the technique is able to minimize interaction graph edge
crossings and edge lengths, which results in a more efficient
expression of the circuits overall for larger two level circuits.
Smaller two level circuits are still dominated by the intraround execution overheads, which are able to be effectively
minimized by linear mapping and force directed techniques.
Once multi-level factories become large enough (occurring
in Fig. 10f at capacity 16), the inter-round effects begin to
dominate. This is the point when graph partitioning techniques
are able to outperform other methods.
The proposed hierarchical stitching technique is able to
leverage the strengths of the force directed and graph partitioning methods to more effectively reduce resource consumption
by mapping each round to near optimality and utilizing the
same force-directed technique combined with the introduction
of intermediate destinations to mitigate the overheads incurred
by inter-round communication. Within all explored multi-level
factory circuits, these optimizations further reduced resource
consumption. In the largest case, a capacity 100 two level
factory shows a 5.64x reduction in overall consumed quantum
volume when moving from the linear mapping approach
without reusing qubits, to hierarchical stitching.
IX. FUTURE WORK
There are a number of immediate extensions to this work:
• System-Level Performance. We are studying the effect of
higher-level factory optimizations on application performance. This includes analysis of resource distribution,
comparison of factory system layout topologies, as well
as architectures with prepared state buffers. The interaction with the Hierarchical Stitching procedure is currently
being analyzed.
• Stitching Generalization. Our proposed hierarchical
stitching procedure can be applied to other hierarchical
circuits, and to arbitrary circuits coupled with procedures
that detect hierarchical sub-circuits. For example, we may
extract sets of (planar) sub-divisions from the interaction
graph and map each sub-division onto the 2-D surface,
and perform permutations (swap gates) that patches the
set of mappings together.
• Teleportation vs. Lattice Surgery vs. Braiding. Along
the lines of [1, 20], we plan to explore the impacts of
changing the surface code interaction style. Our proposed
optimizations may likely change the trade off thresholds
presented in [1].
• Loss Compensation. Typically in distillation protocols,
when magic states are marked as defective they would
be discarded and cause module failure. Future work
would include implementing protocols that compensates
the loss of those defective magic states by having backup maintenance modules that feed high-fidelity states to
ensure the completion of the distillation round.
• Area Expansion. It is possible to expand the utilized area
for these distillation circuits and reduce the execution
latency. Our force directed procedures work well with
additional area, so this may reduce overall consumed
space-time volume.
X. CONCLUSION
Error correction is the largest performance bottleneck of
long-term quantum computers, and magic-state distillation is
the most expensive component. Known optimized scheduling
and mapping techniques for state distillation circuits tend
to work well for small, single level factories, but quickly
incur large overheads for larger factories. We have proposed
a technique that synthesizes mapping and scheduling optimizations to take advantage of the unique efficiencies of
each, which allows for a significant 5.64x reduction in the
realistic space-time volume required to implement multi-level
magic state distillation factories. Global optimizations like
graph partitioning and force-directed annealing work well, but
leveraging structure of the block code circuitry combined with
the specific strengths of both graph partitioning and forcedirected annealing allows for the most improvement, resulting
in large factors of resource reduction overall.