We present novel designs for virtual and augmented reality near-eye displays based on phase-only holographic projection. Our approach is built
on the principles of Fresnel holography and double phase amplitude encoding with additional hardware, phase correction factors, and spatial light
modulator encodings to achieve full color, high contrast and low noise holograms with high resolution and true per-pixel focal control. We provide a
GPU-accelerated implementation of all holographic computation that integrates with the standard graphics pipeline and enables real-time (≥90
Hz) calculation directly or through eye tracked approximations. A unied
focus, aberration correction, and vision correction model, along with a user
calibration process, accounts for any optical defects between the light source
and retina. We use this optical correction ability not only to x minor aberrations but to enable truly compact, eyeglasses-like displays with wide elds
of view (80◦
) that would be inaccessible through conventional means. All
functionality is evaluated across a series of hardware prototypes; we discuss
remaining challenges to incorporate all features into a single device.
CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Displays and imagers;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: holography, near-eye display, augmented
reality, virtual reality, computational displays
1 INTRODUCTION
It’s an exciting time for near-eye displays. In the previous year,
a new crop head mounted displays (Oculus Rift and HTC VIVE)
have demonstrated sucient resolution, tracking performance, and
latency to begin to oer compelling virtual reality (VR) experiences to consumers. In the same year, the Microsoft HoloLens has
demonstrated these same characteristics for the rst time in a selfcontained augmented reality (AR) device.
There’s still a lot of work to be done. The lightweight optics
found in current virtual reality near-eye displays do not scale to
provide resolution on par with human visual acuity. Achieving
such performance with conventional optics would require complex,
multi-element optics with impractical size, cost and weight. Custom
prescription lenses are required to correct visual impairments. Likewise, current optical solutions do not provide a path to obtain wide
eld of view (FOV) and high resolution see-through augmented reality displays in eyeglasses-like form factors that would enable true
mobility and all-day use. We have also not encountered practical
solutions to incorporate true 3D, multi-focal depth cues in these
devices to eliminate the accommodation-convergence conict and
mimic the delity of our natural vision.
Solutions to these challenges require precise control of the wavefront of light. It would be very dicult to overcome all of these
challenges in a passive optical device. We turn to computational
solutions, in which the hardware is simplied and the complexity of
wavefront control is pushed into software. One potential solution is
light eld displays, in which wavefront control is expressed through
individually addressable ray bundles. Some impressive results have
been achieved to date [Huang et al. 2015; Lanman and Luebke 2013].
However, light eld displays have a few limitations. Ray bundles
ineciently encode wavefronts, allowing only coarse approximation of wavefront shape through sparse samples and causing high
resolution loss. Due to diraction, the selected size of the ray bundles also dictates a fundamental trade-o between the maximum
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:2 • A. Maimone et al.
possible spatial and angular resolution, limiting focal control in a
high resolution device. We thus turn to digital holography, oering
very ecient wavefront encoding by holographic superposition,
smooth wavefront control, and no such resolution trade-o.
The benets of digital holography have long been explored through
decades of research, demonstrating powerful features such as variable focal control and optical aberration correction. Despite these
capabilities, holography is often associated with noisy, low contrast, and mono color imagery, large benchtop form factors, high
bandwidth requirements, and expensive computation – relegating
it to the status of a perpetually “future” technology. However, this
reputation is largely undeserved as many of these problems have
already been addressed.
In this paper, we build on much of this existing work to describe
how digital holography can be used to solve many of the key issues
facing virtual and augmented reality displays. We describe a combination of algorithms that can be used to display high quality, full
color phase-only holograms with true per-pixel focal control that
exceed the capabilities of state-of-the-art displays. We show that
these true 3D holograms can be generated directly from the output
of the standard graphics pipeline as an independent post-processing
step. We extend the known optical correction capabilities of holograms to not only correct aberrations but to allow vision correction
capabilities and enable previously inaccessible eyeglasses-like form
factors with wide (80◦
) elds of view. All holographic algorithms
run at real-time rates (≥90 Hz) directly or through an approximate
eye-tracked solution. We emphasize real-world performance by presenting all capabilities across a series of preliminary virtual and
augmented reality display prototypes. We discuss remaining challenges to integrate all features into a single device.
1.1 Contributions
We provide optical and algorithmic designs for holographic virtual
and augmented reality displays that are evaluated in simulations
and a series of hardware prototypes. Specic contributions include:
(1) Variation of the double phase amplitude control technique
for multi-focal Fresnel holograms that includes hardware
design, SLM encoding, and phase adjustment factors
(2) Extension of the Zernike polynomial aberration correction
technique that unies aberration correction, vision correction, and per-pixel depth and provides for user calibration
(3) Real-time computation method based on linearly separable
convolution and real-time approximations of spatially variant focus and aberration correction for eye tracked displays,
with a framework for integration into the graphics pipeline
(4) Optical design for a lensless, compact, wide eld of view
optical see-through holographic display using an o-axis
projector and o-axis holographic optical element eyepiece
1.2 Benefits and Limitations
The proposed holographic displays provide full color, high resolution, and high quality imagery and are capable of true per-pixel focal
control and user vision correction. We provide optical design variations capable of large elds of view with very compact form factors.
We provide a software implementation that is capable of real-time
computation (either directly or through eye tracked approximations)
and integration with the rendering pipeline.
However, there are several limitations of the presented results.
We show various capabilities of near-eye holographic displays (wide
FOV, compact form factors, multi-focus, etc.) but we have not yet
achieved all these capabilities in a single device. We provide evaluation with simple tethered monoscopic prototypes with small exit
pupils. A practical stereo display would require integration of a
pupil expansion or steering device, which we discuss in Section 5.3.
Some of the proposed techniques require eye tracking, which we
simulate but we do not integrate an actual tracking device. We also
do not consider system level AR/VR concerns such as head tracking
and latency. Other minor limitations are listed in Section 5.3.
2 RELATED WORK
Our display designs are related to a wide body of display and holography research which we summarize below.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays. Several recent near-eye displays
combine a holographic projector with various see-through eyepieces: holographic optical elements [Li et al. 2016], waveguides [Yeom
et al. 2015], and lenses with beamsplitters [Chen and Chu 2015; Gao
et al. 2016; Moon et al. 2014]. Our augmented reality displays share
some similar characteristics to these displays; we too employ a holographic projector and demonstrate variable focus. Like the Li et
al. [2016] display, we also employ a holographic optical element
eyepiece, and like the Yeom et al. [2015] display we use holographic
correction to x optical aberrations. We extend these capabilities by
incorporating true per-pixel focal depth, complex full-color shaded
imagery, faster real-time calculation, more powerful aberration correction, vision correction, signicantly wider elds of view, and
more compact form factors.
Other holographic displays and projectors. There is a large body
of closely related work in holographic projection that spans several decades; an overview can be found in Yaraş et al. [2010] or
Tsang et al. [2016]. We draw on many related works; like Reichelt et
al. [2013] and Qi et al. [2016] we use variations of the double phase
encoding method [Hsueh and Sawchuk 1978] to obtain amplitude
control with phase-only SLMs. However, our method varies slightly
as we do not employ o-axis projection with encoded gratings [Qi
et al. 2016] or custom phase combining hardware [Reichelt and
Leister 2013]. Like Häussler et al. [2009] we also propose a reducedbandwidth eye tracked display but in a near-eye form factor. Our
holographic optical correction model is much like that of a set of related works [Freeman et al. 2010; Kaczorowski et al. 2015, 2016], but
we measure aberrations from the perspective of the eye, rather than
from a camera or display, include vision correction, provide integration with per-pixel depth control, and propose alternate acceleration
routines based on eye tracking. As with Makowski et al. [2012] and
Qu et al. [2015], we magnify our projectors using diverging light
sources; we also combine this technique with traditional eyepiece
magnication for near-eye display.
Near-Eye Light Field Displays. Near-eye light eld displays provide some of the same capabilities as our near-eye holographic
displays, such as variable focus [Hua and Javidi 2014; Huang et al.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays for Virtual and Augmented Reality • 85:3
2015], compact form factors [Maimone et al. 2014], or both [Jang
et al. 2016; Lanman and Luebke 2013]. Compared to holographic
displays, it is generally easier to get good image quality with light
eld displays due to the use of conventional, incoherent illumination
and the availability of high quality amplitude modulators. The computation required for these displays is also often more lightweight,
with the exception of those employing a compressive optimization.
The advantage of holographic displays is a very precise ability to
control the wavefront of light, allowing ne focus control, aberration correction, and vision correction. Such displays also encode
this wavefront control very eciently through the holographic superposition principle, requiring only an amplitude and phase for
each true 3D object point in the scene. Operating using diraction,
holographic displays are capable of providing both high spatial and
angular resolution to the viewer. In contrast, light eld displays provide coarser wavefront control that is encoded using a number of
ray samples and have a diraction limited trade-o between spatial
and angular resolution. However, the use of holographic elements
in light eld displays [Lee et al. 2016] may help to overcome some
of these limitations.
Multi-Focus Displays. Another body of related work creates multiple focus planes through special optical congurations. Akeley et
al. [2004] describe a display in which dierent regions of an LCD
panel are mapped to dierent focal planes through a series of beamsplitters. Liu et al. [2010] use a liquid lens that can be addressed to
a specic focal plane or time-multiplexed between multiple planes.
Love et al. [2009] provide a similar capability with a lens that can
quickly switch between multiple states. Schowengerdt et al. [2010]
scan an array of light sources at dierent depths from a lens to
address multiple focal planes. Narain et al. [2015] describe how to
generate optimal imagery for such multi-plane displays. Konrad et
al. [2016] and Johnson et al. [2016] use focus tunable lenses that
are matched to the depth of viewer xation and also experiment
with monovision, the use of an additional xed focus lens in front
of a single eye. Padmanaban et al. [2017] extend these capabilities
by using tunable lenses that are matched to the gaze and refractive
errors of the viewer. See Kramida [2016] for a survey of additional
techniques. Like holographic displays, these displays provide adjustable focal cues. The techniques require little or no computation
and tend to produce high quality images. However, they are limited
in capability to produce a single or xed number of focal planes and
use more complex optical assemblies that are dicult to miniaturize
and extend to wide elds of view.
Vision Correcting Displays. Past displays have demonstated the
ability to correct the viewer’s visual impairments through the use
of light elds [Pamplona et al. 2012], or light elds and image processing techniques [Huang et al. 2014]. Inspired by these displays,
we provide a similar vision correction capability using holograms.
Compared to these methods, holographic displays are able to provide ner control of the wavefront needed for vision correction and
oer less loss of resolution, but have a higher computation cost.
3 SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Our core approach to building near-eye displays is to incorporate
most of the system complexity into a phase-only projector that is
based on Fresnel holographic principles. We design a projector that
is capable of precise and spatially variant control of image focus and
optical aberrations. We use this control to generate true 3D holograms while providing a vision correction capability. We integrate
this projector with an eyepiece that has highly favorable physical
properties, but is highly aberrated, and correct all the optical defects
in the hologram. We provide details in the following section.
3.1 Holographic Projection
3.1.1 Fresnel Holography. Our holographic projector is based
on a variation of the well known principle of Fresnel holography;
we provide a brief overview here. In a Fresnel holographic system
(see Figure 2), light propagates from a source until encountering
a hologram plane in which a spatial light modulator (SLM) device
alters the amplitude and phase of the light. The light is diracted
in such a way that it is focused to one or more object points with
varying intensities that form an image (or volume). We refer to
the specic phase alterations that cause light to be focused to an
object point as a lens phase function. Like a physical lens, these
phase alterations cause light near the center of the hologram to be
deected by a small amount and light near the edge to be deected
by a large amount. The spatial frequency of the phase alterations
dictates the degree of deection; higher spatial frequencies cause
greater deections. If this holographic lens becomes too large, the
spatial frequencies of the lens phase function will exceed those
supported by the spatial light modulator. Thus we conne the lens
phase function representing each object point to a local region
and refer to it as a sub-hologram. Sub-holograms are sized so that
they contain only spatial frequencies supported by the spatial light
modulator. Sub-holograms representing dierent object points may
overlap on the hologram plane.
Mathematically, we represent the lens phase function fo for each
point p® in the sub-hologram representing object point o® as
f (p®)o = e
i(ϕo+
2π kp®− ®ok
λ
)
(1)
where λ is the light wavelength. Essentially fo represents the
phase dierence of a light wave between object point o® and each
point p® in the sub-hologram region. For convenience, fo is represented as a complex-valued function where the phase angle of the
function equals the phase dierence. Note that ϕo is a phase o-
set factor that does not aect the appearance of the holographic
image here but is useful for optimizing phase-only holograms (see
Section 3.1.3). For now, ϕo may be set to zero.
To form a complete hologram H, we simply compute the sum of
the lens phase functions fo for each object point o® while weighting
them by the image intensities:
H(p®) =
Õ
j ∈sp
aj f (p®)j
(2)
where sp is the set of object points whose sub-holograms are
dened at point p® and the desired intensity of object point j®is a
2
j
.
Since this method of calculation computes the hologram as the
explicit integration of all the object points in the scene, we refer to
it as the point-wise integration method. In computer graphic terms,
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:4 • A. Maimone et al.
Hologram
 Plane (SLM)
Sub-hologram
Incoming
Light
Focused Light
(object point)
Lens Phase
Function
Fig. 2. Fresnel holography. A beam is focused to several object points at finite
distances by a hologram. Each point is formed by overlapping regions known
as sub-holograms, where each sub-hologram contains a phase-altering
function that causes light to diract inward much like a refractive lens.
computing hologram H can also be thought of as convolution of the
target image with a spatially-varying, complex-valued kernel.
3.1.2 Magnification and Etendue. As mentioned in the previous
section, the light deection angles of the lens phase functions fo
in a Fresnel hologram are related to the spatial frequency of the
phase alterations. In this way, a hologram acts like a series of superimposed diraction gratings of various frequencies. The light
deection angle is related to the spatial frequency of a grating by
the grating equation:
d(sinθi + sinθm) = λ (3)
where d is the grating pitch, θi
is the light incidence angle, θm
is the diraction angle, and λ is the wavelength. Using a typical
microdisplay with pixel pitch of 8 µm (which by the Nyquist sampling theorem is able to create a grating with a minimum pitch of
d = 16µm) that is illuminated with normally-incident λ = 532nm
green light, a holographic display can only bend light θm = ±1.9
◦
.
Thus a holographic display with today’s technology will need to be
magnied greatly in order to support the wide elds of view (60-100◦
or more) expected by VR and AR displays. A holographic display
can be magnied by conventional means (e.g. refractive lenses),
but the required magnication is immense and thus bulky lenses
are required. However, note that by Equation 3 that the supported
diraction angle is relative to the incident light angle. Therefore,
one can magnify holograms in a lensless manner using a diverging
point light source [Makowski et al. 2012; Qu et al. 2015]. This con-
guration allows the beam divergence to perform the coarse beam
steering while the hologram steers light at a ner angle to focus the
light into an image. We update the lens phase function of Equation 1
to handle diverging light as:
fd
(p®)o = e
i(ϕo+
2π (kp®−®l k+kp®− ®ok)
λ
)
(4)
where ®l is the position of the diverging light source. This conguration is illustrated in Figure 3. Note that the eld of view of the
projector θp is signicantly larger than the maximum diraction
angle θm. In general, the supported eld of view is limited only by
the divergence of the point light source and can be arbitrary large.
Etendue. Two key attributes of any display are the area over
which the display emits light at the plane of the eye (the exit pupil
or viewing eye box) and the range of angles that light is emitted
over this area (the eld of view). The product of these two quantities
equals the etendue of the display system. When a display system
is magnied the etendue is preserved, and thus one must trade o
the size of the exit pupil and the eld of view. For a conventional
near-eye display consisting of a lens placed in front of a display
panel, the etendue is equal to the product of the area of the display
panel and the light emission angle of each pixel that is collected by
the lens. In designs using large display panels and optics (e.g. the
Oculus Rift or HTC Vive) the etendue is quite large and is generally
not a concern.
The etendue of a holographic projector is dened by the product
of the area of the spatial light modulator and the maximum diraction angle (Equation 3). An unmagnied holographic projector has
a eld of view equal to twice the diraction angle and an exit pupil
equal to the area of the SLM. As the projector is magnied with
diverging light, the eld of view increases, but the eective size of
the exit pupil decreases (see Figure 3). Note that the sub-hologram
size used in computation matches the size of the exit pupil. If one
attempted to further increase the size of the sub-hologram, it would
require diraction angles and therefore spatial frequencies higher
than the SLM can reproduce. Thus, unlike a conventional display,
the etendue of a holographic projector is linked to the device resolution. When the holographic projector is coupled with an eyepiece to
form a complete near-eye display (see Section 3.2), the image may
be further magnied but the etendue is preserved.
The size of the exit pupil and sub-hologram have several implications in a near-eye holographic display. If the exit pupil is too small,
the image may disappear if the eyes move too far from the display,
and an additional mechanism will be required to keep the exit pupil
centered on the eye. Further, if the instantaneous exit pupil size is
smaller than the pupil of the eye, the ability of the display to represent shallow depth of eld is limited. We discuss these limitations
further in Section 5.3. Finally, if the size of a sub-hologram is less
than the size of the SLM, light can only be steered locally by phase
modulation. This is a problem if the SLM aords only phase modulation and there are large dierences in illuminance over the image.
We address this issue in the next section. In summary, one must
balance eld of view, the exit pupil size, and the ability to display
holograms with shallow depth of eld in a holographic near-eye
display.
3.1.3 Obtaining Amplitude. Equations 2 and 4 show that calculating Fresnel holograms is quite simple. However, to display such
holograms we require SLMs with both amplitude and phase control, which are not generally available. Availability aside, phase-only
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays for Virtual and Augmented Reality • 85:5
Point Light Source
Hologram
Plane (SLM)
Object Point Plane
ϴm
ϴp
w
Fig. 3. Hologram magnification through a diverging light source. A holographic spatial light modulator capable of steering light a small angle θm
can be used to make a holographic projector with a wide field of view θp
by providing angularly varying incident light from a diverging light source.
The sub-hologram size (and exit pupil size) correspondingly reduces from
the full width of the spatial light modulator to width w.
holograms are often preferred because of their high light eciency:
light is only steered, not attenuated. Thus one of the main challenges
of building holographic displays is calculating holograms that work
with phase-only SLMs. We provide a brief overview of common
alternatives below.
Amplitude discard method. A trivial method for computing a
phase-only hologram is to compute the full complex hologram and
then simply discard the amplitude. Since the phase tends to encode
high frequencies (e.g. object edges), this method may produce an
acceptable result for drawing simple text and symbology that consist of thin lines. This is not a practical general solution; however,
we use this method for performing simple tests of our displays.
Iterative phase optimization. The most common method to compute phase-only holograms is optimization. Observe in Equations 1
and 4 that we have control of the phase ϕo at each object point o®.
As phase values ϕo are changed, the object points will interfere in
a dierent way and produce a dierent set of required amplitude
and phase values for hologram H, resulting in the same image intensity with dierent phase. Since we generally do not care about
the phase of the image (it is not detected by the eyes), we consider
values ϕo as free variables for hologram optimization. The goal of
the optimization is to nd the values ϕo that cause the object points
o® to interfere such that the required amplitude values of H are constant over the hologram. This method is generally performed by
the Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm [Gerchberg and Saxton 1972], in
which light is propagated back and forth between the object and
hologram planes while enforcing amplitude constraints. Modern
variations add error compensation and dene “do not care” regions
of the hologram to increase performance [Georgiou et al. 2008]. The
downside of the iterative approaches is the computational expense
of computing the hologram over many iterations (≈10-100). While
numerically accurate, iteratively optimized holograms also tend to
include undesirable high frequency noise or speckle.
Temporal averaging. Another method to obtain amplitude in a
phase-only device is temporal averaging. If object phase values ϕo
are simply randomized, rather than optimized, the required amplitude on hologram H is a pseudo-random uniform noise pattern. If
the amplitude is discarded on playback, the target image is perceived,
but is heavily contaminated with noise since the required amplitude
is missing. However, if phase values ϕo are set to a dierent set
of random values, the perceived noise pattern is dierent. When
several such holograms are played back in random succession on a
high speed display, the noise tends to average and produce an image
closer to the target. To facilitate the high bandwidth and switching speed requirements, binary phase holograms may instead be
produced for playback on a high speed binary SLM. This approach
is known as One Step Phase Retrieval (OSPR) [Cable et al. 2004].
The primary downside of the approach is that the low contrast of
the noisy hologram sub-frames cannot be recovered by temporal
averaging, and several hologram sub-frames must be calculated for
each image frame.
Direct Amplitude Encoding. Another method to generate phaseonly holograms is to explicitly encode amplitude and phase into two
phase values. This is known as the double phase method [Hsueh and
Sawchuk 1978]. Observe that the complex value c with amplitude a
and phase p can be encoded into the sum of two values c = ca + cb
,
each value having variable phase but constant amplitude:
c = aeip
pa = p − cos−1
a
pb = p + cos−1
a
ca = 0.5e
ipa
cb = 0.5e
ipb
(5)
where a is in the range [0, 1]. Complex-valued hologram H can be
converted to a double phase hologram by converting each complex
value H(p®) to two phase values Pa(p®) and Pb
(p®):
Pa(p®) = ∠H(p®) − cos−1
|H(p®)|
Pb
(p®) = ∠H(p®) + cos−1
|H(p®)|
(6)
where ∠ indicates the phase angle function. Thus Pa(p®) and Pb
(p®)
provide the values to display on a phase-only spatial light modulator
in terms of the desired image intensity (from Equation 2) and the
display geometry (from Equation 1 or 4). Since we require two phase
values for each complex value in H, we expect a corresponding loss
in resolution.
Another closely related method is complex error diusion [Eschbach 1991; Tsang and Poon 2013] in which a complex value is
forced to unity amplitude while the resulting error is pushed to
neighboring values. This algorithm works like the classic error
diusion halftoning algorithm in image processing and tends to
produce a similar result to the double phase method. The benet of
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:6 • A. Maimone et al.
Fig. 4. Example of phase hologram. Hologram corresponds to the “berries”
image in Figure 1A. Blue-bordered inset image shows magnified region,
showing tiled pairs of phase values that encode amplitude and phase using
the double phase method.
either of these direct methods is that the encoding is trivial to compute after the initial complex-valued hologram H is obtained and no
iteration or optimization is required. They do not contain much of
the high frequency noise associated with the iterative and temporal
averaging methods since the phase is not randomized or optimized
but is generally smooth or constant over the hologram. They also
allow arbitrary intensity distributions even if the sub-hologram size
w is less than the size of the full hologram.
However, note that the display must facilitate physical integration
of the two phase values into a single complex value. Two recent
methods are to use a custom spatial light modulator that optically
combines the adjcent phase-only pixels [Reichelt and Leister 2013]
or to encode a grating in the hologram to tilt the projector through
an aperture stop [Qi et al. 2016]. We use a simpler method that
consists of an on-axis projector with a standard SLM, an aperture
stop, and no explicitly encoded gratings. By placing adjacent pairs of
phase values calculated according to Equation 5 in a checkerboardlike pattern on the SLM (see Figure 4) we implicitly create a high
frequency grating that pushes unwanted energy (i.e. the result of
applying amplitude modulation) to the edges of the exit pupil. We
then lter this unwanted light using an aperture stop. The specic
optical layouts of our prototype displays are described in Section 5.2.
We also encode our double phase holograms in a special way on
the spatial light modulator to improve performance. Rather than
use the standard 0 to 2π phase range of the SLM, we center the
distribution of phase values to ll the full phase range of the device
(> 2π) but scale the distribution if necessary to ensure the distribution of phase values tapers o to zero near the maximum and
minimum phase rotation of the device (see Figure 5). This approach
allows us to achieve superior contrast by ensuring smooth phase
over the whole hologram and avoiding errors in wrapping phase
from 2π back to 0 on imperfect, real-world SLMs. An example phase
hologram using the techniques described in this section is displayed
in Figure 4. Due to the smooth phase prole and a sub-hologram
size w that is small compared to the full hologram size, some of the
image structure can be observed in this phase image.
3.1.4 True 3D Holograms. One of the key advantages of holography is the ability to create true 3D images where each object point
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Normalized device phase range
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Counts (x104) Distribution of phase values for double phase algorithm
Fig. 5. Phase distribution for double phase method. We convert the original
distribution of phase values (black) to a new set using the double phase
method (gray) that utilizes the whole device phase range (> 2π ) to avoid
errors in phase wrapping.
appears at a unique focal depth. To form such holograms, we use
the color and depth buers obtained from the standard rendering
pipeline to form a point cloud from the viewer’s eye position with
the occluded points culled. This point cloud comprises the set of
object points o®used in the hologram calculation (see Equation 1). We
assume that any view-dependent eects (e.g. occlusion and specular
highlights) are handled through standard head-tracked rendering,
as with a conventional near-eye display. Note that this arrangement
does not consider intra-pupil view dependent eects, such as the
dierence in occlusion or the appearance of a specular highlight
between the left and right edges of the eye pupil. We expect such
eects would be quite subtle; nonetheless, they can be handled by
appropriately sampling the scene and varying the amplitude over
the lens phase functions [Zhang et al. 2011].
Calculating such a true 3D hologram is easy in principle with
Fresnel holography; we simply set each object point o® in the lens
phase function of Equation 1 or 4 to the actual 3D position. In
practice, it can be dicult to achieve good results when only phase
modulation is available. When implementing planar holograms with
the double phase method, best results are generally achieved when
the object phase ϕo is constant over the hologram. This produces
smooth phase at the hologram plane which keeps noise low and
allows us to implement the previously described device encoding
method. However, for true 3D holograms, the use of a constant
object phase ϕo will result in widely varying object phase at the
hologram plane, which we have found to produce poor results.
However, we can correct object phase ϕo for improved consistency
on the hologram plane according to:
ϕo = −
2π(kp®co − ®l k + kp®co − ®ok)
λ
(7)
where p®co
corresponds to the center point of the sub-hologram of
object point o®. With this correction factor, we are able to generate
high quality holograms with widely varying depth as demonstrated
on a prototype device in Section 5.2.2.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays for Virtual and Augmented Reality • 85:7
3.1.5 Aberration and Vision Correction. Another key strength
of holographic displays is the ability to perform optical corrections
to deciencies in the display hardware (aberration correction) and in
the eyesight of the viewer (vision correction). The optical correction
capabilities of Fresnel holograms are extremely powerful. As previously described, the lens phase functions of Equations 1 and 4 act
like simple focusing lenses. However, in general, these functions
can arbitrarily shape the wavefront that is used to form each object
point, pre-compensating for any aberrations in the optics, and the
correction functions for each object point are independent. In other
words, the optical correction power of such holograms is spatially
variant and oer practically unlimited degrees of freedom. This is
akin to using an independently customized, complex lens to form
each point in the image, and where each of these complex lenses can
physically overlap. In practice, aberration correction is limited to
the angular steering capability of the SLM (Equation 3); however, in
general we nd that even severe aberrations are the result of quite
small angular deviations.
An “exact” solution for aberration and vision correction would
involve inclusion of all the phase delays through the optics and eye
to the exponential in Equation 4. However, we nd this approach
impractical as it is very high dimensional; each unique optical path
through the system must be calculated. Freeman et al .[2010] instead
use a lower dimensional model, the Zernike polynomials, as the
basis for their lens phase functions. This set of polynomial functions,
commonly used in optics to express aberrations, are convenient as
they are orthogonal and each is used to characterize an intuitive
optical defect (defocus, astigmatism, coma, etc.). As with the projectors of Kaczorowski et al. [2015; 2016], we measure the coecients
experimentally, as the optical characteristics (surface shapes, materials, etc.) of each component may not be known, and there may be
some manufacturing and alignment variability.
We extend this method to virtual and augmented displays by using
a single set of Zernike coecients to encapsulate the light transport
from the light source to the retina. In this way, we can treat the
optics of the display and the eye as a “black box” and measure their
aggregate eect through a user calibration process. We thus arrive
at a single unied model for a new lens phase function fz (ρ, θ)o
for object point o® that encapsulates the display optics, aberration
correction, vision correction, and variable focal depth imagery:
Z3(ρ, θ)o = a3o
(2ρ
2 − 1) focus (8)
Z4(ρ, θ)o = a4o
(ρ
2
cos2θ) vertical astigmatism (9)
Z5(ρ, θ)o = a5o
(ρ
2
sin2θ) oblique astigmatism (10)
Z6(ρ, θ)o = a6o
((3ρ
2 − 2)ρcosθ) horizontal coma (11)
Z7(ρ, θ)o = a7o
((3ρ
2 − 2)ρsinθ) vertical coma (12)
ϕo = a3o
(13)
fz (ρ, θ)o = e
i(ϕo+
Í
j Zj(ρ,θ )o )
(14)
where ajo
are the measured Zernike coecients during user calibration and fz (ρ, θ)o is parameterized by polar radius ρ and angle θ
relative to the center of the sub-hologram. Additional Zernike polynomials can be added to correct higher order aberrations if needed.
Note that a3o
is adjusted from its measured value according to the
focal depth of imagery. Also note that object phase ϕo is adjusted
for consistent phase at the hologram plane as was similarly done
for the simpler lens phase function model in Equation 7.
User Calibration Procedure. The goal of the user calibration procedure is to obtain the coecients ajo
for the lens phase function
fz (ρ, θ)o at each object point o®. Each function represents the wavefront that must be emitted so that light is focused to a small spot
on the retina after traveling through all the surfaces in the display
optics and the eye. Knowledge of the optics of the display and eye
are not required but rather the aggregate eect of these components
is measured through user feedback. During calibration, the display
presents a single object point o® to the user which is represented in
the hologram as fz (ρ, θ)o . The user adjusts the coecients ajo
of
fz (ρ, θ)o until the most tightly focused spot is seen. This process
is repeated for additional object points o®. The procedure is fairly
intuitive since the eect of adjusting various coecients is orthogonal and each corresponds roughly to a familiar geometric operation
(scale, squash, rotate, etc.). The measured coecients are applicable
for any image content.
Note that it is impractical to measure fz (ρ, θ)o for all object points
o® since there are expected to be millions. However, as aberrations
tend to be smoothly varying, one can measure coecients ajo
at a
sparse set of object points and interpolate the coecients for the
remaining points. For a highly aberrated system (e.g. the prototype
described in Section 5.2.4), 15 measured points were sucient to
correct the display. For a display without signicant aberrations
(e.g. Figure 1A), we measured coecients for a single object point at
the center of the display. Also note that for true 3D holograms we
perform the calibration for a small number of focal positions (e.g.
four) and interpolate the coecients over the complete focal range.
3.1.6 High Speed Hologram Calculation. Although the Fresnel
holographic model we have built in this section is very powerful, it
is also a very complex calculation. Note that using the point-wise
integration method of Equation 2 to compute hologram H is essentially a quadruple summation over the two axes of the hologram
plane and each sub-hologram. While not intractable, runtimes to
generate a hologram with 2 million object points on a high end
GPU run in the range of one to tens of seconds depending on the
sub-hologram size (see Figure 6, bottom).
To generate holograms in real-time on today’s hardware, faster
algorithms are needed. As noted previously, the point-wise integration method of Equation 2 is equivalent to a convolution of the
target image with a spatially varying kernel. One approach to speed
up the calculation is to remove the spatial variance of the lens phase
function fz (ρ, θ)o so that the function is the same for all object
points o®. In this case, we can substitute the point-wise integration
method of Equation 2 for standard spatially invariant convolution:
H = A ∗ fz (15)
where ∗ denotes complex-valued convolution, A contains the
square root of the image intensities, and fz is the spatially invariant
lens phase function. It is well known in holography that Equation 15
can be computed quickly using the Fast Fourier Transform:
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:8 • A. Maimone et al.
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550
Sub-hologram width (pixels)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Computation time (sec)
Sub-hologram width vs. computation time for pointwise integration
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550
Sub-hologram width (pixels)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Computation time (ms) Sub-hologram width vs. computation time for convolution
separable convolution
FFT convolution
Hologram size: 1920x1080
Hologram size: 1920x1080
Fig. 6. Measured runtimes for various hologram computation methods on
an NVIDIA GTX 980 Ti GPU. Top: Separable and FFT-based convolution.
Boom: The point-wise integration method. All runtimes measure the total
computation time needed to generate a 1920 × 1080 hologram with 1920 ×
1080 object points and encode the result using the double phase method.
Note that the convolution methods are measured in milliseconds while the
point-wise integration method is measured in seconds.
H = F FT −1
(F FT (A)  F FT (fz )) (16)
where  indicates point-wise multiplication. Additionally, if fz
is linearly separable into vectors ®fzx
and ®fzy
, Equation 15 can also
be computed quickly with direct separable convolution as:
H = (A ∗
®fzx
) ∗ ®fzy
(17)
This simplication is common in image processing but to our
knowledge has not been used to compute holograms. Either method
will increase computation speed by several orders of magnitude;
calculation of a hologram of 2 million object points takes just a few
milliseconds on a GPU (see Figure 6, top). Note that the runtime
of the separable method scales linearly with the sub-hologram size
while the FFT method does not depend on this size. The separable
method is faster for smaller sub-hologram sizes and the crossover
point between the two algorithms is near the middle of the range of
sub-hologram sizes used for our prototype displays.
In summary, the prerequisite for high speed computation is a
spatially invariant lens phase function fz , which implies that the
focus and aberration correction is constant over the image. (However, fz can change on a frame-by-frame basis, which we explore
in the next section.) Additionally, if fz is linearly separable, then
separable direction convolution can be used. Lens phase functions of
any focal power and certain aberrations (e.g. horizontal astigmatism
or vertical astigmatism) are linearly separable. If fz is not linearly
separable, then FFT-based convolution can be used for arbitrary fz ;
both methods run at real-time rates.
3.1.7 Increasing Performance in an Eye-Tracked Display. Although
the convolution method of Equation 15 can be computed quickly,
it does not support per-pixel focal control as lens phase function
fz is not spatially variant. A common approximation is to restrict
depth to a set of xed planes [Chen and Chu 2015]. In our case,
we could compute each plane with a separate convolution and lens
phase function fz . However, this approach in general will result in
a slowdown of a factor N for N planes and will not support smooth
depth changes. Another option is the wavefront recording plane
method of Tsang et al. [2015]; however, this method has only been
demonstrated to work in a shallow depth range (0.02 m).
Likewise, the convolution based method does not allow spatially
variant aberration correction. Kaczorowski et al. [2016] show spatially variant aberration correction is possible at interactive rates
with an approximate piece-wise method. However, this approach
is not ideal for our application as we explore displays with severe,
quickly changing aberrations and our amplitude encoding method
does not perform well with abrupt phase discontinuities.
Instead we look to the trend of providing eye tracking to displays
as in such technologies as foveated rendering [Guenter et al. 2012].
Similarly, one can reduce the resolution of the hologram outside the
tracked fovea position; Hong et al. [2016] performed this method
by reducing the density of object points o® outside the fovea. Alternatively, we suggest including all object points but decreasing the
sub-hologram width w outside the fovea (cutting high frequencies),
as our calculation speed scales quadratically with the sub-hologram
size in the point-wise integration method (see Figure 6, bottom).
This method may also reduce temporal aliasing as all object points
are always included in the calculation. However, we have not found
this method to run at high video rates on current GPUs.
A high speed option is to approximate spatially variant focus
and aberration control by providing the correct lens function where
the user is looking rather than computing or approximating the full
spatially variant solution. This can be computed simply as the convolution of Equation 15 where we substitute xed lens phase function
fz for the temporally varying function fzot
, which corresponds to
the lens phase function for object point o®t
, the closest object point
o® to the tracked fovea position. The advantage of this method is
that computation time is nearly the same as for the xed lens phase
function case; we must only recompute fzot
each frame, which
is very fast when performed on the GPU. Another advantage is a
smooth and continuous fallo of aberration correction outside the
foveal region without sharp phase discontinuities in the hologram
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays for Virtual and Augmented Reality • 85:9
Renderer
Object
Generation
Shader
Hologram
Generation
Shader
Phase
Extraction
Shader
Color data Display
Depth map
Complex
object
plane
Complex
hologram
plane
Phase
levels
Lens functions Aberration Map
Fig. 7. Holographic soware pipeline. The scene is drawn o-screen to color
and depth buers using a standard renderer. The scene is then converted to
a hologram using a series of pixel shaders and sent to a phase-only SLM.
from discretized approximations. The limitation is that we must
ensure the that the fallo in resolution from correcting aberrations
only near the fovea occurs no more quickly than the fallo of the
visual acuity of the eye. Additionally, although we are able to adjust
focus and address the accommodation-convergence conict with
this method, we are unable to present true depth of eld if there are
object points with varying depths closely surrounding the tracked
fovea. However, since the eye is only able to focus on a single depth
simultaneously, it is possible to present the correct optical focus
while approximating depth of eld blur in image space. We implemented the tracked spatially varying lens phase function method
on our holographic display prototypes but simulated eye position
with a mouse cursor in lieu of an actual eye tracker.
3.1.8 Rendering pipeline and GPU Implementation. When generating content for a 3D display, it is preferential to render imagery
using the standard graphics pipeline and APIs (DirectX, OpenGL,
etc.), as many tools are available, and independently convert to a
display-specic representation in a post-processing step. Our implementation provides a true 3D, multi-focal hologram directly from
the GPU color and depth buers of a rendered 3D scene using a
series of pixel shaders (see Figure 7). The rst shader converts the
color data to the set of complex object points o®. The next stage converts these object points into the complex hologram plane using the
depth buer and lens phase functions fz (ρ, θ)o , which are computed
on-the-y. The complex hologram is converted to a phase-only representation in a nal shader and is sent to the SLM. Note that we
provide three implementations of the hologram generation shader
that correspond to the point-wise integration, separable convolution,
and FFT convolution methods described in this paper. The separable convolution shader operates in two passes, one for each of the
linearly separable axes. Two versions of the phase extraction shader
were also implemented: one for the amplitude discard method, and
one for the double phase method. As a result of this implementation,
we are able to generate holograms directly from rendered polygonal
models. Figure 8 shows a photograph of a prototype display where
the model was rendered, converted to a hologram, and displayed in
real-time in excess of the display refresh rate.
3.2 Completing a Near-Eye Display
In Section 3.1, we described how a point light source and phase-only
SLM are used as a basis for a holographic projector. However, as
with other near-eye displays, a projector unit (or image panel) is just
one component of a display system; we must also add an eyepiece
to magnify the image, relay it to the eye, and optionally provide a
Fig. 8. Photograph of holographic display. The model was rendered using the
standard graphics pipeline and converted to a hologram in post-processing
pixel shaders. In this example, the hologram resolution is 1920 × 1080 pixels
and the rendering and holographic computation loop ran at a color field
rate of 157 Hz. Dragon model by Stanford Computer Graphics Laboratory.
see-through capability. In this section, we describe the addition of a
suitable eyepiece to complete a VR or AR display.
3.2.1 Virtual Reality Displays. The rst goal of building our neareye displays is to show the best intrinsic capabilities of holograms:
good image quality, true 3D multi-focal imagery, and vision correction capabilities. We focus on this set of capabilities in our VR
displays, which we implement using simple benchtop designs and
conventional eyepieces. We defer more ambitious optics and form
factors for our subsequent AR prototypes.
A basic virtual reality display can be formed by placing a magnifying eyepiece in front of a holographic projector, forming a simple
imaging system. The projector forms an aerial image (or volume)
at the location of the object points, which the eyepiece magnies
and relays to the eye. Since phase-only spatial light modulators are
generally small microdisplays, the eyepiece must provide a high
degree of magnication. Alternatively, magnication may take place
using a diverging beam incident on the SLM, as described in Section 3.1.2. For our virtual reality displays, we use a combination of
these approaches. As also described in Section 3.1.2, as we increase
the eld of view of our display, we decrease the size of the exit
pupil and extend the depth of eld, making focal eects more subtle.
Therefore, we built two virtual reality displays: one to demonstrate
a wide eld of view, and one to demonstrate multi-focal and vision
correction capabilities. As we describe in Section 5.3, this is not
a fundamental restriction as SLMs allowing both capabilities are
available today. We assess and describe the specic congurations
of our virtual reality displays in Sections 4.1 and 5.2.
3.2.2 Augmented Reality Displays. The other goal of building
our near-eye displays is to show the optical corrective power of
holograms, which enable form factors that are inaccessible through
conventional means. We use our augmented reality display prototypes to show that wide elds of view and very compact form
factors are together possible.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:10 • A. Maimone et al.
Eyepieces for optical see-through AR displays present a unique
set of challenges to the display designer, as it is dicult to maintain both see-through and augmented optical paths in a compact,
wide eld of view device. Various eyepieces have been proposed,
such as freeform prisms, waveguides, and o-axis reectors. O-
axis reectors, which employ an image projector that is tilted away
from the optical axis of a reective focusing element, have demonstrated the largest elds of view. However, to reduce the form factor,
the focusing power of these eyepieces must be increased and the
projector must be tilted farther o-axis. Furthermore, curved re-
ective elements tend to have undesirable bulbous form factors,
so it is instead desirable to use at elements with Fresnel-grooved
or xed holographic structures. Unfortunately, all these factors increase optical aberrations, especially as the eld of view increases.
Thus, such optical systems tend to have large helmet-sized form
factors or narrow elds of view. However, our holographic projector aords powerful aberration correction capabilities, enabling us
to instead select the most desirable physical properties – compact,
at, high magnication, wide FOV, and highly o-axis – and use the
holographic projector to correct all the associated aberrations.
The eyepiece we selected for our augmented reality displays is a
thin, at, and wide eld of view holographic optical element (HOE).
The HOE consists of a xed hologram that focuses light from a
highly o-axis beam into an on-axis beam in front of the eye, performing a similar function as an elliptically curved reector. As a
volume (or Bragg) hologram, the HOE acts only over a narrow set
of angles and wavelengths and is thus able to redirect and focus the
light of the projector while providing a clear, highly transparent
see-through view to the user. We assess this eyepiece under two
congurations. In the rst conguration, we combine the benchtop
holographic projector of our virtual reality displays with the HOE
eyepiece, showing the ability to correct severe aberrations in the
compact eyepiece while providing a full color display and complex
imagery. In the second conguration, we replace the benchtop projector with a miniature projection engine that also employs highly
o-axis optics, and attach it to an eyeglasses-like frame. We show
that this compact projector can correct even more severe aberrations
in simple holographic imagery. We assess and describe the specic
congurations of these displays in Sections 4.1 and 5.2.
4 IMPLEMENTATION
4.1 Hardware
We constructed four prototype displays which we assess in Section 5.2. Each prototype included a HOLOEYE PLUTO (model HES6010-VIS) liquid crystal on silicon (LCOS) reective phase-only spatial light modulator with a resolution of 1920×1080 pixels. The pitch
of the SLM is 8 µm, and the active area is 15.36×8.64 mm. The SLM
was illuminated by a single optical ber that was coupled to three
laser diodes emitting at 448, 524, and 638 nm. The laser light was
linearly polarized to match the requirement of the SLM. For full
color operation, the displays operated in a color eld sequential
operation at a 20 Hz frame rate (60 Hz color eld rate), limited by
the refresh rate of the SLM. An Arduino microcontroller was used
to control laser power and synchronize the three color lasers to the
display. The spatial light modulator was connected to a PC with a
NVIDIA GTX 980 Ti GPU, which performed all of the rendering
and holographic calculations. The display was photographed and
lmed using a Point Grey Blacky S industrial color camera with a
resolution of 2448×2048 pixels. The camera focus was set to near
innity for results not showing multi-focal capabilities. To avoid
articially boosting contrast, the non-linear image processing functions of the camera (black level, gamma adjust) were disabled and
no post-exposure adjustments were made to the image les.
4.2 Soware
We performed rendering operations in OpenGL and holographic
calculations in the OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL) running on
Windows 10. The GLFFT library1 was used for FFT calculations. All
input images and holographic output used a resolution of 1920×1080.
For results featuring aberration correction, Zernike coecients
were measured at a grid of 15 points over the display, and MATLAB
was used to interpolate to the full display resolution. Defocus, vertical astigmatism, oblique astigmatism, vertical coma, and horizontal
coma coecients were measured as these were sucient to correct
the aberrations in our display prototypes. For results featuring variable depth, the Zernike focus coecient was measured at several
known focus depths, and these measurements were used to build a
linear function mapping inverse depth to the focus coecient. For
results featuring distortion correction, a sparse set of image-camera
correspondences were measured and interpolated to the full display
resolution using MATLAB. For full color results, these operations
were performed over all three color channels.
All the computation times listed in this paper indicate the time
to run the full rendering and holographic computation loop; thus
results that include the rendering of a complex 3D model (e.g. the
dragon in Figure 8) have lower performance than those in which a
simple 2D image is displayed (e.g “berries” photograph of Figure 9).
Note that all rates listed for color results indicate the color eld rate,
where three color elds are needed to represent a full color image.
Also note that computation times were measured with vertical sync
disabled to measure rates above the display refresh rate of 60 Hz;
however, photographs were captured with vertical sync enabled to
synchronize the display to the three color lasers.
5 EXPERIMENTAL ASSESSMENT
5.1 Soware Simulation
To evaluate the theoretical performance of the algorithms, we rst
performed a numerical reconstruction to simulate the holographic
image. A phase hologram was generated using the separable convolution method with a sub-hologram size of 177 pixels and double
phase encoding. The lens phase function was selected to match the
prototype conguration described in Section 5.2.1. Reconstruction
was performed by inverting the holographic generation process,
i.e. deconvolution of the hologram with the lens phase function, or
equivalently, convolution of the hologram with the complex conjugate of the lens function. Note that this simulation process does
not capture all the intricacies of playback on a specic real-world
SLM (e.g. accounting for the dead space between pixels or phase
inaccuracies), but provides a good rst approximation.
1https://github.com/Themaister/GLFFT
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays for Virtual and Augmented Reality • 85:11
The results are shown in Figure 9. Qualitatively, the simulation
(Figure 9, center) provides a faithful representation of the target
image (Figure 9, left) and provides higher contrast and less high
frequency noise than typical results for random phase, iteratively
generated holograms. However, we notice the resolution loss associated with encoding a single complex value into two phase values as
well as some subtle ringing artifacts. Quantitatively, the PSNR of the
reconstruction was 30.57 dB for red, 30.05 dB for green, and 27.26
dB for blue. We nd this promising as a PSNR ≥30 dB is generally a
target for lossy video compression. See Yoshikawa et al. [2016] for
quantitative analysis of holographic image quality.
5.2 Hardware Prototypes
To further evaluate our approach for real-world use, we built a series
of prototype displays. Each prototype is designed to best showcase
one of more of the strengths of holography in near-eye VR and AR
displays. The prototypes are described in the following sections.
5.2.1 Wide Field of View Virtual Reality Display. Our rst prototype is designed to demonstrate a wide FOV virtual reality scenario
with the best image quality. We use a simple, benchtop optical design
(see Figure 10, left) and a conventional eyepiece (Meade Series 5000
21 mm MWA), deferring compactness for the subsequent prototypes.
Magnication of the 15.36 mm wide SLM to a 70◦ wide FOV was
achieved using a diverging beam and high magnication eyepiece.
An intermediate aperture plane with a stop is used to block the
higher diraction orders and facilitate the double phase encoding
method. A Goyo 6 mm focal length C-mount camera lens was used
to photograph the display. Hologram computation was performed
using separable convolution and double phase encoding.
Figure 8 shows a frame of a video sequence in which a 3D model
was rendered, converted to a hologram at a xed depth, and displayed in real-time. The result shows the ability of our software
to integrate with the standard graphics pipeline. We also note this
result shows the ability to create high contrast blacks and black
regions larger than the sub-hologram size. For this result, the rendering and computation loop ran at a color eld rate of 157 Hz,
including the time to render the model. The supplemental video
includes an animated sequence of the model rotating.
Figure 9 (right) shows a photograph of the prototype display. The
hologram was computed and displayed in real-time. The prototype
shows a reasonable representation of the expected result (Figure 9,
center), although the colors are a bit harsher. In the magnied region,
we observe the resolution is also close to the simulation. Note that
the camera is close to the resolution of the spatial light modulator
and employs Bayer color lters, resulting in the blocky pixel and
color structure visible in the magnied region. For this result, the
computation loop ran at a color eld rate of 260 Hz.
5.2.2 Multifocal Virtual Reality Display. Our second prototype
is designed to display multi-focal and vision correction capabilities.
The second prototype (Figure 10, right) is physically similar to
the rst but uses a lower magnication eyepiece (Edmund Optics
Ere 32 mm) and has a narrower 40◦ diagonal FOV. A Fujinon 12.5
mm focal length C-mount camera lens was used to photograph
the display. For results showing per-pixel depth, the point-wise
integration method and double phase encoding were used. For the
results showing eye tracked depth and vision correction, separable
convolution and double phase encoding were used. All results use a
sub-hologram size of 401 pixels.
Figure 11 shows the ability of our display to display true 3D
holograms where each pixel appears at a unique and individually
controllable depth. By adjusting only the focus ring of the camera,
we were able bring various parts of the model in and out of focus
(see supplemental video). Since each pixel acts as spherical wave
with virtually no discretization, we observe very smooth and natural
focus over the depth of the model. This hologram requires a very
complex computation so processing was performed oine.
Although we are encouraged by the prospect of true 3D holograms with per-pixel depth, we were not yet able to demonstrate
real-time calculation. As described in Section 3.1.7, a useful approximation is to set the entire scene focus to match the depth of the
viewer’s tracked gaze. In lieu of an eye tracker, we simulate this
conguration by setting the global scene focus to the depth of the
scene at the position of the mouse cursor. The results are shown
in Figure 12, which are calculated and displayed in real-time. We
demonstrate that the whole scene appears in focus when the hologram focus matches the camera focus, and out of focus otherwise.
See the supplemental video for additional results. For this result, the
rendering and computation loop ran at 91 Hz; there is virtually no
speed penalty for changing the global scene focus each frame.
Finally, we use our second prototype display to demonstrate vision correction. We placed a cylindrical lens with a focal length
of 200 mm in front of our camera to induce fairly severe vertical
astigmatism (see Figure 13B). When viewing a hologram with this
astigmatic vision, we observe the associated blurring (Figure 13D),
especially among lines with a primarily horizontal component, as
compared to a hologram viewed with normal vision (Figure 13C).
However, when we apply vision correction to our hologram (Figure 13E) the result is virtually the same as the when no astigmatism
was induced (Figure 13C). For these results, the computation loop
ran at a color eld of rate of 92 Hz. We note that the astigmatism is
less severe in the hologram (Figure 13D) than a general camera view
(Figure 13B) because the exit pupil of the display is smaller than the
camera aperture. Also note that the linearly separable convolution
method used for these results can only x vision problems that can
be corrected with a linearly separable phase function. For generalpurpose vision correction, FFT based convolution can substituted,
which runs at a similar speed as demonstrated in Section 5.2.3. Finally note that the that the cylindrical lens also introduced some
geometric distortion (vertical image stretch) which we did not correct but it would be trivial to do so.
5.2.3 Benchtop Augmented Reality Display. Our remaining prototypes are designed to show the potential of holography for optical see-through AR applications. In particular, we demonstrate
the ability to correct severe optical aberrations that help to enable
previously inaccessible form factors. Our rst AR prototype (see
Figure 14, left) is designed to show that a holographic projector
can be used with a high magnication, wide eld of view, highly
o-axis, and at eyepiece. Our eyepiece consists of a holographic
optical element that focuses light from a projector approximately
60◦ o-axis to the on-axis position of the eye, while providing a
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:12 • A. Maimone et al.
Fig. 9. Image quality comparison. Le: Target image. Center: Numerical reconstruction of hologram. Right: Photograph of prototype display described in
Section 5.2.1. Blue bordered inset images show magnified regions. Berries image by Ana Blazic Pavlovic/Shuerstock.
Laser
Beamsplitter
S
Phase
LCOS
Lens
Aperture
Stop
Eyepiece
Laser
Phase
LCOS
Lens Lens
Beamsplitter
Aperture
Stop
Eyepiece
Wide Field of View VR Prototype Multi-focal VR Prototype
Photographing
Display
Fig. 10. Virtual reality holographic display prototypes. Le: Prototype display designed to demonstrate a wide field of view. Right: Display designed to
demonstrate multi-focal capabilities. The blue bordered inset image shows
how the display was photographed using a camera at the eye position.
clear see-through view. The HOE operates at three wavelengths,
enabling a full color display and a horizontal eld of view of >82◦
(limited by the eld of view of our camera). We used the eyepiece
with the same benchtop holographic projector as was used for the
multifocal VR Display (see Section 5.2.2). A Goyo 6 mm focal length
C-mount camera lens was used to photograph the display. Hologram
computation was performed using point-wise integration and the
amplitude discard method for the full screen aberration correction
results, FFT convolution and the amplitude discard method for the
tracked aberration correction results, and point-wise integration
and the double phase encoding method for the display of a full color
model. All results use a sub-hologram size of 401 pixels.
Figure 15 shows the ability of our display to correct eyepiece aberrations. Figure 15A shows the display with no aberration correction,
i.e. the projector focus is set to the correct value for the center of
the display, but no other corrections are applied. Note that there
is severe and spatially varying astigmatism over the display; no
region of the display is in both proper horizontal and vertical focus.
Figure 15B shows the display after full screen, spatially varying
aberration correction is applied. We observe sharp lines in both
directions over the entire eld of view. We note, however, that the
spatially varying aberration correction is an expensive operation
and was computed oine. However, in a eye tracked display, we are
able to correct aberrations in the region that the viewer is looking.
We simulate this eect by correcting aberrations in the position of
a tracked cursor (see Figure 15C). The tracked method runs in realtime at a rate of 89 Hz; see the supplemental video for an animated
result. Finally, in Figure 15D we show a full color, augmented image
of a complex model. This result uses both optical aberration and
geometric distortion correction and was computed oine, although
the tracked aberration correction method could be applied.
We are encouraged by the ability to show clear, full color, augmented holograms in a challenging optical conguration. The seethrough view is also clear and transparent. However, the contrast
is poorer than the VR displays, and some light leaks through the
“clear” regions of the display. The display edges and corners are also
dim, and there is a dimmer region in the center of the display due to
uneven illumination and HOE diraction eciency. These factors
could be improved with a more carefully constructed HOE.
5.2.4 Compact Augmented Reality Display. Our previous AR
prototype, while using a very compact eyepiece, still retained a
holographic projector with a large benchtop form factor. Our nal
augmented reality prototype is designed to show that the holographic projector itself can also be miniaturized, enabling the optics
to be incorporated into an eyeglasses-like form factor, while retaining a wide 80◦ horizontal FOV. We achieved miniaturization by
eliminating the aperture stop and all lenses so that the light needed
only to diverge between the laser and eyepiece (rather than diverge,
converge through the stop, and re-diverge), greatly reducing the
optical path length. We also switched to a highly o-axis (≈60◦
)
SLM illumination scheme that reduced the required space and eliminated the need for a beamsplitter optic. Finally, the optical path was
folded around the head using a set of mirrors until it reached the
HOE, which was cut down to the shape of an eyeglasses lens and
inserted into a 3D printed eyeglasses frame (see Figure 14 (right)
and Figure 1C). We did not incorporate the SLM driving electronics
or light source driving electronics into the glasses frame; we note,
however, that Google Glass has demonstrated that LCOS panel and
light source driving electronics can be housed in a (sub-)eyeglassessized frame. The display was photographed with a Goyo 6 mm focal
length C-mount camera lens. Hologram computation was performed
using point-wise integration and the amplitude discard method. We
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
Holographic Near-Eye Displays for Virtual and Augmented Reality • 85:13
Fig. 11. Photograph of holographic display exhibiting true depth of field. Each pixel appears at a unique and individually addressable focal depth. Le:
Photograph of display with camera focus set to depth of the dragon’s chest region. Notice that the chest appears in focus, while the farther body and tail
appear out of focus. Center column: Magnified regions of the three blue bordered regions of the dragon (chest, middle body, tail) when the camera was focused
at that region. Right Column: Magnified regions of the three blue bordered regions when the camera was focused away from that region. Dragon model by
Stanford Computer Graphics Laboratory.
only tested the display in one color (green), but it is not a limitation
of the design.
Figure 16 shows the ability of our compact augmented reality
prototype to show clear, high resolution images. Although the projected hologram is unrecognizable without aberration correction
(Figure 16, left), the aberration corrected image (Figure 16, center)
shows sharp horizontal and vertical lines over the whole eld of
view. Figure 16 (right) shows the display is capable of retaining
much of the resolution of the SLM. Note that the text can be resolved despite a line width of only SLM pixel wide, with a one pixel
space between the body and dot of the letter i. Also note that text
is sharp in both the center and the corners of the display. Figure
1D shows a simple augmented scene. These results were calculated
oine; however, real-time operation is possible using the previously
described tracked aberration correction method.
We are encouraged by the initial results in this diminutive form
factor. However, we note some drawbacks of the display. The edges
and corners of the display are quite dim due to uneven illumination
and HOE diraction eciency. The consequence of removing the
aperture stop in the projector is that we can no longer block the
higher diraction orders, resulting in some faint ghosting and the
inability to use the double phase encoding method for more complex
imagery. However, we expect that a virtual aperture stop can be
added to the projector without increasing size (see Section 5.3).
5.3 Assessment
We have demonstrated near-eye holographic displays that oer high
resolution, full color, good image quality, variable focus, and vision
correction. We have also shown a powerful aberration correction
capability that enabled a wide eld of view in a very compact device.
However, we note several remaining issues to address in future
work to create practical virtual and augmented reality displays:
Pupil Expansion. One of the major limitations of our prototypes is
the small exit pupil (or eye box). A practical stereo display requires a
pupil expansion device or steering device. One possibility is to shift
the exit pupil by switching light sources or by using a beam-steering
element, which has been demonstrated successfully in large format
holographic displays [Häussler et al. 2009]. When using the device
with human viewers, the small exit pupil and constant holographic
phase can also contribute to the appearance of low frequency speckle
as the eyes move. We noticed that this eect disappeared when we
experimented with a pupil expansion device.
Display Etendue. As described in Section 3.1.2, the limited etendue
of our holographic phase modulator places a eld of view and depth
of eld trade-o in our displays. For this reason, we were unable to
show both a wide FOV and shallow depth of eld in a single device.
However, we note the commercial availability of new 4K resolution
phase modulation panels (e.g. HOLOEYE GAEA and Jasper JD8714)
that have the same area as our phase panel but over twice the linear
pixel density. Such panels will allow both a wide eld of view and
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 85. Publication date: July 2017.
85:14 • A. Maimone et al.
Fig. 12. Photographs of prototype showing real-time tracked global focus.
The focus of the entire scene was changed to match the depth at the tracked
green cursor position. Top: The scene depth at the tracked position (green
crosshair) does not match the depth of focus of the camera (red crosshair).
The scene appears out of focus. Boom: The scene depth at the tracked position (green crosshair) matches the depth focus of the camera (red crosshair).
The scene appears in focus. Blue bordered inset images show magnified
regions. Dragon model by Stanford Computer Graphics Laboratory.
shallower depth of eld in a single device, while also increasing
resolution by more than a factor of four.
Higher Diraction Orders. Our compact AR display did not include an aperture stop plane to block the higher diraction orders,
which did not allow us to implement the double phase encoding
technique for more precise amplitude control. We expect that a “virtual” aperture stop could be implemented in the holographic optical
element itself by increasing the angular selectivity of the volume
hologram through the use of a thicker holographic medium. This
would only aect the thickness of the eyepiece by tens of microns.
Eye Tracking. Although we proposed accelerating holographic
calculations based on gaze-tracking data, we did not incorporate
an eye tracker in our prototypes. We note the availability of subminiature eye tracking cameras (e.g. Omnivision OVM6211, 3 mm
× 3 mm) that could be incorporated into compact devices. We also
note the commercial availability of eye trackers embedded in head
mounted displays by vendors such as SensoMotoric Instruments.
Display Refresh Rate. Our phase spatial light modulator was only
capable of a 60 Hz refresh rate, which caused icker when the display
was viewed in a color sequential operation. Although phase LCOS
modulators tend to be slower than amplitude modulators due to
the need for a thicker liquid crystal layer, we note the availability
of 180 Hz phase modulators (e.g. HOLOEYE LETO and Thorlabs
EXULUS-HD1) which should allow icker-free display.
5.4 Conclusion
Virtual and augmented reality near-eye displays oer great potential to take us to new places, provide instant and spatially-aware
access to information, and begin to integrate computer graphics
with human vision. Realizing these goals eectively requires great
advances in display technology and the satisfaction of numerous
conicting requirements in a single hardware device. Computational
displays are an attractive solution that push complexity to software
where it is easier to fulll a large number of optical constraints.
We have described how digital holography provides an appealing
computational solution to near-eye display, oering high resolution
imagery, per-pixel focal control, vision correction, wide FOV, and
compact form factors. These capabilities were demonstrated across
a series of preliminary hardware prototypes. In future work, we plan
to integrate all these capabilities into a single hardware device while
expanding the exit pupil to create a practical stereo display. In this
way, we hope to become one step closer to truly mobile near-eye
displays that match the range of capabilities of human vision.
