We propose a hardware and software pipeline to fabricate flexible
wearable sensors and use them to capture deformations without line-ofsight. Our first contribution is a low-cost fabrication pipeline to embed
multiple aligned conductive layers with complex geometries into silicone
compounds. Overlapping conductive areas from separate layers form
local capacitors that measure dense area changes. Contrary to existing
fabrication methods, the proposed technique only requires hardware
that is readily available in modern fablabs. While area measurements
alone are not enough to reconstruct the full 3D deformation of a surface,
they become sufficient when paired with a data-driven prior. A novel
semi-automatic tracking algorithm, based on an elastic surface geometry
deformation, allows us to capture ground-truth data with an optical
mocap system, even under heavy occlusions or partially unobservable
markers. The resulting dataset is used to train a regressor based on deep
neural networks, directly mapping the area readings to global positions
of surface vertices. We demonstrate the flexibility and accuracy of the
proposed hardware and software in a series of controlled experiments and
design a prototype of wearable wrist, elbow, and biceps sensors, which do
not require line-of-sight and can be worn below regular clothing.
CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Sensors and actuators; Sensor applications and deployments; • Computing methodologies → Motion capture;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Deformation capture, stretchable,
sensor array, capacitive
1 INTRODUCTION
Motion capture is an essential tool in many graphics applications,
such as character animation for movies and games, sports,
biomechanics, virtual reality (VR), and augmented reality (AR).
Most commonly, motion capture systems are camera-based, either
relying on body-worn markers or more recently markerless.
Vision-based approaches can be highly accurate and in the
case of multiview or depth imaging, they can provide dense
surface reconstructions. However, such systems rely on extensive
infrastructure and are therefore mostly confined to lab and studio
use. Other sensing modalities, such as body-worn inertial and
magnetic sensors, or resistive and capacitive distance sensors have
been explored to provide more mobility, yet these are typically
limited to capturing skeletal deformation only.
We introduce a new, practical, and affordable approach to deformation sensing and motion capture. Our approach bridges the gap
between vision-based and inertial approaches by providing accurate sensing of dense surface deformations while being wearable,
and hence practical for scenarios in which stationary cameras are
unsuited, for example, to capture muscle bulging below clothing.
Capacitive Sensor Array. We propose to leverage a capacitive
sensor array, fabricated entirely from soft and stretchable silicone, that is capable of reconstructing its own deformations.
The sensor array provides dense measurements of area change,
which can be leveraged to reconstruct the underlying 3D surface
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 38, No. 2, Article 16. Publication date: March 2019.
16:2 • O. Glauser et al.
deformation without requiring line-of-sight (see Figure 2). We
furthermore contribute a data-driven surface reconstruction
technique, allowing for the capture of non-rigid deformations
even in challenging conditions, such as under heavy occlusion, at
night, outdoors, or for the acquisition of uncommon deformable
objects. Conductive polymers have been leveraged to fabricate
resistive bend sensors (Bächer et al. 2016; Rendl et al. 2012) and are
the basis of soft capacitive distance sensors, which are now readily
available commercially (Par 2018; Str 2018). Such stretchable capacitive sensors are enticing, since they are thin, durable, and may
be embedded in clothing or directly worn on the body. However,
so far fabrication has been involved and required specialized
equipment, driving up cost. Moreover, such sensors have not been
demonstrated to be accurate enough for motion capture and are
typically limited to measurement of uniaxial deformation. Please
note that capacitive sensing is often considered synonymous with
touch sensing (Grosse-Puppendahl et al. 2017; Lee et al. 1985;
Rekimoto 2002), in which capacitive coupling effects are leveraged
to detect finger contact with a static sensor. In this article, however, the term is used in a different sense, referring to the fact that
capacitance changes when an electrode undergoes deformations.
Custom Fabrication Method. We introduce a fabrication method
for soft and stretchable capacitive deformation sensors, consisting of multiple bonded layers of conductive and non-conductive
silicone. Crucially, the method only requires casting silicone and
etching conductive traces by a standard laser cutter and can thus be
performed using hardware commonly available in a modern fabrication lab. The precision and accuracy of our sensors is comparable
to commercial solutions, and the involved material costs are low.
Our approach supports embedding many sensor cells of custom
shape in a single thin film. Each cell measures changes of its own
area, caused by deformation of the surface it is attached to. The
resulting sensor array can be read out at interactive rates.
Geometric Prior. While providing a rich signal, the area measurements alone are not sufficient to uniquely reconstruct the full
3D sensor shape due to isotropy and lack of direct bending measurement. They are, however, sufficient when paired with an appropriate geometric prior, if expected deformations involve some
amount of non-area preserving stretch. In addition to the hardware, we propose an effective pipeline to acquire the deformation
of the sensor worn by a user, for example, wrapped around the
wrist or an elbow. We propose a data-driven technique based on a
neural network regressor to reconstruct the sensor geometry from
area measurements. At runtime, the regressor estimates the location of a sparse set of vertices, and the dense deformed surface is
computed by a nonlinear elastic deformation method, obtaining a
high-resolution reconstruction in real-time (see Figure 1).
To acquire the necessary training data, we overcome an additional challenge: Optical tracking systems struggle with the heavy
occlusions and large deformations typical for natural motions of
wrists, elbows, and other multi-axial joints. Furthermore, when
capturing other non-rigidly deforming objects, skeletal priors cannot be leveraged to recover missing markers. We thus introduce a
semiautomatic ground-truth acquisition technique, enabling capture of the necessary training data in minutes and reducing tedious
manual cleanup to a minimum. The approach leverages an elastic
Fig. 2. An elbow “hidden” below by a jacket. Top: Video frames for comparison. Bottom: With our approach the dense surface deformation is estimated without requiring line-of-sight.
simulation of the sensor to disambiguate the marker tracks, deal
with unlabeled markers, and correctly attribute marker positions
to the digital mesh model of the sensor.
Evaluation. We demonstrate our sensors in action by acquiring dense deformations of a wrist and lower part of the hand (see
Figure 1), an elbow, an inflating balloon, and muscle bulging. We
also capture deformations of flat sensors, both in and out of plane,
which shows the precision and localization properties of our capacitive sensor arrays. Finally, we evaluate the prediction accuracy
of the learning-based prior quantitatively.
2 RELATED WORK
Our work relates to several areas of the literature ranging from digital fabrication to motion capture and self-sensing input devices.
We briefly review the most important work in these areas.
Camera-based Motion Capture. The acquisition of articulated
human motion using cameras is widely used in graphics and
other application domains. Commercial solutions require wearing
marker suits or gloves and depend on multiple calibrated cameras
mounted in the environment. To overcome these constraints, research has proposed marker-less approaches using multiple cameras (cf. Moeslund et al. (2006)); sometimes these rely on offline
(Ballan et al. 2012; Bregler and Malik 1998; Starck and Hilton 2003)
and more recently online processing (de Aguiar et al. 2008; Elhayek
et al. 2017; Rhodin et al. 2015; Stoll et al. 2011), but they always
require fixed camera installations. Neumann et al. (2013) capture
muscle deformations of a human shoulder and arm with a multicamera system and derive a data-driven statistical model.
Recent pose estimation methods exploit deep convolutional networks for body-part detection in single, fully unconstrained images (Chen and Yuille 2014; Newell et al. 2016; Tompson et al. 2014;
Toshev and Szegedy 2014; Wei et al. 2016). However, these methods only capture 2D skeletal information. Predicting 3D poses directly from 2D RGB images has been demonstrated using offline
methods (Bogo et al. 2016; Tekin et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016) and
in online settings (Mehta et al. 2017). Monocular depth cameras
provide additional information and have been shown to aid robust
skeletal tracking (Ganapathi et al. 2012; Ma and Wu 2014; Shotton
et al. 2013; Taylor et al. 2012, 2016) and enable dense surface reconstruction even under deformation (Dou et al. 2016; Newcombe
et al. 2015; Zollhöfer et al. 2014). Multiple, specialized structured
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 38, No. 2, Article 16. Publication date: March 2019.
Deformation Capture via Soft and Stretchable Sensor Arrays • 16:3
light scanners can be used to capture high-fidelity dense surface
reconstructions of humans (Pons-Moll et al. 2015).
All vision-based approaches struggle with visual clutter, (self-)
occlusions, and difficult lighting conditions, such as bright sunshine in the case of depth cameras, high contrast, or lack of illumination in the case of color cameras. Furthermore, all camera-based
systems require line-of-sight and often precise calibration and are
therefore not well suited in many scenarios, such as outdoors. Our
sensor is a first step in removing these limitations, allowing mobile
and self-contained sensing, without line-of-sight.
Self-sensing Input Devices. An important feature of our method is
the capability of measuring the sensor’s own deformation without
requiring any external cameras. Such self-sensing input devices,
usually not designed for motion capture, have been first demonstrated in the Gummi system (Schwesig et al. 2004), which simulated a handheld, flexible display via two resistive pressure sensors. Other early work used the ShapeTape sensor (Danisch et al.
1999) for input into a 3D modeling application (Balakrishnan et al.
1999). Metallic strain gauges embedded into flexible 3D printed 1D
strips measure the bending and flexing of custom input devices
(Chien et al. 2015). Rendl et al. (2014) use eight transparent printed
electrodes on a transparent and flexible 2D display overlay to reconstruct 2.5D bending and flexing of the sheet in real time but do
not allow for stretch. Bächer et al. (2016) propose an optimizationbased algorithm to design self-sensing input devices by embedding piezo-resistive polymer traces into flexible 3D printed objects.
Sarwar et al. (2017) use polyacrylamide electrodes embedded in
silicone to produce a flexible, transparent 4×4 sensing grid, and
Xu et al. (2016) propose a PDMS-based capacitive array; both are
limited to detecting touch gestures. Hall effect sensors embedded
into hot-pluggable and modular joints can measure joint angles
of tangible input devices used for character animation (Glauser
et al. 2016; Jacobson et al. 2014). While demonstrating the rich interactive possibilities afforded by flexible input devices, none of the
above approaches are directly suitable for the acquisition of dense
non-rigid surface deformation.
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs). Attaching sensors directly
onto the body overcomes the need for line-of-sight and enables
use without infrastructure. IMUs are the most prominent type of
sensors used for pose estimation. Commercial systems rely on 17
or more IMUs, which fully constrain the pose space, to attain accurate skeletal reconstructions via inverse kinematics (Roetenberg
et al. 2007). Good performance can be achieved with fewer sensors
by exploiting data-driven methods (Liu et al. 2011; Schwarz et al.
2009; Tautges et al. 2011) or taking temporal consistency into account, albeit at high computational cost and therefore requiring offline processing (von Marcard et al. 2017). While IMUs provide mobility and accuracy, they cannot sense dense surface deformations.
Strain Gauges, Stretch and Bend Sensors. Strain sensors fabricated
from stretchable silicone and attached directly to the skin have
been proposed to measure rotation angles of individual joints (Lee
et al. 2016). Shyr et al. (2014) propose a textile strain sensor,
made from elastic conductive yarn, to acquire bending angles of
elbow and knee movements. Mattmann et al. (2008) and Lorussi
et al. (2004) use strain gauges embedded into garments to classify
discrete body postures. Scilingo et al. (2003) propose polymerized
fabric strain sensors and demonstrate use of the sensor in a
data glove. Specifically designed for the capture of wrist motion,
Huang et al. (2017) use five dielectric elastomer sensors and
achieve an accuracy of 5◦ for all motion components, highlighting
the difficulty of reconstructing joint orientation of complex,
multi-axial joints such as the wrist, shoulder or ankle. Bending
information can be used to recover articulated skeletal motion,
and resistive bend sensors are typically used in VR data gloves.
However, these suffer from hysteresis (Bächer et al. 2016); imprecise placement and sensor slippage can impact accuracy (Kessler
et al. 1995). A soft bend sensor that is insensitive to stretching and
mountable directly on the user’s skin is proposed in Shen et al.
(2016), increasing angular accuracy, but it is inherently limited to
measuring uni-axial bending.
We propose a wearable, soft, and stretchable silicone-based capacitive sensor design, focused on measuring dense area changes,
which allows us, in combination with a data-driven reconstruction
technique, to accurately capture dense, articulated and non-rigid
deformations.
Fabrication. Producing capacitive elastomer stretching sensors is
challenging, and the mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties
all depend on the type of material used and the pattern of conductive traces or electrodes. Another challenge is that the silicone
is hydrophobic, hence the adhesion of non-silicones is extremely
difficult. For an extensive review of various ways to manufacture
conductive layers for such sensors or actuators, we refer to Rosset
and Shea (2013). Composites of carbon black (conductive powder)
and silicone are widely used; see, e.g., Araromi et al. (2015), Huang
et al. (2017), O’Brien et al. (2014), and Rosset et al. (2016). A large
range of fabrication methods for manufacturing conductive trace
patterns have been proposed. Most methods rely on the potentially
costly fabrication of intermediate tools like screen printing masks
(Jeong and Lim 2016; Wessely et al. 2016), molds (Huang et al.
2017; Sarwar et al. 2017), or stencils (Rosset et al. 2016). To circumvent the adhesion issue, specialized plasma chambers are often
required to selectively pre-treat the base layer (Jin et al. 2017). An
alternative procedure, introduced by Lu et al. (2014), involves patterning conductive PDMS sheets, manually removing excess parts
with tweezers, sealing the resulting circuit with PDMS and bonding multiple such circuit layers to form capacitive touch sensors
(as demonstrated by Weigel et al. (2015)). Similar to Araromi et al.
(2015), our process leverages a standard laser cutter to etch away
the negative sensor pattern, opening up the possibility to digitally
design electrode patterns and produce them with low error tolerance. However, in contrast to prior work, our fabrication method
does not require a plasma chamber or manual alignment and
gluing of the different layers. Hence it allows for the production
of larger sensors with a high alignment quality (see Figure 8). To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a fabrication
method that requires almost no specialized hardware and enables
creating large high-resolution multi-layer sensor arrays.
Capacitive (Touch) Sensing. Ever since the introduction of the
Theremin (Glinsky 2000), an experimental musical instrument, researchers have explored the use of capacitive sensing in the context
of human-computer interaction (HCI). Most notably, capacitive
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 38, No. 2, Article 16. Publication date: March 2019.
16:4 • O. Glauser et al.
coupling effects are the basis of early (Beck and Stumpe 1973; Lee
et al. 1985) and virtually all modern touchscreen devices (Rekimoto
2002). Capacitive coupling effects exist naturally between many
objects (including humans) and their surroundings, and by measuring the changes in relative values it is possible to recover relative position, proximity and other properties. The seminal works
by Smith (1995) and Zimmermann et al. (1995) introduced and categorized the various electric field sensing aspects to the interaction research community and demonstrated applications that went
well beyond binary touch detection. Since then, capacitive coupling effects have been used to sense touch, detect and discriminate
user grip, and grasp, detect, and track objects on interactive surfaces, track 3D positions and proximity, and coarsely classify 3D
poses and gestures. We refer to the survey by Grosse-Puppendahl
et al. (2017) for an exhaustive treatment. Notably, flexible and
bendable sensors (Gotsch et al. 2016; Han et al. 2014; Poupyrev
et al. 2016) and those directly worn on the user’s skin (Kao et al.
2016; Nittala et al. 2018; Weigel et al. 2015) have been proposed.
However, virtually all of the above work measures one or a combination of different capacitive coupling effects, that is, the change in
capacitance due to a conductive object (such as a finger) approaching an electrode. Our work is fundamentally different in that we do
not sense capacitive coupling effects but instead measure changes
in the electrodes’ properties themselves: under deformation, the
area of the electrode’s plates changes, which in turn changes the
capacitance of the plate and hence the charge time of the capacitor.
We show how this effect can be leveraged to recover, using appropriate geometric priors, detailed 3D surface deformations, albeit at
the cost of requiring a custom read-out scheme.
3 OVERVIEW
We present a stretchable silicone elastomer-based sensor and its
corresponding fabrication procedure. The sensor senses its own
deformation and estimates the local surface area changes during
deformation when wrapped around an object or a body part of interest (e.g., a wrist). The sensor array is fabricated layer onto layer
entirely from two-component silicone elastomer with conductive
elements made from the same silicone but mixed with carbon black
particles. The conductive layers can be designed to contain custom
electrode patterns via etching with a standard laser cutter. This approach avoids the production of masks or molds and makes interlayer alignment very straightforward and precise.
As a further contribution, we introduce a silicone-based capacitive area sensor array, whereas prior work only demonstrated individual stretch sensing elements, and arrays only to detect dense touch or pressure (e.g., Block and Bergbreiter (2013),
Engel et al. (2006), Lipomi et al. (2011), Nittala et al. (2018), Ponce
Wong et al. (2012), Sarwar et al. (2017), Wissman et al. (2013), and
Woo et al. (2014)). Our key insight is that such arrays could also be
used to attain dense localized area changes, given an appropriate
read-out scheme. Our arrays are made by placing electrode strips
in two conductive layers, separated by a dielectric, together forming a non-uniform grid of capacitors. Furthermore, we propose a
scanning-based read-out scheme that does not require individually
connected capacitors, which would require a large number of layers or a large portion of the sensor area dedicated to connection
leads. Instead, we propose a time-multiplexing procedure to indirectly read out capacitance values, which allows for a drastically
simplified routing of electric connections. By integrating all the capacitance readings, we can acquire area changes with a sufficient
granularity and accuracy to reconstruct the geometry of an object,
given suitable geometric priors. These dense area measurements
are therefore combined with a deep learning-based regressor to
attain 3D position estimates of key points on the surface and an
elastic deformation optimization to obtain dense deformation reconstructions.
In the following sections, we provide a brief primer on capacitive sensing (Section 4.1), detail our sensor design (Section 4.2) and
detail the fabrication (Section 4.3). We then complete our method
by introducing our data capture and cleanup, learning, and surface
reconstruction approaches (Section 5).
4 SENSOR DESIGN
4.1 Preliminaries
The capacitance C (in Farads) of a plate capacitor is given by
C = ϵr ϵ0
A
d = ϵr ϵ0
lw
d , (1)
where A is the area of overlap of the two electrodes (in square meters), ϵr is the dielectric constant, ϵ0 is the electric constant and
d is the separation between the plates (in meters). Assuming a
rectangular plate capacitor, l is its length and w the width. While
originally derived for static plate
capacitors, this relationship also
holds for capacitors made from
silicone elastomers (Atalay et al.
2017; Huang et al. 2017; O’Brien
et al. 2014). To minimize capacitive coupling effects with other
objects, capacitors are typically shielded via insulating layers (see
inset). Using Equation (1), and assuming the same Poisson ratio of
width and thickness of the sensor (d/d0 = w/w0), a linear relationship between the ratio of the stretched capacitor’s length l to the
rest pose length l
0, and the ratio of the capacitance of the stretched
capacitor C to the rest pose capacitance C0 can be established:
C
C0 = ϵr ϵ0
lw
d
ϵr ϵ0
l 0w0
d0
= l
l0
w
w0
d0
d = l
l0 . (2)
Prior work applies this principle to the design of capacitive, uniaxial stretch sensors (Atalay et al. 2017) by continuously measuring a capacitance, which is then transformed to length measurement using Equation (2). Note that here an assumption is made
that stretch only happens along l, which typically requires fabricating isolated, individual capacitors (Figure 3(a)). Our aim is to
create a dense array of sensing elements, for which stretch may
occur in multiple directions and hence each sensing element captures changes in area.
Area Changes. Starting from Equation (1), and assuming volume conservation (V = V 0 ⇔ Ad = A0d0 ⇔ d0/d = A/A0) and
constant stretch throughout the entire sensor cell, the ratio of
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 38, No. 2, Article 16. Publication date: March 2019.
Deformation Capture via Soft and Stretchable Sensor Arrays • 16:5
capacitance before and after deformation can be expressed as
C
C0 = ϵr ϵ0
A
d
ϵr ϵ0
A0
d0
= A
A0
d0
d =
 A
A0
2
. (3)
Thus, if we know the current capacitance C of a sensor cell and
have recorded its rest pose area A0 and capacitance C0, we can
compute the change in area between the rest state and the current
configuration as
A
A0 =
 C
C0 . (4)
Touch vs. Pressure vs. Stretch. We note that there are fundamental differences between capacitive sensing of touch, pressure, and
stretch. The majority of the HCI literature on capacitive sensing
measure capacitive coupling effects (e.g., changes in capacitance
due to an approaching finger). Applied pressure can be measured
capacitively, since the thickness d is reduced, which leads to a
higher capacitance C (see Equation (1)). Finally, in our work, both
the overlap area A and the thickness d change due to the deformation of the sensor, requiring a custom read-out scheme (cf. Figure 5). We now explain how a naive implementation, designed for
touch or pressure sensing, must be modified to capacitively sense
deformation.
4.2 Sensor Layout
Dense surface deformation capture requires a sensor that can measure local changes in the surface geometry with high density. This
need has to be balanced with the complexity of the electrical design, so that the fabrication remains feasible. Our proposed concept
of the sensor array (Figure 3(b)), which we call simply sensor from
now on, strikes this balance with its two-electrode-layers design.
The sensor is made of two conductive layers with n and k independent electrode strips on each layer, respectively. We call the individual electrodes strips, but they may have any shape. Overlapping
sections of two electrode strips from separate layers form a local
capacitor, which we call a sensor cell S. We lay out the strips in a
non-uniform grid arrangement, as shown in Figure 3(c). Each pair
of strips from top and bottom layers crosses at most once, amounting to s sensor cells (s ≤ kn). This design allows routing all strips
to the same side of the sensor, where the silicone-based traces are
connected to a PCB for the measurement of capacitances (Figure 4).
However, since sensor cells are daisy-chained, we cannot directly
read each one independently. We now derive a read-out scheme
that provides the desired localized area measurements.
Sensor Read-out. As mentioned, our sensor is designed to consist of only two capacitive layers, which renders individual addressing of capacitors difficult without sacrificing sensor surface
for complex routing of electrical traces. We experimentally verified that simple scanning schemes common in mutual capacitive
touchscreens cannot be applied in the case of geometrically deforming and overlapping capacitor plates and traces; see Figure 5.
We propose a time-multiplexing scheme, in which a voltage
is applied to a subset of strips from both layers in turn, and the
remaining strips are connected and serve as the second plate of
the local capacitor. A simple example of a sensor composed of a
3 × 2 grid of electrode strips, with a total ofs = kn = 6 sensor cells,
is shown in Figure 6. For each such measurement, the cells where
Fig. 3. Various electrode strip patterns, with the bottom layer in blue and
the top layer in green. When overlaid, the overlapping regions form sensor cells; we highlight one cell in each example in pink. The dashed lines
outline the places where the read-out circuit is connected. Example (a) is
a classic elastomer strain sensor with 2 leads and 1 sensor cell; (b) is our
array concept with 8 leads and 16 sensor cells; (c) depicts our actual prototype sensor, a warped grid that brings all connection leads to the bottom
side of the sensor, with 24 leads and 92 sensor cells.
Fig. 4. Left: Our prototype sensor with connector boards. Both conductive layers contain 12 electrode strips each, and the overlaps amount to
92 sensor cells. Right: Using silicone glue, the topology of a flat sensor can
be changed to form, e.g., a cylinder. See Figure 14 for our second and larger
fabricated sensor.
Fig. 5. A naive scanning scheme (mutual-capacitance approach, using
charging time to measure capacitance) results in underestimation of the
magnitude of stretch, leads to not well-localized measurements, and even
gives incorrect readings. Left: Sensor is deformed by poking with a pen.
Middle: Change of magnitude per sensor cell, measured by the naive scanning scheme. Right: Change of magnitude per sensor cell, measured by
our proposed scheme (see the respective video clip in the supplemental
material).
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 38, No. 2, Article 16. Publication date: March 2019.