The typical elastic surface or curve simulation method takes a Lagrangian
approach and consists of three components: time integration, collision detection and collision response. The Lagrangian view is beneficial because
it naturally allows for tracking of the codimensional manifold, however
collision must then be detected and resolved separately. Eulerian methods are promising alternatives because collision processing is automatic
and while this is effective for volumetric objects, advection of a codimensional manifold is too inaccurate in practice. We propose a novel hybrid
Lagrangian/Eulerian approach that preserves the best aspects of both views.
Similar to the Drucker-Prager and Mohr-Coulomb models for granular materials, we define our collision response with a novel elastoplastic constitutive
model. To achieve this, we design an anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive
model that separately characterizes the response to manifold strain as well as
shearing and compression in the directions orthogonal to the manifold. We
discretize the model with the Material Point Method and a novel codimensional Lagrangian/Eulerian update of the deformation gradient. Collision
intensive scenarios with millions of degrees of freedom require only a few
minutes per frame and examples with up to one million degrees of freedom
run in less than thirty seconds per frame.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Physical simulation;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: MPM, elastoplasticity, friction, cloth,
knit, hair
1 INTRODUCTION
Physically based animation of elastic surfaces and curves has been
an essential aspect of computer graphics for nearly three decades.
Whether it be different layers of clothing in a virtual garment, individual strands in a head of hair or even yarns in a knit garment,
collision and contact phenomena of these materials are essential
for the richness and realism provided by physics based simulation.
Unfortunately the thin nature of these materials makes collision
detection and resolution challenging. This process is often the bottleneck in modern visual effects. Building on recent methods that
characterize frictional contact in granular materials via elastoplasticity [Daviet and Bertails-Descoubes 2016; Klár et al. 2016; Narain et al.
2010], we present a new approach for codimensional elasticity that
uses a hybrid Lagrangian/Eulerian Material Point Method (MPM)
[Sulsky et al. 1994] discretization to model frictional contact with
a continuum view. Unlike traditional approaches, our elastoplastic
description completely characterizes all collision/contact response
in the continuum and requires no separate post-processing.
Codimensional elastic objects are naturally represented with a
Lagrangian mesh. Such approaches were pioneered in graphics by
Terzopoulos et al. [1988; 1987] and are still primarily used today.
With the Lagrangian mesh model, individual particles are tracked
and mesh polygons or segments are used to approximate the spatial
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 152. Publication date: July 2017.
152:2 • Jiang, C. et al.
Fig. 2. A shag carpet with 1M particles is pushed by a sphere and folds back, showing detailed folds.
Fig. 3. A piece of cloth with 2M triangles falling onto a rotating sphere.
Low friction on the ground and high friction on the sphere causes detailed
wrinkles and folds.
derivatives of the material deformation mapping (often referred to as
the deformation gradient). The mechanics of elasticity are naturally
discretized with this Lagrangian view. However additional modeling
is required to include the effects of self and external contact since
these phenomena may cause interactions between distant regions
in the mesh. For example, mesh facets like points and triangles
or segment pairs must not pass through one another over a time
step. These constraints must be satisfied by some means external
to the elasticity modeling. This can be done in number of ways
including repulsion penalties [Baraff and Witkin 1998; Choi and Ko
2002; Cirio et al. 2014; Harmon et al. 2009; Kaldor et al. 2008, 2010],
impulsive change in momenta [Bridson et al. 2002; Harmon et al.
2008; McAdams et al. 2009; Sifakis et al. 2008; Tang et al. 2016], and
linear complimentary formulations of the constrained dynamics
[Bertails-Descoubes et al. 2011; Daviet et al. 2011; Otaduy et al.
2009].
The Eulerian view is a useful alternative to the Lagrangian view.
In the Eulerian view, discrete samples of the solution are computed
on a stationary background grid as material advects through the domain. While Lagrangian methods require two different components
of the algorithm: elasticity modeling and collision/contact resolution, Eulerian methods typically do not. The constitutive behavior
of contact is expressed as that of the material itself. For example,
for free-surface incompressible flow, no self collision model is imposed beyond the velocity divergence condition needed to enforce
incompressibility [Bridson 2008]. Recently, various researchers have
utilized aspects of Eulerian methods to design collision and contact
treatment for elastic materials [Fan et al. 2013, 2014; Levin et al.
2011; Li et al. 2013; Teng et al. 2016]. For elastic objects accurate
treatment of advection is needed to preserve an accurate rest state
of the material, e.g. the impressive treatment for volumetric objects
in Levin et al. [2011]. However, this is difficult for codimensional
elasticity.
Hybrid Lagrangian/Eulerian approaches seek to combine the benefits of both views. For example Particle-In-Cell (PIC) [Harlow 1964]
approaches like FLIP [Brackbill and Ruppel 1986] and MPM combine
a Lagrangian form of advection with a regular grid momentum update. Various researchers have developed approaches of this type to
simplify contact with Lagrangian methods or to improve the advection accuracy with Eulerian methods. For example, McAdams et al.
[2009] use FLIP and Eulerian incompressibility to efficiently model
self collision for hair. Petrovic et al. [2005] use a hybrid approach
where Lagrangian hair velocities are smoothed on an Eulerian grid.
Faure et al. [2007] also use a hybrid approach defining interaction
penalties and constraints for Lagrangian objects after mapping mass,
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 152. Publication date: July 2017.
Anisotropic Elastoplasticity for Cloth, Knit and Hair Frictional Contact • 152:3
momentum and density to an Eulerian grid. MPM has some similarities to this and allows for the simulation of a wide range of
elastoplastic materials in contact without a separate model for collision [Stomakhin et al. 2013; Yue et al. 2015]. Jiang et al. [2015]
simulate volumetric hyperelastic objects in contact with MPM. Recently, various authors have shown that frictional contact for sand
can be modeled with a hybrid discretization of an appropriate plastic
flow [Daviet and Bertails-Descoubes 2016; Klár et al. 2016; Narain
et al. 2010; Zhu and Bridson 2005].
Our approach is a hybrid Lagrangian/Eulerian MPM method. We
build on the recent approaches for contact and collision via elastoplasticity of granular materials in [Daviet and Bertails-Descoubes
2016; Klár et al. 2016; Narain et al. 2010; Zhu and Bridson 2005]
and via hybrid Lagrangian/MPM approach for volumetric objects in
Jiang et al. [2015]. Standard MPM updates the deformation gradient
on each particle independently with an Eulerian view. However, this
leads to numerical plasticity and failure. While these phenomena
are useful when simulating elastoplasticity with failure, they are
difficult to prevent when simulating hyperelastic objects. To prevent
this, we track the deformation of codimensional elastic objects in
a Lagrangian way, as in Jiang et al. [2015]. However, while the approach in Jiang et al. [2015] allows for self-collision with volumetric
Fig. 4. A piece of cloth with 1.14M triangles is twisted by a cylinder. The
simulation runs at 1.3 minutes per frame on average.
Fig. 5. Our method handles detailed contacts between individual yarn
threads under tension as well as macroscopic collision between yarns as
demonstrated by this knitted cloth being twisted. Complex per-yarn motion
is well resolved through elastoplasticity.
objects, it does not work for codimensional objects. This occurs
because for non-volumetric objects, the Lagrangian update of deformation only tracks components in the manifold, it does not capture
deformation in the orthogonal directions. It is the elastic response
to deformation in these directions that allows for frictional contact
with volumetric objects in MPM simulations. We remedy this by
updating the orthogonal components of the deformation gradient
in the standard MPM way. Furthermore, while relying on the elastic
response alone was sufficient for self-collision simulation with volumetric objects in Jiang et al. [2015], it can lead to artificial cohesion
(stickiness) and excessive friction for codimensional elasticity. We
fix this with a novel plastic flow that enforces a Coulomb friction
inequality between shear and normal stresses in the directions orthogonal to the surface or curve. The approach is similar to the
approach for sand in Klar et al. [2016], but with a modification that
prevents plasticity in the codimensional manifold, which should be
purely elastic. We define the elasticity in an anisotropic way so that
the response in the surface or curve cleanly relates to the response
in the orthogonal directions.
Our approach is computationally efficient, largely due to the
simplicity of handling contact and collision through the constitutive
modeling alone. Furthermore, it naturally allows for coupling with
multiple materials. We demonstrate this by simulating a range of
coupled elastic surfaces and curves, fluids and granular materials
with millions of degrees of freedom in a few minutes per frame. We
investigated both implicit and explicit versions of the grid based
momentum update in MPM. For explicit time stepping, we developed
a novel damping model that does not penalize rigid motions and that
unlike standard approaches like Rayleigh damping, does not impact
the time step restriction. To summarize, we list our contributions
below.
• Elasticity models that cleanly relate the elastic response
in the surface or curve to the response in the orthogonal
directions.
• Anisotropic plasticity models that characterize frictional
contact with elastic surfaces and curves.
• A return mapping algorithm to temporally discretize the
plastic flow.
• A hybrid Lagrangian/Eulerian MPM discretization of the
deformation gradient.
• An explicit damping model that does not penalize rigid
modes.
2 PREVIOUS WORK
2.1 Cloth
Clothing simulation has a long history in computer graphics. Thorough summaries can be found in Choi and Ko [2005], Nealen et al.
[2006] and Thomaszewski et al. [2007]. Baraff and Witkin [1998]
use dynamically defined stiff springs that prevent cloth/cloth penetration and apply an implicit integration scheme for efficiency. Choi
and Ko [2002] develop a semi-implicit treatment that efficiently handles buckling instabilities. Bridson et al. [2002] process collisions
for all point/triangle and edge/edge pairs in the mesh via impulsive
response. Harmon et al. [2008] provide an improved alternative to
the failsafe rigid impact zones of Provot [1997] and Bridson et al.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 152. Publication date: July 2017.
152:4 • Jiang, C. et al.
Fig. 6. Our method is able to capture many intricate features of tearing
apart a fibrous material consisting of 2.15M particles.
[2002]. In [2009] Harmon et al. combine asynchronous variational
integration with kinetic data structures. Collision resolution is done
with barrier potentials that they efficiently approximate with nested
families of quadratic potentials. In Ainsley et al. [2012], they further accelerate this approach by two orders of magnitude. Otaduy
et al. [2009] use an implicit treatment of complimentary collision
constraints and a new solver for large mixed linear complementarity problems. Recent work has shown that implicit time stepping
for cloth can be performed more efficiently via optimization with
auxiliary variables representing strain [Bouaziz et al. 2014; Liu et al.
2013].
2.2 Yarn and knits
In the seminal work of Kaldor et al. [2008] it was shown that elastic
curves representing individual yarns can be used with stunning
effect to create knit garments. In Kaldor et al. [2010] they improve
performance with infrequently updated locally co-rotated linear
approximations of the barrier potential to provide a five fold speed
up. Cirio et al. [2014] build on the work of Sueda et al. [2011] to
resolve warp/weft intersections with a point that connects the two
curves. Breen et al. [1994] also demonstrated yarn-level simulation.
2.3 Hair
A good survey of hair simulation in computer graphics is provided
in Ward et al. [2007]. Many researchers have modeled hair with
various elasticity models per strand [Bando et al. 2003; Choe et al.
2005; Kaufman et al. 2014; McAdams et al. 2009; Selle et al. 2008].
Others model hair as inextensible[Anjyo et al. 1992; Chang et al.
2002; Choe et al. 2005; Müller et al. 2012]. Bertails et al. use Kirchhoff
elastic rod models, which naturally enforce inextensibility [2009;
2006]. Much recent work has shown the importance of including
frictional effects [Bertails-Descoubes et al. 2011; Daviet et al. 2011;
Derouet-Jourdan et al. 2013; Kaufman et al. 2014]. Kaufman et al.
[2014] note that typical impulse based collision models for elastic
rods can lead to instabilities via excitation of stretching modes and
that an improved, adaptively nonlinear model for collision leads to
more robust and accurate simulations.
2.4 Parallel computing
Selle et al. [2009] developed a distributed memory, parallel version
of Bridson et al. [2002] capable of simulating cloth meshes with
millions of triangles. Tang et al. [2013] were the first to implement
all components of a cloth solver on the GPU and achieve speed-ups
of 10-14X over Selle et al. [2009]. They improve on this further in
Tang et al. [2016] with an implicit GPU implementation that adopts
the inelastic impact zone response from Harmon et al. [2008]. Other
CPU/GPU level parallelism is explored in [Li et al. 2011; Schmitt
et al. 2013]. Ni et al. [2015] accelerate the asynchronous contact
mechanics approaches [Ainsley et al. 2012; Harmon et al. 2009] by
up to 12 times with a 384 core Cray XC30.
2.5 Reduced and adaptive models
Recently, much progress has been made in reduced models that can
simulate clothing at interactive rates in many scenarios [de Aguiar
et al. 2010; Feng et al. 2010; Kavan et al. 2011; Kim et al. 2013; Wang
et al. 2010; Zurdo et al. 2013]. For hair, Chai et al. [2014] use a reduced model driven by high-resolution simulation data to incredibly
simulate up to 150 thousand strands in real-time. Adaptivity has
also been shown to produce stunning detail at modest cost in [Koh
et al. 2015; Lee et al. 2010; Narain et al. 2012].
2.6 Eulerian and continuum collision/contact
Goktekin et al. [2004] use an Eulerian approach to simulate viscoelastic materials without need for explicit contact modeling. Levin et al.
[2011] advect the reference configuration in an Eulerian approach
to volumetric elastic object simulation that drastically reduces the
complexity of collision modeling. Fan et al. [2013; 2014] further
improve this by reducing memory and computational cost. Teng el
al. [2016] show that a similar approach handles hyperelastic solids
coupled with incompressible fluids. Li et al. [2013] use an Eulerian
view of hyperelastic surfaces to model skin/tissue contact. Continuum friction models have proven useful for collision models of
crowd interactions [Golas et al. 2014; Narain et al. 2009]. The hybrid
Lagrange/Eulerian PIC/MPM has been used for sand animation in
[Daviet and Bertails-Descoubes 2016; Klár et al. 2016; Narain et al.
2010; Zhu and Bridson 2005]. Also, MPM has been used for various
elastoplastic materials [Jiang et al. 2015; Stomakhin et al. 2013; Yue
et al. 2015]. Müller et al. [2015] mesh the space surrounding elastic
objects and enforce an incompressibility constraint on the mesh.
Wu and Yuksel [2016] use hair volume meshes to simulate hair in
real time. Others have experimented with meshes with dynamic
connectivity for collision processing [Chang et al. 2002; Kim and
Neumann 2000; Sifakis et al. 2008]. Macklin et al. [2014] model
both constitutive response and collision via constraints. Hadap et al.
[2001], Bando et al. [2003] and McAdams et al. [2009] use continuum
fluid concepts to accelerate collision processing for hair.
3 MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND
We represent codimensional objects as volumetric elastoplastic continua. While our objects are thin surfaces or even curves in 3D, it
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 152. Publication date: July 2017.
Anisotropic Elastoplasticity for Cloth, Knit and Hair Frictional Contact • 152:5
Fig. 7. A sweater dropped onto a rising sphere, stretched and then folded
on the ground. The simulation takes 13 seconds per frame.
is useful to conceive of their dynamics as if they have appreciable
thickness in a continuum, e.g. as is done with granular materials in
[Daviet and Bertails-Descoubes 2016; Klár et al. 2016; Narain et al.
2010]. Given the similarities in our assumptions, we adopt the notation of Klar et al. [2016], where the state can be described at each
location by its density ρ(x,t) and velocity v(x,t). The governing
equations come from conservation of mass and momentum (see
[Bonet and Wood 2008; Gonzalez and Stuart 2008] for derivations)
Dρ
Dt
+ ρ∇ · v = 0, ρ
Dv
Dt = ∇ · σ + ρg. (1)
Here σ is the stress, g is gravity and D
Dt is the material derivative.
3.1 Deformation gradient
The material deformation is characterized in terms of the flow map,
ϕ which maps points in the original configuration of the material X
to points in the time t configuration x as ϕ(X,t) = x. The Jacobian
of this mapping F = ∂ϕ
∂X (X,t) is often referred to as deformation
gradient, and it represents the local deformation of the material.
That is, the deformation gradient yields the best local linear approximation to the mapping: ϕ(X˜ ,t) ≈ F(X˜ − X) + x for X˜ near X. For
example, if the material is undeformed local to X then F will be
a rotation. If det(F) < 1, the material loses volume locally, and if
det(F) > 1, it gains volume locally.
Codimensional deformation is expressed via components of F. We
define material directions D1, D2, D3 at point X. In the case of elastic
surfaces D1 and D2 are tangent to the initial configuration of the
surface and D3 is normal to the surface. In the case of curves, D1 is
tangent to the curve and D2 and D3 are orthogonal to D1. We define
di = FDi , i = 1, 2, 3. With this convention, the di represent the
local direction and stretching of material in the Di direction under
ϕ. Thus for curves, all deformation in the manifold is expressed via
d1 and for surfaces, via d1 and d2. The remaining di represent the
deformation of material normal to the manifold. Thus we can both
account for deformation in the manifold, deformation normal to the
manifold and shearing of material relative to the manifold in terms
of the di and their relation to one another. For example for surfaces,
while D3 is normal to the initial surface, d3 will not be when there
is a shearing motion relative to the manifold. We visualize the case
of a curve in 2D in Figure 8.
3.2 Codimensional anisotropic plasticity
Large strain elastoplasticity is modeled by factoring the deformation
gradient into elastic and plastic parts as F = FE FP . The plastic part
FP represents deformation history that has been lost and will no
longer be penalized elastically. The elastic part FE remains and is
penalized elastically. We use a hyperelastic potential energy density
that increases with increasing deformation in FE .
As in Klar et al. [2016], we model frictional contact with elastoplasticity. However, unlike for granular materials where collision
can occur in any direction local to a grain, we only consider contact to occur in the direction orthogonal to the elastic surface or
curve. Therefore, the plasticity should only modify the codimensional components of the deformation. The mechanical response
to deformations in the manifold is purely elastic. This places an
anisotropic constraint on the multiplicative decomposition. To guarantee that deformation in a curve is purely elastic, our plasticity
model must satisfy FD1 = FED1 (equivalently D1 = FP D1). To
guarantee that the deformation in a surface is purely elastic, we
additionally require FD2 = FED2 (equivalently D2 = FP D2). By
satisfying these constraints, we guarantee that all non-rigid deformation of the surface or curve is penalized elastically. Plasticity
is only allowed to effect the components of the deformation that
Fig. 8. Left: F is decomposed into FP , the forgotten sliding and separation, and FE the remembered stretching, collision and shearing. Right: FE
deforms D1 and D2 into d1 and dE
2 .
Fig. 9. Here we show two way coupling between 7M sand grains and a piece
of elastic cloth.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 152. Publication date: July 2017.
152:6 • Jiang, C. et al.
provide compression, extension and shearing in directions normal
to the manifold.
3.3 Codimensional anisotropic elasticity
As in [Klár et al. 2016; Stomakhin et al. 2013] we use a model that
is hyperelastic in FE , where the elastic potential energy density
increases with deformation of the elastic part of the deformation
gradient. The Cauchy stress in the material is σ = 1 det(F)
∂ψ
∂FE FET .
Here ψ (FE ) is the elastic energy density for penalizing non-rigid
FE . In our case, it serves two purposes. First, it expresses the resistance to deformations that change the shape of the surface or curve
manifold. However, as in the Klar et al. [2016] approach to granular
materials, it also defines the resistance to contact and frictional sliding. In the case of codimensional elasticity, this resistance is only to
deformations normal to the manifold and we design an anisotropic
energy density that takes this dual nature into account.
We define our potential with respect to the local material directions D = [D1, D2, D3] as ψ (FE, D). The elastic potential must be
invariant under world space rotations, and so we are free to choose
a convenient basis. One natural choice is given by orthogonalizing
the vectors dE
i = FEDi , the elastically deformed material directions,
with the Gram-Schmidt process to obtain Q = [q1, q2, q3]. Equivalently, QR = FED is the QR-decomposition of FED. We then define
ψ (FE, D) = ψˆ(R). This is similar to the isotropic case where the
additional material frame invariance allows one to choose ui and
vi such that FE vi = σiui , and define ψ (FE ) = ψ˜(Σ).
Another common stress measure is the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress,
defined as P = ∂ψ
∂FE (FP )
−T , and related to σ with σ = 1
J PFT . If we
further denote FED with dE , we have ∂ψ
∂FE = ∂ψ
∂dE DT . We show in
[Jiang et al. 2017a] that ∂ψ
∂dE = Q
T (K) + T (K)
T − D(K)

R−T ,
where K = ∂ψˆ
∂R RT . Here T and D are operators on matrices that
keep upper triangular part and diagonal part respectively.
3.3.1 Curves: We model elastic curves with rotational material
symmetry around the fiber direction D1. In other words for our
curves, the material directions D2 and D3 are regarded as essentially arbitrary and any choices which are mutually orthogonal
with D1 should give the same potential. Guided by this material
symmetry, we decompose R = R3R2R1 into a composition of three
deformations, first (R1) a stretching of the fibers, second (R2) a shearing of the fibers and finally (R3) a deformation of the cross section
of the fibers
R1 =

r11 0 0
0 10
0 01
, R2 =

1 r12 r13 01 0
00 1
, R3 =

10 0
0 r22 r23 0 0 r33
Based on this decomposition, we write our elastic potential for
curves as a sum of 3 terms ψˆ(R) = f (R1) + д(R2) + h(R3). The
first term f (R1) = k
2 (r11 − 1)
2 penalizes change of fiber length,
for the second term д(R2) = γ
2 (r 2
12 + r 2
13) penalizes shearing along
the fibers. In absence of other deformations, we would like a cross
section of the fibers to behave like material in frictional contact,
resisting compression and shearing. Thus for the third term h(R3),
we use the two dimensional version of the elastic potential from
Klar et al. [2016], since it naturally enforces such frictional contact
(when combined with appropriate plasticity law). That is h(R3) =
μ(ϵ2
1 + ϵ2
2 ) + λ
2 (ϵ1 + ϵ2)
2, where ϵ1 and ϵ2 are the logarithms of the
nontrivial singular values of R3.
3.3.2 Surfaces: For the surface energy, we think of the surface
itself as being isotropic, i.e. the potential is invariant under rotation
of the material directions D1 and D2. Again we decompose R =
R3R2R1 into a composition of three deformations, first (R1) an inplane deformation of the surface, second (R2) a shearing of surface
normal and finally (R3) a compression or stretching of the surface
normal
R1 =

r11 r12 0
0 r22 0
0 01
, R2 =

1 0 r13 0 1 r23 00 1
, R3 =

10 0
01 0
0 0 r33
Then we write the energy as a sum of three terms, ψˆ(R) = f (R3) +
д(R2)+h(R1). For the first term f (R3), we only penalize compression
of the material in the normal direction, as we think of the surface as
being mostly surrounded by empty space which can expand freely
f (R3) =
 k
3 (1 − r33)
3 r33 ≤ 1
0 r33 > 1 .
For the second term we use д(R2) = γ
2 (r 2
13 + r 2
23) to penalize
shearing of the normal to the surface. For the third term h(R1) we
use the two dimensional version of the fixed corotated potential
from Stomakhin et al. [2012] to penalize deformation of the surface,
although any in-plane energy can be used (e.g., the in-plane surface
energy from [Baraff and Witkin 1998]) with no change except to
the stress and stress derivatives.
3.4 Friction and plastic yield condition
With Coulomb friction, the frictional force ff must be smaller than
a constant cF , the coefficient of friction, times the normal force fn:
ff ≤ cF fn. In the continuum view, at a given point x in world space
and a normal vector n, the traction vector t gives the local force
per area that the material on one side of the plane with normal n
exerts on the other side [Gonzalez and Stuart 2008]. The traction
has normal and shearing components fn = −nT t and fs = s(n, θ )
T t
respectively where s(n, θ ) is an arbitrary vector in the plane with
normal n, and θ indicates its direction in the plane. Note that we
use the convention that compressive force fn is positive as in the
Coulomb model. If the material is in frictional contact in direction
n, then ff = fs is the component of the frictional response in the
direction s(n, θ ) and for all angles θ, the inequality s(n, θ )
T t ≤ cF fn
must be satisfied.
Expressing the traction in terms of the Cauchy stress σ as t = σn,
shows that the Coulomb model places constraints on the stress:
s(n, θ )
T σn+cF nT σn ≤ 0 for all θ given frictional contact direction
n. This is the idea behind the frictional contact model with DruckerPrager for granular materials [Daviet and Bertails-Descoubes 2016;
Klár et al. 2016; Narain et al. 2010]. However, in the case of a grain,
contact is assumed to happen in all directions. For cloth or curves
we only consider the directions orthogonal to the manifold to be
in frictional contact. Together with our choice of elastic potential,
this results in a less restrictive constraint that does not effect elastic
deformation in the manifold. For frictional contact between surfaces,
we only consider contact in the direction normal to the surface:
n = q3. For curves, there is a two dimensional normal space spanned
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 152. Publication date: July 2017.