We introduce a novel neural network architecture for encoding and synthesis of 3D shapes, particularly their structures. Our key insight is that
3D shapes are effectively characterized by their hierarchical organization
of parts, which reflects fundamental intra-shape relationships such as adjacency and symmetry. We develop a recursive neural net (RvNN) based
autoencoder to map a flat, unlabeled, arbitrary part layout to a compact code.
The code effectively captures hierarchical structures of man-made 3D objects
of varying structural complexities despite being fixed-dimensional: an associated decoder maps a code back to a full hierarchy. The learned bidirectional
mapping is further tuned using an adversarial setup to yield a generative
model of plausible structures, from which novel structures can be sampled.
Finally, our structure synthesis framework is augmented by a second trained
module that produces fine-grained part geometry, conditioned on global
and local structural context, leading to a full generative pipeline for 3D
shapes. We demonstrate that without supervision, our network learns meaningful structural hierarchies adhering to perceptual grouping principles,
produces compact codes which enable applications such as shape classification and partial matching, and supports shape synthesis and interpolation
with significant variations in topology and geometry.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Computer graphics;
Shape analysis;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: analysis and synthesis of shape structures, symmetry hierarchy, recursive neural network, autoencoder, generative recursive autoencoder, generative adversarial training
1 INTRODUCTION
Recent progress on training neural networks for image [van den
Oord et al. 2016b] and speech [van den Oord et al. 2016a] synthesis has led many to ask whether a similar success is achievable in
learning generative models for 3D shapes. While an image is most
naturally viewed as a 2D signal of pixel values and a piece of speech
as a sampled 1D audio wave, the question of what is the canonical
representation for 3D shapes (voxels, surfaces meshes, or multi-view
images) may not always yield a consensus answer. Unlike images or
sound, a 3D shape does not have a natural parameterization over a
regular low-dimensional grid. Further, many 3D shapes, especially
of man-made artifacts, are highly structured (e.g. with hierarchical decompositions and nested symmetries), while exhibiting rich
structural variations even within the same object class (e.g. consider
the variety of chairs). Hence, the stationarity and compositionality
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
52:2 • J. Li et al
RvNN encoder RvNN decoder
𝑛-D
root code
𝑛-D
random noise
Generator Discriminator
real
generated
real
structures
generated
structures
32D
part code
32
3 part
voxelization
(a) RvNN auto-encoder pre-training (b) RvNN-GAN training
32D
part code
(c) Volumetric part geometry synthesis
Training Testing
training
parts
Fig. 2. An overview of our pipeline, including the three key stages: (a) pre-training the RvNN autoencoder to obtain root codes for shapes, (b) using a GAN
module to learn the actual shape manifold within the code space, and (c) using a second network to convert synthesized OBBs to detailed geometry.
assumptions [Henaff et al. 2015] behind the success of most neural
nets for natural images or speech are no longer applicable.
In this paper, we are interested in learning generative neural nets
for structured shape representations of man-made 3D objects. In
general, shape structures are defined by the arrangement of, and
relations between, shape parts [Mitra et al. 2013]. Developing neural nets for structured shape representations requires a significant
departure from existing works on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for volumetric [Girdhar et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2016, 2015;
Yumer and Mitra 2016] or view-based [Qi et al. 2016; Sinha et al.
2016; Su et al. 2015] shape representations. These works primarily
adapt classical CNN architectures for image analysis. They do not
explicitly encode or synthesize part arrangements or relations such
as symmetries.
Our goal is to learn a generative neural net for shape structures
characterizing an object class, e.g. chairs or candelabras. The main
challenges we face are two-fold. The first is how to properly “mix”, or
jointly encode and synthesize (discrete) structure and (continuous)
geometry. The second is due to intra-class structural variations. If
we treat shape structures as graphs, the foremost question is how
to enable a generic neural network to work with graphs of different
combinatorial structures and sizes. Both challenges are unique to our
problem setting and neither has been addressed by networks which
take inputs in the form of unstructured, fixed-size, low-dimensional
grid data, e.g. images or volumes.
Our key insight is that most shape structures are naturally hierarchical and hierarchies can jointly encode structure and geometry.
Most importantly, regardless of the variations across shape structures, a coding scheme that recursively contracts hierarchy or tree
nodes into their parents attains unification at the top — any finite
set of structures eventually collapses to root node codes with a
possibly large but fixed length. We learn a neural network which
can recursively encode hierarchies into root codes and invert the
process via decoding. Then, by further learning a distribution over
the root codes for a class of shapes, new root codes can be generated
and decoded to synthesize new structures and shapes in that class.
Specifically, we represent a 3D shape using a symmetry hierarchy [Wang et al. 2011], which defines how parts in the shape are
recursively grouped by symmetry and assembled by connectivity.
Our neural net architecture, which learns to infer such a hierarchy
for a shape in an unsupervised fashion, is inspired by the recursive neural nets (RvNN)1 of Socher et al. [2012; 2011] developed for
text and image understanding. By treating text as a set of words
and an image as a set of superpixels, an RvNN learns a parse tree
which recursively merges text/image segments. There are two key
differences and challenges that come with our work:
• First, the RvNNs of Socher et al. [2011] always merge two
adjacent elements and this is modeled using the same network at every tree node. However, in a symmetry hierarchy,
grouping by symmetry and assembly by connectivity are
characteristically different merging operations. As well, the
network structures at a tree node must accommodate assembly, reflectional symmetry, and rotational/translational
symmetries of varying orders.
• Second, our main goal is to learn a generative RvNN, for
part-based shape structures that are explicitly represented
as discrete structural combinations of geometric entities.
To accomplish these goals, we focus on learning an abstraction of
symmetry hierarchies, which are composed of spatial arrangements
of oriented bounding boxes (OBBs). Each OBB is defined by a fixedlength code to represent its geometry and these codes sit at the
leaves of the hierarchies. Internal nodes of the hierarchies, also
characterized by fixed-length codes, encode both the geometry of
its child OBBs and their detailed grouping mechanism: whether by
connectivity or symmetry.
We pre-train an unsupervised RvNN using OBB arrangements
endowed with box connectivity and various types of symmetry. Our
neural network is an autoencoder-based RvNN which recursively
assembles or (symmetrically) groups a set of OBBs into a fixedlength root code and then decodes the root to reconstruct the input;
see Figure 2(a). The network comprises two types of nodes: one to
handle assembly of connected parts, and one to handle symmetry
grouping. Each merging operation takes two or more OBBs as input.
Our RvNN learns how to best organize a shape structure into a
symmetry hierarchy to arrive at a compact and minimal-loss code
accounting for both geometry and structure.
To synthesize new 3D shapes, we extend the pre-trained autoencoder RvNN into a generative model. We learn a distribution over
root codes constructed from shape structures for 3D objects of the
1Note that we are adding the letter ‘v’ to the acronym RNN, since by now, the term
RNN most frequently refers to recurrent neural networks.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
GRASS: Generative Recursive Autoencoders for Shape Structures • 52:3
same class, e.g. chairs. This step utilizes a generative adversarial
network (GAN), similar to a VAE-GAN [Larsen et al. 2015], to learn a
low-dimensional manifold of root codes; see Figure 2(b). We sample
and then project a root code onto the manifold to synthesize an OBB
arrangement. In the final stage, the boxes are filled with part geometries by another generative model which learns a mapping between
box features and voxel grids; see Figure 2(c). We refer to our overall
generative neural network as a generative recursive autoencoder for
shape structures, or GRASS. Figure 2 provides an overview of the
complete architecture.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows.
• The first generative neural network model for structured 3D
shape representations — GRASS. This is realized by an autoencoder RvNN which learns to encode and decode shape
structures via discovered symmetry hierarchies, followed
by two generative models trained to synthesize box-level
symmetry hierarchies and volumetric part geometries, respectively.
• A novel RvNN architecture which extends the original
RvNN of Socher et al. [2011] by making it generative and
capable of encoding a variety of merging operations (i.e.
assembly by connectivity and symmetry groupings of different types).
• An unsupervised autoencoder RvNN which jointly learns
and encodes the structure and geometry of box layouts of
varying sizes into fixed-length vectors.
We demonstrate that our network learns meaningful structural
hierarchies adhering to perceptual grouping principles, produces
compact codes which enable applications such as shape classification
and partial matching, and supports generative models which lead
to shape synthesis and interpolation with significant variations in
topology and geometry.
2 RELATED WORK
Our work is related to prior works on statistical models of 3D shape
structures, including recent works on applying deep neural networks to shape representation. These models can be disciminative
or generative, and capture continuous or discrete variations. We
review the most relevant works below. Since our focus is shape
synthesis, we emphasize generative models in our discussion.
Statistical shape representations. Early works on capturing statistical variations of the human body explored smooth deformations of
a fixed template [Allen et al. 2003; Anguelov et al. 2005; Blanz and
Vetter 1999]. Later papers addressed discrete variations at the part
level, employing stochastic shape grammars coded by hand [Müller
et al. 2006], learned from a single training example [Bokeloh et al.
2010], or learned from multiple training examples [Talton et al. 2012].
Parallel works explored the use of part-based Bayesian networks
[Chaudhuri et al. 2011; Kalogerakis et al. 2012] and modular templates [Fish et al. 2014; Kim et al. 2013] to represent both continuous
and discrete variations. However, these methods are severely limited
in the variety and complexity of part layouts they can generate, and
typically only work well for shape families with a few consistently
appearing parts and a restricted number of possible layouts. In a
different approach, Talton et al. [2009] learn a probability distribution over a shape space generated by a procedure operating on a
fixed set of parameters. We are also inspired by some non-statistical
shape representations such as the work of Wang et al. [2011] and
van Kaick et al. [2013] on extracting hierarchical structure from a
shape: our goal in this paper is to learn consistent, probabilistic,
hierarchical representations automatically from unlabeled datasets.
Mitra et al. [2013] provide an overview of a range of further works
on statistical and structure-aware shape representations.
Deep models of 3D shapes. Recently, the success of deep neural
networks in computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language processing has inspired researchers to apply such models
to 3D shape analysis. While these are of course statistical shape
representations, their immediate relevance to this paper merits a
separate section from the above. Most of these works have focused
on extending computer vision techniques developed for images –
2D grids of pixels – to 3D grids of voxels. Wu et al. [2015] propose a generative model based on a deep belief network trained
on a large, unannotated database of voxelized 3D shapes. They
show applications of the model to shape synthesis and probabilistic
shape completion for next-best view prediction. Girdhar et al. [2016]
jointly train a deep convolutional encoder for 2D images and a deep
convolutional decoder for voxelized 3D shapes, chained together so
that the vector output of the encoder serves as the input code for
the decoder, allowing 3D reconstruction from a 2D image. Yan et
al. [2016] propose a different encoder-decoder network for a similar
application. Yumer and Mitra [2016] present a 3D convolutional
network that maps a voxelized shape plus a semantic modification
intent to the deformation field required to realize that intent.
In a departure from voxel grids, Su et al. [2015] build a powerful
shape classifier based on multiple projected views of the object, by
fine-tuning standard image-based CNNs trained on huge 2D datasets
and applying a novel pooling mechanism. Masci et al. [2015] build
a convolutional network directly on non-Euclidean shape surfaces.
Qi et al. [2016] discuss ways to improve the performance of both
volumetric and multi-view CNNs for shape classification. In a recent
work, Tulsiani et al. [2017] develop a discriminative, CNN-based
approach to consistently parse shapes into a bounded number of
volumetric primitives.
We are inspired by the work of Huang et al. [2015], who develop
a deep Boltzmann machine-based model of 3D shape surfaces. This
approach can be considered a spiritual successor of Kalogerakis et
al. [2012] and Kim et al. [2013], learning modular templates that
incorporate fine-grained part-level deformation models. In addition
to being fully generative – the model can be sampled for a point
set representing an entirely new shape – the method automatically
refines shape correspondences and part boundaries during training.
However, like the prior works, this approach is limited in the variety
of layouts it can represent.
Wu et al. [2016] exploit the success of generative adversarial nets
(GAN) [Goodfellow et al. 2014] to improve upon the model of Wu et
al. [2015]. At its core, their model is a generative decoder that takes
as input a 200-D shape code and produces a voxel grid as output.
The decoder is trained adversarially, and may be chained with a
prior encoder that maps, say, a 2D image to the corresponding shape
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
52:4 • J. Li et al
code. The method supports simple arithmetic and interpolation on
the codes, enabling, for instance, topology-varying morphs between
different shapes. Our work is complementary to this method: we
seek to develop a powerful model of part layout variations that can
accurately synthesize complex hierarchical structures beyond the
representational power of low-resolution grids, can be trained on
relatively fewer shapes, and is independent of voxel resolution.
Neural models of graph structure. The layout of parts of a shape
inherently induces a non-Euclidean, graph-based topology defined
by adjacency and relative placement. Several works, not concerning geometric analysis, have explored neural networks operating
on graph domains. The most common such domains are of course
linear chains defining text and speech signals. For these domains,
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), as well as convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) over sliding temporal windows, have proved very
successful. Such linear models have even been adapted to generate
non-linear output such as images, as in the work of van den Oord et
al. [2016b; 2016c], producing the image row by row, pixel by pixel.
These models are, however, limited in such adaptations since it is
difficult to learn and enforce high-level graph-based organizational
structure. Henaff et al. [2015], Duvenaud et al. [2015] and Niepert
et al. [2016] propose convolutional networks that operate directly
on arbitrary graphs by defining convolution as an operation on the
radial neighborhood of a vertex. However, none of these works enable generative models. A different approach to this problem, which
directly inspires our work, is the recursive neural network (RvNN)
proposed by Socher et al. [2012; 2011], which sequentially collapses
edges of a graph to yield a hierarchy. We build upon the autoencoder version of this network, adapting it to learn the particular
organizational principles that characterize 3D shape structure, and
to extend it from a deterministic model to a probabilistic generative
one.
3 OVERVIEW
Our method for learning GRASS, a hierarchical, symmetry-aware,
generative model for 3D shapes, has three stages, shown in Figure 2.
In this section, we summarize the stages and highlight important
components and properties of the neural networks we use.
Geometry and structure encoding. We define an abstraction of
symmetry hierarchies, which are composed of spatial arrangements
of oriented bounding boxes (OBBs). Each OBB is defined by a fixedlength code to represent its geometry. The fixed length code encodes
both the geometry of its child OBBs and their detailed grouping
mechanism: whether by connectivity or symmetry.
Stage 1: Recursive autoencoder. In the first stage, we train an autoencoder for layouts of OBBs. The autoencoder maps a box layout
with an arbitrary number and arrangement of components to a fixedlength root code that implicitly captures its salient features. The
encoding is accomplished via a recursive neural network (RvNN)
that repeatedly, in a bottom-up fashion, collapses a pair of boxes
represented as codes into a merged code. The process also yields a
hierarchical organizational structure for the boxes. The final code
representing the entire layout is decoded to recover the boxes (plus
the entire hierarchy) by an inverse process, and the training loss is
measured in terms of a reconstruction error and back-propagated
to update the network weights.
Stage 2: Learning manifold of plausible structures. We extend the
autoencoder to a generative model of structures by learning a distribution over root codes that describes the shape manifold, or shape
space, occupied by codes corresponding to meaningful shapes within
the full code space. We train a generative adversarial model (GAN)
for a low-dimensional manifold of root codes that can be decoded
to structures indistinguishable, to an adversarial classifier, from the
training set. Given a randomly selected root code, we project it to
the GAN manifold to synthesize a plausible new structure.
Stage 3: Part geometry synthesis. In the final stage, the synthesized
boxes are converted to actual shape parts. Given a box in a synthesized layout, we compute structure-aware recursive features that
represent it in context. Then, we simultaneously learn a compact,
invertible encoding of voxel grids representing part geometries as
well as a mapping from contextual part features to the encoded
voxelized geometry. This yields a procedure that can synthesize
detailed geometry for a box in a shape structure.
By chaining together hierarchical structure generation and part
geometry synthesis, we obtain the full GRASS pipeline for recursive
synthesis of shape structures.
4 RECURSIVE MODEL OF SHAPE STRUCTURE
In this section, we describe a method to encode shape structures
into a short, fixed-dimensional code. The learned encoding is fully
invertible, allowing the structure to be reconstructed from the code.
In Section 5, we present our method to adversarially tune this structure decoder to map random codes to structures likely to come from
real shapes. By combining this generator for sampling plausible
shape structures with a method for synthesizing the geometry of
individual parts (Section 6), we obtain our probabilistic generative
model for 3D shapes.
Our key observation is that shape components are commonly
arranged, or perceived to be arranged, hierarchically. This is a natural organizational principle in well-accepted theories of human
cognition and design, which has been extensively leveraged computationally [Serre 2013]. Perceptual and functional hierarchies follow
patterns of component proximity and symmetry. Hence, the primary
goal of our structural code is to successfully encode the hierarchical
organization of the shape in terms of symmetries and adjacencies.
An important metric of success is that the hierarchies are consistent
across different shapes of the same category. We achieve this via
a compact model of recursive component aggregation that tries to
consistently identify similar substructures.
Our model is based on Recursive Autoencoders (RAE) for unlabeled binary trees, developed by Socher et al. [2014]. The RAE
framework proposed by Socher et al. consists of an encoder neural
network that takes two n-dimensional inputs and produces a single
n-dimensional output, and a decoder network that recovers two n-D
vectors from a single n-D vector. In our experiments, n = 80.
Given a binary tree with n-D descriptors for the leaves, the RAE
is used to recursively compute descriptors for the internal nodes,
ending with a root code. The root code can be inverted to recover
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
GRASS: Generative Recursive Autoencoders for Shape Structures • 52:5
the original tree using the decoder, and a training loss formulated
in terms of a reconstruction error for the leaves.
RAEs were originally intended for parsing natural language sentences in a discriminative setting, trained on unlabeled parse trees.
We adapt this framework for the task of learning and synthesizing
hierarchical shape structures. This requires several important technical contributions, including extending the framework to accommodate multiple encoder and decoder types, handling non-binary
symmetric groups of parts, and probabilistically generating shapes
(as described in the subsequent sections).
Criteria for recursive merging. Our model of hierarchical organization of shape parts follows two common perceptual/cognitive
criteria for recursive merging: a mergeable subset of parts is either
an adjacent pair (the adjacency criterion) or part of a symmetry
group (the symmetry criterion)2
. An adjacent pair is represented
by the bounding boxes of constituent parts. In this stage, we are
interested only in representing the gross layout of parts, so we discard fine-grained geometric information and store only oriented
part bounding boxes, following earlier work on shape layouts [Ovsjanikov et al. 2011] — fine-grained geometry synthesis is described
in Section 6. We recognize three different types of symmetries, each
represented by the bounding box of a generator part plus further
parameters: (1) pairwise reflectional symmetry, parametrized by the
plane of reflection; (2) k-fold rotational symmetry, parametrized
by the number of parts k and the axis of rotation; and (3) k-fold
translational symmetry, parametrized by k and the translation offset
between parts. The different scenarios are illustrated in Figure 3.
We generate training hierarchies that respect these criteria, and our
autoencoder learns to synthesize hierarchies that follow them.
Synthesizing training data. To train our recursive autoencoder,
we synthesize a large number of training hierarchies from a dataset
of shapes. These shapes are assumed to be pre-segmented into constituent (unlabeled) parts, but do not have ground truth hierarchies.
We adopt an iterative, randomized strategy to generate plausible
hierarchies for a shape that satisfy the merging criteria described
above. In each iteration, two or more parts are merged into a single
one. A mergeable subset of parts is either adjacent or symmetric.
We randomly sample a pair that satisfies one of the two criteria until
2Currently, we make the reasonable single-object assumption that all parts are connected by either adjacency or symmetry. For disconnected, asymmetric shapes, we
would need further merging criteria.
Fig. 3. Merging criteria used by our model demonstrated with 3D shapes
represented by part bounding boxes (relevant parts highlighted in red).
From left: (a) two adjacent parts, (b) translational symmetry, (c) rotational
symmetry, and (d) reflective symmetry.
no further merges are possible. In our experiments, we generated 20
training hierarchies for each shape in this fashion. Note that none
of these hierarchies is intended to represent “ground truth”. Rather,
they sample the space of plausible part groupings in a relatively
unbiased fashion for training purposes.
Autoencoder model. To handle both adjacency and symmetry relations, our recursive autoencoder comprises two distinct types of
encoder/decoder pairs. These types are:
Adjacency. The encoder for the adjacency module is a neural
network AdjEnc which merges codes for two adjacent
parts into the code for a single part. It has two n-D inputs
and one n-D output. Its parameters are a weight matrix
Wae ∈ R
n×2n
and a bias vector bae ∈ R
n
, which are used
to obtain the code of parent (merged) node y from children
x1 and x2 using the formula
y = tanh(Wae · [x1 x2] + bae )
The corresponding decoder AdjDec splits a parent code y
back to child codes x
′
1
and x
′
2
, using the reverse mapping
[x
′
1
x
′
2
] = tanh(Wad · y + bad )
where Wad ∈ R
2n×n
and bad ∈ R
2n
.
Symmetry. The encoder for the symmetry module is a neural network SymEnc which merges the n-D code for a generator
part of a symmetry group, as well as the m-D parameters of
the symmetry itself into a single n-D output. The code for
a group with generator x and parameters p is computed as
y = tanh(Wse · [x p] + bse )
and the corresponding decoder SymDec recovers the generator and symmetry parameters as
[x
′
p
′
] = tanh(Wsd · y + bsd )
where Wse ∈ R
n×(n+m)
, Wsd ∈ R
(n+m)×n
, bse ∈ R
n
, and
bsd ∈ R
m+n
. In our implementation, we use m = 8 to
encode symmetry parameters comprising symmetry type
(1D); number of repetitions for rotational and translational
symmetries (1D); and the mirror plane for reflective symmetry, rotation axis for rotational symmetry, or position
and displacement for translational symmetry (6D).
In practice, the encoders/decoders for both adjacency and symmetry are implemented as two-layer networks, where the dimensions
of the hidden and output layers are 100D and 80D, respectively.
The input to the recursive merging process is a collection of part
bounding boxes. These need to be mapped to n-D vectors before
they can be processed by the autoencoder. To this end, we employ
additional single-layer neural networks BoxEnc, which maps the
12D parameters of a box (concatenating box center, dimensions and
two axes) to an n-D code, and BoxDec, which recovers the 12D
parameters from the n-D code. These networks are non-recursive,
used simply to translate the input to the internal code representation
at the beginning, and back again at the end.
Lastly, we jointly train an auxiliary classifier NodeClsfr to decide which module to apply at each recursive decoding step. This
classifier is a neural network with one hidden layer that takes as
input the code of a node in the hierarchy, and outputs whether the
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
52:6 • J. Li et al
AdjEncode
AdjDecode
𝑛-D code vec.
12D parameters
𝑛-D code vec.
𝑛-D code vec.
…
𝑛-D code vec. 𝑛-D code vec.
12D parameters
BoxDecode
…
SymEncode
SymDecode
𝑛-D code vec. Symmetry params
𝑛-D code vec.
𝑛-D code vec.
…
Symmetry params
…
NodeClassifier
BoxEncode
Leaf, adjacent or
symmetry?
3D vector
Fig. 4. Autoencoder training setup. Ellipsis dots indicate that the code could
be either the output of BoxEnc, AdjEnc or SymEnc, or the input to BoxDec,
AdjDec or SymDec.
12D parameters
BoxDecode
Result
𝑛-D code vec.
NodeClassifier
AdjDecode
𝑛-D code vec. 𝑛-D code vec. 𝑛-D code vec. Symmetry params
SymDecode
Leaf Adjacent Symmetry
Prediction
Fig. 5. Autoencoder test decoding setup.
node represents an adjacent pair of parts, a symmetry group, or a
leaf node. Depending on the output of the classifier, either AdjDec,
SymDec or BoxDec is invoked.
Training. To train our recursive autoencoder, we use BFGS with
back-propagation, starting with a random initialization of weights
sampled from a Gaussian distribution. The loss is formulated as a reconstruction error. Given a training hierarchy, we first encode each
leaf-level part bounding box using BoxEnc. Next, we recursively
apply the corresponding encoder (AdjEnc or SymEnc) at each internal node until we obtain the code for the root. Finally, we invert the
process, starting from the root code, to recover the leaf parameters
by recursively applying the decoders AdjDec and SymDec, followed
by a final application of BoxDec. The loss is formulated as the sum
of squared differences between the input and output parameters for
each leaf box.
Note that during training (but not during testing), we use the input
hierarchy for decoding, and hence always know which decoder to
apply at which unfolded node, and the mapping between input and
output boxes. We simultaneously train NodeClsfr, with a threeclass softmax classification with cross entropy loss, to recover the
tree topology during testing. The training setup is illustrated in
Figure 4.
Testing. During testing, we must address two distinct challenges.
The first is to infer a plausible encoding hierarchy for a novel segmented shape without hierarchical organization. The second is to
decode a given root code to recover the constituent bounding boxes
of the shape.
To infer a plausible hierarchy using the trained encoding modules,
we resort to greedy local search. Specifically, we look at all subsets
that are mergeable to a single part, perform two levels of recursive
encoding and decoding, and measure the reconstruction error. The
merge sequence with the lowest reconstruction error is added to the
encoding hierarchy. The process repeats until no further merges are
possible. Particular cases of interest are adjacency before symmetry,
and symmetry before adjacency, as illustrated in Figure 6. For each
such case, we decode the final code back to the input box parameters
(using, as for training, the known merging hierarchy) and measure
the reconstruction error. This two-step lookahead is employed only
for inferring hierarchies in test mode. During training, we minimize
reconstruction loss over the hierarchy for the entire shape, as well
as over all subtrees. Thus, the encoder/decoder units are tuned for
both locally and globally good reconstructions, and at test time a
relatively short lookahead suffices.
To decode a root code (e.g. one obtained from an encoding hierarchy inferred in the above fashion), we recursively invokeNodeClsfr
to decide whether which decoder should expand the node. The corresponding decoder (AdjDec, SymDec or BoxDec) is used to recover
the codes of child nodes until the full hierarchy has been expanded
to leaves with corresponding box parameters. The test decoding
setup is illustrated in Figure 5.
Several examples of test reconstructions are shown in Figure 7.
The above procedures are used to encode a novel shape to a root code,
and to reconstruct the shape given just this root code. In Figure 8,
we show how our RvNN is able to find a perceptually reasonable
symmetry hierarchy for a 3D shape structure, by minimizing the
reconstruction error. Given the structure of a swivel chair, the error
is much smaller when a wheel and spike are merged before the 5-
fold rotational symmetry is applied, than if two separate rotational
symmetries (for wheels and spikes respectively) are applied first.
5 LEARNING MANIFOLD OF PLAUSIBLE STRUCTURES
Our recursive autoencoder computes a compact, fixed-dimensional
code that represents the inferred hierarchical layout of shape parts,
and can recover the layout given just this code associated with the
root of the hierarchy. However, the autoencoder developed so far is
Adjacent
Reflective
sym. Adjacent
6-fold
rot. sym.
Fig. 6. Different two-step encoding orders for two examples, found by minimizing reconstruction errors during testing. Left: Symmetry (reflective)
before adjacency. Right: Adjacency before symmetry (6-fold rotational).
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
GRASS: Generative Recursive Autoencoders for Shape Structures • 52:7
Input box structure Recovered structure
Refl. sym. Refl. sym.
Input box structure
7-fold
trans. sym. Refl. sym.
5-fold Refl. sym.
rot. sym.
Recovered structure
Fig. 7. Examples of reconstructing test shapes, without known hierarchies,
by successively encoding them to root codes, and decoding them back.
The encoding hierarchies inferred by our RvNN encoder are shown at the
bottom.
5-fold rot.
sym.
5-fold rot.
sym.
5-fold rot.
sym.
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8. Our RvNN encoder can find a perceptually reasonable symmetry
hierarchy for a 3D shape structure, through minimizing reconstruction error.
Given an input structure (a), the reconstruction error is much smaller if
parts are grouped by adjacency before symmetry (b), instead of symmetry
before adjacency (c).
not a generative model. It can reconstruct a layout from any root
code, but an arbitrary, random code is unlikely to produce a plausible
layout. A generative model must jointly capture the distribution of
statistically plausible shape structures.
In this section, we describe our method for converting the autoencoder-based model to a fully generative one. We fine-tune the
autoencoder to learn a (relatively) low-dimensional manifold containing high-probability shape structures. Prior approaches for learning feasible manifolds of parametrized 3D shapes from landmark
exemplars include kernel density estimation [Fish et al. 2014; Talton
et al. 2009], multidimensional scaling [Averkiou et al. 2014], and
piecewise primitive fitting [Schulz et al. 2016]. However, these methods essentially reduce to simple interpolation from the landmarks,
and hence may assign high probabilities to parameter vectors that
correspond to implausible shapes [Goodfellow et al. 2014].
AdjDecode
𝑛
-D random noise
𝑛
-D code vec. 𝑛
-D code vec.
1
2D param.
BoxDecode
…
…
1
2D param.
BoxDecode
…
AdjEncode
𝑛
-D code vec. 𝑛
-D code vec. …
1
2D param.
BoxEncode
1
2D param.
BoxEncode
𝑛
-D code vec.
1D vector
…
…
generated
real
Generator network Discriminator network
Fig. 9. Architecture of our generative adversarial network, showing reuse
of autoencoder modules.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow
et al. 2014] have been introduced to overcome precisely this limitation. Instead of directly interpolating from training exemplars, a
GAN trains a synthesis procedure to map arbitrary parameter vectors only to vectors which a classifier deems plausible. The classifier,
which can be made arbitrarily sophisticated, is jointly trained to
identify objects similar to the exemplars as plausible, and others
as fake. This leads to a refined mapping of the latent space since
implausible objects are eliminated by construction. Given a completely random set of parameters, the trained GAN “snaps” it to the
plausible manifold to generate a meaningful sample.
In addition to enabling the synthesis of novel but statistically
plausible shape structures, the learned manifold also supports interpolation between shape codes. The application of this feature to
shape morphing is shown in Section 7.
GAN architecture. The architecture of our generative adversarial
network comprises a generator (G) network, which transforms a
random code to a hierarchical shape structure lying on the estimated
manifold, and a discriminator (D) network, which checks whether
a generated structure is similar to those of the training shapes or
not. Our key observation is that we can directly reuse and fine-tune
the autoencoder modules learned in the previous section, instead of
introducing new components. The decoder component (comprising AdjDec, SymDec, BoxDec and NodeClsfr) is exactly what we
need to estimate a structure from a given code: it constitutes the
G network. The encoder component (comprising AdjEnc, SymEnc
and BoxEnc) is exactly what we need to estimate a code for the
generated structure. The final code can be compared to the codes
of training structures using an additional fully connected layer and
a binary softmax layer producing the probability of the structure
being “real”. This constitutes the D network. Hence, we initialize the
GAN with the trained autoencoder modules and further fine-tune
them to minimize the GAN loss. The architecture is illustrated in
Figure 9, and the training procedure described below.
Training. The GAN is trained by stochastic gradient descent using
different loss functions for the discriminator D and the generator
G. In each iteration, we sample two mini-batches: training box
structures x with their associated hierarchies, and random codes
z ∈ R
n
. The x samples, with known hierarchies, are passed only
through the discriminator, yielding D(x), whereas the z samples are
passed through both networks in sequence, yielding D(G(z)). The
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
52:8 • J. Li et al random code
𝑧
All plausible hierarchies
…
…
𝐷(𝐺(𝑧))
𝐺 𝐷
𝐺
𝐺 𝐷
𝐷
𝐷(𝐺(𝑧))
𝐷(𝐺(𝑧))
0.96
0.85
0.23
Top 𝐾 plausible hierarchies
𝐺(𝑧)
𝐺(𝑧)
𝐺(𝑧)
Classification loss
𝐺 weighted by 𝐷 𝐺 𝑧
𝐽𝐺
𝐺 𝐷
NodeClassifier
Geometric training of 𝐺 (𝐷 is fixed)
Structural training of 𝐺
Fig. 10. The training of our GAN model. Left: Given a random code, we
select the top K “plausible” hierarchies from which G can decode a box
structure to best fool D. Right: For each selected hierarchy, the training
of G is split into geometric (top) and structural (bottom) tuning, based on
different loss functions.
loss function for the discriminator is
JD = −
1
2
Ex [logD(x)] −
1
2
Ez [log(1 − D(G(z)))],
while the loss function for the generator is
JG = −
1
2
Ez [logD(G(z))] .
By minimizing the first loss function w.r.t. the weights of the network D, we encourage the discriminator to output 1 for each training
sample, and 0 for each random sample. By minimizing the second
loss function w.r.t. the weights of the network G, we encourage the
generator to fool D into thinking a random sample is actually a real
one observed during training. This is a standard adversarial training
setup; see Goodfellow et al. [2014] for more details.
With this straightforward training, however, it is still hard to
converge to a suitable balance between the G and D networks,
despite the good initialization provided by our autoencoder. This is
due to the following reasons. First, when mapping a random code z
to the manifold, the G network (which is just the recursive decoder)
may infer a grossly incorrect hierarchy. The D network finds it easy
to reject these implausible hierarchies, and hence does not generate
a useful training signal for G. Second, the implausible hierarchies
generated from random codes may not provide reasonable pathways
to back-propagate the loss from D so that G can be tuned properly.
Third, since the decoding networks in G are split into geometric (e.g.
AdjDec) and topological (NodeClsfr) types, they should be tuned
separately with different losses deduced from D. To these ends,
we devise the following training strategies and priors, to better
constrain the training process:
• Structure prior for G. In an initial stage, we need to prevent
G from mapping a random code z to a severely implausible hierarchy. This is achieved by introducing a strong
structure prior to G. We constrain the hierarchies inferred
by G to lie in a plausible set. This set includes all hierarchies used to train the autoencoder in Section 4. It also
includes all hierarchies inferred by the autoencoder, in test
mode, for the training shapes. For each z, we search the
plausible hierarchies for the top K = 10 ones that best fool
the discriminator, minimizing JG (Figure 10, left). These
hierarchies are then used to back-propagate the loss JG .
• Separate geometric and structural training. Given a selected
hierarchy, we first tune the geometric decoders of G via
back-propagating the corresponding loss JG through the
hierarchy. This tuning is expected to further fool the discriminator, leading to a higher estimate D(G(z)) thatG(z) is
real (Figure 10, top-right). For each selected hierarchy, with
its the newly updated D(G(z)), we then tune the structural
component, NodeClsfr, of G. This is done by minimizing
the classification loss of NodeClsfr at each node in the
given hierarchy, using the node type as ground-truth (Figure 10, bottom-right). To favor those hierarchies that better
fool D, we weight the loss by D(G(z)).
• Constrained random code sampling. Given the priors and
constraints above, it is still difficult to train G to reconstruct a plausible hierarchy from arbitrarily random codes.
Therefore, instead of directly feeding it random codes from
a normal or uniform distribution, we feed it codes drawn
from Gaussians around the training samples x, whose mixture approximates the standard normal distribution. Further,
we train a secondary network fl
to project these “latent”
codes to a space of potential root codes which are easier
for G to process.
Specifically, G takes samples from a multivariate Gaussian distribution: zs (x) ∼ N(µ, σ) with µ = fµ (Enc(x)) and
σ = fσ (Enc(x)). Here, Enc is the recursive encoder originally trained with the autoencoder (before adversarial tuning), running in test mode. fµ and fσ can be approximated
by two neural networks.
We train to minimize the reconstruction loss on x, in
addition to the generator loss in the GAN. In fact, the networks Enc andG constitute a variational autoencoder (VAE)
if we also tune Enc when learning the parameters of the
Gaussian distribution. This leads to an architecture similar to the VAE-GAN proposed by Larsen et al. [2015]; see
Figure 11.
Consequently, we also impose the loss function for VAE
that pushes this variational distribution p(zs (x)), over all
training samples x, towards the prior of the standard normal
distribution p(z). In summary, we minimize the following
loss function:
L = LGAN(zp ) + α1Lrecon + α2LKL
The GAN loss is LGAN = logD(x) + log(1 − D(G(fl
(zp )))),
with zp ∼ p(z). This loss is minimized/maximized by G/D,
respectively. The reconstruction loss is defined as Lrecon =
∥G(fl
(zs (x))) − x ∥2. The Kullback-Leibler divergence loss,
LKL = DKL (p(zs (x)) ∥ p(z)), forces the mixture of local
Gaussians to approximate the standard normal distribution.
We set α1 = 10−2
and α2 = 10 in our experiments.
The results of the GAN training process are fine-tuned RvNN
decoder modules and the fl network. The fl network projects a
random n-D vector drawn from the standard normal distribution
to the space of potential root codes, and the tuned decoders map
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
GRASS: Generative Recursive Autoencoders for Shape Structures • 52:9
𝑧𝑠~𝑁(𝜇, 𝜎)
𝐺 𝐷
𝐺(𝑧)
𝐸𝑛𝑐
𝐸𝑛𝑐(𝑥)
VAE GAN
𝑓𝜇
𝑓𝜎
𝜇
𝜎
𝑧𝑝~𝑝(𝑧)
𝑓𝑙
Fig. 11. Confining random codes by sampling from a learned Gaussian
distributions based on learned root codes Enc(x). Jointly learning the distribution and training the GAN leads to a VAE-GAN network.
the projected vector to a structure lying on the plausible manifold.
Together with a module to generate fine-grained part geometry, described in the next section, this constitutes our recursive, generative
model of 3D shapes.
6 PART GEOMETRY SYNTHESIS
In the previous sections, we described our generative model of part
layouts in shapes. The final component of our framework is a generative model for fine-grained part geometry, conditioned on the part
bounding box and layout. Our solution has two components. First,
we develop a fixed-dimensional part feature vector that captures
both the part’s gross dimensions and its context within the layout.
Second, we learn a low-dimensional manifold of plausible part geometries while simultaneously also learning a mapping from part
feature vectors to the manifold. This mapping is used to obtain the
synthesized geometry for a given part in a generated layout. Below,
we describe these steps in detail.
Structure-aware recursive feature (SARF). The recursive generator
network produces a hierarchy of shape parts, with each internal
node in the hierarchy represented by an n-D code. We exploit this
structure to define a feature vector for a single part. A natural contextual feature would be to concatenate the RvNN codes of all nodes
on the path from the part’s leaf node to the root. However, since
paths lengths are variable, this would not yield a fixed-dimensional
vector. Instead, we approximate the context by concatenating just
the code of the leaf node, that of its immediate parent, and that
of the root into a 3n-D feature vector (Figure 12). The first code
captures the dimensions of the part’s bounding box, and the latter
two codes capture local and global contexts, respectively.
Concatenated code
Fig. 12. Construction of structure-aware recursive feature (SARF) for a part
in a hierarchy. We concatenate the RvNN codes of the part, its immediate
parent, and the root into a fixed-dimensional vector.
32 FC
SARF code
32x32x32 input
part volume 32D
SARF code
Training Testing
training
parts
32x32x32 output
part volume
32x32x32 output
part volume
96
256 384 256 256 384 256
96
6
32 FC
512 FC
512 FC
Fig. 13. Training and testing setup for part geometry synthesis.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Fig. 14. Geometry synthesis from part structure. Given a generated part
structure (a), we synthesize the geometry inside each part box in volumetric
representation (b). The per-box volumes are then embedded into a global
volume (c) from which we reconstruct the final meshed model (d).
SARF to part geometry. In the second stage, we would like to map
a SARF feature vector to the synthesized geometry for the part,
represented in our prototype as a 32 × 32 × 32 voxel grid. Such a
mapping function is difficult to train directly, since the output is
very high (8000) dimensional yet the set of plausible parts spans
only a low-dimensional manifold within the space of all outputs.
Instead, we adapt a strategy inspired by Girdhar et al. [2016]. We
set up a deep, convolutional autoencoder, consisting of an encoder
GeoEnc to map the voxel grid to a compact, 32D part code, and a
decoder GeoDec to map it back to a reconstructed grid. The learned
codes efficiently map out the low-dimensional manifold of plausible part geometries. We use the architecture of Girdhar et al., and
measure the reconstruction error as a sigmoid cross-entropy loss.
Simultaneously, we use a second deep network GeoMap to map an
input SARF code to the 32D part code, with both networks accessing
the same code neurons. The mapping network employs a Euclidean
loss function. We train both networks jointly, using both losses,
with stochastic gradient descent and backpropagation. At test time,
we chain together the mapping network GeoMap and the decoder
GeoDec to obtain a function mapping SARF codes to synthesized
part geometry. The training and test setups are illustrated in Figure
13. The synthesis of the overall shape geometry is done by predicting part-wise 3D volumes, which are then embedded into a global
volume, from which we reconstruct the final meshed model. See
Figure 14 for an example.
7 RESULTS AND EVALUATION
We evaluate our generative recursive model of shape structures
through several experiments. First, we focus on validating that our
autoencoder-based RvNN learns the “correct” symmetry hierarchies,
where correctness could be qualified in different ways, and the
resulting codes are useful in applications such as classification and
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
52:10 • J. Li et al
M1 M2
G1 G2 G3
A1 A2
refl. refl.
trans. refl.
rot.
trans. refl.
Fig. 15. Our RvNN encoder correctly parses six out of seven 2D box arrangements designed to test handcrafted, perceptually-based grouping rules
from [Wang et al. 2011]. The G2 rule is violated in our example, with 2-fold
translational symmetry (highlighted in the red box) taking precedence over
the reflectional one.
partial matching. Then we test the generative capability of our
VAE-GAN network built on top of the RvNN.
Dataset: We collected a dataset containing 1000 3D models from
five shape categories: chairs (500), bikes (200), aeroplanes (100),
excavators (100), and candelabra (100). These models are collected
from the ShapeNet and the Princeton ModelNet. Each model is presegmented according to their mesh components or based on the
symmetry-aware segmentation utilized in [Wang et al. 2011]. The
average number of segments per shape is 12 for chairs, 10 for bikes,
7 for aeroplanes, 6 for excavators, and 8 for candelabra. Symmetric
parts are counted as distinct. We do not utilize any segment labels.
Our RvNN autoencoder is trained with all shapes in the dataset.
The generative VAE-GAN is trained per category, since its training
involves structure learning which works best within the same shape
category. Part geometry synthesis is trained on all parts from all
categories.
Learning recursive grouping rules. In the original work on symmetry hierarchies by Wang et al. [2011], a total of seven precedence
rules (labeled M1, M2, G1, G2, G3, A1, and A2; see the Appendix for
a reproduction of these rules) were handcrafted to determine orders
between and among assembly and symmetry grouping operations.
For example, rule A1 stipulates that symmetry-preserving assembly
should take precedence over symmetry-breaking assembly and rule
M2 states that assembly should be before grouping (by symmetry)
if and only if the assembled elements belong to symmetry groups
which possess equivalent grouping symmetries. These rules were
inspired by Gestalt laws of perceptual grouping [Köhler 1929] and
Occam’s Razor which seeks the simplest explanation. One may say
that they are perceptual and represent a certain level of human
cognition.
The intriguing question is whether our RvNN, which is unsupervised, could “replicate” such cognitive capability. To test the rules,
we designed seven box arrangements in 2D, one per rule; these
patterns are quite similar to those illustrated in Wang et al. [2011].
… …
refl.
…
rot.
…
rot.
… …
…
… … …
Fig. 16. Inferred hierarchies are consistent across sets of shapes, shown for
two shape classes (candelabra and chairs).
For rule A2, which involves a connectivity strength measure, we
simply used geometric proximity. In Figure 15, we show the seven
box arrangements and the grouping learned by our RvNN. As can
be observed, our encoder correctly parses all expected patterns except in the case of G2, where 2-fold translational symmetry takes
precedence over the reflectional one in our example.
Consistency of inferred hierarchies. Our RvNN framework infers
hierarchies consistently across different shapes. To demonstrate
this, we augment two categories of our segmented dataset – chair
and candelabra – with semantic labels (e.g., for chairs: “seat”, “back”,
“leg”, and “arm”). Note that these labels occur at relatively higher
levels of the hierarchies, since legs, backs, etc., may be subdivided
into smaller parts. If the hierarchies are consistent across shapes,
these high-level labels should follow a consistent merging order.
For example, the seat and legs should be merged before the seat and
back are merged. Let ℓp denote the label of part p. Given another
label ℓ, let h(p, ℓ) denote the shortest distance from p to an ancestor
that it shares with a part with label ℓ. Note that h(p, ℓp ) = 0 by
definition. Let Sℓ be the set of parts with label ℓ. For labels ℓ1, ℓ2,
we measure the probability Pℓ
(ℓ1 ≺ ℓ2) that ℓ1 is more regularly
grouped with ℓ than ℓ2 as Í
p ∈Sℓ
I(h(p, ℓ1) < h(p, ℓ2))/|Sℓ
|, where I
is the indicator function and the sum is additionally restricted over
shapes in which all three labels appear. The overall consistency is
estimated as one minus the average entropy over all label triplets:
C = 1 +

|L|
3
−1 Õ
ℓ, ℓ1, ℓ2 ∈L, ℓ,ℓ1,ℓ2
Pℓ
(ℓ1 ≺ ℓ2) log2
Pℓ
(ℓ1 ≺ ℓ2)
The average consistency over the two categories of training shapes
was measured as 0.81, and over the two categories of test shapes
as 0.72. The high values show that our RvNN infers hierarchies
consistently across different shapes. Figure 16 shows several pairs
of shapes with consistent inferred hierarchies.
Classification of shape structures. Our autoencoder generates compact encodings for shapes segmented into arbitrary numbers of
parts, via a recursively inferred hierarchy. To test whether these
codes effectively characterize shapes and shape similarities, we conducted a fine-grained shape classification experiment for each of
four classes: airplane, chair, bike, and candle. The sub-classes were:
airplane – 5 classes including jet, straight-wing, fighter, delta-wing,
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
GRASS: Generative Recursive Autoencoders for Shape Structures • 52:11
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Ours
MV-CNN
3DShapeNets
Recall
Precision
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Ours
MVCNN
3DShapeNets
Recall
Precision
Candle
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Ours
MV-CNN
3DShapeNets
Recall
Precision
Chair
Airplane
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Ours
MV-CNN
3DShapeNets
Recall
Precision
Bike
Fig. 17. Precision-recall plots for classification tasks.
swept-wing; chair – 5 classes including armchair, folding, swivel,
four-leg, sofa; bike – 4 classes including motorcycle, casual bicycle,
tricycle, mountain bike; and candelabra – 3 classes including with
arms, w/o arm, with two-level arms. To represent each shape, we
used the average of all codes in the shape’s hierarchy, which, as in
Socher et al. [2011], we found to work better than just the root.
Following the standard protocol for each category of shapes,
we hold out one shape in turn, and sort the remaining shapes by
increasing the L2 distance between average codes, terminating the
results by a variable upper limit on the distance. The number of
results from the class of the query shape are considered as true
positives.
We show precision-recall plots for four classes of interest in Figure
17. The average accuracy of (subclass) classification over all four
classes is 96.1%.
As baselines, we show the performance of two state-of-the-art
descriptors on this task [Su et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2015]. This is not an
entirely equal-grounded comparison: our method leverages a prior
segmentation of each shape into (unlabeled) parts, whereas the baseline methods do not. However, our method does not consider any
fine-grained part geometry, only oriented bounding box parameters.
The considerable improvement of our method over the baselines
demonstrates that gross structure can be significantly more important for shape recognition than fine-grained geometry, and accurate
and consistent identification of part layouts can be the foundation
of powerful retrieval and classification methods.
Partial structure matching. While the previous experiment tested
full shape retrieval, it is also interesting to explore whether subtree
codes are sufficiently descriptive for part-in-whole matching. As
before, we use the average of codes in a subtree as the feature for the
subtree. Figure 18 contains some partial retrieval results, showing
that our method correctly retrieves subparts matching the query.
Shape synthesis and interpolation. Our framework is generative,
and can be used to synthesize shapes from the learned manifold in
a two-step process. First, the VAE-GAN network is sampled using a
random seed for a hierarchical bounding box layout. Second, the leaf
nodes of the hierarchy are mapped to fine-grained voxelized geometry, which is subsequently meshed. Several examples of synthesized
shapes are shown in Figure 19.
Our model can also be used to interpolate between two topologically and geometrically different shapes. For this task, we compute
the root codes of two shapes via inferred hierarchies. Then, we
linearly interpolate between the codes, reconstructing the shape
at each intermediate position using the synthesis procedure above.
Although intermediate codes may not themselves correspond to
root codes of plausible shapes, the synthesis procedure projects
them onto the valid manifold by virtue of the VAE-GAN training.
We demonstrate example interpolations in Figure 20. Note that our
model successfully handles topological changes both in the part
layout and within parts, while maintaining symmetry constraints.
Unlike Jain et al. [2012], we do not require prior knowledge of part
hierarchies. Unlike both Jain et al. and Alhashim et al. [2014], we do
not require part correspondences either, and we can handle smooth
topological changes in individual parts.
Implementation and Timing. Our RvNN and VAE-GAN are implemented in MATLAB. The geometry synthesis model is implemented
using the MatConvNet neural network library. Pre-training the autoencoder (Section 4) took 14 hours. Adversarial fine-tuning (Section
5) took about 20 hours for each shape class. Training the part geometry synthesis network (Section 6) took 25 hours. Mapping a random
code vector to the manifold of plausible structures to synthesize a
hierarchy takes 0.5 seconds, and augmenting it with synthesized
fine-grained part geometry takes an additional 0.2 seconds per part.
8 DISCUSSION, LIMITATION, AND FUTURE WORK
With the work presented, we have only made a first step towards
developing a structure-aware, generative neural network for 3D
shapes. What separates our method apart from previous attempts
at using neural nets for 3D shape synthesis is its ability to learn,
Query Top ranked box structures
Fig. 18. Partial structure retrieval results for two shape classes (chair and
bicycle). The query and matching parts are highlighted in red.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 36, No. 4, Article 52. Publication date: July 2017.
52:12 • J. Li et al
Fig. 19. Examples of shapes synthesized from different classes.
without supervision, and synthesize shape structures. It is satisfying
to see that the generated 3D shapes possess cleaner part structures,
such as symmetries, and more regularized part geometries, when
compared to voxel fields generated by previous works [Girdhar
et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2016]. What is unsatisfying however is that we
decoupled the syntheses of structure and fine geometry. This hints
at an obvious next step to integrate the two syntheses.
The codes learned by our RvNN do combine structural and geometric information into a single vector. Through experiments, we
have demonstrated that the hierachical grouping learned by the
RvNN appears to conform to perceptual principles as reflected by
the precedence rules handcrafted by Wang et al. [2011]. The codes
also enable applications such as fine-grained classification and partial shape retrieval, producing reasonable results. However, the
internal mechanisms of the code and precisely how it is mixing
the structural and geometric information is unclear. The fact that it
appears to be able to encode hiearachies of arbitrary depth with a
fixed-length vector is even somewhat mysterious. An interesting
future work would be to “visualize” the code to gain an insight on all
of these questions. Only with that insight would we be able to steer
the code towards a better separation between the parts reflecting
the structure and the parts reflecting low-level geometry.
Our current network still has a long way to go in fully mapping
the generative structure manifold. We cannot extrapolate arbitrarily –
we are limited to a VAE-GAN setup which samples codes similar to,
or in between, the exemplars. Hence, our synthesis and interpolation
are confined to a local patch of that elusive “manifold”. In fact, it
is not completely clear whether the generative structure space for
a 3D shape collection with sufficiently rich structural variations
is a low-dimensional manifold. Along similar lines, we have not
discovered flexible mechanisms to generate valid codes, e.g., by
applying algebraic or crossover operations, from available codes.
All of these questions and directions await future investigations. It
would be interesting to thoroughly investigate the effect of code
length on structure encoding. Finally, it is worth exploring recent
developments in GANs, e.g. Wasserstein GAN [Arjovsky et al. 2017],
in our problem setting. It would also be interesting to compare with
plain VAE and other generative adaptations.