We present an approach to the accurate and efficient large-scale simulation
of the complex dynamics of ferrofluids based on physical principles. Ferrofluids are liquids containing magnetic particles that react to an external
magnetic field without solidifying. In this contribution, we employ smooth
magnets to simulate ferrofluids in contrast to previous methods based on the
finite element method or point magnets. We solve the magnetization using
the analytical solution of the smooth magnets’ field, and derive the bounded
magnetic force formulas addressing particle penetration. We integrate the
magnetic field and force evaluations into the fast multipole method allowing
for efficient large-scale simulations of ferrofluids. The presented simulations
are well reproducible since our approach can be easily incorporated into a
framework implementing a Fast Multipole Method and a Smoothed Particle
Hydrodynamics fluid solver with surface tension. We provide a detailed
analysis of our approach and validate our results against real wet lab experiments. This work can potentially open the door for a deeper understanding
of ferrofluids and for the identification of new areas of applications of these
materials.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Physical simulation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Computational Electromagnetics, Fast
Multipole Method (FMM), Ferrofluids, Fluid Mechanics, Large-scale Simulations, Magnetic Fluids, Maxwell’s equations, Natural Phenomena, NavierStokes Equations, Numerical Simulations, Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics
(SPH), Validation Experiments.
1 INTRODUCTION
Ferrofluids were invented in the early 1960s by NASA scientists to
pump fuel into spacecrafts in low gravity environments without
mechanical actions. Today, these fluids are mostly known to the
public for its peculiar behavior when interacting with magnetic
fields. Because of the interesting geometric structure, they are widely
used in artwork (as, e.g., in the SIGGRAPH Art Gallery [Kodama
2008]), science exhibitions, and in several advertisements. Due to the
complexity of the movements of their spikes, it becomes impossible
for an artist to create a lively animation by intuition. A fast and
accurate ferrofluid simulator can not only be used for animation,
but also to explore, and perhaps better understand, the interplay
between the magnetic field, the geometry of the external object,
and the resulting surface shape/topology of the ferrofluid. However,
realistic simulations of the ferrofluid dynamics are not yet available.
In this contribution, for the first time, we achieved the level of
realism to bring its fascination from reality to the virtual world.
With such a simulation tool at hand, we can further design the
magnetic field and external objects in the virtual world to create the
desired shapes in reality.
Next to their artistic applications, ferrofluids are employed in
different scenarios described in the literature [Nochetto et al. 2016a;
Raj et al. 1995] ranging from applications in acoustics, instrumentation, lubrication, vacuum technology, vibration damping [Miwa
et al. 2003], to radar absorbing materials [Vinoy and Jha 1996]. Several applications are also touching the field of visual computing,
for example, ferrofluids are used for magnetic resonance imaging
contrast enhancement and the construction of adaptive deformable
mirrors [Brousseau et al. 2007]. Additional applications can be
found in the field of micro- and nanoelectronics [Hartshorne et al.
2004; Zahn 2001].
The interesting dynamics of ferrofluids are caused by the interplay
of an external magnetic field and the surface tension, forming a
pattern of characteristic spikes. Figure 2 illustrates the influence of
the magnetic field strength and surface tension on the shape of the
spikes: a strong surface tension force smooths the contour, while
a strong field strength increases the height of the spikes. These
effects are further coupled with fluid motion finally leading to a
highly complex dynamical behavior. Given this degree of complexity,
the large-scale numerical simulation of ferrofluids can potentially
open the door for a deeper understanding of ferrofluids and for the
identification of new areas of applications of these materials.
In this contribution, we aim for the large-scale simulation of
ferrofluid dynamics. The simulation of magnetism-based effects is
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 38, No. 4, Article 93. Publication date: July 2019.
93:2 • Huang, L. et al.
an active subject of research within the visual computing community.
In previous work, the authors are mostly focusing on magnetized
rigid bodies, e.g., Thomaszewski et al. [2008] simulated magnetic
rigid body interactions by subdividing a rigid body into small cells,
and magnetize each cell only using external fields to calculate the
net force. The recent work of Kim et al. [2018] addresses the dynamic
magnetization process of the material improving the quality and
stability of such simulations. However, both models may lead to
instabilities when particles come close.
Moreover, in the absence of a magnetic field, our simulation of a
ferrofluid is reduced to a Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH)
fluid simulation with surface tension. Such large-scale fluid simulations are studied in detail within the computer graphics community.
Our magnetic force model is different from previous particle based
methods in the graphics and physics literature since we use a smooth
magnet instead of a point dipole magnet, for each particle. This
eliminates the magnetic field singularities at the dipole positions,
and accounts for the self-generated magnetic field when considering
the magnetization process. Additionally, our magnetic force model
can accurately calculate the forces, in particular if two particles
overlap. Our forces are bounded in contrast to point magnet forces.
Such property allows for the natural extension to other magnetizable
continuum such as magnetic slime and paste by changing the fluid
solver to a viscous material solver.
Our specific technical contributions are as follows. We devise a
novel approach to robustly calculate the magnetic field generated
by multiple magnetizable bodies exposed to an external magnetic
field. Moreover, we present a magnetic force model between magnetized particles that enables the accurate formation of the ferrofluids’
spikes. Finally, we integrate the Fast Multipole Method (FMM) into
the magnetic field and force calculations enabling efficient and accurate large-scale simulations of ferrofluids. Our simulations are
well reproducible since our approach can be easily incorporated
into a framework implementing a FMM and a SPH fluid solver with
surface tension. To further ensure reproducibility, we disclose all
relevant details of our implementation and provide all physical and
numerical parameters. Moreover, we present a detailed derivation
of our method in the supplemental material. We provide a detailed
analysis of our approach and validate the results of our simulations
against data obtained in real experiments carried out in the wet lab.
2 RELATED WORK
As in the case of regular, i.e., non-magnetizable fluids, the dynamics of ferrofluids and its numerical simulation have been studied
in different scientific communities including applied mathematics,
computational physics (in particular, in computational fluid dynamics (CFD)), as well as in visual computing.
2.1 Ferrofluids Simulation
Within the scope of visual computing, Ishikawa et al. [2013] employed an SPH approach to simulate the fluid’s motion and treated
each particle as a perfect magnetic dipole. After calculating the
magnetic moment for each particle, a procedural method is applied
to elevate the surface according to the magnetic strength to generate the spikes. Ishikawa et al. [2012] seeds the fluid’s surface with
Fig. 2. If a magnetic field is applied, the ferrofluid forms its characteristic
spikes. This is illustrated here for different surface tension and magnetic field
strengths using a vertical homogeneous magnetic field. A strong surface
tension force smooths the contour while a strong magnetic field strength
increases the height of the spikes.
particles and generate dynamical spikes by moving the particles
according to the strength of the magnetic field. Both methods are
not based on self-evident physical laws leading to a limited physical accuracy. This results in significant shortcomings including an
unnatural look of the final shapes of the spikes.
Within the computational physics communities, Yoshikawa et
al. [2010] employed the moving particle semi-implicit (MPS) method
for incompressible free surface flows and reused the particles as
nodes in a finite element method (FEM) solver for computing the
electromagnetic interactions. They were able to produce only one
spike purely based on physical principles without additional geometric modeling. However, the ever-changing mesh topology impedes
an efficient simulation. Mitsufuji et al. [2016] also achieved the formation of a single bulge rather than multiple spikes using a particle
method for simulating the fluid’s dynamics. They formulated the
magnetization problem as a system of linear equations as done in
our work presented in this contribution. There are additional meshbased examples [Cao and Ding 2014; Gollwitzer et al. 2007; Lavrova
et al. 2006, 2008] successfully generating multiple spikes in the presence of an external field. They alternately solve the magnetization
of the fluid given the surface profile and use the magnetic field
to update the deformation of the surface profile. However, their
formation process of spikes is an evolving sequence towards the
equilibrium shape rather than a dynamic system advancing in time.
Such mesh-based methods also suffer from topology changes in
dynamical simulations.
Within the applied mathematics disciplines, Nochetto et al. [2016a]
proposed a diffuse interface model for two-phase ferrofluid flows
which is representative for the usual approach taken in this field:
their solution is given as a function of time rather than iterating
towards equilibrium shapes as done in most of the work presented
in the computational physics communities. The authors provide
a comprehensive analysis on the stability of their scheme and the
convergence of the solution. Their model is sufficient to produce
many spikes in a two dimensional example without making any nonphysical assumption about the geometric structure of the spikes. A
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 38, No. 4, Article 93. Publication date: July 2019.
On the Accurate Large-scale Simulation of Ferrofluids • 93:3
FEM approach is used in order to solve their set of partial differential equations. Nochetto et al. [2016b] simulate the ferrofluid using
Rosensweig’s equation [1997]. However, it is only applied to one
phase, and as a consequence no spikes can be formed.
2.2 Fluid Solvers
Our approach for the simulation of ferrofluids requires the utilization of a particle-based fluid solver. For this, we use the SPH
solver described by Adami et al. [2012]. The authors provide a versatile way to handle complex boundaries easily. Its accuracy and
efficiency is sufficient to prove that our ferrofluid force model is
qualitatively accurate. In essence, it is still a weakly-compressible
SPH (WCSPH) solver. We would like to mention, that there are more
efficient SPH solvers available, e.g., DFSPH [Bender and Koschier
2017], IISPH [Ihmsen et al. 2014a], and PCISPH [Solenthaler and
Pajarola 2009]. Some other aspects of SPH methods can also be
improved, e.g., viscosity forces [Peer et al. 2015; Peer and Teschner
2017], boundary handling [Akinci et al. 2012; Band et al. 2018a,b],
and data structures [Ihmsen et al. 2011]. Recent advances in CFD
include particle shifting [Lind et al. 2012; Sun et al. 2017] and density
diffusion [Antuono et al. 2012]. The possible improvement list is
far from being exhaustive, and we refer the reader to surveys in
computer graphics [Ihmsen et al. 2014b; Koschier et al. 2019], in
mesh-free methods [Belytschko et al. 1996], and in CFD [Monaghan
1992, 2012] for further information.
We believe in principle that next to SPH, particle-based fluid
solvers handling incompressibility should also work with our approach; see, e.g., [Fu et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2017;
Zheng et al. 2015; Zhu and Bridson 2005].
To ensure the formation of the accurate shapes of the spikes,
surface tension has to be incorporated into the simulation. In this regard, a few surface tension models are available: Müller et al. [2003]
incorporated surface tension in their SPH framework using the
Laplacian of a so-called color field, which is equal to one inside
the fluid and zero outside. He et al. [2014] used the surface energy
to calculate the surface tension based on the gradient of the color
field. These methods are making use of the geometry of the liquid. In contrast, other authors [Akinci et al. 2013; Tartakovsky and
Meakin 2005; Yang et al. 2017] employ a pair-wise force between
particles, handling the surface tension in a microscopic way: SPH
particles attract and repel each other depending on their relative
distances, and particles on the surface are exposed to imbalanced
forces towards the inside, which become the surface tension forces.
In this contribution, we incorporate the surface tension model as
described by Yang et al. [2017] which is based on pair-wise forces
with additional anisotropic filtering for poor-sampled regions.
3 FERROFLUID DYNAMICS
The formation of spikes in ferrofluids can be explained by two facts.
First, magnetization: magnetizable objects concentrate magnetic
field lines around them. Second, magnetic forces: a small magnet
tends to be aligned with the magnetic flux density, and is attracted
to regions with denser field lines, for example to the center region
as illustrated in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. Illustration of the field lines of a constant vertical magnetic field under the influence of cubes with different susceptibility χ . The susceptibility
set to χ = 0.5, 5, 50, 500 (from left to right). Typical ferrofluids have a susceptibility between 1 and 5 [Rosensweig 1987]. The field lines are generated
by advancing tracing particles along the magnetic flux density direction B.
Please note that four independent fields are plotted.
A ferrofluid is a deformable and paramagnetic continuum. It is
non-magnetic in the absence of an external magnetic field since
the total magnetic field caused by the randomly moving magnetic
nanoparticles is canceled out. If an external field is present, these
magnetic nanoparticles are still moving randomly but rotate statistically to a dominant direction within a short relaxation time, and the
fluid becomes magnetized concentrating the field lines. Whenever
there is a small bump on the ferrofluid surface caused by a minor
perturbation, it bends the field lines and attracts the molecules in its
neighborhood forming a larger bump, eventually becoming a spike.
The growth of such a spike is limited by gravity, external magnetic
forces, and surface tension.
Our approach for the simulation of ferrofluids consists of two
components: a fluid solver incorporating surface tension and a magnetic force solver. We discretize the fluid as overlapping smooth
magnetizable particles. The fluid solver with surface tension and
magnetic forces evolves the motion of these particles .
3.1 Magnetization
We derive the magnetization equation from Maxwell’s equations,
then use the smooth magnets concept to discretize and solve the
equation. We use a bold letter for a vector (tensor), and its thin
version with superscripts for its components in its canonical coordinates. We add a tilde symbol to denote the same vector (tensor)
in other coordinates (m˜ ,m). We use the subscript to identify the
associated index of a particle.
The relaxation time is much smaller than our numerical integration step sizes, so that the magnetization process achieves the equilibrium instantly. The strength of a magnetized object is described
by the magnetization field M = dm/dV , which is the density of the
magnetic moment m (one can naively equate m to tiny magnets).
Here we use a simplified model and assume a linear relationship
between the magnetization of the ferrofluid and the magnetic field:
M = χ(r)

Hext + Hferro(M)

, (1)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 38, No. 4, Article 93. Publication date: July 2019