The corrosion problem in the conventional steel reinforcement in concrete structures has diverted the researchers to explore alternative materials. As a substitute to replace the traditional steel bars in reinforced concrete structures, innovative reinforcement such as fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) rebars has been suggested. Consequently, different codes and guidelines have been proposed for forecasting the shear strength of FRP reinforced members using traditional empirical methods and neural networks. The current paper concentrates on the development of a hybrid intelligence model, namely an artificial neural network articulated with a Bayesian optimization algorithm (ANN-BOA) for estimating the shear strength of these types of members without stirrups. Totally, 216 specimens, collected from the literature, were used in this analysis. The input parameters of the model were beam depth, the ratio of shear span and depth, effective reinforcement ratio, and concrete strength. The ANN hyperparameters (viz. neuron numbers in the hidden layer, learning rate) have been tuned automatically to get the best predictions. The estimated shear strengths are compared with the recent design provisions of Japan (JSCE), UK (BISE), Italy (CNR-DT 203), Canada (CHBDC, CSA S806), and the USA (ACI 440.1R). The results were also compared with a similar ANN model. It was observed that the predicted results using the proposed method are better than those of the other methods in terms of some statistical as well as performance measuring parameters with a maximum Pearson correlation coefficient (R) value of 0.97. These values are higher than the other investigated methods.

Introduction
The concept of utilizing fibers as reinforcement was first started in 500 BC. Among various materials used for reinforcing the concrete, the use of steel fibers was the most common and versatile all over the world for the last 2 decades [1, 2]. Recently, fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) bars have been recognized as a viable substitute for steel bars owing to their anti-corrosion property and other favorable behaviors such as high strength compared to their weight and magnetic neutrality. Conversely, these bars have two major drawbacks: (1) elastic behavior up to failure and (2) lower elastic modulus compared to the steel bars. Also, the bond properties of FRP bars are different than those of steel bars [3]. These lead to different characteristics of FRP reinforced members than those of the steel reinforced members. It was observed that the flexural capacity of FRP reinforced members can be estimated using traditional elastic theory [4]. However, the forecasting of shear capacity is very complex because of different mechanisms of shear transfers [5,6,7] and the continual changes in the design equations [8]. The shear transfer mechanism depends on: (a) arch action, (b) shear carried by uncracked concrete compression zone, (c) dowel action, (d) aggregate interlock, (e) tensile stress between cracks, and (f) transverse reinforcement if any [9]. The relative influences of these mechanisms for FRP reinforced members are different from the steel reinforced members [10,11,12]. A lower modulus of elasticity of FRP bars causes the flexural cracks deeper into the beam, and the cracks become wider compared to the beams with the same amount of steel reinforcement. These may decrease the influence of shear from the aggregate interlock, residual tensile stress, and uncracked concrete zone [13]. Similarly, the dowel action will also be reduced due to the less axial stiffness of the FRP bars and the wider crack formation [12]. The arch action may remain the same as long as the anchorage of the FRP bars is maintained [12]. However, the exact contribution of shear strength from these different mechanisms is yet to be determined. Therefore, different codes and guidelines have been suggested for forecasting the shear capacity [14,15,16,17,18,19] and the predictions vary widely among the codes and guidelines. This is partly due to the lack of proper consideration of different parameters. Besides, the models are based on empirical formulations which rely on the behavior of the limited data set. These models cannot be fitted for every data set. Therefore, there is always a need to develop a robust and consistent model.

During the last few decades, artificial neural network (ANN) or artificial intelligence (AI) techniques have been used in many engineering fields [20]. These techniques have been successfully used to solve some complex civil engineering problems, such as geotechnical [21], structural [22], materials [23], and earth sciences [24]. In particular, ANN is used by several researchers to predict the shear strength of FRP reinforced members without stirrups [25,26,27,28,29,30]. Mashrei [25] proposed an ANN model by minimizing the error function manually using 74 test data. The author’s proposed model provided good predictions; however, the performance of this model for the larger dataset is unknown. The author utilized a trial-and-error procedure to determine the optimum configuration of the network which is time-consuming. A similar study was conducted by Bashir et al. [26], Lee and Lee [27], Yabuz [28], and Naderpour et al. [29, 30], utilizing 124, 106, 104, 177, and 110 test data, respectively. The authors found that the predicted results using their models are close to the corresponding experimental results. However, the authors didn’t use the optimization technique to tune the model parameters or hyperparameters to achieve the optimized model. Amani and Moeini [31] utilized an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) and artificial neural network with multi-layer perceptron (MLP)/back propagation (BP) approach to predict the shear capacity of FRP reinforced members. The authors utilized a dataset of 123 test results and found that the ANN model with MLP/BP provided better results than the corresponding ANFIS model. However, the authors utilized a rigorous approach by creating and testing 19 models to determine the optimum one. Jumaa and Yousif [32] utilized ANNs, gene expression algorithm, and regression analysis for forecasting the shear strength of FRP reinforced concrete members having no stirrups. The authors utilized the MLP/BP technique to develop ANN model and observed that ANN showed the best performance over other methods investigated. However, the ANN model was unduly monotonous and was not as simple as the usual design method. Alam and Gazder [33] applied generalized regression neural network model for anticipating the shear strength of FRP reinforced members. Recently, Musawi et al. [34] explored hybrid artificial intelligence (AI) model for predicting the shear capacity of steel fiber reinforced concrete beams. The authors utilized the firefly optimization algorithm (FFA) integrated with support vector regression (SVR). Here the authors used FFA to tune the hyperparameter to develop an optimized SVR model.

Although the above-mentioned investigations are acceptable, the hyperparameters for most of the models were not tuned properly. In addition, the models were trained and tested with a limited number of specimens in the dataset. It is noted that the performance of AI approaches depends primarily on hyperparameters used by the models. Several techniques including manual search, grid search, and random search are used to tune hyperparameters [35]. Manual search needs users with high academic background and practical experience. Most of the above AI methods utilized manual search techniques to optimize the hyperparameters, which is time-consuming. This may not also provide the optimum results and will be difficult to carry out for high-dimensional data (viz. high number and ranges of hyperparameters). The efficiency of grid search decreases also with high-dimensional data. The random search is good for high-dimensional space, but it is unreliable for training some complex models. Contrarily, all these limitations can be avoided by the Bayesian optimization algorithm and it can be integrated with the AI approach to tuning the hyperparameters automatically, which results in the generation of a hybrid optimal intelligence approach [35]. As such, this research gap ought to be attempted with a database having wide-range independent and response variables.

Accordingly, this study deals with the development of a hybrid intelligent (HI) model based on an artificial neural network (ANN) integrated with a Bayesian optimization algorithm (BOA) for forecasting the shear strength of concrete members reinforced with FRP. The predicted results achieved from the HI model are compared with the most recent shear design equations of Japan Society of Civil Engineering (JSCE) [14], British Institution of Structural Engineers (BISE) [15], Italian (CNR DT) [16], Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC) [17], Canadian Standard Association (CSA) [18], and American Concrete Institution (ACI) [19] design provisions. The comparison will also be made with the recent ANN model of Naderpour et al. [30].

Existing experimental data
A comprehensive dataset of 216 was obtained and compiled from 21 existing experimental studies on the shear capacity of fiber reinforced polymers reinforced concrete members. For members with 𝑎/𝑑 less than 2.5, the shear capacity is governed by arch action rather than beam action. Hence, the samples with 𝑎/𝑑 less than 2.5 are not included in the dataset. The dataset includes 3 samples from Deitz et al. [11], 6 samples from Tureyen and Frosch [13], 3 samples from Alkhrdaji et al. [36], 6 samples from Massam [37], 18 samples from Yost et al. [6], 12 samples from Gross et al. [38], 15 samples from Matta et al. [39], 12 samples from Tariq and Newhook [40], 6 samples from Razaqpur et al. [41], 1 sample from Zhang et al. [42], 6 samples from Ashour [43], 18 samples from El-Sayed et al. [44,45,46], 1 sample from Guadagnini et al. [47], 1 sample from Steiner et al. [48], 27 samples from Alam and Hussein [49,50,51], 4 samples from Bentz et al. [52], 20 samples from Olivito and Zucarello [53], 5 samples from Zeidan et al. [54], 6 samples from Ashour and Kara [55], and 34 samples from Kim and Jang [56].

Supplementary Table S1 documents the basic statistic of four independent and one response variable. As can be shown, the values of 𝑑, 𝑎/𝑑, 𝑓′𝑐, 𝜌eff, and 𝑉exp vary from 141.0 to 937.5 mm with an average value of 288.8 mm, from 2.5 to 6.5 with an average value of 3.9, from 24.0 to 88.3 MPa with an average value of 41.6 MPa, from 0.08 to 1.48% with an average value of 0.35%, and from 8.76 to 264.80 kN with an average value of 58.85 kN, respectively.

Contribution from different shear transfer mechanisms
The vertical component of forces resist by the transverse cross section of the beam is defined as shear resistance. As mentioned earlier, the resistance of shear can be from the mechanism of (1) un-cracked concrete compression resistance, (2) aggregate interlock mechanism, (3) dowel resistance of main flexural reinforcement, (4) tensile stress in cracks, (5) arching action, and (6) shear carried by shear reinforcement (if presents). The contributions from the first five mechanisms are defined as the concrete contribution of shear resistance. The current paper focuses on this, and the probable contributions from these mechanisms are explained below.

Due to different mechanical properties of FRP bars, the failure modes of FRP reinforced concrete elements differ from those reinforced by steel [6, 10, 11], because the use of FRP bars leads to the formation of a larger and deeper crack due to their low modulus of elasticity. Larger cracks reduce the influence of the shear capacity of the aggregate interlock and the residual stress between the cracks. In addition, the deeper cracks reduce the influence of the shear capacity of the compression zone of the uncracked concrete [41, 47].

On the other hand, to resist a certain load, a lesser amount of GFRP reinforcement is required due to the greater resistance of the bars than steel. This leads to an increase in the stress and strain for FRP members. This increased strain, combined with the reduced stiffness of the rebars, decreases the overall stiffness of the element, and thus, higher deflections and wider cracks are achieved. Consequently, less shear force is expected to occur from the aggregate interlock of GFRP reinforced elements. The contribution of residual tensile stresses is also reduced by wider cracks.

In addition, a test of pure dowel strength showed that the GFRP bars have a dowel strength of 8.7% of the ultimate tensile strength [57, 58]. Kotsovos and Pavlovic [57] recommended that the dowel effect on steel reinforced elements be very low. In the case of FRP reinforcement with low transverse rigidity and strength, the dowel effect will also support a lower load.

Owing to less transverse stiffness and wider cracks, some researchers also argued that the contribution of the dowel effect will have a negligible effect on the shear resistance [41]. Therefore, the contribution of FRP reinforcement to the dowel effect could be neglected. As a result, the shear capacity of the FRP reinforced elements is lesser than that of the steel reinforced elements.

The arc effect on FRP reinforced elements can remain strong like traditional steel reinforced elements, provided that the bonding is maintained. FRP reinforcement can withstand high tensile force. Since the shear transfer for the arch action relies mainly on the ratio of shear span to depth (𝑎/𝑑) ratio and the strength of concrete (𝑓′c), these two properties do not depend on the properties of the reinforcement [41].

Description of proposed hybrid intelligence technique
The proposed ANN model consists of an input layer, one or more hidden layers depending on an output layer, and network utilization. The correlation among the input, hidden, and output levels can be expressed in Eq. (1):

𝑦𝑗=𝑓(∑𝑖=1𝑁𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖+𝑏)
(1)
where the input parameter is x, the weighted average of input parameters is w, the activation function is f to produce an output y, the number of inputs is N, and the bias function is b that helps to optimize input data. During the training of an ANN model, the initial weights are gradually corrected and the estimated results are compared to the targets, and then, the errors are back propagated.

Several well-known transfer functions can be used to connect, such as hyperbolic tangent sigmoids (tansig), linear (purelin), and logarithmic sigmoids (logsig). In this paper, we used tansig from the input to the hidden layer and purelin from the hidden layer to the output layer. The data were trained using the back-propagation technique. Among various BP algorithm techniques, the scaled conjugate gradient (trainscg) algorithm was selected. The procedures were continued til the root mean square error (RMSE) was achieved by updating w and b to a specific value.

For model development, the total dataset (216) was divided into training (170) and testing (46). Generally, it is not known what sample size is appropriate when using ANNs in a specific context. However, a well-known rule of thumb is that the sample size needs to be at least a factor of 10 to 100 times the number of features [59, 60]. In this study, four different features (e.g., the beam depth, ratio of shear span-to-depth, strength of concrete, and effective reinforcement ratio) were utilized to develop the model. Thus, the minimum sample size can be calculated as 40. The total sample size (216) is larger than this minimum calculated sample size (40). The optimal structure of the ANN network depends on several hyperparameters (viz., number of hidden layers, hidden neuron numbers, learning rate, etc.). In this respect, the following k-fold cross-validation and Bayesian optimization algorithm (BOA) approaches were utilized for all hyperparameter tuning.

Cross-validation of k-fold
The data set is divided into k subsets in a similar way. One set of data is selected as the test subset, and other datasets are applied as the training subsets. This procedure is repeated k times, and therefore, each subset is used one time for testing.

Bayesian optimization algorithm (BOA)
The aim of Bayesian optimization is to choose the best hyperparameters that minimize validation errors. For instance, the possible hyperparameter space being X and objective function being f to minimize the validation error, the BOA optimization can be shown as Eq. (2):

𝑥∗=argmin𝑥∈𝑋𝑓(𝑥)
(2)
where 𝑥∗ is the set of hyperparameters that produce the minimum target score, and x is any value of space 𝑋.

The term ‘optimization’ is considered as a global optimization of a black-box function whose equation and its derivatives are unknown [61, 62]. This optimization is more efficient than random, manual, or grid search algorithms [35]. This algorithm utilizes a surrogate probability model based on the Bayes’ theorem [63]. This approach uses the results of the previous iterations when selecting the values for the next iteration. Therefore, the optimum point can be reached more effectively than arbitrary selection. This theorem can be stated as below:

𝑝(𝑤|𝐷)=𝑝(𝐷|𝑤)𝑝(𝑤)𝑝(𝐷)
(3)
where p(w) is the prior probability, 𝑝(𝐷) is the evidence, p(D|w) refers to the probability, and p(w|D) is the posterior probability. In this method, the best point to be evaluated is determined as per the acquisition function which is a function of the surrogate model. The Gaussian process (GP) can model 𝑝(𝑤|𝐷). The model can be described with the mean value function (𝜇) and the covariance function (K) as follows:

𝑓(𝑥)∼𝐺𝑃(𝜇,𝐾)
(4)
For more details, readers are referred to the article published elsewhere [64].

In general, BOA can be concisely described by the following phages:

Phage 1: Defining an objective function that minimizes validation errors.

Phage 2: Building a surrogate probability model for the objective function

Phage 3: Getting the best performing hyperparameters in the surrogate probability model.

Phage 4: Using these hyperparameters for the actual objective function.

Phage 5: Combining the new results to modify the surrogate model.

Phage 6: Repeating phases 3 through 5 until reaching the maximum number of iterations.

A computational flow diagram of the established hybrid ANN model with k-fold cross-validation and BOA is shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Flow chart used for the hybrid ANN model with cross-validation of k-fold and Bayesian optimization approach

Full size image
Result and discussions
Development of HI model
A hybrid ANN-BOA model for the shear capacity of FRP reinforced concrete members was developed using the real-life experimental data obtained from the existing research studies. These data were allocated randomly to train, validate, and test datasets. Model parameters (neuron weights and biases) were estimated using the training dataset, and validation data, on the other hand, were used to determine network generalization. The inputs used in the ANN model were the shear span to depth ratio, beam depth, concrete strength, and the effective reinforcement ratio. The performance of the model depends greatly on hyperparameters (viz., number of neurons in the hidden layer, learning rate). In this regard, an integrated fivefold cross-validation and BOA approach was applied to obtain the optimal values of all hyperparameters, which provided the optimum ANN model automatically. The growth of the hyperparameter optimization including the viable operating points is shown in Fig. 2. The estimated target value is the result of the surrogate probability model and the observed target value is the value of the true objective function. The best workable point is where the observed objective value is the lowest. The observed objective or validation error was found to be 7.61 over 42 iterations. The tuned hyperparameters were achieved at this location. Table 1 shows the tuned parameters used to determine the optimal model. The learning rate is one of the most important hyperparameters for the ANN model. Very high learning rates can assist the model to quickly converge to a suboptimal solution, while very small values can cause the process to get stuck. Therefore, a compromise between low and high values is necessary. It was noted that the optimum learning rate was determined to be 0.9993. Figure 3 shows the optimized ANN structure for shear strength. It is comprised of four input neurons, nineteen hidden neurons, and one output neuron.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Evolution of Bayesian optimization for tuning hyperparameters of ANN. The estimated value is the result of the surrogate probability model, and the observed value is the true objective function. The observed validation error was found to be 7.61 at 42 iterations

Full size image
Table 1 Optimized hyper-parameters of ANN
Full size table
Fig. 3
figure 3
Optimum ANN structure

Full size image
Evaluation of the model performance
The model performance is evaluated using the following statistical accuracy metrics for training, testing, and the entire dataset:

Pearson correlation coefficient,𝑅=1−∑𝑁𝑖=1(𝑉exp−𝑉𝑀)2∑𝑁𝑖=1(𝑉exp−𝑉́ exp)2‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾⎷
(5)
Mean absolute error,MAE=∑𝑁𝑖=1∣∣𝑉exp−𝑉𝑀∣∣𝑁
(6)
Root mean square error,RMSE=∑𝑁𝑖=1(𝑉exp−𝑉𝑀)2𝑁‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾√
(7)
Mean absolute percentage error,MAPE=(1𝑁∑𝑖=1𝑁∣∣∣𝑉exp−𝑉𝑀𝑉exp∣∣∣)×100
(8)
Fractional bias,FB=2∑𝑁𝑖=1(𝑉exp−𝑉𝑀)∑𝑁𝑖=1(𝑉exp+𝑉𝑀)
(9)
where VExp denotes the experimental shear strength, 𝑉́ exp denotes the mean experimental shear capacity, VM is the model forecasted shear capacity, N denotes the number of test data. Table 2 shows the results of all the performance indicators in the model. Large values of Pearson correlation coefficient (> 0.95) were observed during training, testing, and overall. It shows that the estimated results and the experimental results are superimposed. It was observed that the parameters related to statistical errors (MAE, RMSE, MAPE) were low (Table 2). Furthermore, when |FB|≤0.5, the performance of the model is sufficient [65, 66]. Therefore, the results shown in Table 2 show that the forecast model used in this study is very acceptable. The correlation coefficient and the p value of the relationship between the predicted and the experimental shear capacities are 0.969 and 0.0, respectively. The correlation coefficient is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). It is worth noting that the predictions of the hybrid model are reliable when the error values and correlation coefficient and error values are close to 0 and 1, respectively. The models satisfy these criteria. In addition, the correlation coefficients are very close to one another, which indicates no overfitting.

Table 2 Performance metrics for training, testing, and overall dataset
Full size table
Figure 4 shows the box plots of the experimental and predicted shear capacities of the specimens having no stirrups. As can be shown, the 1st and 3rd quartile values of the experimental and predicted shear strengths are 24.78 kN, 72.99 kN, and 23.47 kN and 73.32 kN, respectively. These could imply that the estimations are very close to the laboratory results.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Experimental and predicted shear strengths Box plot

Full size image
The relationship between the experimental and predicted shear capacities is presented in Fig. 5. As can be depicted, a very good correlation existed between the experimental shear strengths and those obtained by the ANN model having 𝑅2 value of 93.8% and adjusted 𝑅2 value of 93.8%. The minimum value between the difference of 𝑅2 and adjusted 𝑅2 represents more reliability and precision of the data points generated by the proposed ANN model.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Plotted line of experimental and predicted values for 216 samples

Full size image
Figure 6 shows the comparison between the estimated and the experimentally measured shear capacity of FRP concrete members. As can be shown, the predicted shear strength values evaluated by the ANN method revealed a very good correlation with those obtained by the experimental procedures.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Comparison of estimated shear strength and experimentally measured shear strength

Full size image
The residuals of the data points, differences between the experimental shear strengths and those produced by the proposed ANN model, over the number of experiments are presented in Fig. 7. It is worth noting that the residual plot is a scatter plot and the model is acceptable if the residual data points or relative deviations are scattered around the zero line. As can be illustrated, the data points are in a well-scattered fashion and do not show any skewed, and normally symmetric around a line that goes through at zero residual. About 90% of the data points lie within 25 kN of shear capacity. Figure 8 shows the results of relative deviation vs experimental values. One can see that most of the data points lie around the zero line. This may mean that the model's predictions are reliable.

Fig. 7
figure 7
Residual plot concerning observation

Full size image
Fig. 8
figure 8
Relative deviation of predicted shear strength from its experimental values

Full size image
Further, to validate the model forecasting capability, the developed hybrid ANN model was applied to predict additional 24 data points under various experimental conditions obtained elsewhere (see Supplementary Table S2). The 24 data points include: 6 from Ali et al. [67], 9 from Cholostiakow et al. [68], 2 from Johnson and Sheikh [69], and 7 from Tottori and Wakui [70]. Figure 9 shows an approximate linear plot of experimental and predictive data (24 data points). The value of R2 was 0.969, indicating that there is a "good correlation" between the experimental and predicted values. Besides, the MAE, RMSE, and MAPE values were found to be 5.47, 8.3741, and 11.7468, respectively, which are relatively small. The results show that the hybrid ANN model developed is highly capable of predicting invisible data within the scope of their independent capabilities.

Fig. 9
figure 9
Fitted line of 24 experimental data points with the corresponding forecasted values

Full size image
Comparison of the predictions with existing design provisions and ANN model
The results obtained from the hybrid ANN model are compared with the traditional Japanese [14], UK [15], Italian [16], Canadian [17, 18], and USA [19] design provisions and Naderpour et al. [30] ANN model. In this comparison, all factors used in the prediction equations are considered equal to 1.0. The mean, standard deviation, coefficient of variations, R, RMSE, MAE, and FB of the predictions are shown in Table 3. One can see that the mean of the proposed model is very close to 1.0. The mean and standard deviations are 1.02 and 28%, respectively. Although the STDV of BISE [15] is lower than the proposed model, the mean value is higher than the proposed model. However, the values of R, RMSE, and MAE are the lowest than other traditional methods. The MAPE value is also the lowest of the other methods except for BISE [15] which is slightly lower than the proposed method. Moreover, if the absolute FB≤0.5, the performance of the model is sufficient [66]. The proposed model FB value is 0.00, which is lower than other methods suggesting more reliable in prediction. On the other hand, although the RMSE value of Naderpour et al. [30] model is lower than the proposed model, the MAE value is higher than the proposed model. Hence, it can be argued that the proposed hybrid model predicts the results more accurately than the other available methods.

Table 3 Comparison of the predictions (𝑉exp/𝑉pred)
Full size table
The plots in Fig. 10 show the variation in experimental to the predicted shear strengths for different models. The trendline of the predictions as well as 45° lines that pass through the origin is also plotted for comparison. The R2 values of the trendline for different models are shown in the plots. It can be observed that there are noticeable deviations between the trendlines and 45° lines for all models except the BISE and the proposed HI-ANN model. However, the HI-ANN model shows a better match than that of the BISE model. Recently, it has been reported that the value of R2 is equal to 0.93 using ANN [30]. The proposed hybrid ANN-BOA shows the highest R2 value (equal to 0.94) among all the reported models.

Fig. 10
figure 10
Plot of experimental (𝑉exp) to the predicted shear strength (𝑉pred): a JSCE, b BISE, c CNR-DT 203, d CHBDC, e CSA S806-12, f ACI 440.1R-15, and g proposed model

Full size image
Conclusions
Herein, the development of a hybrid intelligence model using ANN-BOA for estimating the shear resistance of FRP reinforced members, having no stirrups, has been presented.

The hyperparameters were tuned using BOA to find the optimized ANN model. A comprehensive database collected from the literature was utilized to develop the model. The accuracy of the model was evaluated using different statistical/performance evaluating parameters such as MAE, R, MAPE, RMSE, and FB. The values of these parameters were calculated to be 0.969, 7.895, 12.866, 17.062, and − 0.0046, respectively, which indicate that the model predictions are excellent. A comparative study of the model with major design codes and guidelines of Japan, the UK, Italy, Canada, and the USA was conducted. The shear strength evaluated by CHBDC (2010) showed the most deviation as compared to the experimental results. In contrast, the shear strength generated from the numerical model proposed by BISE (199) showed less deviance. Among the existing six numerical models, the proposed hybrid intelligence model (ANN-BOA) predicted shear strength showed an excellent alignment having an angle of nearly 45º and R2 value of 0.94 with that of the experimental values. This value is also higher than the corresponding value of Naderpour et al. [30] proposed ANN model. The developed hybrid model has also been validated further with extra 24 data. Overall results revealed that the proposed hybrid model predictions are better than the other models. The use of this model in structural design will provide economic and safe design compared to some of the existing methods. Further investigation is needed to simplify and improve this ANN model for a structural designer and to incorporate it in the design codes.

Keywords
Hybrid intelligence
Artificial neural network
Bayesian optimization algorithm
Reinforced concrete
Shear capacity
Fiber reinforced polymer