Vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) and the services they support are an essential part of intelligent
transportation. Through physical technologies, applications, protocols, and standards, they help to ensure
traffic moves efficiently and vehicles operate safely. This article surveys the current state of play in VANETs
development. The summarized and classified include the key technologies critical to the field, the resourcemanagement and safety applications needed for smooth operations, the communications and data transmission protocols that support networking, and the theoretical and environmental constructs underpinning
research and development, such as graph neural networks and the Internet of Things. Additionally, we
identify and discuss several challenges facing VANETs, including poor safety, poor reliability, non-uniform
standards, and low intelligence levels. Finally, we touch on hot technologies and techniques, such as reinforcement learning and 5G communications, to provide an outlook for the future of intelligent transportation
systems.
CCS Concepts: • Networks → Network architectures; Network protocols; Network security;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Vehicular ad hoc networks, VANETs, machine learning, deep learning,
graph neural networks, reinforcement learning, emergency message broadcast
1 INTRODUCTION
As the latest achievement in the Internet of Things (IoT), vehicular ad hoc networks
(VANETs) are an essential part of modern intelligent transportation systems. They are tomorrow’s control centers of urban traffic management, distributing information between vehicles,
infrastructure, and authorities to ensure safe, efficient, and comfortable driving experiences for
everyone on the road [4, 20, 23, 48, 49, 53, 55, 80, 96, 146]. Much research has been done to develop VANETs to where they are today. However, there is much, much more still to do. Hence, as
a guide for new researchers in this emerging field, this survey provides a detailed overview of the
past, present, and future of VANETs research and development. We summarize and categorize the
theory and practice of research to date, identify several challenges currently facing VANETs, and
discuss the technologies and techniques that will underpin the likely future of intelligent transportation systems. To begin the survey, this introduction provides a primer on VANETs, followed
by a brief history of intelligent transport systems, and the key research topics that have occupied
interest in the field.
The services VANETs provide range from traffic forecasting [40, 98] and resource scheduling [74,
120] to accurate positioning [167, 168] and emergency message broadcasting [2, 73], from intersection management [6, 19] to vehicle security and early warning systems for faults or breaches [111,
139]. Additionally, VANETs are the orchestrators that prevent collisions between autonomous vehicles [93]. All these services depend on communication and data exchange both between vehicles
and between vehicles and other infrastructure. Hence, communication protocols, data formats, and
standards to ensure compatibility between the diverse entities populating VANETs are important
aspects of this field.
Beyond improving traffic safety and efficiency, VANETs have much to offer. For a start, improving traffic safety and efficiency both have significant economic impacts. Additionally, VANETS
can help to reduce energy consumption—a point that has attracted a great deal of interest from
governments, industry, and academia the world over. The US, the EU, and Japan are just some of
the regions involved in developing VANETs and other advancements in intelligent transportation.
For example, as far back as 1991, the U.S. Congress passed the Intelligent Vehicle Highway
Systems (IVHS) plan, which called for the Department of Transportation (US DoT) to study
how VANETs might be used to improve traffic safety, increase road efficiency, and reduce the environmental pollution associated with fossil fuels. By 1996, the US had established the “Intelligent
Transportation System (ITS) Standards Program.”
Over the next two decades, researchers and innovators would develop a host of disparate systems and technologies spanning everything from speed cameras to driverless cars, and, gradually,
these innovations coalesced into larger, more collaborative IoT-style systems. In 2014, the US
DoT’s ITS joint program office released its strategic plan for the next 5 years (2015–2019). The
aims were simple and forthright: improve vehicle and road safety, increase vehicle efficiency, and
reduce the environmental impact of road transportation. The suggested priorities for achieving
these goals included better collision avoidance algorithms, better management measures, and
better communication mechanisms. In the next few years, the EU would also issue its strategy,
calling for large-scale, co-operative intelligent transport across Europe by 2019. Again, improving
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:3
communications was a prominent concern, with calls for advances in both vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications. Japan’s goals included stepping
up its development of VANETs and automation technologies and a specific objective to build
a world-leading intelligent transportation system before 2020. China joined the suit in 2017,
when its Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) issued guidelines to
establish a national system of industrial standards to support assisted and autonomous driving.
The guidelines call for standards over low-level autonomous driving to be in place by 2020,
followed by standards for high-level autonomous driving in 2025. High-level driving functions
include intelligent, automatic vehicle controls; network-based collaborative decision-making; and
technical requirements related to scenario-specific driving.
With the world’s richest nations all publicly professing capital investments into intelligent
transport systems over the coming years—both financial and intellectual—it is unsurprising that
VANETs have developed into a major research area in recent years. To date, most of the theoretical research on VANETs has focused on three key issues: methods of information collection and
transmission; modes of intelligent decision-making by vehicles and roadside units; and solutions
to the instability of communications.
As evidenced by the focus given to improving communications technologies in national strategies, network instability is one of the biggest challenges facing VANETs. Because vehicles move,
the topological structures in VANETs are constantly changing. Hence, interruptions and failed connections would be the norm without innovations to ensure otherwise. Among the studies on this
issue, Al-Sultan et al. [7] start from the ground up, outlining the features, functions, and communication modes of application units, roadside units, and on-board units. Cooper et al. [30] explore
clustering techniques for VANETs, summarizing how they can be applied to solve the problems of
routing protocol stability and scalability.
Notable studies on information collection and decision-making include Bila et al. [16], who
summarize the various methods VANETs rely on to detect vehicles, roads, and pedestrians. Additionally, they outline methods of collision avoidance using information and communication
technologies and conduct an in-depth analysis of VANETs’ security mechanism based on visual
and sensor data. Taking a different angle, Hasrouny et al. [42] focus on the characteristics, challenges, and requirements of VANET security, analyzing network attack models and corresponding solutions for the Internet of Vehicles. In meta-research, Eze et al. [35] review the research
status of VANETs in terms of concepts, application, and research difficulties, while Karagiannis et al. [52] investigate the history of and civic interest in intelligent transportation systems
starting with the Internet of Vehicles right through to projects pursued by the US, the EU, and
Japan.
In short, the literature so far has only extended to a few aspects of VANETs. There is a great
deal more that needs to be done on these and other topics, such as collaborative data acquisition
for vehicles, data transmission, diverse network representations, AI integration and learning techniques, possible future directions of development, and so on. This is something we seek to rectify
with this article. We hope that this guide for new researchers will inform and inspire keen interest
in VANETs.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews applications in the two most
common objectives of VANETs—efficiency and safety—and Section 3 summarizes the key technologies associated with data collection and transmission, routing protocols, and emergency message
broadcasting. The current challenges facing the field are discussed in Section 4, and Section 5 outlines some potential future directions of research. The article concludes in Section 6 with a brief
summary of the content covered.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:4 Z. Xia et al.
2 COMMON APPLICATIONS
The ultimate goal of VANETs is to improve traffic efficiency and ensure safer travel. Largely, these
objectives are accomplished through applications. Applications oriented toward efficiency mainly
include traffic forecasting and resource scheduling, while safety-oriented applications include accurate positioning, intersection management, cooperative adaptive cruise control, vehicle safety
early warning, and automatic driving.
2.1 Efficiency-Oriented Applications
Traffic forecasting and resource scheduling are complex tasks, which means that traditional machine learning methods often fail to extract the correct or enough spatial and temporal features to
support predictions. Graph neural networks (GNNs), however, can be used to deal with complex, non-linear data structures [70, 106, 116]. Hence, many researchers are turning to these techniques. To date, GNNs have been used to analyze problems with traffic forecasting, resource scheduling, resource allocation efficiency, waste reduction, and energy consumption [14, 17, 18, 41, 57,
121, 135, 153, 170].
GNN uses in traffic forecasting: Timely and accurate traffic forecasting is crucial because it
provides drivers and route planners with accurate navigation, scheduling, and flow control, which
is the very basis of an intelligent transportation system. Traffic forecasting means to predict future
traffic flows in terms of speed, volume, and/or density [33, 75, 134, 148, 154]. Forecasts can be shortterm (5–30 min) or medium-to-long term (over 30 min). Medium-to-long term forecasts fall into
two main categories: dynamic modeling and data-driven methods.
Dynamic modeling uses differential equations and physical knowledge to describe simulations
of traffic problems. For this reason, dynamic modeling typically rests on an enormous amount of
programming and consumes a significant amount of computing power. Importantly, invalid assumptions can significantly reduce the accuracy of predictions, so solid reasoning and meticulous
rigor are essential with this type of forecasting.
Data-driven methods mostly rely on machine learning techniques, which make predictions
about traffic. For example, Li et al. [63] developed a diffusion convolutional recurrent neural
network (DCRNN), driven by machine learning, that regards traffic flow as a diffusion process
on a directed graph. DCRNNs calculate spatial correlations via bidirectional random walks on a
graph. An encoder-decoder architecture with scheduled sampling then captures temporal correlation to improve prediction accuracy. Any data available for collection is represented as weighted
graph д = (n, e,W ), where n is a set of graph nodes, e is a set of graph edges, and W is a weight
matrix. Formally, let X represent the graph signal of traffic flow, which is observed on д. The traffic
flow obtained on д is represented by X, and X(t) is the graph signal obtained at time t. The goal
of the prediction exercise is to derive a function f (·) that maps the historical graph signals N  to
future graph signals N, given a graph д:

X(t−N
+1)
,...,X(t)
; }
 f (·)
−→
X(t+1)
,...,X(t+N )

. (1)
Bing Yu et al.’s [147] solution to predicting traffic flow involved a deep learning framework based
on a spatio-temporal graph convolution network (STGCN). The task is set out on a graph,
and the model is constructed through a full convolution structure, resulting in an approach that is
very fast to train and requires fewer parameters than other convolution networks. As illustrated in
Figure 1, the data in the STGCN Vt can be either a directed or an undirected graph, with or without
a weight Wij , that is divided into frames. Each frame shows the traffic status at at a timestep t.
The application of GNNs in resource scheduling: Vehicle demand forecasting can help cities
pre-allocate resources to meet their citizens’ travel needs while also minimizing wasted resources.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.      
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:5
Fig. 1. Graph-structured traffic data.
With the growing popularity of vehicle and bike sharing, accurately predicting market demands
is becoming more important.
Traditional demand forecasting for vehicles mainly depends on time series [115, 157, 158] forecasting. However, modeling complex data with non-linear time-space relationships is not feasible
with this approach. Hence, Huaxiu Yao et al. [144] designed a deep multi-view spatial-temporal
network (DMVST-Net) framework that jointly considers spatial, temporal, and semantic relations. The DMVST-Net constructs a regional map of vehicle demand based on the similarity of
demand patterns, then makes predictions about the number of taxis that will be needed in various
locations within a given time interval. To better manage bike-sharing systems, Chai et al. [22] presented a new multi-graph CNN to predict bike demand at the station level. In the model, the nodes
of the graph are stations and the edge reflects a relationship between stations, e.g., where a bike
may be picked up from one station and dropped off at another. Multiple graphs are constructed
to reflect heterogeneous relationships, such as vehicle distance, driving record correlation, and so
on. Lin et al. [65], similarly, introduced a data-driven, graph-based CNN model that forecasts bike
demands at the station level on an hourly basis. This work was particularly impressive because the
bike-sharing network discussed was very large-scale and many of the relations between stations
were hidden, and so needed to be extracted.
2.2 Safety-Oriented Applications
Most applications concerned with making vehicle operations safer involve some form of data
transmission—whether about the prevailing traffic conditions or the behavior of the driver or vehicle. Many safety applications are designed to work in IoT environments. Therefore, the section
begins with a discussion on these types of applications before moving on to other types of safety
applications.
2.2.1 Safety Applications for IoT Environments. As the number of vehicles on the streets has
increased, so too has public attention toward driving safety. Several IoT sensor devices [54, 95,
118, 155] have been developed to resolve unsafe driving behaviors, such sensors that analyze the
way a driver operates their vehicle and then provide feedback to help drivers change problematic
behavior.
Drunk, drowsy, and distracted driving are the main causes of traffic accidents. To combat
these three behaviors, algorithms have been used to assess driver behavior as they drive through
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:6 Z. Xia et al.
in-vehicle perception technology. Such technology automatically evaluates and provides feedback
to drivers, reducing traffic accidents. As powerful tools with rich internal sensors, smartphones can
be used to detect all aspects of human behavior, including while driving. For example, Mariakakis
et al. [81] use a support vector machine (SVM) coupled with smartphones that collect data from
a driver’s smartwatch to predict and prevent drunk driving. Similarly, Xie et al. [138] proposed a
drowsy driving detection system called D3 guard, which uses acoustic sensors embedded in smartphones to detect when a driver may be tired. More specifically, the sensors look for Doppler shift
effects known to be caused by nodding, yawning, and operating the steering wheel in particular
ways, then D3 guard uses that data plus an LSTM neural network to build a personalized drowsy
driving detector based on the driver’s unique habits. Hong et al. [45], too, built a sensing platform
based on smartphones and cheap sensors. Their model identifies aggressive driving by collecting
data on vehicle speed, acceleration, deceleration, and steering wheel movements.
2.2.2 Other Safety Applications. Other safety applications include precise positioning systems,
intersection management, cooperative adaptive cruise control, early warning systems, and emergency message broadcasting, among others.
Vehicle positioning applications [58, 60, 79, 101] can locate a vehicle in real time and reflect
its trajectory on an electronic map. However, one familiar and frequently used backbone to these
applications, GPS, has many disadvantages, including blind spots, unstable satellite signals, and
poor accuracy. As a result, contemporary position applications combine GPS with a VANET for
much more precise positioning. Interestingly, traffic lights are often used as noise reference points
to increase the accuracy of GPS positioning. Pedestrian detection is a related technology, which
commonly includes further integrations of vehicular radar or on-board cameras.
Given its role in reducing traffic congestion and accidents, intersection management has become a hot topic of research in the field of VANETs. Intersections are the main places where traffic
congestion and traffic accidents occur and, at present, most intersections are governed by traffic
lights with fixed timing controls. Lights change from red to green and back again as they were
programmed no matter the present traffic conditions. The result is often congestion and low vehicle throughput. However, once all vehicles are able to exchange data on their speed, locations,
and other motion states through V2I or V2V communications, VANETs will be able to govern extremely high throughput intersections. Further, once autonomous vehicles become the only cars
on the road, traffic lights will not even be needed [32, 61, 82, 132, 149, 163]. Liu et al. [69] proposed
a cooperative scheduling mechanism for intersections called TP-AIM. TP-AIM collects information about the surrounding vehicles, assigns the appropriate priority for all vehicles present, and
plans an optimal route to the specified destination to ensure safety and reduce latency. Similarly,
Wu et al. [133] proposed an autonomous intersection management system to replace conventional
traffic control strategies. The system models vehicles that are driving through the intersection as
sequences in a multi-agent Markov decision process. In this way, vehicles collaborate to move
through the intersection, without colliding, in a way that minimizes delays. Note that the communication and computation technologies of automated vehicles are a necessary part of the framework. Cheng et al. [26] devised a system based on deploying a controller at the intersection. The
controller divides all the vehicles in one lane into priority groups according to information exchanged with the vehicle and a fuzzy neural network grouping mechanism. Instructions to pass
through the intersection are dispatched to each group of vehicles in turn via WiFi. This approach
not only reduces vehicle waiting times and reduces congestion, but also provides a fairer passage
through intersections. Improving traffic efficiency with schemes for intelligent intersections such
as this is one of the most important aspects of traffic management.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:7
Cooperative adaptive cruise control, or CACC for short, is basically a networked form of
cruise control [56, 108, 113, 159, 164]. CACC has the potential to address many of the safety, stability, and fuel consumption problems of our current transport systems and, for this reason, it has
been given much attention over the last decade. In normal cruise control, the driver sets the vehicle’s speed and the system automatically maintains that speed by braking and accelerating as
needed [8, 31, 78, 97]. However, with CACC, the vehicles form a platoon and travel at a coordinated speed. The vehicles are generally equipped with radar sensors to measure their distance
from other vehicles, and they are used to collect and share information about surrounding vehicles via V2V. Gao et al. [37] extended adaptive cruise control with a scheme called distributed
adaptive sliding mode control (DASMC). DASMC allows vehicles to interact with other surrounding vehicles using different eigenvalue-bounded topologies. To improve highway safety and
throughput, Amoozadeh et al. [11] suggested a novel CACC system that follows a split, leader
leaves, and follower leaves strategy. Their system can also retransmit messages to improve stability
when communication fails. He et al. [44] proposed a Pareto-based framework to optimize energy
management in CACC applications for hybrid electric vehicles. The method finds an optimal balance between the multiple objectives of energy efficiency, vehicle stability, and safety. To improve
the stability of existing CACC strategies, Gong et al. [38] proposed an adaptive proportionalderivative (PD) controller. The scheme limits the impact of communication failures and, if communications do fail, the PD controller automatically switches to another type of CACC without
exiting the original CACC, thus further increasing the system’s stability.
Early warning systems span a number of needs, from warnings of inclement environmental
conditions to vehicle faults to collision prevention. Early warning systems based on VANETs and
machine learning to detect imminent collisions largely maintain the safety of vehicles and pedestrians by gathering information through V2V communications. However, these systems also frequently incorporate sensor technology, such as lasers, radar, cameras, and other types of optical
sensors [122, 143, 169]. V2V communications is also integral to CACC, assistance with changing
lanes or confluence, and glare reduction.
2.2.3 Emergency Message Broadcasting. Emergency message broadcasting [5, 28, 67, 68, 110,
150] is the basis of national safety systems and VANET safety applications alike. It involves quickly
and reliably broadcasting information about danger to nearby vehicles, while allowing enough
reaction time to take adequate measures to avoid an incident. However, given the stability issues that plague VANETs, transmitting emergency messages to relevant vehicles with surety can
be problematic. The most common and reliable workaround is to broadcast black burst frames,
which is a particular kind of analog signal often used as a reference signal to synchronize video
equipment. This method divides the communication range into segments by sending black-burst
interference frames. A number of different partitioning methods are available, including binary
partition assisted broadcast (BPAB), trinary partitioned black-burst based broadcast protocol (3P3B), and Huffman average coding-based broadcast protocol (HFMAVG). Among the
benefits of black-burst broadcasts, they require no additional infrastructure, and they can identify
unique forwarding relay vehicles, message redundancy is reduced, and improves the employment
of VANETs’ channels.
Naturally, transmission speeds are a vital indicator of a good emergency message broadcasting scheme. The faster the speed, the sooner vehicles will receive the information, and the more
time they will have to react [64]. However, without clear reference in the literature, we compared
the transmission speeds of the three most common emergency message broadcasting protocols—
BPAB, 3P3B, and HFMAVG—in a simulated environment built using the Veins framework. The
scenario involved a SUMO mobile network running the 802.11p protocol. In the experiment, we
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:8 Z. Xia et al.
Fig. 2. Transmission speed on the 3,200 m, two-lane road.
Fig. 3. Transmission speed on the 2000 m, six-lane road.
placed two roads: one that was 3.2 km long with two lanes, and another 2 km long with six lanes.
We then set the maximum vehicle density of passing vehicles per lane to n = 0.3, which matches
the standard capacity of a general urban road at less than 1,100 vehicles per hour. With these parameters in place, we analyzed the speed of message transmissions given different protocols and
n ∈ (0, 0.3).
The results of this experiment are shown in Figures 2 and 3. The horizontal coordinates represent
the density of the lanes and the vertical coordinates chart the average transmission speeds of the
emergency message. As shown in Figure 2, messages traveled fastest on the two-lane road at a
density of 0.16. The average propagation velocities were 3P3B: 4.95 × 106 m/s; BPAB: 4.58 × 106
m/s; and HFMAVG: 5.4 × 106 m/s. Figure 3 shows that, on a six-lane road, transmission speeds
peaked at a density of 0.08. The average speeds for each protocol were 3P3B: 4.51 × 106 m/s, BPAB:
4.26 × 106 m/s; and Huffman: 5.34 × 106 m/s.
According to these results, black-burst transmission speeds decrease as the number of lanes
increase. Notably, advances in 5G communications may see improvements in the timeliness and
reliability of emergency message broadcasting.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:9
Fig. 4. The architecture of a typical VANET: Vehicles are equipped with application and on-board units,
cameras, sensors, and/or other devices that collect road and traffic information, such as the IDs, types, positions, distances, and so forth, of other vehicles. These data are then transmitted to the other vehicles as
well as to network applications to improve vehicle safety and efficiency. More specifically: (a) devices on the
vehicles collect data; (b) these data are transmitted to other vehicles according to routing protocols; (c) transmissions are sent through 4G/5G broadband, satellite internet, WiFi, and so forth. Data exchange between
vehicles is referred to as V2V communications, and exchanges between vehicles and infrastructure are referred to as V2I communications. (d) Network security protocols surrounding data transmission protect the
security and integrity of the data and the system.
3 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INTO KEY VANETS TECHNOLOGIES
Like its applications, the key technologies surrounding VANETs support its goals of improving
efficiency in urban transportation systems, reducing the incidence of traffic accidents, and reducing energy consumption. Further, VANETs will be foundational to the smart city of tomorrow. As
shown in Figure 4, the main components of a VANET include vehicle information collection [112],
data transmission [1], routing protocols [51, 85], security mechanisms [59, 77, 88, 90], and practical applications, or services [21, 103, 152]. Application, on-board, and roadside units commonly
comprise GPS, radars, cameras, and sensors. After acquiring vehicle information, these entities use
4G/5G, satellite Internet and ZigBee to exchange data following the appropriate routing protocols
via either V2V or V2I communication.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:10 Z. Xia et al.
Fig. 5. Inter-vehicle communications: Vehicles exchange data with other vehicles or a roadside unit.
3.1 Information Collection
Information about a vehicle’s status can be gathered through application units, on-board units,
road-side units, cameras, sensors, GPS devices, radar, and so forth. Once gathered, the data are
sent to their destination via a routing protocol [34]. There are two categories of data exchange:
in-vehicle and inter-vehicle. In-vehicle communication concerns the data a vehicle gathers about
itself, such as the vehicle’s own position and speed. This type of data is generally transmitted to
a safe or efficient application. Inter-vehicle data pertains to road traffic information and is most
commonly used to assist with collision avoidance, passing assistance, and platooning [50]. A diagram showing the various types of information exchange is provided in Figure 5. In either V2V or
V2I communications, data can be exchanged via 4G, 5G, satellite internet, a roadside unit, and so
forth.
Vehicle position tracking is mostly handled by GPS in conjunction with the VANET. Relevant
data about the vehicle’s position in three-dimensional space, plus its direction, speed, and the time
are conveyed in a short message from a satellite and displayed on a map. Although GPS does not
work indoors or in tunnels, and it is prone to errors, its low cost, established infrastructure, and
global coverage still make it the first choice for vehicle positioning.
To increase the accuracy of GPS and overcome blind spots, VANETs can use roadside units, radar
detectors, and cameras installed on the vehicle in tandem with GPS. Radar can be used to detect
targets, and calculate distances and velocities for obstacle discovery, collision prediction, adaptive
cruise control, and reversing assistance. The signal return times are processed using the beam to
encounter the obstacle back measurement and high-precision maps are generated to reflect the
characteristics of the surrounding environment. With the advantages of real-time, high precision,
strong resistance to environmental interference, high security, and adaptability to all-day climate
change, radar is an essential supplement to GPS and sensors and a critical element of autonomous
driving.
Sensors may be, arguably, the most accessible and convenient way to collect accurate and reliable information. Sensors can be internal or external to a vehicle. They can also be equipped to
roadside units. Vehicle sensors can collect information on factors such as a vehicle’s speed, distance
traveled, distance to objects, pressure, temperature, and other engine indicators, as well as providing drivers with information about the current conditions surrounding the vehicle. Sensors also
play an integral role in many safety applications, especially collision avoidance and autonomous
driving. Internal sensors are typically used to detect engine temperature, oil pressure, battery, fuel
consumption, and so on, while the main purpose of external sensors is to gather information about
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:11
traffic and weather conditions, other vehicles, and pedestrians. External sensors often measure indicators like temperature, pressure, speed, energy consumption, acceleration, and radiation. Many
sensors combined can provide a holistic picture of the drivers, vehicles, and environmental conditions of an entire transportation system. Hence, sensors have played a key role in the development
of VANETs.
Application units are devices that provide services and can communicate with on-board units.
They might be a user device, like a smartphone or tablet, that draws from one or more on-board
units to provide a service, such as emergency vehicle warnings. Some applications, such as collision
avoidance application, package the application unit and the on-board unit together in one physical
unit. The application unit provides the services and the on-board unit manages all communication
functions and liaises with the network.
On-board units are communication devices, designed for short-distance communication following the WAVE standard. A unique property of on-board units is that they can spontaneously form
a self-organizing network to exchange information between vehicles without the need for other
infrastructure [137]. On-board units generally consist of a GPS, a communications unit, sensors,
and an audio and video processing module. Because communication can only occur over short distances, vehicles are, all at once, transmitters, receivers, relays, and routers, transmitting packets
of data through a forwarding mechanism. The strategy provides for highly accurate vehicle positioning information over long distances and supports two-way V2V and V2I communication. This
system can also broadcast information such as a vehicle’s speed and acceleration, provide services
for vehicle platooning and CACC, and play a role in vehicle security and early warning systems,
auxiliary systems. As with most VANET elements, on-board units are also key to autonomous
driving.
Roadside units are the single biggest contributor to improving VANET stability and expanding
their data transmission range. In a sea of high-speed, frequently shifting network entities, roadside
units are a fixed anchor for nearby vehicles to access many different kinds of communications
and networking services. Roadside units are a type of network device, specifically designed for
short-distance communications using the 802.11P protocol. They can serve as routers, data buffers,
and servers; they can also provide or relay various types of information to vehicles on the road.
Roadside units are a crucial component of VANET services like traffic and accident warnings,
emergency messaging services, and electronic tolling.
3.2 Wireless Access Technology
In their current implementations, many wireless access technologies are simply used to provide
the wireless interfaces needed for vehicles for V2I, V2V, and D2D communications. These modes
of communication form the basis of all network cooperation. The main different types of wireless
access technology include mobile network access, vehicle network access, and short-range communications, as shown in Figure 6, and the main network technologies are mobile (cellular) networks, WiFi, WiMAX (world interoperability for microwave access), Bluetooth, ZigBee, and DSRC
(dedicated short-range communications). Of these, cellular networks, WiFi, and WiMAX depend on centralized infrastructure to coordinate communication between nodes, while Bluetooth,
Zigbee, and DSRC use a distributed coordination mode to communicate.
3.2.1 Mobile Networks. Perhaps better known as 2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G, a mobile network is a
hardware architecture for mobile communications. Mobile networks usually consist of a mobile
station, a base station subsystem, and a network subsystem, which together provide many advantages, such as frequency reuse, wide transmission range, strong reliability, and high security.
WiMAX is a high-speed wireless data network standard based on IEEE 802.16 that is mainly used
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:12 Z. Xia et al.
Fig. 6. The different types of wireless network technologies.
in urban area networks. Its advantages include a high data transmission rate, a wider transmission distance, better reliability, and wider bandwidth for higher quality communication. WiMAX
can transmit at up to 35 Mbps over 15 km, and so is mainly used for multimedia, video, and language applications. Satellite internet combines satellite communication with optical fibers on the
ground to provide wireless access for either V2I or V2V. With downstream data speeds of up to 506
Mbit/s and a communication range of between 100 m and 6,000 km, satellite internet access enjoys a broad coverage area and high reliability, making this access technology good for expanding
the transmission range of a VANET or providing VANET services for remote villages. However,
its disadvantages can include long transmission delays, high construction costs, and the need for
complex control systems.
3.2.2 Vehicle Networks. Network communications can be sent through a wide range of
schemes, such as mobile terminals or wireless local area networks. DSRC is an on-board communications technology based on IEEE 802.11p that supports vehicles moving at speeds of up to
200 Km/h with a range of 300 m–1,000 m. Data rates can exceed 27 Mbps. The advantages of
DSRC include mobility support and low communication delays. Continuous Air-interface, Long
and Medium range, or CALM for short, is a standard for networking within the ISO TC204/WG16
suite of guidelines. CALM stipulates a frequency of 5.9 GHz for seamless connectivity between
vehicles and roadside systems.
3.2.3 Short-Range Communications. WiFi, also known as WLAN, follows the IEEE 802.11a standard for wireless network connections at a frequency of 5 GHz. Supporting data transmission rates
of up to 54 Mbps and a communications range of between 30 m and 140 m, WiFi can be used for
either V2I or V2V. It has a wider bandwidth, stronger RF signals, and lower power consumption
than other access technologies, but its disadvantages are low security and a limited transmission
range.
ZigBee is a close proximity ad hoc wireless network based on IEEE 802.15.4 that is used to
transmit sensor data in VANETs. Zigbee can also estimate the position coordinates of vehicles in
a VANET. Its communication range is in the order of 10 m–100 m, and the data rate is 250 kbit/s.
It is highly secure, has low power consumption, and is cost-effective. But its short transmission
distance and low data transmission rates are disadvantages.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:13
Table 1. The Optimal Wireless Protocols for Different Types of Applications in a VANET
Application
Type Example Services
Optimal Wireless
Access
Technology
Technical
Requirements
Preventive
Lane change assistance
Adaptive cruise
Misalignment warning
DSRC Low delay High stability
Data transfer rate
Warning
Automatic braking,
emergency Electronic
braking Dangerous
location notification
DSRC Low delay High stability
Data transfer rate
Navigation
Real-time traffic
information Parking space
search Vehicle location
DSRC Mobile support Privacy
protection
Teleservice
Remote locking Vehicle
diagnosis Notification of
interest points
4G/5G
Long communication
range High data
transmission rate
Scalability
Entertainment Music download Online
radio Location sharing WiFi Data transmission rate
Mobile support Scalability
Bluetooth is another widely used standard for short-range communications. A consumeroriented protocol, Bluetooth is often used for in-vehicle communications, such as navigating via
GPS, streaming services, or allowing phone calls via the in-car interface. Its operating range is
10 m–100 m, and its connection speeds can reach up to 24 Mbps. Bluetooth is low-cost, easy to
deploy, and is very robust to interference. However, it only operates over short distances and it
suffers greatly from incompatibility issues, which makes it a poor tool for network-building.
These communication technologies differ in data rates, communication ranges, mobile support,
communication latency, security support, and scalability. Hence, application developers must be
careful to match the technical characteristics of the wireless access technology used for the service requirements of the application. Table 1 shows the best type of wireless network to use for
different types of applications. Safety applications, such as lane change assistance, adaptive cruise,
and warning applications like emergency electronic brakes and hazard location alerts can improve
driving safety, but they require low latency and a stable data transmission rate. For this reason,
DSRC is usually preferred. DSRC is also preferred for navigation applications, such as parking
space searching and vehicle positioning, which both require high privacy protection. For remote
services involving vehicle diagnosis and point of interest notification, 4G/5G or other mobile networks are the common options. For music downloads, online radio, and other entertainment apps,
which tend to be data-intensive, WiFi is usually chosen.
3.3 Routing Protocols
As mentioned, vehicles move means VANETs topologies change frequently and rapidly, and communications and data exchange across the network is notoriously unstable as a result. Hence,
methods to ensure reliable, real-time exchanges between vehicles have been the focus of many
studies. Among the solutions, effective routing protocols are a key contributor to improving the
speed and reliability of data transmission in VANETs [100, 102, 124].
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:14 Z. Xia et al.
Table 2. The Comparison of VANETs Routing Protocols
Protocol Objective Forwarding
Decision
MapBased
Delay
Tolerant
Network
Type
Classification
Criteria
GSR Minimize delay Source-route,
greedy Yes No V2V Geographic
information
IDTAR Minimize delay Source-route Yes No V2V Geographic
information
LBRP Minimize delay Source-route Yes No V2I, V2V Position-based
ESRA-MD Minimize delay Table-based No No V2I Geographic
information
PassCAR Improve stability,
minimize delay Table-based No No V2V Cluster-based
CBLTR Improve stability Table-based No Yes V2V Cluster-based
CCRM Improve stability Table-based No Yes V2I Cluster-based
GPSR Shortest distance Table-based No V2I, V2V Greedy-based
GNGR Minimize delay,
improve stability Table-based No No V2I, V2V Greedy-based
TGF Minimize delay Table-based No No V2I, V2V Greedy-based
BTSC Improve stability Source-route Yes Yes V2V Bus-based
Velar Minimize delay Source-route Yes Yes V2V Bus-based
GeoMob Minimize delay Source-route Yes No V2I, V2V Bus-based
PROPHET Minimize delay Source-route No Yes V2I, V2V Greedy-based
CAREFOR Minimize delay Source-route,
greedy No Yes V2I, V2V Greedy-based
MOPR Improve stability Table-based Yes No V2V Link
stability-based
VHRP Improve stability Table-based No No V2I, V2V Link
stability-based
In reviewing the literature, we find routing protocols have been classified according to many different factors. However, the majority base their categories on the topological structure and types
of information considered in routing decisions. Wang et al. [117] divide routing protocols this way
into those based on topology, location, cluster, broadcast, and geography. Zheng et al. [166], however, propose a more comprehensive classification system based on whether the communication
is V2V or V2I. In this article, we have based our classifications on the routing policy and method
of data propagation. Table 2 presents a summary of representative protocols.
3.3.1 Policy-Based Protocols. The main types of policy-based routing strategies are based on
location, clustering, or greedy algorithms, as shown in Figure 7.
Location-based protocols: Location-based routing protocols use a vehicle’s self-configuring
positioning mechanism and GPS to determine its location from road maps. Then, suitable vehicles
are selected for data forwarding according to that location to reduce delays and improve the stability of data exchange. The GSR protocol defines city intersections as vertices in a model and streets
as edges, while the Dijkstra algorithm finds the shortest path through which to forward a message.
In message forwarding, intermediate vehicles act as a local cache and carry data forward as a proxy
for normal direct transmission [89]. The IDTAR protocol [3] selects the appropriate intersection
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:15
Fig. 7. Routing protocol classifications given different routing policies.
through which to transfer the data according to a vehicle density coefficient and the distance to
the data packet destination, while the LBRP protocol developed by Hu et al. [46] is based on link
lifecycle awareness for large-capacity content transmission. The vehicles make routing decisions
about forwarding messages using a semi-Markov model that calculates transmission times and delays based on message headers, and the current speed and location of the vehicles in the network.
Since vehicle movement is usually two-way and limited to the road infrastructure, any information directly relevant to location is of vital importance to decisions made in location-based routing
protocols.
Cluster-based routing protocols: Routing protocols based on clustering group network nodes
into a cluster according to some characteristic, such as node degree, lifecycle, the distance between
nodes, and so forth. Throughput and stability are then improved by forwarding data based on
the clustering partition and layering characteristics. For example, in the PassCAR protocol [13]
a combination of the node degree, expected transmission quantity, and lifecycle of multi-metric
selection strategy are applied to determine the cluster head, before forming a stable and reliable
cluster structure for data forwarding. The CBLTR protocol [125] first defines the range of the cluster, before calculating the lifecycle of the vehicle according to the vehicle speed and the distance of
the cluster boundary. The vehicle with the longest lifecycle is taken as the cluster head to improve
the duration and stability of the connection. The CCRM routing protocol [62] divides vehicles into
two groups: those with a relative distance of less than half the communication range and a trajectory of less than 45 degrees and connection time is less than threshold into a group, calculating
to choose nodes with high stability and more connecting members as cluster heads. To maintain
network topologies in a 5G network, the cluster heads are periodically exchanged with others on
a membership list gathered together based on status information, base stations, and neighboring
cluster heads. Overall, cluster-based routing protocols can simplify network topologies and improve throughput and stability. Moreover, they are suitable for large-scale network environments.
Greedy protocols: Routing protocols based on greedy algorithms construct the best path from
the source node to the destination given distance, delay, location information, and other metrics.
The GPSR routing algorithm, which uses a greedy forwarding algorithm to establish its route, is a
typical example of a greedy routing protocol. With this protocol, the nearest node to the destination
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:16 Z. Xia et al.
Fig. 8. Routing protocol classification given different data propagation.
node is selected as the next hop for routing and forwarding, and the process is repeated until all
the data is transferred to the destination. GNGR greedy routing [9] searches for the shortest path
from the node to the destination by forwarding packets to all nodes within transmission range.
This serves to reduce data transmission delay and improve both the data transmission rates and the
stability of the algorithm. The TGF routing protocol [47] searches for the farthest vehicle within
communications range by sending data packets to all reachable nodes. It then uses the farthest
vehicle as a relay node to reduce the number of hops and, in turn, delay between the source and
destination. The TGF algorithm is simple to implement, fast to transmit, and it does not require
too many control packages. In addition, it can improve network throughput, although it cannot
guarantee the best overall performance.
3.3.2 Propagation-Based Protocols. Routing protocols based on data propagation use the road
and bus routes information on maps to construct data transmission paths. In addition to improving
communications efficiency and stability, this approach has the added benefit of reducing the cost
of path recovery. Figure 8 shows the different types of propagation-based routing protocols. These
include protocols based on vehicle trajectories, message forwarding probabilities, and link stability.
Vehicle trajectories: Buses are the most common form of public transport, with nearly every
city and country in the world having some form of bus network, at least over its major traffic
corridors. Hence, it makes sense to equip these buses with on-board units and use them to help
route and relay data across the VANET. Sun et al. [104] developed a street center routing algorithm based on bus routes. The data routing maps are constructed by analyzing the probability
of buses traveling each route. Buses along the selected route(s) are then chosen as relays to help
transmit the data. Vela [151] also designed a routing protocol based on vehicle trajectories extracted from geolocation data. The framework mines the historical trajectories and travel times of
buses as distributions, and uses that knowledge to predict actual traffic patterns given the same
area and time of day. Routes are then propagated based on predicted actual running times and
the probability of encounter. The GeoMob protocol [156] selects routes by analyzing the number
of commuters between different regions coupled with the movement patterns of individual vehicles using geographic location information from smartphones. Paths with low predicted delays
and high transmission rates are chosen. In fact, this is one of the key benefits of trajectory-based
routing protocols. Because they incorporate existing vehicles and roadside units as data relays,
this mode of routing is generally characterized by low transmission delays and high packet rates,
making them suitable for urban traffic environments with large vehicle densities.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:17
Message forwarding probability: Probability-based routing protocols are a recent but promising innovation. They use vehicle dynamics and co-location information, historical encounters
with other vehicles, time-dependencies, plus the distance the message needs to be transmitted
to estimate the probability that a message will be delivered. Co-location information includes the
density of the vehicles and physical distance between neighboring vehicles. Unlike existing carryforward mechanisms, message forwarding protocols use a predefined probability model to improve
the overall performance of the VANET. Lindgren et al.’s [66] PROPHET protocol is one example.
PROPHET, which stands for probabilistic routing protocol using history of encounters and transitivity, increases message delivery rates by selecting connected nodes with a higher (probabilistic)
chance of transmitting the message to the final destination given the history of vehicle encounters
and the transitive properties of the message. Mostafa et al. [87] introduced a novel probabilistic
routing protocol called CAREFOR (collision-aware reliable forwarding model) that lowers
packet forwarding collision by using a predefined probability to receive packets and rebroadcast
those packets to neighboring nodes. To calculate the predefined probability, CAREFOR collates
various environmental factors, such as vehicle density, transmission range, and the distance between the sender and receiver. The result is the probability that neighboring vehicles will receive
a message and be able to rebroadcast it.
Link stability: This method improves link stability and consequently lowers the cost of path
recovery, by using information about a vehicle’s movement to predict the duration of a given path
and find a new one before the link is disconnected. MOPR by Menouar et al. [84] is such a method.
It improves the reactive routing process by assembling a routing table with information about
the position, direction, speed, and street information of adjacent vehicles and constructing transmission routes based on forecasts given the information recorded. More specifically, the protocol
calculates the lifetime of a link by searching the routing table for nodes in between the sender and
receiver with similar speeds and directions. It then forecasts the future positions of those vehicles.
Vehicles are included in the link based on their future position and estimated message transmission
times. Taleb et al.’s [107] routing protocol, VHRP, groups vehicles according to their speed (and
direction), on the premise that the groups of vehicles loosely traveling together will lend high stability. To reduce the risk of the link being interrupted if a vehicle leaves the current group, VHRP
sends regular checks to make sure each vehicle is still with the pack.
4 THE CHALLENGES FACING VANETS
As a nascent, dynamic, and highly interdisciplinary field, there are still many challenges to address
in the theory and application of VANETs.
4.1 General Challenges
The main theoretical challenges to overcome include weak network security, poor system reliability, a lack of global standards, and low intelligence levels.
4.1.1 Weak Network Security. The biggest and most urgent challenge facing VANETs is system
security. As self-organizing mobile networks, VANETs are easy targets for hackers [77, 83, 145].
But a vulnerable VANET can place people’s lives at risk or bring a city to its knees through gridlock.
Thus, VANET security is a problem in need of urgent solutions.
The most common modes of attack [94] are location deception, denial of service, attacks on
data integrity, and attacks on authentication and identification. For example, by masquerading as
internal nodes, hackers can send error messages to nearby nodes to consume network bandwidth
or spread false information about busy traffic to obscure or damage the topology of the network.
Adversaries can also inject false information into data packets for a range of nefarious purposes.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:18 Z. Xia et al.
The goal may be to infect neighboring vehicles which are currently acting as relays, or to change
a routing table so as to direct a vehicle into an area without GPS coverage, making a real-world
crime more difficult to trace [15, 48, 99, 114, 131, 141]. A brief description of each type of the main
types of attack follows.
Location deception: Location information is of crucial importance in a VANET and, unfortunately, one of the easiest targets in a network to hack. Location deception consists of forging
identities to provide false location information about a vehicle to its neighboring nodes. The idea
is generally to use the fake position to cause a serious accident.
Denial of service (DoS): Arguably, DoS attacks are the most dangerous and vindictive class
of attacks. The strategy is to bombard the system’s communications channels with so much false
information and transmission activity that service is completely disrupted for legitimate users.
DoS attacks are usually system-wide, meaning they attack both the vehicles and the VANET infrastructure. As such, they are a fatal challenge to overcome.
Attacks on data integrity: Having data integrity means that the complete dataset arrives at
its destination. Hence, attacks on data integrity include modifying, deleting, and adding vehicle
information, usually with the objective of preventing vehicles from accessing application services.
V2V communications are the most vulnerable to this kind of attack because an attacker can simply
drop some data packets during transmission. Modifying a vehicle’s sensors is also an option.
Attacks on authenticity and identification: Authenticity and identification are the first line
of defense for VANETs. All terminals in a VANET should be authorized before accessing services.
However, in authenticity and identification attacks, agents steal information by tampering, manufacturing, altering, masquerading as, and/or deleting vehicle identifiers. The only way to overcome
this type of attack is to ensure that each vehicle in the VANET is authorized and certified.
4.1.2 Poor Reliability. As mentioned, the combination of moving objects and wireless communications in a self-organizing network inevitably makes the topological structures of VANETs
unstable and unreliable. Further, vehicles move quickly, so network topologies change quickly, and
interruptions are common as vehicles switch wireless connection points or try to talk to other vehicles that are no longer in the position they were. Communication paths typically have a very short
lifetime, which affects network reliability. Another weakness in VANETs is that vehicle movements are constrained to the road, which rules out some of the traditional “re-routing” methods
of improving stability. Section 3.3 on the routing protocols discussed some of the different approaches to stabilizing data transmission. However, to improve the reliability of the whole system,
not just data exchange, transmission media, network recovery, and network management must all
be considered.
4.1.3 A Lack of Uniform Standards. VANETs can make urban traffic safer, greener, and more
efficient. However, for every vehicle, roadside unit, application unit, onboard unit, smartphone
and so forth, to be able to connect, uniform international standards are required that all manufacturers and network designers must follow. VANETs need to be as universal as the internet. At
present, two main camps are each for a different set of standards to become the norm. The US DoT
supports DSRC, while China supports the LTE-V2X standard. DSRC is based on IEEE 802.11p and
relies exclusively on radio frequencies to communicate. It supports real-time transmission of images, voice, and data information and recognizes high-speed moving targets in a specific area using
two-way V2V or V2I communication. DSRC has the advantage of low latency and low interference,
but it is only suitable for short-range communications. By comparison, the LTE-V2X standard relies on the existing mobile network and other infrastructure so it can handle both short-distance
and wide-area communications. Its advantages include long-distance coverage, high capacity, high
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:19
reliability, and low delay. However, due to its relative newness, the standards are still being revised
and finessed. Whichever standard emerges as the victor, cooperation between countries and the
support of international organizations will be needed to promote and advance the standards into
a fully supported framework for VANET implementation. Further, as 5G communications technology matures, it will provide better support and more choices for the development of VANETs.
4.1.4 Low Intelligence Levels. Although scholars have been undertaking research into VANETs
for years, relatively little work has been translated into applications and fully popularized. Network stability and interconnectivity have been major roadblocks to progress. However, so has a
lack of basic data on intelligent vehicles. As a result, the intelligence levels of VANETs are rather
low[71, 105, 109, 123, 142, 161]. There is little to no support for functions such as intelligent routing
protocols, traffic forecasting, resource scheduling, malicious activity detection, or network management. The last two decades have seen incredible developments in artificial intelligence, image recognition, pattern recognition, natural language processing, and other similar technologies.
These advances now need to be incorporated into VANETs. More on this issue is discussed in Section 5; however, the foreseeable future of VANET research is heavily bent toward meeting higher
benchmarks for safety and efficiency by integrating intelligent technologies such as autonomous
judgment and real-time decision-making.
4.2 Application Challenges
In keeping with our focus on safety and efficiency, this section is divided into the unique challenges
application designers are facing in meeting these two objectives.
4.2.1 Safety. The biggest challenge facing safety-oriented applications is delays in transmission
times. As a general rule, the faster one receives a warning, the more time one has to react, and the
greater the chance of averting danger. Hence, safety applications are typically highly sensitive to
time delays. Delays can be caused by many things, including changes in the topological structure
of the VANET and long transmission distances. Solutions in the form of better coding or routing
protocols have solved most of the existing problems with delay times. However, contemporary
standards do not yet meet the performance required for emergency messaging. As 5G continues to
develop, with its very low delay times and support for long-distance communications, integrating
VANETs and 5G may change this situation.
4.2.2 Efficiency. Instilling efficiency is heavily dependent on data collection and, more specifically, on extracting as many features as possible from the data collected so as to maximize a model’s
prediction accuracy. Traditionally, data was described in Euclidean space and, while this conceptualization will continue to be commonplace, a growing number of applications are representing data
in non-Euclidean terms, such as via complex graph structure. Prediction techniques for Euclidean
space are well-established; we can use deep learning, support vector machine, XGBoost, and many
other techniques, to build a precise prediction model. For graph data, however, the existing GNN
methods are less developed. For example, it is not always easy to extract spatio-temporal data features from a graph. And directly applying current GNN techniques to heterogeneous graphs containing mixed data types and formats can be problematic. Further, graph structures may change
in a way that makes it difficult for models to adapt.
5 FUTURE DIRECTIONS OF RESEARCH
Advancements in 5G, GNNs, reinforcement learning, deep learning and other future technologies
are constantly providing new research directions for VANETs. 5G is showing promise as a way
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:20 Z. Xia et al.
to improve the quality of service and the reliability of data transmissions, while machine learning is opening avenues for intelligent applications, adaptive network management, and securing
networks. From our analysis of the current development trends in VANETs, in the future, researchers should pay attention to improving security, improving reliability, and raising intelligence, as discussed next.
5.1 Improving Security
VANETs are an immature innovation. As a result, they have low security and tend to be easy targets
for hackers. The most common defense against adversaries is to protect or obscure the information
in the system.
For example, to protect against location spoofing attacks, nodes can be encrypted with anonymous secret keys, pseudonyms, or group signatures [43, 140] that only trusted parties know. The
Bayesian model may also be able to capture the characteristics of the attack by analyzing many
attacks and automatically investigating and filtering malicious queries and wrong locations. Machine learning algorithms, such as decision trees, can help with this filtering process and may also
be able to isolate the attacker and stop their spoof.
Intermediate attacks might be prevented through a cooperative message authentication mechanism. Such mechanisms allow vehicles to use public-key encryption and secret-key encryption
to sign messages. Alternatively, roadside units, which can track vehicles, can be used to detect
improper behavior by nodes via member authentication.
To cope with the information spoofing attacks of the destruction of hardware and software
in VANETs, Wang et al. [119] have proposed a security framework based on group signatures.
The framework can detect nodes that are tampering with software using access control methods
and a probabilistic signature verification scheme. To prevent tampering with hardware, vehicle
data are correlated and cross-validated through a series of rules. In this same vein, other security
frameworks could be developed to protect VANET assets by checking functions like signature
generation and verification, password authorizations, or firewall exceptions [119].
5.2 Improving Reliability
Improving network reliability will rest on better hardware and software designs. Hardware choices
can reduce load capacities and node failures, making data exchange and processing a much more
certain task. Software choices can lower delays and extend transmission ranges to the same end.
One promising hardware innovation is optical devices. Optical devices are cameras and lidar.
They have excellent stability and so work to improve the reliability of network nodes and increase
the network’s capacity for data transmission. This is especially important because VANET applications can generate large amounts of structured and unstructured data.
Hardware architecture is another important element. Existing architectures comprising cellular
networks, roadside units, and vehicles are not capable of handling scalable data efficiently. However, IoT-based edge and fog computing are some appealing strategies for overcoming this issue,
especially when implemented in a distributed architecture that can support different services such
as storage, computation, and communication between the vehicles.
Improving reliability through software will come from better routing protocols or by creating combined software/hardware solutions. For example, 5G enjoys high reliability and low latency, making it a dependable protocol for data transmission. Combining cloud platforms, such as
Hadoop, Amazon’s EC2, Alibaba Cloud, and Azure, to manage distributed hardware can improve
reliability. Moreover, combining AI-driven routing protocols with 5G and a cloud platform can create an open and flexible system to support a variety of powerful safety and efficiency applications.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:21
Table 3. Summary of Machine Learning Algorithms that Could Raise Intelligence in VANETs
Category Task Approach Application
Supervised
learning
Classification
Bayesian classifier Vehicle location prediction;
Network monitoring; Resource
optimization; Link fault
classification; Network error
detection; Traffic classification
Support vector
machine
Neural networks
Binary decision tree
Regression
K-nearest neighbor Traffic forecasting; Interest point
notification; Vehicle status
prediction
Regression tree
LSTM
XGBoost
Reinforcement
learning -
Value iteration Real-time decisions; Skill
acquisition; Personal driving
assistant; Autonomous cars
Policy iteration
Monte Carlo
Unsupervised
learning
Clustering
k-means Recommendation system; System
filtering; Network parameter
configuration; Fault classification
CNNs
DBNs
Generative
adversarial
networks
- Malicious attack detection; Image
generation
Dimensionality
reduction
Principal component
analysis Face recognition
Semisupervised
learning
Classification
GNNs Traffic forecasting; Resource
scheduling GCNs
RGNNs
5.3 Raising Intelligence
Intelligent VANETs can improve vehicle safety, comfort, and energy efficiency—so VANET intelligence is a major trend area for future development. As shown in Table 3, there are many machine learning algorithms that could replace traditional algorithms to boost VANET intelligence.
Machine learning algorithms can be divided into four main groups: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and reinforcement learning. Each type of algorithm has
its strengths and weaknesses and can be used to improve a different aspect of network intelligence
or application service, as the last column in Table 3 shows [10]. In the following sections, we highlight four promising areas of future development that could significantly contribute to raising the
intelligence capacity of VANETs.
Reinforcement learning: In the world of machine learning, improved accuracy and performance means gathering as much data as possible. However, in VANETs, these data are distributed
between vehicles, application units, roadside units, base stations, cloud servers, and so on, and so
cannot be used reliably. Reinforcement learning can aggregate data from the number of source
nodes onto one destination node to provide a solid and sufficient dataset for a machine learning
model [12, 24, 29, 76, 86, 92, 136].
The reinforcement learning tasks can be formalized as follows: Given a tuple R(S,A, ρ, f , R),
where S = {s1,s2,s3 ...st } is the set of environmental states, and st is the state of the agent at time
t; A = {a1, a2, a3 ... at } represents a collection of actions, and at is the action taken by the agent
at time t. ρ is a reward function for executing action at at state st , f is the probability distribution
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021.
37:22 Z. Xia et al.
function of state transition, which represents the probability that the agent performs an action at
the state st to transfer to the next state st+1, R is the reward value obtained by executing action at at
state st . Reinforcement learning is the agent in the state st select action at . The agent then performs
the action and transfers its state from st to the next state of the st+1 with a certain probability f .
The last step is to distribute feedback in the form of rewards Rt . Usually, the reward received in
each timestep is multiplied by a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. Hence, the formula for calculating the
sum of obtained rewards received from time t to time T is
Sum =

T
i=t
Rt−Tγi . (2)
Inspired by recent successes in solving complex control problems through reinforcement learning techniques, we contend that reinforcement learning might also be used to solve routing problems in VANETs. The movements of vehicles could be predicted by employing deep reinforcement
learning, from which a few routing paths with good transmission capacity could be chosen as “pilot
routes.” The idea would be to send packets down these routes to provide in-time routing information. Selecting the forwarding direction between vehicles according to the destination location
and the estimated transmission delays in different directions may also help to lower transmission
delay and improve stability.
Therefore, with the advantages of short training time, moderate data requirements, and high
performance, reinforcement learning might be an excellent model for applications in the area of
autonomous driving, real-time decision-making, congestion control, and intelligent routing.
GNNs: With the rapid development of VANETs, more and more applications are generating
heterogeneous data. However, large-scale data are of little use without effective methods of feature
extraction. GNNs are excellent at capturing temporal and spatial dependence while concurrently
solving dynamic problems. Hence, a key component of future VANET research is highly likely to
involve designing new GNN models.
Network traffic classification: Network traffic classification is the basis of network monitoring, quality of service, and intrusion detection, and is a task that would benefit substantially from
advancements in machine learning [128–130]. Machine learning classifiers, such as Naive Bayes
[126, 127], neural networks [160], and decision trees, could be used to automatically classify network traffic according to any of multiple criteria, e.g., the time interval between packet arrivals,
packet size, cyclic traffic patterns, and so forth [36]. The lack of labeled traffic data currently prevents real-time classification with traditional machine learning techniques. However, there are
many deep learning techniques that can learn features from raw data. The obstacle, therefore, becomes one of resources. Deep learning demands high-performance equipment, but the resources
in VANETs tend to be quite limited. Hence, sleek and efficient deep learning models, specifically
designed to operate on the scant resources of VANETs, will be much needed in the future.
Predicting states in VANETs: Perhaps one of the most significant functions that AI could perform in a VANET going forward is to predict the state of the vehicle. Traditional Bayesian models
can predict the state of the next period according to the current characteristics and feature relationships. However, RNN [27, 162] -based deep learning [165], tree-based XGBoost [25, 91], and
LSTM neural network [39, 72] can improve prediction accuracy to include characteristic dependencies across a relatively long period of time. For example, a deep neural network could be used
to predict the target lane of a vehicle given the vehicle’s status and lane information. These prediction models could also be used to assess future values or states based on past samples. An example
mathematical representation might be
Pˆ = F (At, ρ) + L(., .), (3)
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 12, No. 4, Article 37. Publication date: June 2021. 
A Comprehensive Survey of the Key Technologies and Challenges Surrounding VANETs 37:23
where Pˆ is the prediction value based on the past historical state. At = {At 1,At 2,At 3,...,AtT } is
a set of features extracted from historical data after data processing and ρ is the parameter set in
the prediction model.
In the process of forecasting, the parameters of the model need to be continuously adjusted so
that the prediction performance of the model achieves the best prediction accuracy. Here, L(., .)
is a loss function, which is mainly used to assess the difference between the estimated values
and the true values. The prediction model, based on sequential data, seeks to find a function F
according to the prediction target. High prediction accuracy is achieved by continuously adjusting
the parameter set ρ of the model according to the loss function and the feature set of the historical
data.
This or a similar strategy may go a long way to offsetting the reliability and stability problems
with VANETs. However, the only way to know is to undertake further study.
6 CONCLUSION
As an essential part of intelligent transport, VANETs have attracted increasing research attention
in recent years. To offer the interested reader a comprehensive perspective on the existing research
in the field, we have reviewed three main VANET research areas: typical applications, key technologies, and major challenges faced. To begin, we reviewed the safety and efficiency applications
of VANETs and related technologies, focusing on GNNs, Reinforcement Learning (RL), 5G, and
others. These technologies can significantly improve the safety and efficiency of vehicles. Additionally, we explored and compared information collection, routing algorithms, and emergency
message broadcasting within VANETs. Finally, we discussed the limitations of VANETs in terms
of network security, reliability, and intelligence, before elaborating on the challenges and future
directions associated with intelligent VANETs. We highlighted VANET intelligence as a promising
future research direction. In particular, researchers could consider how to tackle issues such as
vehicle dynamics, computational resource consumption, and lack of extensive available data, to
enhance VANET intelligence. Further, we argue that lightweight and efficient learning models are
needed and should be a future research focus.