The impact of IoT-ML in the healthcare sector is very significant and it has helped us to change our view at the traditional treatment methods. In IoT-ML-based healthcare applications, the sensing layer is responsible for collecting information from humans and transferring it to the storage layer through communication technology. ML is implemented to make intelligent decisions for healthcare applications. This survey shows all the fields starting from the IoT sensor devices to the deployment of ML in the healthcare sector. We have conducted a comprehensive survey of the existing literature covering IoT and ML strategies from a healthcare perspective. We also provide insights into the different types of network storage and computing strategies used for other health-based applications. We believe that the presented work is innovative as no other survey is furnished in such manner. From this survey, researchers can get an overview of IoT-ML and cloud-based healthcare applications under the single system. We have proposed a unique taxonomy from an IoT-ML-based healthcare perspective where we have highlighted key steps in developing healthcare systems. We have culminated the most striking technologies in IoT, communications, network storage and computing, and ML for healthcare systems. Another contribution of our survey is that we have collected and discussed surveys and scientific literature based on the proposed taxonomy and their sub-taxonomy throughout this paper. Besides that we have reviewed several types of popularly used sensors, development boards in healthcare with various examples. We also show the mapping of communication technology with the protocols used by IoT sensors. In the ML section, we have shown an ML pipeline centering on healthcare application and discussed every step of it. Finally, we have identified a number of research challenges including exploration of Deep Learning based models, proper data acquisition and handling of data, privacy and ethics, security issues in WBAN, etc. These research challenges will provide the researchers the necessary future research directions while developing IoT-ML-based healthcare applications.

Previous
Keywords
Healthcare applications

Machine learning

IoT

Cloud computing

Communication

Taxonomy

1. Introduction
The vastness of the Internet has spread worldwide and it is influencing human lives in incredible ways. Recent development in the micro-electrical sensing and flexible electronic devices, high-scale data processing and rapid growth of wireless technology have made the Internet of Things (IoT) a key enabler across many application domains (Ray et al., 2020). IoT refers to the interconnection between all uniquely identifiable digital and physical objects within the Internet infrastructure, which provides numerous services, e.g., smart healthcare, smart farming, smart home, smart transport, etc. These objects can communicate with each other and with the physical world. They are also able to respond to the events in the surrounding world (Ahmadi et al., 2019). Reports show that a total number of 75 billion IoT devices will be installed worldwide by 2025 (Anon, 2016). IoT is providing solutions in various fields including smart city, home automation, enterprises, government, industries, health and welfare, etc. The last decade has seen digital growth in many disciplines, including sensors, micro-controllers, network technology, computing instances, and social needs (Ray et al., 2020). The aforementioned growth inspires the researchers to use the IoT network in more diverse fields.


Download : Download high-res image (319KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Overview of the IoT-ML-based healthcare applications.

The healthcare domain is flourishing the most with the help of IoT devices in recent years. Experts estimate that the global healthcare IoT market size will reach up to $188.2 billion by 2025 (Kalra, 2020). In a traditional medical system, the hospitals had a busy waiting room where many patients had to wait in long queues outside the room with frustrated faces to see the doctors. However, things started to change with the blessings of the IoT technology, healthcare mobile applications, faster network speed, and the use of big data handling techniques in early detection of diseases and patient monitoring. In addition, many studies have been carried out to reduce the patient’s waiting time by introducing IoT-based healthcare services (Cáceres et al., 2018). In this survey, we have discussed about how IoT devices can be used to diagnose serious diseases. It gives us a clear picture about which types of IoT devices could be used to detect various diseases including stroke, lung cancer, blood cancer, cardiac and Parkinson’s diseases. The symptoms and the sensors that are used to diagnose these diseases can be found in Table 3. Plenty of IoT sensors available in the market to monitor human health. Among them, biosensors perform the most significant role. Relying on biosensors, IoT enables the human race to move towards the fully digitized e-healthcare services. IoT devices are used in a variety of medical domains, such as stroke prediction (Monteiro et al., 2018), glucose level monitoring (Kumar et al., 2018a), sleep monitoring, fall detection (Mrozek et al., 2020), elderly care (Sokullu et al., 2020), heart disease prediction (Gupta et al., 2019), lung cancer identification (Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019), neurological activity detection (Sciarrone et al., 2020), clinical diagnosis, smart home care (Pham et al., 2018), etc.

Traditional medical services require well-trained practitioners and heavy testing equipment that force patients to go to the hospitals on regular basis. Besides, it increases the medical expenses, which sometimes becomes unbearable to middle- and lower-income families. Sometimes, many patients intentionally delay medical tests to avoid the unexpected medical bills. Another reason is that people often get through an extremely busy schedule at their workplace, thus they do not get enough time to go for medical tests on time. Therefore, a real-time and uninterrupted health monitoring system can be very beneficial to them. An IoT-based remote health monitoring system can play a notable role in this situation as it provides an intelligent service that allows monitoring health in different environments, such as hospitals, houses, offices or in situ. It also brings significant change in human lives by reducing medical costs and other burdens. Besides, it speeds up the diagnostic process and the treatment. Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN), mainly used in patient monitoring tasks, has become popular in this era to fully utilize and optimize wireless technologies. WBAN is designed to operate independently by connecting disparate medical sensors in human bodies.

Improving the performance of healthcare services is currently a top concern around the world. The term Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) emerges from the idea that various medical devices and sensors are connected to develop healthcare services in embedded systems. With the advancement of IoT, a large amount of data is now easily collected from wearable devices and sensors. As the number of IoT devices increases, it generates an immense amount of data, which exhibits many opportunities alongside many barriers. Transmission of data from one end to another is possible due to the high-speed wireless connectivity. Cloud servers are currently attracting attention for storing and processing large-volume of data. Moreover, recently IoT has achieved unprecedented success due to the contribution of Machine Learning (ML). Many complex tasks are nowadays being performed in the medical services by data mining that is being applied over IoT-generated data.

We live in the age of Artificial Intelligence (AI) where various ML and Deep Learning (DL) methods are being utilized in heterogeneous sectors (Qayyum et al., 2020). IoT-based systems are also exploiting the progress of ML, DL and data mining techniques to accurately diagnose diseases and make a phenomenal improvement in healthcare (Hosseinzadeh et al., 2021). ML and DL techniques have also illustrated incredible success in various health-related tasks, e.g., diagnosis of cardiac disease (Moghadas et al., 2020a), nutrition monitoring (Sundaravadivel et al., 2018), clinical decision support (Yang et al., 2019), dementia monitoring (Enshaeifar et al., 2018), segmenting accelerometer data (van Kuppevelt et al., 2019), etc.

ML strategies are integrated into the IoT-based health services to enhance the healthcare efficiency and to improve the medical expert’s work (Al-Dhief et al., 2020). ML techniques are applied over collected data from the IoT devices to uncover the hazardous situations and to improve the quality of life. The collaboration of IoT, cloud, and ML strategies provides a wide range of applications, especially in the medical domain, thus can perform complex tasks with high intelligence. The day is not far when intelligent software will help healthcare practitioners in monitoring patients and be able to predict diseases with minimal or no human intervention. In 2018, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced the approval of AI-based system that can detect several diabetes-related eye problems without human intervention (Qayyum et al., 2020).

The overall workflow of an IoT-based healthcare infrastructure can be broadly divided into four steps: sensing using IoT devices, establishing network and communication, storing and computing strategies, and implementing data mining algorithms. Many existing comprehensive surveys have already explored the preceding steps as individual systems (Qadri et al., 2020, Qayyum et al., 2020, Mutlag et al., 2019, Ray et al., 2019). However, very few notable reviews can be found in the literature that include these four steps together. Fig. 1 shows the overview of the IoT-ML-based healthcare applications. It depicts a complete workflow i.e., from the sensing devices to the visualization of the data. This study approaches the workflow from the healthcare application’s IoT device to the network storage and computing with communication technology transferring information from the sensing layer to the storage layer and proposes this four general steps for it. We have separated the existing computing process from the network storage area and named it as a separate layer, namely ML to provide decision supports. We have explored each of these steps in detail. In addition, we review a variety of existing literature based on healthcare-related issues, such as various disease prediction and detection, diseases diagnosis, real-time patient monitoring, remote health monitoring, elderly care, etc.

The purpose of this paper is to provide a comprehensive summary of the existing literature that has been carried out to incorporate IoT and ML techniques in healthcare, as well as to describe the types of network storage used to store big data on health services. We have provided a unique taxonomy that illustrates IoT, communication, network storage and computing, ML, and healthcare applications. We have also described different communication technologies that are used in healthcare applications. The major contributions of this paper are summarized below:

•
We have identified all the important steps of an IoT-based healthcare application that incorporates ML for taking intelligent decisions and depends on the cloud-type infrastructure for remote storage and computing. Based on these steps (i.e., IoT, communication, network storage and computing, and ML), we have proposed a unique taxonomy (shown in Fig. 3) that is basically a collection of small taxonomies that are being developed around each major step.

•
We have presented an in-depth analysis of the IoT architecture in healthcare which is composed of sensors, actuators and development boards.

•
We have divided different communication technologies based on the communication range and layers. We have also identified the underlying technologies that are being used in diverse healthcare models regarding the IoT device requirements.

•
To handle big data, we have also showcased existing cloud-related literature and its characteristics. Furthermore, while delays and security are a problem for operating real-time monitoring systems, we have discussed the prominent role of fog and edge computing in resolving them in the context of healthcare.

•
We have formulated an ML pipeline that is composed of different steps including data collections, features, pre-processing, evaluation and results. A number of IoT and ML-based healthcare applications have been identified and been compared in terms of different steps of the pipeline.

•
Finally, we have identified the research challenges that need to be addressed for widespread deployment of the IoT and ML-based healthcare applications.

The organization of the paper is shown in Fig. 2. Section 2 summarizes existing survey papers that have similar scope. We have established the necessity of this paper by comparing this work with other existing surveys using several factors, e.g., IoT, communication, network storage, ML, and use cases. Section 3 provides the complete taxonomy that we have developed and describes each area extensively. Section 4 presents the overview of the IoT architecture in healthcare and further presents different sensors, wearable devices, actuators and development boards. Section 5 discusses various communication technologies and IoT protocol stack that are used in IoT healthcare infrastructure. Section 6 demonstrates the network storage related studies and examines the characteristics of the edge, fog and cloud computing infrastructures. Section 7 presents the ML pipeline in the healthcare sector and explores each steps of that pipeline regarding the context of healthcare. Section 8 introduces the research challenges in the IoT-ML-healthcare field. Some concluding remarks are illustrated in Section IX. Finally, we conclude that Sections 3 Taxonomy, 4 Architecture of Internet of Things (IoT) in HealthCare, 5 Communication of IoT, 6 Network storage and computing, 7 Machine Learning (ML), 8 Research challenges and issues encompass the main contributions of this paper.


Download : Download high-res image (191KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Organization of our survey.

2. Related work
In this section, we describe existing works and also compare our work with other notable works.

Qadri et al. displayed an overview on Healthcare IoT (H-IoT) structure and its relevant use cases, particularly Cardiovascular diseases, Neurological disorders, Ambient Assisted Living (AAL), and Fitness tracking. The authors also discussed on the state-of-the-art literature on ML, edge/fog computing, big data, blockchain, and Software Defined Networks (SDN). They demonstrated the importance of Internet of Nano Things in future research context and finally reported the future research directions in healthcare (Qadri et al., 2020). Al-Dhief et al. proposed a survey about the state-of-the-art IoT and ML techniques implemented in healthcare applications in general and presented a voice pathology surveillance system in distinct. They further discussed some open issues and challenges regarding IoT framework in healthcare (Al-Dhief et al., 2020). Qayyum et al. presented a survey on the privacy and security challenges of ML/DL models in healthcare systems. They addressed these vulnerabilities by formulating an ML pipeline and also provided a taxonomy of various solutions that ensure the secure and robust ML/DL applications (Qayyum et al., 2020). Karthick et al. provided an overview related to Human Healthcare Internet of Things (H2IoT) application areas; analyzed sensing devices and data transmission technologies used in H2IoT; talked about challenges, privacy, security issues, and attacks in H2IoT (Karthick and Pankajavalli, 2020). Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) faces a number of health issues. It affects not only the lives of children with disabilities but also reduces the quality of life (QoL) of their caregivers. Hosseinzadeh et al. investigated methods of diagnosing the disease of children with ASD and also presented a plan to develop the QoL in them (Hosseinzadeh et al., 2021). Ahmadi et al. illustrated a systematic literature review to discover the prominent application area of IoT in healthcare. They also discussed essential components of IoT infrastructure in healthcare, the most famous network technology used in IoT, and alongside the characteristics of cloud-related architecture. Furthermore, they described various security and interoperability issues in IoT-based healthcare in their paper (Ahmadi et al., 2019). Dhanvijay et al. discussed wireless Body Area Network (WBAN) based health systems and reviewed various network topology, platform, architecture, and healthcare applications. In their work, they analyzed privacy and security issues and also reported some research gaps (Dhanvijay and Patil, 2019). Saheb et al. presented a review on big data analytics paradigm (BDA) and fog computing in healthcare. They examined how BDA influences the health industry and addressed several IoT BDA health-related applications (Saheb and Izadi, 2019). Mutlag et al. proposed a systematic overview of fog computing paradigm in IoT healthcare systems (Mutlag et al., 2019). Ray et al. discussed the role of the edge paradigm in IoT healthcare solutions and demonstrated different use cases regarding edge-IoT based healthcare architecture. In their work, they presented a novel edge-IoT based architecture for e-healthcare (Ray et al., 2019). Faust et al. reported existing works on deep learning techniques applied on physiological signals, where ECG, EMG, EOG, and EEG based applications are also present (Faust et al., 2018). Sethi et al. demonstrated a survey regarding advance methods, technologies, protocols, and application in IoT infrastructure; discussed about computing techniques; highlighted communication technologies in-depth. In addition, the authors examined various IoT domains, e.g., smart homes, transport, logistics, healthcare, environment, agriculture, smart cities, and green energy (Sethi and Sarangi, 2017). Qi et al. provided a systematic review about IoT-enabled Personalized Healthcare Systems (PHS). They pointed out IoT-key enabling technologies and modern healthcare applications; also examined research challenges (Qi et al., 2017). Tokognon et al. introduced a framework of Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) system using IoT and big data aspects; also described different communication technology and protocols in monitoring SHM (Tokognon et al., 2017). Islam et al. proposed a survey of IoT-related healthcare services and applications. They further reviewed the industrial trends on IoT healthcare solutions. The authors demonstrated IoT security and privacy issues in healthcare; alongside, presented an intelligent collaborative security model to decrease security risks; additionally addressed IoT in healthcare policies with diverse open issues about IoT-based healthcare (Islam et al., 2015).


Table 1. Comparison of this paper with existing 15 survey papers on IoT, Communication, Network Storage, ML, and Application .

Year	Study	IoT	Communication	Network Storage	ML	Application
2020	Qadri et al. (2020)	✓	–	✓	✓	✓
2020	Al-Dhief et al. (2020)	✓	–	–	✓	✓
2020	Qayyum et al. (2020)	–	–	–	✓	✓
2020	Karthick and Pankajavalli (2020)	✓	✓	–	–	✓
2020	Hosseinzadeh et al. (2021)	✓	–	–	✓	✓
2019	Ahmadi et al. (2019)	✓	✓	✓	–	✓
2019	Dhanvijay and Patil (2019)	✓	✓	–	–	✓
2019	Saheb and Izadi (2019)	✓	✓	✓	–	✓
2019	Mutlag et al. (2019)	✓	–	✓	–	–
2019	Ray et al. (2019)	✓	–	✓	–	✓
2018	Faust et al. (2018)	✓	–	–	✓	✓
2017	Sethi and Sarangi (2017)	✓	✓	✓	–	✓
2017	Qi et al. (2017)	✓	✓	–	✓	✓
2017	Tokognon et al. (2017)	✓	✓	✓	–	✓
2015	Islam et al. (2015)	✓	✓	–	–	✓
–	Our Survey	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓
Comparison with our work:
Table 1 demonstrates the comparison between our survey paper and other existing highly cited surveys. The novel contribution of this paper is that it considers all the tiers mentioned in the table with various examples. There have been many kinds of literature that discussed these tiers separately as standalone systems (Qayyum et al., 2020, Karthick and Pankajavalli, 2020). However, we have united all of them into a single system. In Table 1, we have identified the areas that early health-related surveys have covered. The first survey paper published by Qadri et al. is shown in Table 1 (Qadri et al., 2020) provides an overview of IoT on healthcare infrastructure. The authors further discussed the ML techniques in the H-IoT perspective with several use cases. Although our work might seem to be apparently similar to their work, the focus and the breadth of the material of these two papers are distinct. Authors in (Qadri et al., 2020) focus on future technology analysis at H-IoT and discussed ML, edge computing, blockchain, big data, and SDN. On the other hand, we propose an innovative taxonomy that focuses on every step of the overall workflow, from the hardware level to the user-level visualization of IoT-ML-healthcare applications. The work has been presented in a well organized manner. However, the main difference with our work is the presentation of the ML section where they have presented ML on the basis of several use cases. Whereas, we have formulated an ML pipeline and explored each step of that pipeline separately and discussed them in a detailed manner. Moreover, although they described communication, they did not provide much comprehensive discussion about its technologies and protocols.

The main difference between other papers presented in Table 1 with our paper is that we have introduced a unique taxonomy with the concept of IoT-ML-healthcare. It gives the basic idea of IoT-ML-based healthcare in the big picture. Throughout the paper, we have described all of these areas and their subareas in detail as it is demonstrated in the taxonomy (see Fig. 3).

Another innovative contribution is that while other survey papers first collect scientific papers and then summarize them in their work, we have collected research papers based on the proposed taxonomy and its sub-taxonomies. We further structured the overall survey papers according to that, where we have demonstrated various types of sensors, actuators, and development boards extensively in the IoT infrastructure section. We have focused on various fatal diseases, such as stroke, lung cancer, leukemia, cardiac, Parkinson’s disease, etc. Many studies have been done to identify and diagnose these diseases from the perspective of IoT healthcare. However, there is no clear study that describes the total number of IoT devices that can be used to diagnose these diseases. We have conducted a comprehensive study to identify different types of sensors used for a variety of diseases and then briefly described them for better visibility. We have also covered the state-of-the-art communication technologies and their protocols from the perspective of the IoT protocol stack.

A significant contribution to our survey is that we have shown the mapping of network technologies and protocols used by popular sensors. This has not been discovered in the prior surveys on communication technology (Karthick and Pankajavalli, 2020, Sethi and Sarangi, 2017). In the computing architecture section, we have briefly discussed network storage based architectures for the concept of big data analysis and further reported the characteristics of fog, edge, and cloud paradigms. This section also categorizes state-of-the-art literature based on computing architecture.

Another key contribution of this survey is that we have described each step of the ML pipeline thoroughly with the IoT-ML-based healthcare applications. To the best of our knowledge, such a kind of presentation and classification of the ML section is innovative compared to other surveys (Qayyum et al., 2020). Other surveys are bounded when discussing applications (Al-Dhief et al., 2020, Hosseinzadeh et al., 2021, Faust et al., 2018), whereas we have considered a large variety of applications, such as stroke, cardiac, lung cancer, blood cancer, breast cancer, fall detection, elderly care, and other types of disease detection and monitoring systems. All these major additions make our work more comprehensive, detailed, and balanced compared to other surveys.

3. Taxonomy
In this section, we propose a taxonomy for research in IoT and ML driven healthcare systems, where five essential components, namely IoT, Communication, Network Storage, ML and Application are identified. The main focus of the taxonomy is the use of IoT and ML in certain areas of healthcare, e.g., cardiac, stroke, cancer, etc. (see Fig. 3).

The first component of the taxonomy is IoT, since it is used diversely in medical domain and also it covers a very large area. IoT is a collection of various technologies, such as sensors, actuators, development board, storage and communication. Sensors are used to collect data from the environment and widely used in IoT applications. For example, medical sensors are used to measure and monitor a patient’s heart rate, oximeter, pressure, glucose, temperature, ECG, EEG, EMG, etc. Nowadays, a large number of sensors are available inside the smartphone, e.g., location sensor (GPS), accelerometer, gyroscope, proximity sensor, camera, microphone, etc. There are some additional sensors that are used in IoT solutions, e.g., neural, environmental, radio frequency identification (RFID), chemical, infrared (IR) sensors, wearable health devices, etc. Actuators are used to influence a new change in the surroundings, for example, the temperature controller of an air conditioner. Development boards are other parts of IoT. There are various types of development boards, such as arduino, raspberry pi, intel edison, etc. that are available to build the system to capture, process, and transfer data to different types of systems. In Section 3, we discuss different types of sensors and devices that are used in IoT health applications.

The next component that we briefly describe here is communication. A detail view of different communication technologies in the area of healthcare is shown in Section 5. In the IoT architecture, signals transfer from the perception layer to the storage layer via communication technologies and protocols. The most common short-range and low powered communication technologies are Bluetooth, RFID, near field communication (NFC), WiFi, Thread, ZigBee, etc. Subsequently, the long-range communication technologies are NB-IoT, LoRaWAN, Sigfox, etc. Therefore, various protocols have been proposed for different layers based on the requirements of IoT devices inside the IoT stack. We give a mapping where different technologies are grouped into their corresponding protocols.

The third component is the network storage. This module works as temporary storage for processing the data. The advancement of IoT based healthcare systems has raised the curiosity about big data analysis, cloud, fog and edge computing are likely to processing and storing the big data. In Section 5, we discuss about network storage in healthcare applications. Here we show the characteristics of these paradigms. In addition, we present the advantage of edge-fog-cloud architectures over the solo cloud computing.

In Section 6, we discuss related works of different ML algorithms that are implemented in the area of healthcare. ML algorithms and feature extraction techniques are used to diagnosis the disease and monitoring the physical conditions. In the taxonomy, we mainly classify the area into feature extraction and analysis techniques. Feature extraction is the significant task in ML before feeding sensor signals into models. There exist numerous feature extraction techniques, such as principal component analysis (PCA), Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC), etc. Analysis techniques in ML are divided into supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and deep learning. In supervised learning, there are several algorithms, such as support vector machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), random forest (RF), decision tree (DT), naïve bayes (NB), boosting, etc. Unsupervised learning is categorized into clustering and dimensionality reduction techniques. Whereas, a large number of work have already been done using deep learning method, namely recurrent neural network (RNN), convolutional neural network (CNN), etc.

We discuss different types of healthcare applications throughout the paper. We demonstrate the related works of stroke, blood cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, cardiac disease prediction, and detection severally. We further discuss other types of health-related issues and relevant applications.

4. Architecture of Internet of Things (IoT) in HealthCare
This section describes the first key element of the taxonomy (i.e. IoT). The section begins with presenting a 4-layer IoT architecture for healthcare systems and then narrates the Sensing/Physical Layer hardware components such as sensors, actuators and the development boards that play the pivotal role in building IoT applications for healthcare systems.

The basic idea behind using IoT devices in healthcare is two-fold: (1) a patient often seems reluctant to visit a physician on due time, which may cause severe damage; and (2) it helps a physician to monitor his/her patient on a real-time basis. Thus, smart medical devices are used for an early reaction of people towards physical symptoms.

There is no single generalize architecture for IoT that can be agreed upon by the researchers. Different researchers proposed architecture differently. The most basic architecture of IoT consists of three layers: Sensing Layer, Network Layer, and Application layer. It gives the main idea of IoT in a very concise manner, which is insufficient for the research aspects. Therefore, we exhibit a four-layer architecture where we further divide the Network Layer into Communication Layer and Network Storage Layer (Lin and Bergmann, 2016). We also demonstrate a mapping between the four-layer IoT architecture with the IoT protocol stack in TCP/IP layer perspective (see Fig. 4). The layers of the architecture are described below.

4.1. IoT layers
Sensing Layer
The sensing layer is located in the patient-nearest layer. This layer is responsible for data acquisition. It is composed of several wearable sensors that are carried or wore by the patients. This layer is designed to observe a patient’s physical, mental, and emotional conditions (Wan et al., 2018). Multiple sensors are embedded to measure physiological parameters from the human body, such as ECG, EEG, GPS, skin temperature, blood pressure, glucose measure, etc. are shown in Fig. 5. The smartphone is further used to collect data from the human body (Tabassum et al., 2019, Magaña-Espinoza et al., 2014).

Communication Layer
The data collected from the sensor is transferred to the network storage level through various protocols and technologies. Depending on the type of sensors, several protocols, such as ZigBee, WiFi, Bluetooth, NFC, RFID, etc. are applied at this level.

Network Storage Layer
The third layer of the IoT architecture is Network Storage Layer. Due to the advancement of IoT technology, the number of users is increased, which further increases the volume of data. The idea of IoT cloud-based architecture came from this issue. Generally, this layer is responsible for storing and managing the large scale of data. It also helps to reduce the load of a sensor device (Yang et al., 2016).

Application Layer
This layer is responsible for data visualization. It basically applies application based services. It allows hassle-free access to data stored in the IoT cloud server. It helps the physicians, caregivers, and patients’ family to know about a patient’s physical whereabouts via web applications. Sometimes, it provides a warning message when a patient’s health condition deteriorates. The mobile app plays a vital role in the immediate response to the patient. There can be many applications, such as Smart Home Monitoring System, Smart City System, Smart Wheelchair System, Activity Recognition, Disease Prediction, etc.

4.2. Sensors
A sensor is a device, module, or subsystem whose function is to observe or detect the environmental changes and to transmit that information to some other electronic devices. All IoT applications contain one or more sensors to collect data. Data collection is the most crucial part of an IoT-based application. The selection of a sensor depends on which types of parameters need to be monitored. Sensors play a major role in patient’s monitoring. Mostly, IoT sensors are small in size, lightweight, consume less power, and reasonable in price. These make IoT objects affordable for the users. Recently, many studies have been made on IoT sensors (Lou et al., 2020, Ray et al., 2020) to build smart applications. There are many types of sensors that we use in our daily life. Notwithstanding, we have listed below only those sensors that are used in health monitoring systems (see Fig. 6).

Medical sensors
Recent advances in treatment sensors make IoT-based health monitoring applications much more useful. It collects treatment parameters from the human body for monitoring, identification, or analysis of health-related issues. It allows users to monitor their health remotely. When a person is alone or unable to go to a hospital in a critical situation, these types of applications can provide an alternative way to check their health status on real-time basis. Some applications provide immediate feedback to the physicians and/or to the patient’s family members. This helps them to take immediate and necessary steps. There are multiple medical sensors available in the market that can measure heart rate, pulse, body temperature, blood pressure, glucose level, movement, etc. For example, Force sensor, Heart Rate sensor, Pulse Oximetry sensor, Pressure sensor, etc.

•
Force Sensor: One of the essential features used in medical devices is the force sensing technology. The force sensor responds when pressure raises to a certain level. It generally measures when the force is placed on an object. For example, piezoelectric sensor is used to collect vital signs from the chest surface (Allataifeh and Al Ahmad, 2020).

•
Heart Rate Sensor: This sensor counts the heart beat as per minute as heart rate indicates one’s health quality. As heart rate is a very important parameter, it needs to be more accurate. Although the normal heart rate varies from person to person, it is found from American Heart Association that the average heart rate for adults ranges from 60 to 100 bpm (beats per minute). Arrhythmia is a condition in which the heart beats too fast, too slow, or in an irregular rhythm. Tachycardia occurs when the heart beats faster than 100 bpm (Santos et al., 2020). Whereas, bradycardia happens when heart beats falls below 60 bpm. For example, Mi Band 2 is used to monitor a patient’s heart rate (Alfian et al., 2018).

•
Pulse Oximetry Sensor: It measures the oxygen saturation level in the patient’s blood. It is an easy process to calculate the pulse rate. A small ray of light passes through a finger and measures oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin by the amount of light absorption. For example, it is often used to check the health condition of a patient such as heart disease by measuring the amount of oxygen in the blood (Ali et al., 2020). It represents the percentage of oxygenated hemoglobin compared to the total amount of hemoglobin in the blood. Normal blood oxygen level (SpO2) reading varies between 95 to 100% (Santos et al., 2020). MAX30102 is an example of integrated pulse oximeter module (Magno et al., 2019).

•
Pressure Sensor: In the medical domain, this type of sensor measures blood pressure (Syed et al., 2019). It is attached to the patient’s skin to monitor pulse waves by measuring blood pressure. Mostly, pressure sensors are used to build an embedded system. When a patient’s blood pressure drops, s/he is more likely to become unconscious. High blood pressure can also cause chest pain, severe headache and other symptoms (Maia et al., 2014). Therefore, a patient’s regular blood pressure monitoring is very essential. Blood pressure is measured using the ratio of two factors: systolic blood pressure (i.e., pressure in arteries is measured when heart beats) and diastolic blood pressure (i.e., pressure is measured during heart rest between beats). The normal range of systolic blood pressure is 120 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure is 80 mmHg (Santos et al., 2020). A person has Hypertension (High Blood Pressure) when his/her systolic blood pressure raises  mmHg and diastolic blood pressure becomes  mmHg. LUCAS NOVA sensor is used to measure blood pressure (Orha and Oniga, 2013).

•
Glucose Sensor: It is used to measure glucose level in the blood. It calculates the amount of sugar in the interstitial fluid and converts it to the electrical signal. The signal represents the glucose level. Google smart contact lenses (Birch, 2018) and insulin pumps are examples of this type of sensor. Data which is accumulated from the smart contact lenses can be transferred to the gateway for analysis. Normal blood sugar levels for the healthy people are: Between (72 to 99 mg/dL — while fasting), and up to (140 mg/dL — 2 h after eating) (Kaur et al., 2018).

•
Temperature Sensor: This sensor plays a vital role in this pandemic situation of the corona virus (Covid-19), where it is used to measure the body temperature of a person. High temperature indicates a person’s illness, thus, s/he needs immediate medical care. LM-35 temperature sensor and thermosistor are examples of this type of sensor (Alwan and Rao, 2017). Body temperature may vary between person to person. Studies show that body temperature between 97.7°F and 99.5°F is considered as normal, whereas temperature above 100°F indicates that a person has fever.

•
Electromyogram (EMG) Sensor: It measures the electrical activity of the skeletal muscle. EMG signal shows the muscle activation, state, and pressure generated by the muscle (Faust et al., 2018).

•
Electrocardiogram (ECG) Sensor: The ECG signal is regulated by the electrical activity of the heart. It connects the electrodes to the chest to measure the electric signal. AD8232 (Devi and Kalaivani, 2020) and chest strap (Syed et al., 2019) are examples of ECG sensors.

•
Electroencephalogram (EEG) Sensor: It detects electrical activity in the brain. EEG is measured by attaching the electrodes to the scalp. For example, raw EEG signals can be recorded by the use of Emotiv Insight NeuroHeadset (Zamora et al., 2019).

Besides the aforementioned sensors, other types of medicals sensors are photo optic sensor, humidity sensor, respiration rate sensor, EOG sensor, etc.

Neural sensor
The neural sensor is used to read the electrical activity inside the brain. The neurons in the brain communicate electronically and can be measured from outside using a sensor. Thus, it can be easily analyzed whether the brain is clam or upset i.e., it can be helpful for mental health issues.

Mobile phone sensors
The mobile phone is the most user-friendly and portable device that can be easily accessible by everyone. In this era, it is impossible to think over a single day without using a mobile phone in our daily life. The growing popularity of smartphones has prompted researchers to integrate a variety of sensors into it and make smart IoT applications using it. The smartphone based sensors are used to detect the environmental changes. The use of smartphone and its integrated sensors with the processing features makes it easy to implement smart applications in healthcare.

•
Gyroscope Sensor: It senses the orientation of the mobile. In the medical domain, the gyro sensor measures users’ body movements precisely (Uddin, 2019).

•
Global Positioning System (GPS): GPS identifies the location of the phone precisely. It uses radio wave frequency between the receiver resided in the phone and the satellites to detect the location. It is useful to identify the patient’s whereabouts.

•
Accelerometer: The accelerometer is a sensor whose purpose is to detect the orientation of the phone. It is also used to detect the acceleration of human body. It can also track a person’s physical activity such as whether a person is walking, driving, cycling, running, going up or down stairs, etc. It generally measures acceleration in three dimensions and also helps to reduce the risk of having chronic diseases. It is observed that acceleration value is the primary parameter to detect fall (Divya and Leena, 2020).

•
Camera: It is the most popular sensor in the smartphone. The primary function of the camera is to take photos and record videos. These visual details provide useful information about a patient. It can be used in the health monitoring applications such as remote doctor consultation, teledermatology, etc. (Stankevich et al., 2012).

•
Microphone: A microphone captures audio information from the environment. The audio information can further be analyzed into contextual knowledge and can give an idea about the person’s feelings (Muhammad et al., 2017).

•
Proximity Sensor: It is used to sense the presence of an object. This sensor can be used in fall detection application.

There are other types of sensors in a smartphone, i.e., photo optic sensor, barometer sensor, magnetometer, etc. Mobile apps like health and fitness monitoring system can be built to track a person’s health. Besides, the smartphone has WiFi, Bluetooth, etc. module which are used to transmit the sensed data. It can also help to communicate between patients and health professionals.

Environmental sensor
Environmental sensor is utilized to detect physical environmental changes. Air pollution is responsible for the deterioration of various physical health conditions, such as asthma, lung cancer, etc. (Sood and Mahajan, 2018). The sensor can measure temperature, humidity, air pollution, etc.


Download : Download high-res image (103KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(a). (a) Arduino.


Download : Download high-res image (106KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(b). (b) Raspberry Pi.


Download : Download high-res image (97KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(c). (c) Intel Edison (Anon, 2021c).


Download : Download high-res image (83KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(d). (d) Intel Galileo (Anon, 2021e).


Download : Download high-res image (67KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(e). (e) Node MCU (Anon, 2021h).


Download : Download high-res image (120KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(f). (f) E-health Shield (Anon, 2021d).


Download : Download high-res image (33KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(g). (g) Atmega328p MC (Anon, 2021b).


Download : Download high-res image (85KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7(h). (h) LCP2148 ARM7 MC (Anon, 2018).

Fig. 7. Images of different types of development boards.


Table 2. Comparison between different development boards.

Features	Arduino	Raspberry Pi 3 Model B	Intel Edison	Intel Galileo	Node MCU	E-health shield	Atmega328p MC	LCP2148 ARM7 MC
RAM Size	2 KB	1 GB	4 GB	256 MB	128 KB	2 K	2 KB	40 KB
Processor	Single-Core 8-bit AVR 16 Mhz	quad-core 64-bit Broadcom BCM43438 1.2 Ghz	dual-core 32-bit Intel Quark x86 500 Mhz	Single-Core 32-bit Intel Quark X1000 400 Mhz	Tensilica 32-bit RISC CPU Xtensa LX106 160 Mhz	Atmega 328 (Arduino UNO)	Single-chip 8-bit AVR 20 Mhz	32-bit RISC ARM 60 Mhz
Operating System	Windows, macOS, Linux	Raspberry Pi OS, Ubuntu MATE etc.	Windows, macOS, Linux	Windows, macOS Linux	–	–	–	–
Network	SB, SPI, TWI/IC, and Ethernet	integrated 802.11n wireless LAN	Broadcom* 43340 802.11 a/b/g/n	1x Wired 10/100 Ethernet, Optional PCIe Wireless	integrated 802.11 b/g/n	WiFi, 3G, GPRS, 802.15.4, ZigBee	–	–
Bluetooth	Yes	Bluetooth 4.1	Bluetooth 4.0	Yes	HC-05 Bluetooth module	Yes	HC-05 Bluetooth module	HC-05 Bluetooth module
IDE	Arduino IDE 1.8.13	Lazarus IDE	Arduino IDE	Arduino IDE	Arduino IDE	Arduino, Raspberry Pi Platform	Arduino IDE	Keil uVision IDE
License	Open-source	Open-source	Open-source	Open-source	Open-source	Open-source	Open-source	Open-source
Language	C/C++	Python	C/C++, Python	C/C++, Python, Node.js, Javascript	Lua scripting language	–	C++	–
Chemical sensor
It detects chemical and biochemical materials from the surroundings. Chemical sensor is used in several applications; one of them is human sweat detection. Human sweat contains chemical elements which state the physiological condition. Another application is electronic nose, which detects a lung cancer patient from his breath (Capuano et al., 2019).

Infrared sensor (IR)
It detects infrared radiation. It is used in medical treatment. The IR ray is used to hit the cancer cells.

Radio-frequency identification (RFID)
It is an automatic identification technology. RFID tag contains a small chip with antenna, whose function is to transmit data to the RFID reader. Data is transmitted in a radio wave form. Some applications using RFID tags are human motion tracking, activity recognition, and can monitor people in domestic and hospital during the night (Amendola et al., 2014).

Wearable health devices
There are many types of devices available in the market that use to monitor the health and fitness of a patient. They are integrated with different medical sensors and measure heart rate, blood pressure, respiration rate, glucose level, sweat monitoring, etc. The variability of the heart rate as well as the environmental conditions can be monitored with the help of wristbands (Syed et al., 2019). Other types of devices are smartwatches, fitness trackers, skin patches, smart garments, etc. These devices have some features, such as stretchability, biocompatibility, biodegradability, ultrathin, and self-healing (Lou et al., 2020).

With the recent development of technology, researchers are now working day and night to discover advanced types of sensors to improve diagnosis. Japanese researchers have developed a gel-based sensor that applies to the organs and senses biometric information more accurately (Anon, 2014, Syed et al., 2019).

4.3. Actuators
An actuator is a machine which is capable of making certain changes in the environment. It converts electrical energy into another form of energy. In another word, an actuator performs in the opposite direction of a sensor. It takes electrical energy as an input and transform it into physical action. There are many types of actuators in IoT-solutions, such as automatic light on–off in a smart home system. Another example is a “Home Service Robot” which can be used for healthcare service (Pham et al., 2018).

4.4. Development boards
There are several hardware platforms in IoT which refers to the Micro-controller unit (MCU) or processor unit and used for data processing. It is called as the heart of the Internet of Things (IoT). Development boards mainly operate as per the system or application’s requirements. A board is a small device that acts like a computer; however the difference is that it typically works for a single function. Development boards are mainly used for receiving, monitoring, analysis, and recording the sensor signals and send them to the healthcare practitioner. These signals can also be sent to the cloud-server for further analysis and processing. Different sensors can be attached directly to a development board and build a complex system to monitor multiple health parameters. Since, there are various types of development boards that are used in this domain, anyone can choose as per the requirement. Among them the most popular boards are discussed below.

Arduino
Arduino is a very familiar name within the IoT platform. It receives sensor data and capable of processing them. It also interconnect with other elements of IoT platform. It has a built-in micro controller chip that run on the arduino software. It works as the brain of a system. WiFi module is used to send data between an arduino and the cloud platform (Devi and Kalaivani, 2020, Azariadi et al., 2016, Wan et al., 2018, Satija et al., 2017, Pham et al., 2018).

Raspberry Pi
Raspberry Pi is almost like a computer but smaller in size. It is used in several IoT based applications and does many complex tasks easily (Queralta et al., 2019, Alwan and Rao, 2017, Hegde et al., 2020, Greco et al., 2019).

Intel Edison
One of the primary features of this board is that it has huge processing ability (Dubey et al., 2015, Monteiro et al., 2016). It is capable of running a complete Linux platform. This module is used in experts, entrepreneurs, and various IoT-solutions.

Intel Galileo
It is the first product based on Intel® architecture, a chip designed for small products. It consumes low power. It targets for the market that includes IoT and wearable computing (Azariadi et al., 2016).

Node MCU
The node and the MCU (micro-controller unit) terms are combined to form the word NodeMCU. It is basically a low-cost open-source IoT platform. It is smaller in size than the Arduino Uno, however offers more ROM (4MB) than the Uno (32kb). It can store more code than Uno and also capable of running in an Arduino IDE. It is very popular to use in IoT-based projects (Gupta et al., 2019).

E-health shield
E-Health shield is a special module that allows Arduino and Raspberry Pi users to accurately meet the requirements of the medical device (Rghioui et al., 2020). Nine medical sensors can be attached with this module to monitor physiological parameters. Therefore, it can be used for either monitoring data in real-time or collecting information for further analysis. It can use both arduino or raspberry pi platform. Based on the requirements of the application, the collected data can be transmitted through any of the mentioned technologies e.g., WiFi, 3G, GPRS, 802.15.4 and Gigabyte.

Atmega328p MC
It is a single-chip micro-controller and also a modified Harvard architecture 8-bit RISC processor. Atmega328 is used in a variety of IoT or autonomous projects that require low-cost, low-powered micro-controllers. However, it is popularly used with Arduino board (Hashim et al., 2020).

LCP2148 ARM7 MC
It is a 32-bit micro-processor that provides high performance with a very low power consumption (Anon, 2018). It can be considered as a stand-alone system with many built-in peripherals that make them more efficient. It can be a reliable choice for beginners and also for the high-end application developers. It is very popular for its low cost and low power consumption (Magaña-Espinoza et al., 2014).

Table 2 shows the comparison of different development boards in terms of technical specifications. In this table, a general overview can be found that helps researchers to choose an appropriate board for a particular IoT project. Fig. 7 demonstrates the images of the corresponding developments boards.

Table 3 shows the symptoms of stroke, lung cancer, leukemia, parkinson’s, heart disease, and the sensors associated with them. We have demonstrated these diseases in a different table since stroke, lung cancer, blood cancer, and heart disease are among the top life-threatening diseases. Many applications have already been made to detect these diseases, however no single study has been conducted that studied the types of sensors used to diagnosis these diseases. Thus the summary table is prepared to give an overview to the researchers. In addition, we have included parkinson’s disease in the table as lately it has received a lot of attention to the research community. From Table 2, we receive a clear idea of what types of sensor are necessary to detect these diseases. Furthermore, some sensors may be added or discarded as per the detection requirements.


Table 3. Diseases with their Corresponding Sensors & Symptoms .

Diseases	Symptoms	Sensors
Stroke	balance loss, facial weakness, numbness of one side of body, difficulties in speaking or understanding speech, blurriness in one or both eyes, dizziness, severe headache	EEG, ECG, EMG, EOG, Accelerometer, EDSAP (Samsung), Pulse Oximeter, Respiration Rate, Blood Pressure, Heart Rate Sensor
Lung Cancer	coughing for a long time, coughing up blood, bone pain, difficulty in breathing, chest pain, headache, losing weight	Pulse oximeter, ECG, Respiration Rate, Microphone, Glucose, Electronic Nose (e-nose), Electrochemical Biosensors, Pressure, Thermistor, Accelerometer, Mobile Spirometer, FET-based Biosensor
Blood Cancer	coughing, bone pain, fever, itchy skin, weakness, breath shortness, swollen and painless lymph nodes in body parts	Optical Biosensors, CMOS, Thermistor, PPG, Accelerometer, Heart Rate, Blood Flow, Electrochemical Biosensor
Cardiac	chest pain, breath shortness, weakness, pain in several body parts	ECG, Pulse Oximeter, Accelerometer, Heart Rate, Glucose, Blood Pressure, Camera (image), Microphone, Accelerometer, PPG, Pressure, Piezoelectric, Electrochemical Biosensor, FET-based Biosensor, Smart watch
Parkinson’s	tremor, muscle rigidity, slow in movement, speech changes, automatic movement disorders, changes in writing, imbalance in walking	Accelerometer, EMG, EEG, Force, Gyroscope, Magnetometer, Bending Sensor
4.5. Application
In Table 4, we have categorized different types of IoT applications based on sensing layer that are mentioned in the aforementioned subsections. From this table, we get a basic idea about the different types of sensors, wearable devices, and hardware platforms that the researchers have used in their research work.


Table 4. Summary of different types of IoT applications .

Application	Sensors	Wearable Devices	Development Boards	Remarks	
Cloud-based Smart Home Environment (Pham et al., 2018)	Pulse Oximeter, Grid-EYE thermopile array, Acoustic, Passive Infrared	Smart Garment	Arduino	Sensors collect motion, activity and physical information. In their work, they used Smart Phone for result display and proposed Home service robot as an actuator.	
Real-time health monitoring system (Wan et al., 2018)	Heartbeat, Temperature, Blood pressure Sensor, RFID Reader	–	Arduino	Proposed a monitoring system where sensors collected data from human body and Web based GUI developed to access the data	
Body sensor network (Gope and Hwang, 2016)	ECG, EEG, EMG, Blood pressure, Motion sensor	–	–	In their work, sensors collected physiological parameters and Android phone used as a local processing unit that works as a router between sensor and server	
IoT based smart home for elderly (Sokullu et al., 2020)	Fluid Detection, Humidity, Light, Gas, Temperature sensor,Pressure Sensitive Mats	Wristband	Intel Galileo, Arduino	Sensors collect person’s activity in the home and Android/IOS devices used to transfer data to the required recipients	
Remote Monitoring of Lower Limb Health of Amputees (Mathur et al., 2016)	Movement sensor, Thermistors	–	Raspberry Pi, Arduino	Proposed a system to collect limb temperature and measure gait using sensors and android mobile app shows result.	
Fog computing interface for processing clinical speech data (Monteiro et al., 2016)	Microphone	Smartwatch	Intel Edison	Microphone sensor from smartwatch collected audio signal and send it to the fog computer where features are extracted from the signal, extracted signals are further sent to the cloud	
ECG monitoring system (Satija et al., 2017)	ECG sensor	–	Arduino	Proposed Signal Quality Aware (SQA) method for assessing the quality of ECG signal under resting, ambulatory, and physical activity environment.	
Real-time heart disease prediction system (Gupta et al., 2019)	ECG, Temperature, Heart Rate Pulse Sensor	–	Node MCU	Proposed a system where sensors collected data and send it to Node MCU where it mapped into digital values and further transferred to the laptop.	
Diabetes detection system (Rghioui et al., 2020)	Blood Glucose meter	–	E-health shield, Arduino	Glucose meter collect blood from human body and connected with the E-Health shield, which also connected with arduino. GSM module used to send SMS to the doctor	
Fall detection system for PD elderly patients (Hashim et al., 2020)	Accelerometer, Myoware muscle, Force sensor	–	Atmega328p Microcontroller, Arduino	Arduino received sensor data by zigbee protocol and send the processing information on the laptop screen and buzzer gives an alert for the patients.	
Blood cell counting application (Roy et al., 2014)	CMOS image sensor	–	–	Lens-free shadow imaging technique used for blood cell count.	
Automated system for recording physiological parameters (Orha and Oniga, 2013)	Blood Pressure (Lucas Nova sensor), Temperature, GSR, Airflow sensor	–	Arduino	Sensors collected several physiological parameters from patient and it is controlled by arduino which send data to the PC for further processing.	
Wearable sensor glasses to recognize neurological symptoms (Sciarrone et al., 2020)	Magnetometer, EOG sensor	Wearable sensor glasses	–	Proposed a model to wearable sensor glasses that able to detect the presence of Essential Tremor (ET) of the head and count the number of Eye Blink (EB). Accuracy of ET is above 97% and RMSE value of EB is 0.4	
WSN based home care monitoring system (Magaña-Espinoza et al., 2014)	Accelerometer, Heart rate sensor	–	LCP2148 ARM7 Microcontroller	proposed a WSN technology to detect heart rate and motion rate of the seniors. Presented PNR algorithm to detect falls and provide resulting alerts to the patient’s family through the smart phone.	
5. Communication of IoT
Data acquired through various sensors in an IoT-driven application are being transferred to the network storage through several communication technologies. In this section, we present the communication technologies, another key element of the taxonomy that lies between IoT sensors and network storage in the taxonomy, which is depicted in Fig. 3.

The development of IoT-based devices has recently been increased manyfold. As a result, the number of smart devices connected to the Internet has also been increased. One of the attractive characteristics of IoT network is heterogeneity (Hussain et al., 2020). IoT devices with different capabilities are connected to each other and they can use different mediums for communication, such as wireless or wired.

As shown in Fig. 5, the communication layer allows the sensing layer devices to collect physical parameters and pass these parameters or information to other (layer) devices e.g., fog node, cloud server, etc. This layer contains a wide range of technologies, protocols, topologies and architectures.

5.1. Classification of IoT communications
As shown in Fig. 3, we divide the IoT communication technologies depending on the communication ranges or the layers.

5.1.1. Communication ranges
When sensors are physically deployed, they either form a network or join an existing network to communicate with other devices placed in other locations. Thus, based on communication range, the technology can be categorized into short range communication and long range communication. The technologies that are used in short range communication are IEEE 802.15.4 standard, IEEE 802.11ah standard (also known as Wi-Fi HaLow), RFID, Bluetooth, NFC, ZigBee, Thread, etc. Short range technologies, which typically cover ranges between 10 m and 1000 m, cannot cope well if they need to conduct long range transmission. Cellular technologies, such as 2G, 3G, 4G, etc. can fulfill the requirement, however, they need a lot of energy. Thus, the stipulation for the IoT enabled applications has compelled the emergence of low power Wide Area Network i.e., LPWAN, which can provide 5 km and 40 km coverage in urban and rural areas, respectively and has a battery lifetime over 10 years. LoRa, NB-IoT, Sigfox, etc. are examples of LPWAN technologies used for wide-range of IoT devices.

5.1.2. Communication layers
Communication protocols can be considered as a set of rules that govern how a particular communication technology will work. These protocols are divided based on the role that they play in the network. Fig. 4 illustrates the IoT protocol stack, where protocols are classified by different layers. The application layer is the highest layer in the IoT protocol stack, which lies above the service discovery layer. It can be considered as an interface between the end devices and network. This layer is very close to the client’s end-services and thus, directly interacts with applications. This layer is usually based on HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP). However, HTTP is not suitable for resource-constrained contexts as it is heavy weight and results in a large parsing overhead. There are many alternative protocols for application layer such as Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT), Secure Message Queue Telemetry Transport (SMQTT), Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP), and Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) (Priya, 2021). Likewise, the transport layer is responsible for data transfer between two end users and it uses Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or User Datagram Protocol (UDP). The network layer receives packets from the transport layer and determines the packet routing. The commonly known protocol for this layer is IP. This layer also includes Routing Protocol (RPL), Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), and other protocols. We have merged physical and data link layers in TCP/IP model to form PHY and MAC Layers and it consists of IEEE 802.15.4, IEEE 802.3, (Sethi and Sarangi, 2017) etc. standards.

5.2. Communication technology and protocols used by popular sensors
In healthcare systems, devices and the sensors that are used become interconnected and various wireless technologies are used to transfer signals to the cloud (see Fig. 8). After data processing at this stage, the cloud sends the processed data to the application services. Table 5 summarizes the communication technologies and protocols commonly used in several healthcare applications for sensor data transfer. In the table, we have shown the most frequently used sensors, which are used to monitor physical parameters. Note that in several cases, the protocol being used is not mentioned in the reference. A ‘-’ has been used to indicate that the protocol related information is missing in the reference. It further shows that some healthcare applications use multiple types of sensors to form a single system, which we have described below.


Table 5. Communication Technology and Protocols used by different sensors .

Sensors	Communication Technology and Protocol used
ECG Sensor	(BLE, -) (Biagetti et al., 2020, Touati et al., 2013a), (Bluetooth, CoAP) (Granados et al., 2017), (IEEE 802.11, MQTT) (Mishra et al., 2018), (WiFi, HTTP and MQTT) (Yang et al., 2016), (ZigBee, -) (Wang et al., 2014, Kobayashi, 2011, Guo et al., 2009, Boquete et al., 2012), (LoRa, -) (Shahidul Islam et al., 2019), (NFC, -) (Jara et al., 2012, Gune et al., 2013), (6LoWPAN, -) (Touati et al., 2013b, Gia et al., 2015b, Jung and Chung, 2013), (3G, -) (Peng et al., 2011, Hu et al., 2013)
EEG Sensor	(Bluetooth, MQTT) (Zamora et al., 2019), (BLE, -) (O’Sullivan et al., 2018), (ZigBee, -) (Boquete et al., 2012), (3G, -) (Roggeveen et al., 2015), (ESP8266 WiFi module, MQTT) (Laport et al., 2020), (6LoWPAN, -) (Gia et al., 2015b), (XBbee module, -) (Arnin et al., 2013)
EMG Sensor	(Bluetooth, -) (Chang et al., 2012), (BLE, -)(Biagetti et al., 2020), (6LoWPAN, -)(Gia et al., 2015b), (ZigBee, -)(Kobayashi, 2011), (ESP8266 WiFi module, -) (Kumar et al., 2018b)
EOG Sensor	(Bluetooth, -) (Bulling et al., 2009), (ZigBee, -) (Boquete et al., 2012, Sung et al., 2013), (XBee module, -) (Arnin et al., 2013)
Accelerometer	(6LoWPAN, -) (Touati et al., 2013b), (LoRa, -) (Zhang et al., 2020b), (6LoWPAN, MQTT) (Yacchirema et al., 2018a), (BLE, -) (Lin et al., 2017), (ZigBee, -) (Song and Chen, 2008)
Blood Pressure Sensor	(LoRa, -) (Mdhaffar et al., 2017), (WiFi, HTTP) (Wan et al., 2018, Wilhelm et al., 2016), (XBee module, -) (Fezari et al., 2015), (BLE, XMPP) (Kakria et al., 2015), (BLE, HTTP) (Alfian et al., 2018), (3G, -) (Peng et al., 2011, Hu et al., 2013), (NFC, -) (Lermthong et al., 2016, Gune et al., 2013), (ZigBee, -) (Guo et al., 2009)
Pulse Oximeter	(Bluetooth and LoRa, -) (Shahidul Islam et al., 2019), (6LoWPAN, -) (Gia et al., 2015b), (WiFi, MQTT) (Kadarina and Priambodo, 2018), (LoRa, -) (Zhe and Weiping, 2019), (3G, -) (Peng et al., 2011), (BLE, -) (Magno et al., 2019), (ZigBee, -) (Banuag and Salva, 2019))
Temperature Sensor	(BLE, XMPP) (Kakria et al., 2015), (WiFi, HTTP) (Wan et al., 2018, Wilhelm et al., 2016) (NFC, -) (Gune et al., 2013, Lermthong et al., 2016), (Bluetooth and LoRa, -) (Shahidul Islam et al., 2019), (6LoWPAN, -) (Touati et al., 2013b), (ZigBee, XMPP) (Pawara, 2017), (BLE and LoRa, MQTT) (Wu et al., 2019), (ESP8266 WiFi module, MQTT) (Shao et al., 2019), (ZigBee, -) (Banuag and Salva, 2019, Alwan and Rao, 2017)
PPG Sensor	(ESP8266 WiFi module, -) (Bathilde et al., 2018), (BLE & LoRa, MQTT) (Wu et al., 2019), (ZigBee, -) (Guo et al., 2009), (6LoWPAN, -) (Jung and Chung, 2013), (3G, -) (Hu et al., 2013)
Glucose Sensor	(LoRa, -) (Mdhaffar et al., 2017), (BLE, HTTP) (Alfian et al., 2018), ( WiFi, -) (Perez et al., 2016), (ZigBee, -) (Chou et al., 2015)
Heart Rate Sensor	(ZigBee, XMPP) (Pawara, 2017), (Esp8266 WiFi module, HTTP) (Mishra and Chakraborty, 2018), (XBee module, -) (Fezari et al., 2015), (BLE, XMPP) (Kakria et al., 2015), (BLE, HTTP) (Alfian et al., 2018), (NFC, -) (Lermthong et al., 2016), (ZigBee, -) (Banuag and Salva, 2019), (Bluetooth, -), (WiFi, HTTP) (Wan et al., 2018)
ECG sensors
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) has a similar protocol stack as classic Bluetooth. It consumes less energy than the standard Bluetooth, as the name indicates. It operates on low-power applications where data packet size is small. In (Touati et al., 2013a), a remote health monitoring system is presented, where an ECG simulator uses ECG sensors to generate ECG signals and transferred via BLE. Another ECG monitoring system is proposed in (Yang et al., 2016), where ECG signals are collected in the IoT infrastructure and transmitted using WiFi. HTTP and MQTT are both employed in the IoT cloud server to visualize the data. Granados et al. proposed a real-time ECG monitoring system where Bluetooth is used for ECG data transmission and CoAP protocol is used in the application layer (Granados et al., 2017). Mishra et al. demonstrated an ECG monitoring system using IEEE 802.11 (WLAN) for data transmission and MQTT protocol for visualization (Mishra et al., 2018). For long-term health monitoring in the IoT platform, another ECG monitoring system is proposed in (Spanò et al., 2016) that allows multiple patient monitoring simultaneously. ECG sensors collect data and send them via WiFi or Bluetooth or ZigBee protocol. However, there are also some healthcare systems that use ZigBee (Wang et al., 2014), LoRa (Shahidul Islam et al., 2019), NFC (Gune et al., 2013), 6LoWPAN (Touati et al., 2013b), and 3G (Peng et al., 2011) for ECG data transference.

EEG sensors
EEG signals are used to classify eye state in (Laport et al., 2020). In this work, the ESP8266 WiFi module is used to send raw EEG signals, where MQTT protocol deals with the communication between different IoT agents. ESP8266 is a micro-chip that allows micro-controllers to connect with a WiFi network. The usage of mobile phone in our daily activities is increasing remarkably. However, it raises worries about the negative impacts of the radiation of mobile phone on the health. In (Roggeveen et al., 2015), a 3G mobile phone is used to investigate whether EEG activity is affected by radiation. The authors have further examined whether the location of the mobile phone is the cause of the impact. Thus, they have tested by placing the phone near the ears and chest. In (Zamora et al., 2019), a robotic arm application is proposed for motor disabilities where EEG and motion signals are passed using Bluetooth from the Emotiv insight headset. MQTT protocol and Raspberry Pi are used for data transfer in that application. There are also some systems that used BLE (O’Sullivan et al., 2018), ZigBee (Boquete et al., 2012), 6LoWPAN (Gia et al., 2015b), and XBee module (Arnin et al., 2013) as a communication technology for EEG sensor.

EMG sensors
EMG is a non-invasive measure for monitoring muscle activity. Surface electromyography (sEMG) is one kind of EMG. This is used to measure the surface of a skin above the muscle. Muscle fatigue detection through sEMG is an important application (Chang et al., 2012). Here, a wireless sEMG system is developed by using Bluetooth transmission technology. A wireless data acquisition of an electrode module for EMG is presented in (Kumar et al., 2018b), where an Arduino is used as a development board, and the ESP8266 WiFi module is used to send EMG signals. In some systems, BLE (Biagetti et al., 2020), 6LoWPAN (Gia et al., 2015b), and ZigBee (Kobayashi, 2011) are used for data transmission.

EOG sensors
In (Bulling et al., 2009), an eye motion analysis is introduced to detect activity using an EOG sensor. The authors proposed an embedded wearable eye goggle system where EOG signal is processed and stored for a long time. The signal is transferred to a remote device via Bluetooth. Some systems also use ZigBee (Boquete et al., 2012) and XBee module (Arnin et al., 2013) with EOG sensors to transfer physiological parameters.

Accelerometer
Fall detection is a significant application for elderly people in healthcare. In this context, a 3D-axis accelerometer embedded with a 6LoWPAN device is proposed in (Yacchirema et al., 2018a). To send emergency alert notification to the caregivers, MQTT protocol is used. In (Lin et al., 2017), patient handling activity recognition is introduced to reduce the injury risk of the caregivers. In this work, the authors presented a smart footwear device integrated with a pressure sensor, 3-axis accelerometer, 3-axis gyroscope, and 3-axis magnetometer, where BLE is used for the data transmission subsystem. In addition, 6LoWPAN (Touati et al., 2013b), LoRa (Zhang et al., 2020b), and ZigBee (Song and Chen, 2008) are also used to transfer accelerometer data in some systems.

Blood pressure sensor
For health monitoring, a novel wearable IoT-cloud-based health monitoring system (WISE) is presented in (Wan et al., 2018), where an Arduino board is integrated with temperature, blood pressure, and heart rate sensor nodes. Here, the extracted signals are transferred via WiFi. An RFID reader is connected to the Arduino to individually identify the users and a web-based GUI is developed using HTTP protocol. Furthermore, some systems have been proposed using BLE technology, where XMPP (Kakria et al., 2015) and HTTP (Alfian et al., 2018) protocol are used to transfer blood pressure data. On the contrary, some systems only used LoRa (Mdhaffar et al., 2017), XBee module (Fezari et al., 2015), 3G (Hu et al., 2013), NFC (Lermthong et al., 2016), and ZigBee (Guo et al., 2009) as a data communication technology.

Pulse oximeter
An IoT-based health monitoring system is proposed to support the mother and child health program in Indonesia (Kadarina and Priambodo, 2018). In this article, a pulse oximeter sensor is used to collect heart rate and SpO2. The authors have further illustrated MQTT protocol to deliver the collected signals to the Thingsboard through WiFi. In addition, 6LoWPAN (Gia et al., 2015b), LoRa (Zhang et al., 2020a), 3G (Peng et al., 2011), BLE (Magno et al., 2019), and ZigBee (Banuag and Salva, 2019) can also be used to transfer pulse oximetry data.

Temperature sensors
A wireless sensor node is introduced using MQTT protocol (Shao et al., 2019). A ESP8266EX WiFi module is connected with temperature sensor, air pressure sensor, and also with the local WiFi router to transfer the accumulated signal. In some systems BLE along with XMPP protocol (Kakria et al., 2015), WiFi along with HTTP protocol (Wilhelm et al., 2016), and ZigBee along with XMPP protocol (Pawara, 2017) are used for communication.

PPG sensors
Atrial fibrillation can be detected using PPG sensors by examining variations in the period of each heart rate. A wireless heart monitoring system is developed to detect atrial fibrillation by using PPG sensors and WiFi module (Bathilde et al., 2018). A health monitoring application is proposed, which consists of a Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN) and a low-power wide-area network (LPWAN) (Wu et al., 2019). PPG and temperature sensors are used for the WBAN network and BLE is used for data transmission within the WBAN. LoRa is used to transfer the data from the WBAN to the LPWAN. In this article, MQTT protocol is used.

Glucose sensors
A monitoring system introduces for the diabetes patient where vital signals like glucose level, weight, blood pressure, heart rate are collected and transmitted through BLE, and an advanced app deployed using the HTTP protocol (Alfian et al., 2018). Other systems used LoRa (Mdhaffar et al., 2017), WiFi (Perez et al., 2016), and ZigBee (Chou et al., 2015) for the communication technology.

Heart rate sensors
A real-time heart monitoring application is presented in (Kakria et al., 2015) to monitor cardiac status. The data extracted from heart rate, temperature, and blood pressure sensors are sent via BLE and a web application is developed using the XMPP protocol. An automated patient monitoring system is proposed for the hospital wards (Banuag and Salva, 2019), where oxygen saturation, temperature, heart rate, etc. (vital signs) are collected through IoT devices; and ZigBee technology transmits the data. Some systems also use BLE (Alfian et al., 2018), Esp8266 WiFi module (Mishra and Chakraborty, 2018), and WiFi (Wan et al., 2018) with HTTP protocol for heart rate sensors. Besides, a smart rehabilitation system is proposed in (Fan et al., 2014), where RFID does the object identification task and collects the sensor data.

Finally, we conclude the section with Table 6, where we have shown the protocols vs. communication technologies for different sensors that are being used in healthcare systems. In the table, a ‘-’ sign indicates that the information is missing.

The following section describes Network Storage, the third key element of the taxonomy.


Table 6. Protocols with their Corresponding Communication Technologies .

Protocols	Communication Technology
BLE	Bluetooth	WiFi	ZigBee	6LoWPAN	ESP8266 WiFi
CoAP	–	ECG (Granados et al., 2017)	–	–	Fall (Yacchirema et al., 2018a)	–
MQTT	–	EEG (Zamora et al., 2019)	Pulse Oximeter (Kadarina and Priambodo, 2018)	–	Accelerometer (Yacchirema et al., 2018a)	EEG (Laport et al., 2020), Temperature (Shao et al., 2019)
HTTP	Blood Pressure, Glucose, Heart Rate (Alfian et al., 2018)	–	Blood Pressure, Temperature (Wan et al., 2018, Wilhelm et al., 2016), Heart Rate (Wan et al., 2018)	–	–	Heart Rate (Mishra and Chakraborty, 2018)
XMPP	Blood Pressure, Temperature, Heart Rate (Kakria et al., 2015)	–	–	Temperature, Heart Rate (Pawara, 2017)	–	–
6. Network storage and computing
In our taxonomy, as shown in Fig. 3 the network storage and computing element lies in between communication technologies and ML-based applications. It is worth noting that the data stored in the network storage is being accessed and manipulated by different ML-based healthcare applications.

IoT devices generate a massive amount of data, which becomes very challenging to deal with. It is not possible to store such a large amount of data in local servers. In this aspect, the concept of remote cloud for data storage has become popular. Although cloud computing provides great elasticity, interoperability and scalability (Doukas and Maglogiannis, 2012), it has the drawback of high latency. Some applications in health monitoring systems require that the sensitive data need to be transferred to the cloud very quickly, and the responses are received instantly by the front-end applications to visualize the results (Dastjerdi et al., 2016). Otherwise, the delayed result from the whole processing may not bring any significant outcome (Sunhare et al., 2020). To overcome this issue, fog computing is introduced where the initial processing and computing take place between the IoT devices and cloud storage to decrease the latency. Fog computing adds an additional computing layer between the IoT devices and the cloud to keep short, time-sensitive, and critical data for analysis. It also helps to respond to an emergency situation quickly without wasting time. Edge computing, in contrast to fog computing, occurs in the IoT devices itself. The function of fog and edge computing is similar. The main difference is the location where actual data processing occurs. Conventionally, fog and edge computing take place at the lower tiers of the cloud computing. A comparison between cloud, fog and edge computing in terms of cost, time, bandwidth, storage, implemented algorithms, processing time, distance to sensors, etc. are summarized in Table 7. Below, we discuss briefly about cloud, fog, and edge computing.


Table 7. Comparison between cloud, fog and edge computing.

Computing Types	Cloud	Fog /Edge
Cost	Increased cost	Decreased cost
Time	Required high time to collect data from lower tier	Required less time to collect data from lower tier
Bandwidth	Required high bandwidth	Required less bandwidth
Storage	High storage capacity	Low storage capacity
Algorithm’s Complexity	High complex algorithms can be performed	Low complex algorithms can be performed
Processing	Complex processing can be performed	Simple processing can be performed
Distance from Sensor	Large distance from sensor	The fog layer is located a short distance from the sensor; In the edge layer, computing takes place wherein data is created
Energy Consumption	High	Low
Architecture	Centralized	Distributed
Comments	Unable to provide real-time notification; Globally store information	provide real-time alert; locally store information
6.1. Cloud computing
Instead of maintaining own data center and storing IoT generated data in it, many organizations prefer to store their data by renting storage in the cloud. Fig. 9 illustrates a cloud based architecture where sensor data directly go to the cloud storage. In this figure, cloud acts as an intermediate layer between the physical and the application layers. Data are sent to the cloud through a gateway using a direct or indirect network connection. Cloud services not only help to store data but also process and compute them (Sethi and Sarangi, 2017). It provides accessibility to data according to the needs of web or Android services (Hassanalieragh et al., 2015). In addition, cloud computing helps IoT devices to overcome resource constraints, such as limited memory and CPU power by providing unlimited storage and security to the stored data (Muhammad et al., 2017, Tawalbeh et al., 2016). In this context, many systems prefer to use cloud-based architecture for remote monitoring of patients, e.g., heart monitoring (Bansal and Gandhi, 2019, Hussein et al., 2018) and patient health observation (Zorkany et al., 2019) systems, where the systems perform the constant monitoring. This is because if any abnormalities are noticed, the doctor or caregiver can be informed immediately to take necessary actions.

Note that centralized cloud servers fail to deal with sensor data in real-time. In some applications, IoT devices need to handle the real-time activity of a user. For example, Early Warning Score (EWS) for health difficulties identification (Azimi et al., 2017a) and remote patient monitoring system require uninterrupted network connection while network failure causes data loss (Azimi et al., 2017b). Therefore, patient abnormalities need to be predicted through immediate response or notification. On the other hand, cloud computing has some known limitations, such as inefficient use of resources, high bandwidth requirement, data redundancy, latency, etc. (Dastjerdi et al., 2016, Mahmoud et al., 2018). To overcome some of these limitations fog and edge computing have been introduced.


Table 8. Healthcare applications that uses different network storage based architectures.

Computing Types	Application
Cloud	Voice pathology monitoring (Muhammad et al., 2017), Heart disease diagnosis (Khan and Algarni, 2020, Bansal and Gandhi, 2019, Hussein et al., 2018), Diabetes prediction and diagnosis (Kumar et al., 2018a, Kaur et al., 2018), Patient monitoring system (Zorkany et al., 2019)
Fog	Chikungunya disease diagnosis (Sood and Mahajan, 2018), Patient monitoring (Moghadas et al., 2020b, Debauche et al., 2019, Mani et al., 2020, Paul et al., 2018), Heart disease diagnosis (Tuli et al., 2019, Gia et al., 2015a), Fall detection system for elderly (Yacchirema et al., 2018a), Disease diagnosis healthcare framework (Verma and Sood, 2018), Sleep apnea monitoring (Yacchirema et al., 2018c), Sleep monitoring (Yacchirema et al., 2018b), Mosquito-borne diseases detection and prevention (Vijayakumar et al., 2019), Hospitalization system (Hassen et al., 2020)
Edge	Voice disorder assessment and treatment (Muhammad et al., 2018), Activity prediction system (Uddin, 2019), Real-time health monitoring (Azimi et al., 2019), Fall detection in older adults (Mrozek et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020)
Fog and Edge	Fall detection system (Queralta et al., 2019, Divya and Leena, 2020)
6.2. Fog computing
Fog computing helps to reduce the burden of the cloud. The primary difference between cloud and fog is that cloud is a centralized system, whereas fog computing is a distributed and decentralized architecture. Fog is not an isolated architecture from the cloud, and it does not replace the functionality of cloud computing. Rather it enhances the services provided by the cloud (Dastjerdi et al., 2016). Fig. 10 presents a fog-based architecture where the fog layer acts as a bridge to deliver data from IoT devices to the cloud. In this architecture, fog is a mediator between the physical and the cloud layers. It processes and locally stores the acquired data in the fog node or gateway, which is located within the LAN. It controls which data should be sent to the cloud and which can be processed nearby. In this way, it reduces the load on the centralized server, enabling the cloud to process, calculate, and store data more efficiently when needed. The fog-based architecture includes several components, e.g., router, wired or wireless switches, local gateway, and dedicated fog devices (Abdelmoneem et al., 2020). These elements run on both the edge node and the cloud server. In this architecture, gateway devices perform data monitoring, processing, analyzing as well as data interaction to the cloud. In addition, any device featuring computing, storage, and network connectivity can be considered as a fog node and stays at a single-hop distance from the sensor nodes. These are such as mobile phones, high-power sensors, etc. (Luan et al., 2015, Qadri et al., 2020). The data obtained from the sensor are in the form of volume, which is distributed to various edge devices in this LAN to process the fog layer locally. Thus, it makes the system more efficient as it helps to reduce the chances of cloud loading failure (Paul et al., 2018). Fog nodes can also implement virtualization functions, supported by Software Defined Network (SDN) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV). Fog Computing can further be implemented at the base stations of mobile networks (Roman et al., 2018, Qadri et al., 2020). Moreover, fog nodes can store data locally and also provide real-time emergency warning to the health provider (Mani et al., 2020). Some examples are fall detection system (Yacchirema et al., 2018a), sleep apnea monitoring (Yacchirema et al., 2018c), and sleep monitoring (Yacchirema et al., 2018b) wherein real-time notification system is used to control the emergency situation of the patient. Fog removes redundant data from the sensor and sends the filtered data to the cloud for permanent storage and off-line analysis (Vilela et al., 2019). On the other hand, data filtering reduces the volume of data transmission along with lessening network bandwidth (Mahmoud et al., 2018). Fog computing can introduce low latency, mobility, real-time response, interaction with cloud, high security, compression, etc. (Sethi and Sarangi, 2017). Fog nodes allow less time to access captured data than the cloud. Furthermore, it can provide an immediate response, which reduces latency and provides great accessibility (Moghadas et al., 2020b).

Fog architecture has some limitations, such as limited storage and computing resources as compared to the cloud. Thus, fog nodes process sensor data using computationally simple algorithms and methods. Besides, cloud computing does complex data processing and may apply powerful machine learning algorithms (Azimi et al., 2017b, Dubey et al., 2015). In this aspect, Fog computing cannot do everything solely. Therefore, fog computing goes together with the cloud to fulfill the needs of IoT services.

6.3. Edge computing
In edge computing, data capture, processing, storing, and analysis are performed on sensors or IoT devices where data are created, rather than being transferred to somewhere. Edge technology reduces the required bandwidth for data transmission (Mrozek et al., 2020), make data more secure and save time by analyzing in real-time (Azimi et al., 2019). This layer allows to send alert message to the health providers instantly when patient’s critical situation occurs. A significant weakness of this technology is to understand which data should be kept in the edge and which data should be transferred to the cloud. Since simple algorithms are applied for data analysis at the edge level and complex algorithms are applied to the cloud, it is necessary to manage where the data are to be processed. Fig. 11 illustrates an edge-based architecture, where edge devices capture and process data, and also send some data to the cloud for further analysis or storage when needed.

Fog and edge computing can be used together to handle sensor data and it does the work of general processing and analysis. Fig. 12 illustrates the fog and edge-based architecture where the fog and edge paradigms are combined to reduce the workload of the cloud. This is a 5-tier architecture where the edge layer does the simple computation task over the sensor data and sends data to the fog over the Internet. Fog processes data with advanced algorithms at its level and transfers data to the cloud for the final analysis and global storage. This infrastructure takes the advantages of the edge, fog, and cloud. This helps to reduce latency and utilizes bandwidth efficiently (Queralta et al., 2019).


Download : Download high-res image (404KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. An edge-based architecture where the edge layer processes the sensor data first.

Table 8 shows several healthcare applications wherein different types of computing architectures have been used. Some systems use solo cloud-based infrastructure to observe patient’s physical parameters (Verma and Sood, 2018, Kumar et al., 2018a, Kaur et al., 2018, Zorkany et al., 2019). On the other hand, some systems use either fog- (Debauche et al., 2019, Vijayakumar et al., 2019) or edge-based (Muhammad et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2020) computing that later is associated with the cloud. In contrast, (Queralta et al., 2019, Divya and Leena, 2020) use a combined edge and fog-cloud based architecture.


Download : Download high-res image (568KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. A fog and edge-based combined architecture where edge and fog process sensor data.

In the subsequent section, we describe Machine Learning, the fourth and a key element of the taxonomy.

7. Machine Learning (ML)
In accordance with our taxonomy as depicted in Fig. 3 ML-based application is the final element of the taxonomy that we discuss. The applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) or Machine Learning (ML) in research fields have been increasing progressively in the recent years. AI is a branch of computer science where we study intelligent systems that think and behave like a human. AI includes machine learning, natural language processing (NLP), vision, knowledge-based decisions, robotics and other branches of computer science (Qadri et al., 2020). On the other hand, ML is a very important branch of AI. ML is used to build a system that is capable of learning from experiences or examples through self-improvement without being explicitly programmed.

A massive number of sensor devices, used in the IoT and healthcare, is driven by the intelligence of AI or ML. The sensors collect physical parameters and AI/ML algorithms are applied on them to predict and detect the patterns or abnormalities in them. It helps widely the patients as well as the physicians. Diseases can be diagnosed more efficiently at an early stage with the help of AI. Thus, it helps to reduce the mortality rate as well as the medical cost. AI is used in various fields of medication such as elderly care (Yacchirema et al., 2018a), disease diagnosis (Kumar et al., 2018a, Tuli et al., 2020), personalized health monitoring (Kaur et al., 2019, Alfian et al., 2018), assisting devices for physical fitness monitoring (Syed et al., 2019), alarms after finding physiological flaws (Magaña-Espinoza et al., 2014, Divya and Leena, 2020) and clinical decision support systems (Yang et al., 2019).

Fig. 13 shows different steps that are followed in a typical ML methodology. It starts with a problem definition followed by the collection of dataset that is suitable for the type of the problem. Then pre-processing is applied to the data and to prepare for the model selection. Thereafter, an algorithm is selected and the resulting model is trained and evaluated. A feedback mechanism from the evaluation of the model may go back to improve any of the previous steps. Finally, the model is deployed after thorough experimental analysis.


Download : Download high-res image (295KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Steps of the Machine Learning Workflow.

The rest of the section is organized to describe these steps in detail in the context of IoT in Healthcare. IoT and ML are so vast that many healthcare applications have used them individually. In this survey literature, we only discuss those applications that cover both IoT and ML.

7.1. Problem formulation
Problem definition is the first step towards understanding and formulating a problem suitable for ML. The problem formulation often depends on the type of the ML problem. In general an ML problem is associated with a task for which the performance measure increases with the experience the agent have for that task.The ML problems are generally categorized into four broad categories: (1) supervised, (2) unsupervised, (3) semi-supervised and (4) reinforcement learning, depending on the underlying task (Qadri et al., 2020). Supervised learning uses supervision or guidance from any previous experience as labeled data to perform the task. In unsupervised learning, no such guidance are available. In semi-supervised learning, majority of the instances in the dataset are unlabeled while only a subset of them are labeled. It is a combination of supervised and unsupervised learning. In reinforcement learning, the agent learns a policy that maps states to actions from experiences. Deep learning is another important kind of ML that helps a system to mimic the behavior of a human brain. It consists of multi-layer neural network and models the working of the neurons of a brain. Deep reinforcement learning is a subclass of ML, which combines both reinforcement and deep learning. The tasks of supervised learning are mostly prediction of one of the two types: (1) discrete class prediction or classification and (2) numeric value prediction or regression. Classification is again can be either binary or multi-class or multi-label depending of the domain of the predicted discrete values.

In IoT based healthcare, often the sensors are equipped to acquire the necessary data which works as experience for the ML task. This data is then processed based on the ML task intended for. In our research, we have observed that most of the early works done in healthcare i.e., Covid-19 identification (Singh and Kaur, 2020), diabetes prediction (Kaur et al., 2018), fall detection (Mrozek et al., 2020, Yacchirema et al., 2018a), heart disease diagnosis (Moghadas et al., 2020a) and others (Qiu et al., 2020, Devi and Kalaivani, 2020, Klucken et al., 2013, Satpathy et al., 2019, Syed et al., 2019, Vijayakumar et al., 2019, Memon et al., 2019, Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018, Akhbarifar et al., 2020, Verma and Sood, 2018, Yang et al., 2018, Kaur et al., 2019, Sharon et al., 2020), combining both IoT and ML, are based on supervised learning. Since supervised learning learns from labeled data, most of the authors prefer to use it to identify or diagnose patients. Moreover, this learning technique helps to optimize the performance of the classifier using previous experience. Compared to that, fewer works have been found in unsupervised (Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019, van Kuppevelt et al., 2019, Enshaeifar et al., 2018, Enshaeifar et al., 2019) learning because it often provides unpredictable results as the data is unlabeled. Similarly, we have found less works in semi-supervised (Yang et al., 2019, Zhou et al., 2020) and reinforcement learning (Shukla et al., 2018, Zhou et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2018). Lately, many researchers are focusing on deep learning too (Divya and Leena, 2020, Kumar et al., 2018a, Alfian et al., 2018, Ali et al., 2020, Vedaei et al., 2020, Bhatia et al., 2020, Tuli et al., 2020, Sundaravadivel et al., 2018, Wadhwani et al., 2019, Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019, Zhang et al., 2020a). Since DL works with a huge number of features, it has become trend in the healthcare sector. Furthermore, it can be used to detect abnormalities from the medical images. In Table 9, we have presented a summary of the healthcare applications that are divided into four groups: supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and deep learning. Specially, we have equipped Table 9 which oversees supervised learning at the top. Thereafter, unsupervised and semi-supervised learning, similarly reinforcement, deep reinforcement and deep learning in the bottom of the table. We have organized the table based on IoT devices, computing techniques and ML algorithms applied to several ML powered applications.

Application area
Nowadays, smart healthcare systems have taken a broad role in the recent development of IoT based healthcare (Akhbarifar et al., 2020, Syed et al., 2019). These systems provide a convenient way for the people with health problems to be monitored at home without having to go to the hospital regularly. This reduces the number of clinic visits, standing in line for hours, treatment costs, etc. During the recent pandemic of Covid-19, we have realized the need of such systems more than ever. During this period, hospital accessibility is tremendously reduced for minor health related issues. Moreover, infected patients are required to be in isolation from others. There have been several recent studies involving smart healthcare systems and the Covid-19 pandemic (Singh and Kaur, 2020, Vedaei et al., 2020, Taiwo and Ezugwu, 2020).

Remote monitoring of elderly patients has currently received a lot of attention. Fall detection is one of the most serious prediction tasks for the elderly people and the critical patients in general (Mrozek et al., 2020, Yacchirema et al., 2018a, Divya and Leena, 2020). Heart disease is another leading cause of death. Detection and monitoring of heart diseases accurately are very important to provide treatment of the affected patients (Tuli et al., 2020, Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018, Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019). Many researches have been performed on various heart diseases such as cardiovascular disorder detection (Satpathy et al., 2019), heart disease prediction (Ali et al., 2020), segmenting ECG data (van Kuppevelt et al., 2019) and cardiac arrhythmia (Moghadas et al., 2020a, Devi and Kalaivani, 2020). Cancer, often called the emperor of all maladies, is another severe disease. The detection of lung cancer (Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019), breast cancer (Memon et al., 2019), blood cancer (Wang et al., 2017), etc. have recently seen the significant use of IoT and ML. Some other useful applications of IoT and ML are diabetes prediction (Kumar et al., 2018a, Kaur et al., 2018), gait analysis (Klucken et al., 2013), stroke rehabilitation (Yang et al., 2018) and dementia detection (Enshaeifar et al., 2018).

In Table 9, we have summarized various healthcare applications that are based on both IoT and ML. Besides, we have explored which types of IoT devices, computing strategy, and ML methods have been used in those works. In some cases, IoT devices and computing techniques are not explicitly mentioned. In those cases, a ‘-’ sign has been used to indicate that information is missing.

7.2. Dataset collection
Required datasets for ML are usually collected through one of the following processes: real-time data via sensors and devices, previously stored medical records or database, and open-source data from a repository or datasets that have already been published and validated in the scientific literature. In many cases, classifiers are trained by existing available data, whereas IoT devices are used to retrieve physiological parameters and are used to test the model (Mrozek et al., 2020, Syed et al., 2019, Tuli et al., 2020, Devi and Kalaivani, 2020). On the other hand, some applications have used primary sensor data to both train and test the classifiers (Bhatia et al., 2020, Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018, Klucken et al., 2013, Enshaeifar et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2018). In case of IoT, prediction of performance depends on whether the sensor is placed correctly and data is captured at the right time (Divya and Leena, 2020). To train the classifiers, many researchers often use available datasets from different online platforms (e.g., UCI and Kaggle), government or agent websites that provide open data, etc. In Table 9, we observe that most of the datasets are collected from UCI library. Among them, a few are frequently used, for example, Cleveland dataset for heart disease (Ali et al., 2020, Tuli et al., 2020), Sisfall data on fall detection (Mrozek et al., 2020, Yacchirema et al., 2018a), and Wisconsin data on breast cancer (Memon et al., 2019). MIMIC is another open dataset that is developed by MIT and is widely used (Anon, 2021g).

7.3. Pre-processing
Data gathered from various IoT devices often contain raw signals that are noisy in nature. They require several pre-processing activities to be performed such as cleaning, noise removal, feature extraction, imputation, normalization, dimension reduction, etc.

Here, we only discuss those pre-processing activities that have been omitted from Table 10 since this information is in scattered format. Raw signals from IoT devices may not provide any meaningful information, therefore, filtering of signals is required (Divya and Leena, 2020, Devi and Kalaivani, 2020, Mora et al., 2017). Missing data is another common problem which has a significant affect on the performance of the classification. This problem can be handled by deleting rows or columns containing null data (Syed et al., 2019, Memon et al., 2019) or using various data imputation techniques (Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019, Ali et al., 2020, Sharon et al., 2020). Collected signals also contain noises which affect the data preparation processes. To remove noises various approaches are used such as low pass filters (Yacchirema et al., 2018a), Kalman filters (Ali et al., 2020), high pass filters (Hussein et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2018), hamming window FIR filters (Wadhwani et al., 2019), etc. (Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019, Enshaeifar et al., 2018, Akhbarifar et al., 2020, Wadhwani et al., 2019). Another significant data preparation technique is normalization of the features (Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019, Enshaeifar et al., 2019, Ali et al., 2020, Tuli et al., 2020) that minimizes scale bias. Feature engineering is the process of selecting effective features from raw data using domain knowledge or data mining techniques.

In Table 10, we have listed different features and pre-processing techniques deployed in the surveyed literature. In the pre-processing column, we have shown the approaches used in the respective literature to select features. From the table, we can observe that the feature selection techniques are information gain (Ali et al., 2020, Klucken et al., 2013), linear regression (Satpathy et al., 2019), recursive feature elimination (Memon et al., 2019), cross modality (Verma and Sood, 2018), etc. (Sundaravadivel et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2019). While studying these literature, we have found that waveform transform (Wadhwani et al., 2019) and time interval (Kumar et al., 2018a) are used for pre-processing of raw signals received from some IoT devices. However, in some cases they are not required. Furthermore, dimensionality reduction techniques (Tuli et al., 2020, van Kuppevelt et al., 2019) are also applied to data to improve the representation that enhances the model.

7.4. Model selection
The model selection step involves selection of particular ML algorithm that is suitable for the task. Often a large number of algorithms and their variants are tested to find out the suitable model. In Table 9, we have summarized the algorithms used in the surveyed literature. Note that we have already mentioned about supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, reinforcement, and deep learning in the preceding sections. In the top half of Table 9, we have outlined some of the popular supervised learning algorithms used in the state-of-the-art research, such as -Nearest Neighbor (NN) (Moghadas et al., 2020a, Vijayakumar et al., 2019), Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Qiu et al., 2020, Devi and Kalaivani, 2020, Yang et al., 2019), Logistic Regression (LR) (Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018), Decision Tree (DT) (Yacchirema et al., 2018a, Mrozek et al., 2020), Random Forest (RF) (Singh and Kaur, 2020) and Naïve Bayes (NB) (Singh and Kaur, 2020, Syed et al., 2019). Comparably, we have observed that the unsupervised learning methods are the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Singh and Kaur, 2020, Yang et al., 2019) and Clustering (Enshaeifar et al., 2018, Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019) in the second half of the Table 9. Besides, Markov Chain Model (Enshaeifar et al., 2018) is considered as supervised or unsupervised learning approach. Deep Q-Network (Zhou et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2018) is one kind of deep-reinforcement learning algorithm. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) (Bhatia et al., 2020), Neural Network (NN) (Ali et al., 2020, Sundaravadivel et al., 2018), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) RNN (Wadhwani et al., 2019, Zhou et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2018) and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (Divya and Leena, 2020, Zhang et al., 2020a) fall under deep learning is similarly shown in the bottom half of the table.


Table 9. Summary of different types of ML driven applications in terms of IoT devices, Computing strategy, and ML-methods .

Application	IoT Devices	Computing Strategy	Methods
Supervised Learning
Covid-19 identification at an early stage (Singh and Kaur, 2020)	Temperature, X-ray, ECG sensor, Surveillance Camera, Health Band, Tablets, and Gadgets	Fog-Cloud architecture	Ensemble classifier including Random Forest, Naive Bayes, Generative Adversarial Networks
Diabetes prediction (Kaur et al., 2018)	Wearable device	Cloud architecture	Ensemble of Decision Tree and Neural Network
Fall detection (Mrozek et al., 2020)	Mobile device with sensors	Edge-Cloud architecture	Boosted Decision Tree
Fall detection (Yacchirema et al., 2018a)	Accelerometer embedded in wearable device, Smart IoT gateway containing Raspberry Pi 3	Fog-Cloud architecture	Decision Tree
Cardiac Arrhythmia monitoring (Moghadas et al., 2020a)	Arduino Uno, Raspberry Pi 3 B+, AD8232 sensor module	Fog-Cloud architecture	K-Nearest Neighbor
Selective Encryption scheme to protect ECG data (Qiu et al., 2020)	ECG sensor	–	Support Vector Machine
Cardiac Arrhythmia diagnosis (Devi and Kalaivani, 2020)	Arduino, AD8232 ECG Sensor	–	Support Vector Machine
Motor impairment detection in parkinson’s disease (Klucken et al., 2013)	Accelerometer and gyroscope are attached to a shoe that record motion signals, Laptop	–	Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), AdaBoost, SVM
Prediction of pathological condition for cardiovascular disease (Satpathy et al., 2019)	Wearable device that collects blood pressure, breathing before and after exercise, heart beat, angina, Smart phone, FPGA device	Cloud architecture	Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) implementation of a fuzzy classifier
Ambient Assisted Living (Syed et al., 2019)	Accelerometer, Gyroscope, Magnetometer, ECG	Cloud architecture	Multinominal Naïve Bayes
Mosquito-borne diseases monitoring (Vijayakumar et al., 2019)	Wireless mosquito sensor, Smart Phone	Fog-Cloud architecture	Fuzzy KNN, Social Network Analysis
Breast cancer detection (Memon et al., 2019)	–	–	SVM kernel Linear
Heart monitoring system (Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018)	Wearable sensors to collect physiological data	Cloud architecture	Logistic Regression
Remote monitoring system (Akhbarifar et al., 2020)	IoT device, IoT medical device sensors	Cloud architecture	K-star
Smart student diagnosis system (Verma and Sood, 2018)	Medical sensors	Fog-Cloud architecture	DT, KNN, SVM
Stroke rehabilitation system (Yang et al., 2018)	Smart wearable armband by integrating a sEMG module with textile electrodes, 3-D robotic hand	–	LDA, MLP, SVM
Healthcare monitoring system (Kaur et al., 2019)	Medical devices	Cloud architecture	KNN, Linear-SVM, MLP, DT, RF
Rheumatoid arthritis classification (Sharon et al., 2020)	Electronic image sensor	–	Bagging, Adaboost, Random subspace; KNN, RF as a base learner
Unsupervised Learning
Lung cancer prediction (Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019)	IoT device collects blood pressure, sugar level, heart beat	–	Incremental classification algorithm that combines Association Rule Mining, Decision Tree with temporal features and CNN; Fuzzy C-Means Cluster
Dementia monitoring and detection of Agitation, Irritation, and Aggression (Enshaeifar et al., 2018)	PIR, Motion, Pressure, Door sensor, Central energy consumption monitoring device, Physiological monitoring sensors	–	Entropy-based Markov Chain Model, K-means Clustering, Hierarchical information fusion
Segmenting accelerometer data (van Kuppevelt et al., 2019)	Accelerometer	–	Hidden Semi-Markov Model
Detection of Urinary Tract Infections and analysis daily activity patterns (Enshaeifar et al., 2019)	PIR, Motion, Pressure, Door sensors, Central energy consumption monitoring device, Physiological monitoring sensors	–	Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF), Isolation Forest
Semi-supervised Learning
Clinical decision support system (Yang et al., 2019)	Multiple sensors	–	Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), SVM and KNN as base learners; finally used SVM (kernel-linear and RBF-based) as final classifiers
Reinforcement Learning
Latency reduction in IoT-healthcare (Shukla et al., 2018)	Iot devices	Fod-Cloud architecture	Fuzzy Reinforcement Learning Data Packet Allocation (FRLPDA)
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Human Activity Recognition (Zhou et al., 2020)	Accelerometer, On-body wearable devices, GPS, Orientation, Light	–	Deep Q-Network, LSTM
Human-thing cognitive interactivity (Zhang et al., 2018)	Emotiv Epoc+ headset	Cloud architecture	Deep Q-Network, Weighted average spatial LSTM
Deep Learning
Fall detection (Divya and Leena, 2020)	Smart Camera, Wearable sensor that contains acceleration and gyroscopic values	Edge-Fog-Cloud architecture	Deep Convolution Network, Xtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)
Diabetes diagnosis (Kumar et al., 2018a)	Medical sensors	Cloud architecture	Fuzzy Rule based Neural Classifier
Personalized health monitoring system with diabetes classification and future BG prediction (Alfian et al., 2018)	Mi Band 2, Mi Smart Scale, Caresens, Omron, Smart phone	–	MLP, LSTM
Heart disease prediction (Ali et al., 2020)	Respiration rate, Oxygen Saturation, Blood Pressure, Cholesterol, Glucose level, Temperature, EMG, EEG, ECG sensor, Wearable Watch	–	Ensemble Deep Learning that contains feed-forward network; LogitBoost as Boosting algorithm; Ontology based recommendation
Covid-SAFE framework for providing patient health monitoring and a physical distance tracking system (Vedaei et al., 2020)	Temperature, PPG Sensor, Raspberry Pi Zero, Smart Phone	Fog-Cloud architecture	Adaptive-Network-Based Fuzzy Inference System
Urine-based diabetes monitoring (Bhatia et al., 2020)	Electronic hydrometer, Multi-analyte sensors, E-urine Strips	Fog-Cloud architecture	Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Bayesian Belief Model, Self-Organized Map
Heart disease diagnosis (Tuli et al., 2020)	ECG, EEG, EMG, Oxygen level, Glucose level, Temperature, Respiration Rate Sensor, Smart Phone, Raspberry Pi	Edge-Fog-Cloud architecture	Ensemble Neural Network
Nutrition monitoring system (Sundaravadivel et al., 2018)	Weighing sensor, Micro-controller, Smart Phone	Cloud architecture	5-layer neural network, Bayesian network
Patient monitoring system (Wadhwani et al., 2019)	Arduino UNO, AD8232 ECG module, ECG ring electrodes, LM35 temperature sensor, Sphygmomanometer	Cloud architecture	LSTM RNN
Heart disease prediction (Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019)	Smart watch	Cloud architecture	Higher Order Boltzmann Deep Belief Neural Network
Gait analysis ans application of Virtual Reality (VR) fitness game (Zhang et al., 2020a)	Triboelectric smart socks, Microcontroller Unit, PC	–	1D CNN

Table 10. Summary of different types of ML applications in terms of data collection, selected features, pre-processing techniques, evaluation metrics, and results .

Reference	Data Collection	Features	Pre-processing	Evaluation	Results
Supervised Learning
(Singh and Kaur, 2020)	Synthetic Covid-19 data	Temperature, Pulse rate, Blood pressure, Difficulty in breathing status, Coughing, Tightness of chest, Running nose, Environmental data; Features: 14	Attribute selection algorithm selects 10 attributes	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%
10-fold cross validation	Recall: 0.93; F1-score: 0.871
(Kaur et al., 2018)	UCI - Pima Indians Diabetes DB; includes 768 records	Features: 9	–	Train : 70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 94.5%
Specificity = 90%;
Sensitivity = 93.1%
(Mrozek et al., 2020)	SisFall; containing 38 peoples daily activities. After preprocessing total instances: 4,505	Maximum magnitude of acceleration and angular velocity; Average, standard deviation, variance, sum of accelerometer and velocity’s value; Pearson’s correlation coefficient for various pairs of axes of accelerometer and gyroscope, etc. After preprocessing total features: 46	Pearson’s correlation coefficient used	5-fold cross-validation	Accuracy: 73%;
Precision: 92%
(Yacchirema et al., 2018a)	SisFall	Acceleration values in the x, y, and z axes	Filtered over the gathered movement data using a first order IIR low-pass filter	–	Accuracy: 91.67%;
Precision: 93.75%
(Moghadas et al., 2020a)	UCI Arrhythmiac DB; samples: 452	Age, Sex, Height, Weight, QRS, PR interval, Heart rate etc.; Features: 279	–	Train: 80%;
Test: 20%	Accuracy: 94.44%;
RMSE:2.231
(Qiu et al., 2020)	MIT-BIH Arrhythmia DB includes 96 records; MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm DB includes 36 records, and The BIDMC Congestive Heart Failure DB includes 30 records	QRS complex, Q-wave, R-wave, S-wave, P-wave, T-wave	Auto-Regressive model coefficients, Shannon entropy values, Multi-fractal Wavelet	Train:70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 97.96%
(Devi and Kalaivani, 2020)	MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm DB; including 18 ECG records; MIT-BIH Malignant Ventricular ectopy DB; 22 ECG records; CU Ventricular Tachycardia DB; 35 records; MIT-BIH Supraventricular Arrhythmia DB; 78 records	Minimum, Maximum, Mean, Standard deviation, Kurtosis, and Skewness, HRV features	Pan Tompkins algorithm for QRS detection	10-fold cross validation	Confusion Matrix is given
(Klucken et al., 2013)	Sensor signals used	step dependent, sequence dependent, frequency dependent features; Features: 694	Information Gain and Sequential Forward Selection used for feature selection	10-fold cross validation	Accuracy: 81%
(Satpathy et al., 2019)	UCI - Cleveland DB and IoT device	bps, cp, chol, max_hra, st, slope, vessels, defect values; Features: 76	Linear Regression model used to eliminate irrelevant features and selects 8 features	–	Computation time: μ
(Syed et al., 2019)	UCI - MHEALTH DB; includes 12 physical activities; records: 33629	Vital Physiological signs, Heart rate, Body movements; Features:23	–	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 97.1%
(Vijayakumar et al., 2019)	UCI machine repository; includes personal and demographic information; takes 14 different samples	Patient’s personal information, Symptoms, Location, Contextual Information, images of place	Jaccard Similarity Coefficient to measure similarity	–	Accuracy: 95.9%;
Precision: 92.4%;
Recall: 94.5%;
F1-score: 93.4%
(Memon et al., 2019)	Wisconsin Diagnostic Breast Cancer DB - UCI; Samples: 569	ID, Mean the values of Radius, Texture, Area, Compactness, Concavity, and Concave points; Severity of the Radius, Perimeter, Compactness, and Fractal dimension; Radius worst, Texture worst, Area worst, Compactness worst, Concavity worst, Concave point worst, Symmetry worst; Features: 32	Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) used to select 18 features	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 99%
Specificity: 99%;
Sensitivity: 98%;
F1-score: 99;
MCC: 99;
Error: 1;
Time: 0.030s
(Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018)	Real-life data from IoT devices;	Respiratory rate, Heart rate, Blood Pressure: Systolic range, Blood Pressure: Diastolic range, Body temperature, Blood Sugar: Fasting, Blood Sugar: Post meal; Features: 7	–	–	ROC analysis used to identify most significant clinical parameters
(Akhbarifar et al., 2020)	Online DB; Samples: 400	Hypercholesterolemia (HCLS) history, HCLS duration, HCLS control, Hypertension (HTN) history, HTN duration, HTN control, Respiratory rate, Heart rate, Isolated Systolic Blood Pressure, Isolated Diastolic Blood Pressure, LDL Cholesterol, HDL Cholesterol, Cholesterol, Oral Temperature,  saturation etc.	Random selection of sampling used	10-fold cross validation	Accuracy: 95%;
Precision: 94.5%;
Recall: 93.5%;
F1-score: 93.99%
(Verma and Sood, 2018)	UCI data to diagnosis a student with obesity, infectious, respiratory, heart related diseases	Body weight, Temperature, Gasterointestinal tract, Stress pattern, Blood pressure etc.	Cross modality regression used to identify attributes	4-fold cross validation	For infectious diagnosis DT(C4.5) better, Accuracy: 92.8%;
Specificity: 93.3%;
Sensitivity: 90.4%;
f-score: 96%.
For heart related diagnosis KNN better, Accuracy: 94.3%;
Specificity: 93.6%;
Sensitivity: 96.2%;
F1-score: 90.9%; For stress level diagnosis SVM better, Accuracy: 87.4%;
time: 34ms
(Yang et al., 2018)	Real-life data	Mean absolute value, Standard deviation, Variance, Waveform length, Root mean square, Zero crossing	Univariate feature selection, Classification complexity estimating algorithms (CCEA) and PCA applied for feature selection; Selected Features: 6	Train: 40%;
Test: 40%;
Validation: 20%	Avg. Accuracy: 96.20%
(Kaur et al., 2019)	Breast cancer, Diabetes, Spect_Heart, Heart disease, Surgery_Data, Thyroid, Dermatology, Liver_Disorder DB	–	–	Train: 80%;
Test: 20%	–
(Sharon et al., 2020)	RA DB, Samples: 40;
UCI - Orthopaedics DB, Samples: 310	Area, Perimeter, Circularity, Integrated density, Median, Skewness, Raw integrated density, Roundness, Solidity, Pelvic tilt numeric, Lumbar lordosis angle, Pelvic incidence, Pelvic radius etc.	–	10-fold cross validation; Holdout	For DB1, random subspace with KNN shows better performance; Accuracy: 97.50%
For DB2, bagging-RF is better; Accuracy: 94.84%
Unsupervised Learning
(Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019)	ILD medical DB.
Used 300 images	Local variance features, Transition region based features, Morphological Features	Otsu thresholding method is used for extracting the transition region	–	Accuracy: 85%
(Enshaeifar et al., 2018)	Real-life data	–	–	10-fold cross validation	Precision: 0.81%;
Recall: 0.83%;
F1-score: 0.80%
(van Kuppevelt et al., 2019)	500 participants from Millennium cohort study	Acceleration mean and variance, Duration mean and variance	Principal Component Analysis	–	–
(Enshaeifar et al., 2019)	Clinically approved annotated DB	Increase in the body temperature and urination, Sleep patterns, Temperature, Blood pressure, pulse, 	NMF applied to extract latent factors; Alternating Constrained Least Squares to extract underlying features; Two-level rule based reasoning algorithm to identify sleep patterns.	5-fold cross validation	–
Semi-supervised Learning
(Yang et al., 2019)	Cerebral Stroke DB - Kunming hospital, China; Samples: 11039	Features: 33	Pairwise constraint based-feature selection method	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%
10-fold cross validation	Accuracy: 84%
Reinforcement Learning
(Shukla et al., 2018)	Medical IoT devices	Blood pressure, Heart rate, ECG, Blood sugar	–	–	–
Deep Reinforcement Learning
(Zhou et al., 2020)	Two free datasets collected from scientific literature	Accelerometer data, GPS, Magnetic field, Sound level, Light	LSTM recurrent network applied for extract temporal features	Train: 60%;
Test: 20%
Validation: 20%	ROC curve used;
Avg. AUC: 0.95; precision: 98%;
recall: 97%, f1-score: 98%
(Zhang et al., 2018)	Data collect from 7 subjects using IoT device; Samples: 241,920	–	Selective Attention Mechanism used to discover distinctive features from the brain signals	Train: 31,104;
Test: 3,456	Accuracy: 0.9363%;
Latency1s
Deep Learning
(Divya and Leena, 2020)	UP-Fall detection DB includes consisting 11 activities from 17 subjects; Surveillance image dataset.	Accelerometer and gyroscopic values	Threshold based filtering	Tensorflow platform	ROC curve used;
Avg. Accuracy: 99%
(Kumar et al., 2018a)	Medical IoT devices; Medical records; Diabetes dataset from UCI	–	Features extraction using time interval	10-fold cross validation	Accuracy: 94%;
Specificity: 91%;
Sensitivity: 97%;
Time: 20ms
(Alfian et al., 2018)	UCI - PIMA Indians Diabetes DB; includes 786 records	2h glucose tolerance, Diastolic blood pressure, Body mass index, Age; Selected Features: 4	features were selected based on the similarity with their BLE-based sensor devices	10-fold cross validation	Accuracy: 77.083%;
Precision: 76.6%;
Recall: 77.1%
(Ali et al., 2020)	Cleveland and Hungarian DB contains 597 cases	Age, Gender, Chol, Smoke, CAD history, etc.; Features: 14	Information gain-based feature selection	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 98.5%
(Vedaei et al., 2020)	Accumulated 30 COVID-19 and pneumonia infected patients samples	Shortness of breath, Cough rate, Temperature, Age, Gender, Predicted risk, 	–	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 74.7
(Bhatia et al., 2020)	Real-world UbD DB of 4 persons	Blood cell count, Ketonic count, Puss cell count, Bilirubin count	Temporal data extracted by Temporal Granularity Procedure	Training the model until minimal error obtained	Avg. Precision = 94.56%;
Avg. Specificity = 93.45%;
Avg. Sensitivity = 94.14%
(Tuli et al., 2020)	Cleveland DB	Age, Sex, Chest pain, Rest BPS, Cholesterol, Fasting Blood Sugar etc.	Principal Component Analysis used to reduce the size of filtered data	Train: 70%;
Test: 20%;
Validation: 10%	Accuracy, Confidence
(Sundaravadivel et al., 2018)	USDA - food DB includes 8791 instances and Sensor data	Nutritional information related features i.e., nutrition value, weight of each item	Bayesian network to obtain nutrient features	Train: 60%;
Test: 40%	Accuracy: 98.6%
(Wadhwani et al., 2019)	10,000 sets of diseased and healthy peoples	QRS complex, Q-wave, R-wave, S-wave, P–R interval, R–R interval, heart rate	Wavelet transform, Signal processing, Using local maxima and minima	–	Accuracy: 95.8%
(Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019)	UCI repository	Peak amplitude, Total harmonic distortion, Heart rate, Zero crossing rate, Entropy, Energy, Mean, Root mean square of sum of the successive differences; Features: 23	–	Train: 70%;
Test: 30%	Accuracy: 99.03%;
Specificity: 98.51%;
Sensitivity: 99.5%
(Zhang et al., 2020a)	13 individual gait patterns	Humidity data, Temperature data, Frequency, Amplitude, Interval of peaks, Holding Time	–	Train: 60%;
Test: 20%;
Validation: 20%	Gait analysis, Accuracy: 93.54%;
Human Activity Detection, Accuracy: 96.67%
7.5. Model evaluation
The model selection decision in ML often depends on the model evaluation strategies. The model evaluation techniques are divided into two categories: (1) holdout (train-test split) and (2) cross-validation. In holdout method, the whole dataset is split into train and test datasets. The most well known cross-validation techniques are -fold cross validation and leave-one-out cross validation or jack knife test. Table 10 shows a summary of the evaluation techniques used in the literature. From the table, we can see that a large number of works have used the train-test split method (Ali et al., 2020, Moghadas et al., 2020a, Vedaei et al., 2020, Syed et al., 2019, Kaur et al., 2018, Sundaravadivel et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2018), whereas many have used -fold cross-validation method (Kumar et al., 2018a, Mrozek et al., 2020, Devi and Kalaivani, 2020, Klucken et al., 2013, Akhbarifar et al., 2020, Verma and Sood, 2018, Enshaeifar et al., 2018, Enshaeifar et al., 2019). However, a few number of authors have also used both holdout and cross-validation methods in their work (Singh and Kaur, 2020, Yang et al., 2019). Another prominent section is hyperparameter tuning (Kaur et al., 2019, Mrozek et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2018), which has the ability to improve the performance of the models by selecting a set of optimal hyperparameters.

7.6. Result analysis
From the predicted results of the trained model, a variety of performance measures are used in the analysis step. The selection of such metrics depends on the type of the ML task and the nature of the dataset. In Table 10, we have summarized different performance measures that are being used in the surveyed literature. Most of the results are taken from the papers as reported by them or from the graph. The most commonly used classification evaluation metric is accuracy (Ali et al., 2020, Vedaei et al., 2020, Qiu et al., 2020, Klucken et al., 2013, Syed et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2018, Palani and Venkatalakshmi, 2019, Sundaravadivel et al., 2018, Wadhwani et al., 2019). However, accuracy might provide misleading outcome in cases of class imbalance. Therefore, some additional evaluation metrics are used to fetch some meaningful information from the model prediction results. It is noted that some researchers consider multiple metrics alongside accuracy in their work, e.g., precision, recall or sensitivity, F1-score (Vijayakumar et al., 2019, Akhbarifar et al., 2020); some used specificity, sensitivity (Kumar et al., 2018a, Kaur et al., 2018, Al-Makhadmeh and Tolba, 2019); some considered accuracy and precision (Mrozek et al., 2020, Yacchirema et al., 2018a); and some treated confusion matrix (Devi and Kalaivani, 2020, Syed et al., 2019, Wadhwani et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2018). Moreover, Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve (Divya and Leena, 2020, Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018, Zhou et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2018), Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) (Memon et al., 2019) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) (Moghadas et al., 2020a) are also used in some other works, and computational time is treated as an evaluation factor (Satpathy et al., 2019). It is very challenging to understand what type of metric has been used for evaluation in which healthcare case. ROC curve does not provide useful information in the imbalanced dataset. Besides, the confusion matrix gives a better insight into the classifier. Furthermore, precision, recall, and specificity give better visualization in some critical situations where the effects of false positives and false negatives are very significant. In addition, they give appropriate results in case of imbalance data.

7.7. Deployment
Three types of deployment scenarios are found in the literature: (1) fully deployed, (2) partially deployed and (3) without any deployment. Fully deployed ML models are powered by online platform or mobile application and are in use within an organization (Sailunaz et al., 2016, Wan et al., 2018, Alfian et al., 2018). We have noticed that some of the healthcare applications are web-based, and others have been deployed in mobile platforms. Partially deployed systems are those where the systems are developed but not in use or in practice (Wadhwani et al., 2019, Syed et al., 2019, Taiwo and Ezugwu, 2020, Mrozek et al., 2020, Vedaei et al., 2020, Syed et al., 2019, Tuli et al., 2020). On the other hand, there are a good number of research efforts without any practical implementations (Divya and Leena, 2020, Kumar et al., 2018a, Satpathy et al., 2019, Sundaravadivel et al., 2018, Vijayakumar et al., 2019, Verma and Sood, 2018). Since the practical implementation of healthcare applications is challenging, most of the work does not go to that stage.

8. Research challenges and issues
Many significant efforts have already been carried out by the researchers in the field of IoT based applications in healthcare domain using ML; however, there still exists several limitations that are listed in the open issues. Since the fields of both IoT and next-generation ML (i.e., deep learning and reinforcement learning) are evolving, many more new avenues will be opened to explore. Thus, in this section, we describe the research challenges and open issues that have been identified throughout this survey.

8.1. Exploration of recent deep learning based models
In the recent literature of deep learning, we have observed a tremendous growth in supervised learning using multi-modal deep learning. In health care domain, often the decisions are made on historical data that are similar in nature. However, this have started a new horizon in the robotics domain and deserves more exploration in healthcare domain. Also Generative Adversarial Networks are now often used in augmentation of the datasets and thus improving the overall performance of ML algorithms. To the best of our knowledge GANs are less explored in this area (Singh and Kaur, 2020, Yang et al., 2019). Recently, a few Deep Reinforcement Learning based techniques are being employed in agent based modeling in the health care domain. However, more sophisticated design of the health care environment might be needed to fully deploy RL based algorithms.

8.2. Acquisition of data
Well-curated datasets play a vital role in the performance of machine learning based systems. Several attempts have been made by using real-time knowledge to train the classifier (Klucken et al., 2013, Kumar and Devi Gandhi, 2018). However, most of the works have used datasets that are gathered from public repositories shared by others. Often these datasets contain unwanted bias and lacks the variance. In healthcare domain in particular, the dataset collection is a difficult task. Moreover, change in control parameters of the environment might change the nature and effectiveness of the dataset. In addition to these, often the data stored as electronic health records are not compatible and thus poses another level of challenge.

8.3. Handling data streams
Data Stream Mining is the method of gaining useful knowledge from an uninterrupted and fast data streams. With the development of remote health monitoring systems, the recent healthcare industry uses real-time components to obtain instant useful physiological information. This concept brings the idea of how to manage continuous and big data streams (Mrozek et al., 2020). Data that come from the sensors through the IoT framework in the streams have big volume, high velocity, large variety and veracity (Vitabile et al., 2019, Syed et al., 2019). The challenge is therefore in storing and processing this stream data handling problems, such as concept drift, model re-training, adaptive model selection, etc. This have been overall a new area and definitely need much exploration in the IoT based healthcare setting.

8.4. Privacy and ethics
Privacy refers to the handling of a patient’s personal information by the issuing authority (Selvaraj and Doraikannan, 2019). It also should address where the data should be placed and who can view a person’s medical records (Meingast et al., 2006). Under a general scenario, doctors, nurses and technicians can view and manage these data. However, in some emergency cases, in order to receive the appropriate treatment this sensitive information need to be disclosed to other people too. In addition, patients may not want to disclose too personal data (e.g., early pregnancy) to anyone other than family members (Al Ameen et al., 2012). Therefore, such information should not be in the public domain. Moreover, the fog layer is the closest to the user, so it needs more protection from external attacks (Kaur et al., 2021). In remote monitoring, a patient’s personal information is saved in the storage unit. Therefore, it is necessary to protect the privacy of that personal information from any unauthorized access (Satpathy et al., 2019, Vijayakumar et al., 2019). Note that a trade-off is needed between preserving the privacy and providing the personalized care.

With the increase in the electronic acquisition of personal data, ethical issues about the decision making capability of ML based models are of deep concern. Often the predictability of the ML models are over-stated and the algorithms lack the empathy, which is a very important concern in healthcare domain.

8.5. Security issues
The information collected from the human body that is transmitted and stored through WBAN devices plays an important role in getting the right treatment in the healthcare system. Therefore, it is very essential to assurance the security for the patient’s sensitive information (Al Ameen et al., 2012). Security refers to the information protection from unauthorized access or modification during the data transfer, processing, collection, and storage phases (Selvaraj and Doraikannan, 2019). Besides that some necessary measures should be taken at the sensor-closest level to protect user data. Fog or Edge computing could be a better option to provide data security (Qadri et al., 2020). Following three are the crucial security properties that need to be ensured (Selvaraj and Doraikannan, 2019):

•
Data Confidentiality: Encryption is the appropriate technique to ensure data confidentiality which needs distribution of a shared key through a WBAN communication channel (Qadri et al., 2020).

•
Integrity: The health related information within a device should not be altered by an intruder (Al Ameen et al., 2012). The necessary measures have to be taken to maintain the accuracy and consistency of the information.

•
Data Availability: A patient’s health information should be provided instantly just when an authorized entity requests for it. Patients data is sensitive, and it should always be accessible and available from the network.

8.6. Orchestration of cloud, fog and edge computing
In the fog and edge computing paradigms, medical data are processed and analyzed near or within the device where they are created, instead of transferring the large amounts of data directly to the cloud. It sends only processed data to the cloud unit for further analytics (Vitabile et al., 2019). However, there exists a challenge of orchestration of cloud, fog and edge computing (Carnevale et al., 2018). We need to identify exactly which computing will be performed at the cloud, edge or fog so that the latency, bandwidth and cost are minimized, and the response time and the security are maximized.

8.7. Underdeveloped countries
In the literature, we have observed that the researchers often make some assumptions that are subject to the infrastructure of the region or locality. The successful models are mostly from the developed countries. On the other hand, very few successful works have been carried out in the under-developed region of the world. Lack of infrastructure might add a wide variety of challenges including lack of communication backbone, less access to data, increased cost of devices, and unfriendly and stringent regulations that are not suitable for development in the relevant field.

9. Conclusion
In recent years, IoT and ML have extensively been used in the medical domain. As a result, the applications of IoT and ML in healthcare have gained much attention to the researchers. In this paper, we have proposed a novel taxonomy that depicts the complete workflow of IoT and ML based healthcare applications. We have divided the whole process into four large areas, namely IoT, communication, network storage and computing, and ML. Data collection is performed using IoT devices; transfer of the data to the cloud storage is completed through an appropriate communication technology; finally, ML enables intelligent decision making in healthcare system. Different components of this workflow have been discussed throughout this paper. The main contribution of this paper is that it gives readers a comprehensive overview of the IoT and ML driven healthcare research. Another novelty of the work is that we have organized research works based on all the tiers and their sub-tiers in the taxonomy and analyzed them from the point of view of healthcare. This way of presentation is unique from the traditional survey works.

We strongly believe that the researchers involved in both academia and industry will be benefited from this work. Particularly, a researcher may receive proper guideline on different types of sensors that may be used for stroke, lung cancer, blood cancer, cardiac, and Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. The researchers may also receive an idea about the technical specifications of different development boards. Moreover, an in-depth analysis of medical sensors, communication technologies and application layer protocols that have been provided in this paper facilitate the researchers to design a smart and intelligent healthcare system as it has formulated an ML pipeline and demonstrated healthcare applications based on the pipeline. Finally, the research challenges and open issues identified in this work give the researchers some clear future research directions.

For designing, developing and bringing a successful product to the market, we need the knowledge of all important steps of a system. Most of the academic works address a very specific research problem and thus discusses a narrow area of a complex and multifaceted product. For example, most of the research works, reviewed in this paper, solve a problem either from IoT, communications, cloud computing or ML domain, but not addressing all together. This survey paper will fill the gap of bringing all important issues together. Moreover, the relationship between them (if any exists) have also been identified. Therefore, this paper might be the starting point for the industries who are involved in developing IoT-ML-based healthcare products.

