Many real-world relations can be represented by signed networks with positive links (e.g., friendships and
trust) and negative links (e.g., foes and distrust). Link prediction helps advance tasks in social network analysis
such as recommendation systems. Most existing work on link analysis focuses on unsigned social networks.
The existence of negative links piques research interests in investigating whether properties and principles
of signed networks differ from those of unsigned networks and mandates dedicated efforts on link analysis
for signed social networks. Recent findings suggest that properties of signed networks substantially differ
from those of unsigned networks and negative links can be of significant help in signed link analysis in
complementary ways. In this article, we center our discussion on a challenging problem ofsigned link analysis.
Signed link analysis faces the problem of data sparsity, i.e., only a small percentage of signed links are given.
This problem can even get worse when negative links are much sparser than positive ones as users are inclined
more toward positive disposition rather than negative. We investigate how we can take advantage of other
sources of information for signed link analysis. This research is mainly guided by three social science theories,
Emotional Information, Diffusion of Innovations, and Individual Personality. Guided by these, we extract three
categories of related features and leverage them for signed link analysis. Experiments show the significance of
the features gleaned from social theories for signed link prediction and addressing the data sparsity challenge.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Social networking sites; Social networks; • Human-centered
computing → Social networks; • Applied computing → Sociology;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Signed link analysis, social theory, emotional information, diffusion of
innovation, individual personality, feature engineering, data sparsity
1 INTRODUCTION
The pervasive use of social media allows users to participate in online activities and produce large
amounts of data. Social links are one of the most significant portion of user-generated data and
can take different forms. Examples include links to users as in befriending behavior, links to entities as in purchase behavior, or links to communities as in joining behavior. Social links could
be unsigned (e.g., friendship on Facebook) or signed. Individuals form links that represent their
friendship, support, and approval or disagreement, distrust, and disapproval toward each other.
Positive or negative attitudes between users assign positive or negative signs to links. Examples
include trust/distrust on Epinions,1 friend/foe on Slashdot,2 and vote/dispute on Wikipedia.3
Positive links are important in helping users find relevant and credible information online [90]
and benefit many applications such as recommendation and information filtering [89]. However,
negative links could help decision makers reduce vulnerability and uncertainty associated with
decision consequences [26, 42, 62] and add a significant amount of knowledge to that already embedded in positive links [89]. Link analysis is a central problem in social network analysis. It aims
to understand the factors influencing the link formation [58]. Findings from link analysis have
been used in a variety of social media mining tasks such as link prediction [1], community detection [73], and recommendation [10, 59, 87]. For example, it has been shown that users with positive
links are more likely to share similar preferences with each other than strangers and users with
negative links. This indicates the importance of signed links in building effective recommendation
systems [87].
Link analysis in unsigned social networks or networks with only positive links has been extensively studied. For example, users tend to form positive links with those sharing certain level of
similarity with them (Homophily [63]), or two individuals geographically closer are more likely
to connect (Confounding theory). Though there is a good amount of research on link analysis in
unsigned social networks, it is shown that we cannot simply apply their findings to signed networks [58, 89]. For example, negative links present substantially distinct properties from positive
links [86], Homophily of unsigned networks are not directly applicable to signed networks [91],
and signed link prediction problem differs from the unsigned link predication [15]. It is shown that
negative links are not negation of positive ones; instead, they have significant added value, complementary to positive ones, in the signed link analysis tasks [91]. For example, a small portion
of negative links can improve recommendation performance [59] or positive link prediction [41,
58]. Moreover, signed link analysis without negative links may result in a biased estimate of positive links [91]. Therefore, one cannot simply extend findings of unsigned networks to signed link
analysis. It is thus sensible to investigate both positive and negative links simultaneously.
Recent research on signed link analysis benefits from social psychological science theories, e.g.,
balance theory [20, 44] and status theory [58]. Their success endorses signed links for various
signed network mining tasks such as link prediction [58], and social psychological science theories can be used to guide link analysis in signed networks. However, a majority of the existing
works [25, 53, 58, 66, 82] use the topological structures and properties of the existing networks,
which rely on a reasonable number of signed link information. As is well known, signed links
in social networks are usually very sparse where most users have few in-degrees or out-degrees.
The data sparsity for signed links gets worse as users tend to reveal more positive disposition than
negative. This makes negative links much sparser than positive links. Hence, we often encounter a
challenging problem of signed link sparsity. Existing signed link analysis methods require addressing this problem. Though positive and negative links are sparse, there are substantial amounts of
information that can be gleaned from users of social media networks. Some pervasively available
sources of information include users’ personality and emotion. Our work is to investigate whether
1www.Epinions.com. 2www.Slashdot.org. 3www.Wikipedia.com.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:3
these new sources of information can be tapped to address signed link analysis problems in the
face of sparsity of signed links.
Inspired by the success of link analysis with social psychological theories, we look into theories
from psychology and social sciences to guide our signed link analysis research: Emotional Information, Diffusion of Innovations, and Individual Personality. The first theory suggests that emotions
of individuals toward each other are strong indicators of positive and negative links. Researchers
have shown that emotions can significantly influence the level of positive and negative links between individuals [17, 34, 65, 78]. The second theory treats positive and negative link formation
as a problem of an individual’s probability of adopting a new behavior in the network following
her friends’ behaviors [72, 92]. In our work, “diffusion” means forming a signed link toward an individual. The third theory, derived from References [6, 19], suggests that personality information
affects individuals’ tendency to form the positive and negative links. We only consider two common types, optimism and pessimism, which should be conceptualized as independent according
to psychologists [23, 36, 46].
In our previous work [14], we studied whether these social and psychological theories are applicable to user-generated data. We correlated the theories to formation of positive and negative links
in signed social networks. In this work, we expand on our findings from Reference [14] and seek
to understand how the correlation between these theories and user-generated social media data
could be utilized to compensate for data sparsity problem in signed networks. The key nuances
are as follows:
• We incorporate our findings from the above theories to guide the feature engineering for
signed link analysis and extract three different categories of features from user-generated
data.
• We deploy these social-theory-guided features for the task of link prediction in signed networks.
• We perform a thorough analysis and conduct extensive experiments to investigate the effectiveness of these features for the problem of signed link prediction.
• We study how well each category aligns with the theories. We set out to understand the
importance of each category and their combination in signed link prediction. We also study
how robust these social-theory-guided features are against the sparsity problem in signed
link analysis.
2 RELATED WORK
The ease of using the Internet has raised numerous security and privacy issues. Mitigating these
concerns has been studied from different aspects such as identifying malicious activities [2–5],
addressing users’ privacy issues [7, 9, 11, 13], and studying signed links [8, 12, 14, 15, 88, 90]. Link
analysis [58, 89] is amongst the most popular research directions (e.g., information spread [52]
and opinion formation [51]) to understand users’ behavior in social networks. Link analysis has
been extensively studied in unsigned networks [1], while less effort has been devoted to signed
networks [58, 90]. Homophily and Confounding are two examples of unsigned link analysis. Homophily suggests that users tend to create positive links with their similar peers [63]. However,
Confounding considers the geographical closeness between users. Though the majority of methods in signed networks have focused on only positive links (trust prediction), recent studies have
demonstrated that negative links could add value to positive ones [88]. It is also shown that we
cannot simply apply the findings of unsigned social networks to signed network link analysis [58,
89]. Thus, increasing attention has been paid to the signed link analysis [25, 58].
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:4 G. Beigi et al.
Recent signed link analysis methods benefit from social psychological science theories, e.g.,
Homophily theory, balance theory [20, 44], and status theory [44]. Homophily is also known as
assortative mixing. A network is called assortative with regard to a property if a bias is observed
in favor of connections between nodes in the network with similar property [22]. For example,
Homophily effect suggests that similar users have a higher likelihood to establish trust relations
with each other [90]. Balance theory is usually bonded by phrases “the enemy of my friend is
my enemy” and “the friend of my enemy is my enemy.” Status theory studies the effect of nodes’
ordering on signed link formation, with positive links pointing from left to right and negative
links vice versa. In general, link formation works are divided into supervised and unsupervised
methods.
Supervised methods consider the positive and negative link creation problem as a classification
problem by using the existing positive and negative links and train a classifier with features extracted from the signed networks [25, 58]. For example, Reference [58] first extracts in-degree and
out-degree numbers from positive (or negative) links and then uses balance and status theory to
extract triangle-based features. Then it trains a logistic regression classifier to verify the importance of balance and status theory for positive and negative link prediction. Reference [25] extends
the triangle-based features to the k-cycle-based features. Khodadadi et al. [56] use tendency rate of
triple-micro structures in signed networks. In particular, given a pair of users, this method extracts
closed triple micro structures around the given edge for two different cases: (1) the edge is positive
and (2) the edge is negative. Comparing the tendency rates for two cases, the sign of the edge is
determined by the scenario that has the greater tendency rate. Another work [97] proposes a new
method to address the negative link sparsity challenge in signed link prediction problem. It first
converts the original graph into the edge-dual graph. Then, instead of predicting signed links in
the original graph, this method predicts sign of nodes in the edge-dual graph. This method measures the similarity between nodes using Jaccard coefficient in the new graph and then utilizes
similarities to classify the sign of nodes using the Support Vector Machine (SVM) model. Naaman
et al. [66] also propose a method to assign a set of topological properties to each edge (a.k.a. VOTE)
such as centrality measures, degrees, community measures, and scale motif frequencies. After normalizing each attribute, a machine learning approach, such as deep learning, random forest, and
stochastic gradient descent, is applied on the extracted features to predict signs of edges.
Unsupervised methods are usually based on certain topological properties of signed networks
to perform predictions [47, 95]. One type is node similarity–based methods [85], which first define similarity metrics to calculate node similarities and then provide a way to predict the signed
relations. Propagation-based methods are also used for the problem of positive and negative link
formation [29, 41, 98]. Positive sign propagation is treated as a repeating sequence of matrix operations, which consists of four types of atomic propagations [41]. Negative sign propagation is
then incinerated after multiple steps of positive sign propagation [41]. Reference [98] proposes
to integrate negative links into the process of the Appleseed positive links computation instead
of superimposing it afterward. Another category is based on low-rank matrix factorization [47,
95]. For example, Reference [47] mathematically models the signed link prediction problem as a
low-rank matrix factorization model, based on the weak structural balance on the signed network.
Also, Reference [95] extends the low-rank model to perform link prediction across multiple signed
networks. Another unsupervised method [53] categorizes nodes into a number of clusters so that
number of negative intra-cluster links and positive inter-cluster links are minimized and clusters
are balanced. It deploys a user-based collaborative filtering using similarity between clusters to
predict signed edges between nodes.
Another group of works in signed network analysis is signed network embedding, which seeks
to capture signed network topological properties such as the variance between positive and
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:5
negative links, signed link sparsity, and ratio of signed triangles. These captured properties are
further used to learn a meaningful low-dimensional representation for the given signed network.
The final nodes’ representation can be utilized for different applications such as signed link prediction [30, 93] and node classification [69]. Since the focus of these works is on learning a representation for the network, they leverage topological network structures to learn the node embeddings.
Kunegis et al. [57] extend spectral analysis for signed networks. Another work proposes a matrix
factorization-based model that factorizes the adjacency matrix of the signed network into two
low-rank latent matrices and then extracts the node embeddings [47]. Wang et al. [93] exploit
structural balance theory and information of 2-hop networks to model the semantic meaning behind positive and negative links and extract node representations. Derr et al. [30] also use balance
theory to guide capturing important properties of the signed networks and modeling it. Another
work utilizes balance theory in a graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs) model to aggregate
and propagate collected signed network information across layers of the signed GCN model [31].
The vast majority of the existing algorithms utilize the topological networks structures, which
relies on a reasonable number of signed link information. However, users usually establish positive
links with a small proportion of users, which results in sparse positive links [90]. It is also significantly easier for users to express positivity than negativity in social networks, and, consequently,
negative links are often much sparser than positive links in a signed network [88]. Therefore, the
aforementioned methods suffer from the signed link sparsity problem severely. For the existing
signed link analysis methods to work, it is necessary to address this sparsity problem. There are
few studies [12, 15, 88] that incorporate other available sources of information to tackle the signed
link sparsity problem. For example, Reference [88] incorporates user interactions to predict negative links.
Exploiting user’s features such as trustworthiness, bias, and optimism has been discussed in
References [12, 14, 64, 81, 82]. References [81, 82] address the problem of sign prediction based on
users’ optimism/reputation. They define optimism as users’ voting pattern and reputation as their
popularity. Their approach calculates optimism as difference between number of user’s positive
and negative out-links. They introduce rank-based optimism and reputation based on the rank of
users in the signed social network. Reference [64] computes bias and prestige of nodes based on
positive links between users in signed social networks. It defines bias as user’s truthfulness. The
prestige is also calculated based on opinion of other users in the form of in-links a user gets. Our
work is different than References [64, 81, 82], as we calculate users’ optimism/pessimism based
on a source other than signed links, i.e., users’ feedback/interactions on different entities such
as items/posts. The additional sources of information could help overcome the data sparsity and
imbalance problem for signed link data. Therefore, exploiting other sources of information such as
emotional and personality information can mitigate the data sparsity problem and has the potential
to improve the performance of signed link prediction.
3 SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES
We aim to address the problem of sparse signed links in social networks, guided by three social
psychological theories: Emotional Information, Diffusion of Innovations, and Individual Personality.
3.1 Emotional Information Theory
Users express their emotions toward each other via various ways. In Slashdot, users comment and
reply to the posts; while product-review sites such as Epinions provide the rating mechanisms
for users to express their emotions toward each other. Emotional information is thus pervasively
available in social media no matter how they are exposed [15]. The study of emotion exists from the
Aristotle era and is based on the common sense that people have emotional experiences that are
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:6 G. Beigi et al.
linked to their cognitive appraisal of the environment [84]. Emotions affect a variety of decisionmaking processes such as the decision whether to trust/distrust a stranger (positive/negative link
creation), which is likely to be influenced by person’s emotional state [37]. According to psychologists and sociologists, the emotions of people have toward each other are strong indicators of
positive and negative links. They study the impact of emotional states on positive and negative
relations between individuals and support the supposition that various emotions can significantly
influence the level of positive/negative relations (trust/distrust) between individuals [17, 34, 65,
78]. In particular, interpersonal emotions with positive valence such as happiness, gratitude, and
satisfaction could lead to positive links, while emotions with negative valence like anger, sadness,
and fear imply negative relations. Furthermore, Reference [16] studies the effect of negative emotions on distrust in online environments and shows that negative relations could be built when
expectations are not met or negative emotions are raised. Sociologists have found that the level of
emotional certainty and personal feelings are the most important factors influencing the effect of
an emotion on creation of positive or negative relations between people [65]. Consequently, taking
into account user’s emotional information for the problem of signed link analysis could provide a
better insight.
3.2 Diffusion of Innovation Theory
Innovations and novel ideas do not necessarily spread at once—they instead propagate gradually
through channels [96]. Adoption of medical and agricultural innovations are classic examples of
how innovations diffuse through the society [27, 92]. Diffusion of innovation theory studies how,
why, and at what rate innovations are spread among people. In particular, any idea, behavior, or
object that is perceived as new by the audience is considered an innovation. Diffusion is the process
of an innovation being communicated through certain channels over time among the participants
of a social system [72]. Diffusion also focuses on the conditions that the likelihood of adopting a
new innovation, idea, or technology will decrease or increase as well as studying what qualities
make innovations spread. Unlike many change theories, diffusion of innovation theory considers
changes as being about reinvention of behaviors so they become a fit for individuals’ specific needs
rather than persuading individuals to accept the change [72].
This theory has many applications in the data mining literature such as influence maximization [55] and marketing [32]. The problem of positive and negative link creation could be also
related to the well-studied topic of diffusion of innovation by treating it as a behavior that spreads
through the network. Therefore, it turns into a new problem of analyzing an individual’s tendency
to follow her friends’ behaviors toward other users. Thus, the most basic question would then be
as follows: Does one’s probability of creating a positive/negative link toward another individual
depend on her friends’ behavior? This question is closely related to the diffusion of innovations
with a particular property; that is, “diffusing” in our work is establishing a signed link toward a
given individual. The answer to this question can further give insight into the problem of evolution
of signed links in dynamic networks (determining who will establish a link in the future), which
is not in the scope of this article.
3.3 Individuals Personality Theory
Users’ behavior in social media could be good indicators of their personality and the reasons are
twofold [40]. First, social media allows for exposing views by providing appropriate platforms
to satisfy users’ basic psychological needs. Second, there is an ample amount of data regarding
normative behaviors of individuals that guarantees fair analysis of their personality. Thus, rich
hidden personality information available online has inspired recent studies to propose methods to
extract and study them [28, 40, 50, 80]. As a result, exploiting user’s personality information has
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:7
potentials in signed link analysis. Research from sociology also suggests that a person’s personality determines his or her propensity to positive/negative relations [6, 19]. Though other types of
personality may exist, e.g., Big Five Model [61], we only consider two common types, optimism and
pessimism, which should be conceptualized as independent according to psychologists [23, 36, 46,
60]. Note that optimism and pessimism have specific relationships with Big Five personality model
dimensions [54, 83]. In particular, optimism is broadly related to neuroticism, extroversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Pessimism is also strongly correlated with conscientiousness and
neuroticism.
Research from psychology and sociology suggests that people’s optimism/pessimism personality implies individual’s tendency to positive and negative relations [39, 74, 77]. According to
Scheier et al. [74], a person is defined as an optimist when he or she is more likely to reinterpret
negative events in a positive way and find meaning and growth in stressful situations. However, an
individual is referred to as pessimist when he or she is pre-occupied only with the negative aspects
of the environment and overlooks the positive aspects [74]. Optimists have better social functioning and relations. Therefore, they actively pursue social relationships and have higher chances in
establishing positive links, resulting in longer-lasting friendships [18, 39, 67, 74, 79]. In contrast,
pessimists likely practice the opposite way, i.e., having negative attitudes and expecting the worst
of people and situations. Consequently, they often establish negative links with others [18, 39,
67, 77, 79]. Another interesting observation of optimism/pessimism is that people generally like
optimists more than pessimists and thus react more positively to optimists than to pessimists. In
other words, optimists likely attract more positive links while pessimists receive more negative
links [18, 21, 38, 45, 71]. Therefore, considering user’s personality information could be very helpful for studying the problem of signed link formation and signed link analysis, which leads to the
issues to be discussed in the next section.
Note that these theories are different from the assortative mixing concept. Assortativity concept
captures bias between a pair of individuals. However, these theories are defined for an individual
person and study the person’s behavior toward others regardless of other people’s behavior.
4 ARE SOCIAL THEORIES APPLICABLE TO SOCIAL MEDIA DATA?
Before applying the above theories to signed link analysis, we first determine whether these theories are applicable to social media data. We first conduct a sanity check to determine whether
social media data are suitable for applying these established social psychological theories. In the
following, we introduce our datasets and then conduct data analysis to verify some hypotheses
related to the sanity check.
4.1 Datasets
We collect two large online signed social networks datasets from Epinions and Slashdot, where
individuals can express their opinions toward each other besides creating positive and negative
links.4 In addition, availability of product-rating data in Epinions and individuals’ post reviews
data in Slashdot can help to approximate users’ emotions toward each other. In contrast, personality information is not readily available online. Individuals usually do not label themselves as
optimistic/pessimistic. A conventional way of obtaining personality information is to directly ask
people whether they expect outcomes in their lives to be good or bad [75], which is often seen
in psychological surveys designed for measuring an individual’s optimism and pessimism (e.g.,
Reference [76]). However, since social media data are large scale, and mainly observational, it is
impractical to ask every user for his or her personality information. The onus is therefore on us to
4The data are available at http://www.public.asu.edu/∼gbeigi/TIST/.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:8 G. Beigi et al.
find a sensible way to infer whether a user is optimistic/pessimistic or neither. An indirect approach
is to measure optimism/pessimism based on the idea that people’s expectancies for the future stem
from their interpretations of the past [70]. Thus, past experience can reflect an individual’s levels
of optimism/pessimism. With social media data, the question is how to define a computational
measure of optimism/pessimism. To recap, individuals do not explicitly offer their personality information, and it is infeasible to ask a large number of them about that, but individuals do leave
their traces online. We ask whether we can aggregate individual’s data and automatically figure
out whether a user is optimistic or not.
Scheier et al. [74] defines optimism as re-interpreting negative events in a positive way and
pessimism as preoccupying with the negative aspects and overlooking positive events. Following
the psychology literature, a user’s feedback could be also used to estimate his or her optimism and
pessimism, as they are counterparts of each other [48, 49]. It is shown in References [48, 49] that on
social media websites, optimists are more willing to give more positive feedback, while pessimists
are more biased toward giving more negative feedback than usual. We utilize this observation
to calculate users’ optimism and pessimism by leveraging their feedback to different entities in
social media (e.g., items and users). Accordingly, we shall define the aforementioned aspects of
personality, based on the user’s item rating behavior in Epinions and opinions expressing behavior
toward each other in Slashdot.
4.1.1 Epinions. This is a product review website where users can establish trust and distrust
relationships toward each other. We treat each relation as either positive or negative links and
construct user-user matrix F, where Fij = 1 if user i trusts user j and Fij = −1 if user i distrusts
user j. Also, Fij = 0 where the information is missing. Users can also express opinions toward each
other by rating how helpful their reviews are from 1 to 6. From these ratings, we also construct
the positive and negative emotion matrices P and N as follows: (1) We consider low helpfulness
ratings {1, 2, 3} as negative emotions, high helpfulness ratings {4, 5} as positive emotions and the
rating 3 as neutral, and (2) for each pair of users (ui,uj), we compute the number of positive and
negative emotions expressed from ui to uj to create Pij and Nij , respectively.
We define the optimism and pessimism in Epinions as follows. Let I = {I1, I2,..., IM } be the set
of M items and assume rik denotes the item rating score from ui to item Ik with rik = 0 indicating
that ui has not rated Ik yet. Also, consider r k as the average rating score of the kth item rated
by users. In this article, we consider scores in {1, 2, 3} as low and {4, 5} as high scores. We use
OL (i) = {Ik | rik  0 ∧ r k ≤ 3} to denote the set of items with low average rating scores and rated
by ui . We further use OH L (i) = {Ik | Ik ∈ OL (i) ∧ rik > 3} to denote the set of items that are scored
high by ui and meanwhile have low average scores. Intuitively, the more frequent user ui has rated
above the average, the more optimistic she is. Therefore we define the optimism score for ui as
oi = | OH L (i)|
| OL (i)| , where |.| is the size of the set.
Similarly, we use PH (i) = {Ik | rik  0 ∧ r k > 3} to denote the set of items with high average
rating scores and rated by ui , Let PLH (i) denotes the subset of items from PH (i), which are given
low rates by ui :
PLH (i) = {Ik | Ik ∈ PH (i) ∧ rik ≤ 3}.
We define the pessimism score ui as: pi = | PLH (i)|
| PH (i)| .
4.1.2 Slashdot. It is a technology-related news platform that allows users to tag each other as
either “friend” or “foe.” Similar to the Epinions, we construct user-user matrix F from the positive
(friendship relations) and negative links (foes relations) in the network. Likewise, users can express
their opinions and comments toward each other by annotating the articles posted by each other. In
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.  
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:9
Table 1. Statistics of the Preprocessed Data
Epinions Slashdot
# of Users 21,308 6,615
# of Positive Links 373,351 53,836
# of Negative Links 29,254 20,361
# of Positive Emotions 8,459,770 870,042
# of Negative Emotions 96,250 20,650
a similar way to the Epinions, using positive and negative opinions, we create user-user positive
and negative emotion matrices P and N by computing the number of positive or negative emotions
users express toward each other.
Additionally, we can define individual’s personality in Slashdot based on user-user emotion
matrices P and N. Let P and N be the average of positive and negative emotions between all pairs
of users, respectively. We also define Pj and Nj as the average of positive and negative emotions
that user uj has received. Further, we define OL (i), as a set of users uj who have received positive
emotions from ui , but at the same time, have received more negative emotions than the average
in the network, i.e., they are worse than the average,
OL (i) = {uj | Pij  0 ∧ Nj > N}.
We formally define OH L (i) to denote the set of users uk who belong to OL (i) and have received
more positive emotions from ui than Pk ,
OH L (i) = {uk | uk ∈ OL (i) ∧ Pik > Pk }.
Intuitively, the more frequent ui has given positive emotions to the worst users in the network,
the more optimistic she is. Therefore we define the optimism score for ui as oi = | OH L (i)|
| OL (i)| .
Likewise, we define PH (i), as a set of users uj who have received negative emotions from ui ,
but at the same time, have received more positive emotions than the average in the network, i.e.,
they are better than the average,
PH (i) = {uj | Nij  0 ∧ Pj > P}.
We define PLH (i) to denote the set of users uk who belong to PH (i) and have received more
negative emotions from ui than Nk ,
PLH (i) = {uk | uk ∈ PH (i) ∧ Nik > Nk }.
Pessimism score of ui could be similarly defined as pi = | PLH (i)|
| PH (i)| .
One thing that needs further clarification is that we shall not expect a person in real life to
always behave optimistically or pessimistically—with a high chance, they will act differently in
different situations. This means that an individual could inherently possess both personality traits
at very high or very low levels but only exposes one of them at the moment [43]. Likewise, we
allow each user to simultaneously have two personality traits with either very high or very low
values.
There might be other ways to construct positive and negative emotion matrices, P and N, as
well as optimism and pessimism vectors, o and p, such as psychological surveys, which is beyond
the scope of this article. We perform some standard preprocessing in both datasets by filtering
out users without both positive and negative links. Table 1 shows key statistics of Epinions and
Slashdot.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.  
11:10 G. Beigi et al.
4.2 Data Analysis and Observations
Here, we investigate how each theory is related to the formation of positive and negative links.
4.2.1 Emotional Information Theory. Here, we investigate (1) the existence of the correlation
between emotional information and positive and negative links in signed social networks and
(2) study the impact of emotional strength on the formation of positive and negative relations.
Specifically, we aim to answer the following two questions:
• Q11: Are users with positive (negative) emotions more likely to establish positive (negative)
relations than those without?
• Q12: Are users with higher positive (negative) emotion strengths more likely to create positive (negative) links than those with lower positive (negative) emotion strengths?
To answer Q11, we study the relation between positive emotions and positive links. For each pair
of users (ui,uj) with positive emotions, we randomly select a user uk with no positive emotions
from ui to uk . We then check whether positive relations from ui to uj and ui to uk exist. We set
vp = 1 if Fij = 1 and vp = 0 otherwise. Likewise, we set vr = 1 if Fik = 1 and vr = 0 otherwise. We
obtain two vectors, vp and vr , where vp is the set of allvps for pairs of users with positive emotions
and vr is the set of vrs for pairs of users without positive emotions. We conduct a one-tailed two
sample t-test, {vp, vr }, on vp and vr . The null and alternative hypotheses H0 and H1 are defined as
follows:
{vp, vr } : H0 : vp ≤ vr, H1 : vp > vr . (1)
The null hypothesis H0 assumes that pairs of users without positive emotions are more likely to
establish positive links in comparison with pairs of users with positive emotions and the alternative
hypothesis H1 assumes the vice versa. The null hypothesis is rejected at significance level α = 0.01
with p-values of 4.32e−62 and 6.17e−47 over Epinions and Slashdot, respectively. A similar t-test
procedure, {vn, vr }, can be followed for negative emotions where the null hypothesis is rejected
with p-values of 2.54e−48 and 5.13e−23 for Epinions and Slashdot, respectively. Results from ttests suggest that, with high probability, users with positive (negative) emotions are more likely to
establish positive (negative) links than those without.
To answer Q12, we rank all pairs of users (ui,uj) with positive emotions according to their emotion strengths Pij in a descending order and divide those pairs into K groups E = {E1, E2,..., EK }
with equal sizes. The emotion strengths in Ei are thus larger than those in Ej ifi < j. Then we form
K(K−1)
2 pairs of groups (Ei, Ej) with i < j, where Ei is the group with higher emotional strengths
and Ej is the one with lower emotional strengths. For each pair of groups, we use hp and lp to
denote the number of pairs of users with positive relations in Ei and Ej , receptively. By repeating
this over all pairs of groups, we can obtain two vectors hp and lp for hps and lps, respectively.
We conduct a one-tailed two sample t-test on hp and lp by defining the null hypothesis H0: users
with weak positive emotion strengths are more likely to establish positive links and the alternative
one H1: users with strong positive emotion strengths are more likely to create positive links:
{hp, lp } : H0 : hp ≤ lp, H1 : hp > lp . (2)
By choosing K = 10, the null hypothesis is rejected at significance level 0.01 with p-values of
8.47e − 23 and 1.72e − 19 for Epinions and Slashdot. We make similar observations with K = 30
and K = 50. Similarly, we observe the impact of negative emotions on the formation of negative
links by following a similar t-test on {hn, ln }. Results suggest that users with higher positive (negative) emotion strengths are more likely to establish positive (negative) links than those with lower
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:11
Table 2. P-values of t-test Results Corresponding
to the Emotional Information Theory Analysis
at Significance Level α = 0.01
{vp, ve } {vn, vr } {hp, lp } {hn, ln }
Epinions 4.32e−62 2.54e−48 8.47e−23 6.12e−19
Slashdot 6.17e−47 5.13e−23 1.72e−19 7.28e−14
The null hypothesis for each test is refuted.
Table 3. P-values of t-test Results
Corresponding to the Diffusion of
Innovation Theory Analysis at
Significance Level α = 0.01
{fp,fr } {fn,fr }
Epinions 1.84e−75 4.83e−69
Slashdot 3.56e−91 4.27e−86
The null hypothesis for each test is refuted.
positive emotion strengths. Table 2 summarizes the p-values for the above t-tests at significance
level α = 0.01.
4.2.2 Diffusion of Innovation Theory. Following the diffusion of innovation theory, our goal
here is to study whether the behavior of user ui toward user uj could be influenced by the behavior
of ui ’s friend uk toward uj . More specifically, we aim to answer the following question:
• Q21: Is user ui with a friend uk who has a positive (negative) link to user uj more likely to
establish a positive (negative) link with uj than if he/she does not have such friend?
To answer this question, we first find a pair of users (ui,uj) where ui ’s friend uk has a positive link
to uj . We also randomly select a user ur without any positive relations with uk . We then check
whether there are positive links fromui to uj and fromui to ur . We set f p = 1 if Fij = 1 and f p = 0
otherwise; similarly, we set f r = 1 if Fir = 1 and f r = 0 otherwise. We then construct two vectors,
fp and fr , where fp is the set of all f ps and fr is the set of f rs. We conduct a one-tailed two sample
t-test {fp,fr } on fp and fr with the null and alternative hypotheses H0 and H1 defined as follows:
{fp,fr } : H0 : fp ≤ fr, H1 : fp > fr . (3)
The null hypothesis is rejected at significance level α = 0.01 with p-values of 1.84e−75 and
3.56e−91 over Epinions and Slashdot, respectively. Likewise, we repeat the t-test process {fn,fr }
for friends with negative links; however, for brevity we omit the details and directly give the
suggestions from the results of the one-tailed two sample t-test as follows: Users are likely to follow
their friends’ behaviors in terms of positive and negative link creation. P-values for the above t-tests
at significance level α = 0.01 are summarized in Table 3. The theory is likely to encourage triads
as shown in Figure 1, which are balanced according to balance theory.
4.2.3 Individuals Personality Theory. According to Reference [40], people’s behavior observed
in social media could be indicative of their personality. This is because, first, social media websites
allow for free interaction and exposing viewpoints by providing an appropriate platform to satisfy users’ basic needs. Second, there is an ample amount of data regarding normative behaviors
of individuals for analysis of individual’s personality. Thus, rich hidden personality information
available on social media has been used in recent studies [28, 40, 50, 80].
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:12 G. Beigi et al.
Fig. 1. Balanced triads encouraged by diffusion of innovation theory.
Moreover, research from psychology and sociology suggest that people personality determines
individuals’ propensity to positive and negative relations [6, 19]. For example, optimistic users
(1) give better responses to difficulties, (2) are happier with their lives, (3) are grateful, and
(4) receive more social support. Therefore, they have higher chances in establishing and receiving positive links. In contrast, pessimists likely (1) have negative attitudes, (2) expect the worst of
people and situations, and (3) treat positive events as flukes and believe that they will not happen
again. Consequently, these individuals often receive or give negative links. Hence, considering
users’ personality information could be helpful for studying the problem of positive and negative
link formation. Although there are many types of personalities [61], in this article, as a starter, we
only consider two common ones, i.e., optimism and pessimism.
Next, we investigate the impact of user’s personality on the formation of positive and negative
links via studying the correlation between personality information and positive and negative links.
We seek to answer the following questions:
• Q31: Are users with higher optimism more likely to establish positive links than those with
lower optimism?
• Q32: Are users with higher pessimism more likely to create negative links than those with
lower pessimism?
To answer the question Q31, we rank all users in a descending order according to their optimism
scores and divide them into K levels with equal sizes denoted as G = {д1,д2,...,дK }. There are
K(K−1)
2 pairs of (дi,дj) where i < j. We consider дi as the group of more optimistic users compared
to those in дj . For each pair (дi,дj), we use Ho and Lo to denote the number of positive links
established by users in groups дi and дj , respectively. Therefore, we have two vectors ho and lo for
Ho s and Lo s of all pairs of groups.
We conduct a one-tailed two sample t-test on ho and lo where the null hypothesisH0 is that users
who are less optimistic are more likely to establish positive links and the alternative hypothesis
H1 is that users with higher level of optimism are more likely to create positive relations:
{ho, lo } : H0 : ho ≤ lo, H1 : ho > lo . (4)
We set K = 20, and the null hypothesis is rejected at significance level 0.01 with p-values 3.16e − 19
and 1.60e − 23 for Epinions and Slashdot datasets, respectively. We make similar observations by
setting K = 30 and K = 50. These results suggest that users with high optimistic behavior are more
likely to establish positive links than those with low optimism. To answer the question Q32, we follow
a similar procedure and apply t-test {hp, lp } to observe the impact of pessimism on the formation
of negative links. The results suggest that users who are more pessimistic are more likely to establish
negative relations than those with low level of pessimism. Table 4 summarizes the p-values for the
above t-tests at significance level α = 0.01.
4.2.4 Summary. These results verify that established social psychological theories are applicable to social media data and in that they are correlated to the problem of signed link formation.
Our findings could be summarized as follows:
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:13
Table 4. P-values of t-test Results
Corresponding to the Individuals
Personality Theory Analysis with
K = 20 at Significance Level α = 0.01
{ho, lo } {hp, lp }
Epinions 3.16e−19 5.36e−10
Slashdot 1.60e−23 7.18e−12
The null hypothesis for each test is refuted.
• Users with higher positive (negative) emotion strengths are more likely to establish positive
(negative) links than those with lower positive (negative) emotion strengths
• Users are more likely to follow their friends’ behaviors in terms of positive and negative
links.
• Users with high optimistic (pessimistic) behavior are more likely to establish positive (negative) links than those with low optimism (pessimism).
Findings from signed link analysis could benefit a variety of tasks of signed network mining as
it introduces new sources of information that could alleviate the signed link sparsity problem. We
next investigate how to incorporate these findings from social psychological theories as a guidance
to feature engineering in addressing the data sparsity problem in signed networks.
5 SOCIAL-THEORY GUIDED FEATURE ENGINEERING
FOR SIGNED LINK PREDICTION
The previous section suggests that social psychological theories are applicable to the usergenerated data and are also correlated with signed link formation. These theories could be then
helpful in addressing the problem of sparse negative and positive links. We incorporate our findings into the task of link prediction in signed networks. Signed link prediction is an important
problem in social computing as it can help to infer and understand attitude of a specific user toward
other users using the extracted information from positive and negative links in the vicinity [58].
Signed link prediction also has many applications in network analysis tasks such as community
detection and recommendation systems require information about positive and negative linkages
between entities. For example, recommendation systems’ outputs (i.e., product recommendation)
are derived from other users’ choices. Given negative linkage between users, the recommender can
improve the quality of recommendation by avoiding to recommend items from one user’s preferences to another. Users with positive links are also more likely to share similar preferences [87].
Another example of signed link prediction application is in political analysis that one needs to
complete a picture of online political landscape. Inferring the signed links in political networks
can further help description of rivalries and coalitions between groups [68].
The problem of signed link prediction is different and more challenging than its existing variants, positive link prediction [90] and sign prediction [94]. We illustrate the unique characteristics
of the singed link prediction along with those of the existing variations in Figure 2. We list the key
nuances of the signed link prediction problem as follows.
• In positive link prediction, we seek to predict only positive links from the existing ones.
In contrast, as illustrated in Figure 2(c), in signed link prediction, we aim to predict both
positive and negative links simultaneously.
• Sign prediction problem infers the signs of the existing links (Figure 2(b)). In the signed link
prediction, we predict both link and its sign between users.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:14 G. Beigi et al.
Fig. 2. Differences of positive link prediction, sign prediction, and signed link prediction.
Fig. 3. Positive and negative link predictor model based on network structure and other sources of usergenerated information, i.e., personal and emotional information.
• A few factors can influence people in their establishment of positive links: Since positive
relations require time to nurture, a user usually does not have a large number of positive relations, or available explicit positive links are often sparse [90]. Online users are often more
willing to show positivity than negativity, and, therefore, negative links are much sparser
than positive links in a signed network, which results in the signed link sparsity problem.
Consequently, the problem of signed link prediction is more challenging than positive link
prediction.
• The vast majority of existing works for the problem of signed link prediction [58] aims at
predicting positive and negative links by leveraging only the existing links between users.
This could result in an inaccurate link formation due to the data sparsity problem. However, we seek to leverage additional resources such as user’s emotional information and
personality to alleviate the signed link sparsity problem.
Signed link prediction in signed social networks can be considered as a classification problem as
shown in Figure 3, where (1) features are extracted from available sources to represent each pair
of users; (2) existing positive links are considered as positive class with label +1, and existing negative links are considered as class with label −1 ; and (3) a supervised classifier is trained by using
these extracted features and labels. Given a pair of users (u,v), we predict the signed link between
them using the classifier probability estimation pc ∈ [0, 1]. Probability estimation represents the
strength of the link between two users. If the probability estimation pc has a higher value than a
given positive link threshold ϵp , i.e., pc ≥ ϵp , then there is a positive link between (u,v). If pc is less
than a given negative link threshold pc < ϵn, then there is a negative link between (u,v). Note that
ϵp ≥ ϵn. Based on the classification framework for the link prediction problem, one effective way
to incorporate findings from social psychological theories and link analysis is through feature engineering [33, 58]. This means, instead of brute force search for all possible features from available
sources, we can extract features derived from our findings guided by social psychological theories.
In particular, we extract three different categories of features that we discuss in details next.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:15
Table 5. Summary of Group of Features for a Pair of Users (ui,uj )
Feature Group Features
EI: Emotional
information
(1) Proportion of negative interactions between (ui, uj ) ( Ni j
Ni j +Pi j )
(2) Proportion of positive interactions between (ui, uj ) ( Pi j
Ni j +Pi j )
(3) Proportion of negative interactions of ui ( Ni
Ni +Pi )
(4) Proportion of positive interactions of ui ( Pi
Ni +Pi )
(5) Proportion of negative interactions of uj ( Nj
Nj +Pj
)
(6) Proportion of positive interactions of uj ( Nj
Nj +Pj
)
DI: Diffusion of
innovation
(1) Proportion of followees of ui whom established negative link to uj (
|{uk |F(ui,uk )=1∧F(uk ,uj )=−1}|
|{uk |F(ui,uk )=1}| )
(2) Proportion of followees of ui whom established positive link to uj (
|{uk |F(ui,uk )=1∧F(uk ,uj )=1}|
|{uk |F(ui,uk )=1}| )
IP: Individual’s
personality
(1) Optimism of ui
(2) Pessimism of ui
(3) Optimism of uj
(4) Pessimism of uj
The first category of social-theory-guided features is constructed with regard to the correlation
between emotional information and signed link formation suggesting that (1) with high probability,
users with positive (negative) emotions are more likely to establish positive (negative) links than those
without and (2) users with higher positive (negative) emotion strengths are more likely to establish
positive (negative) links than those with lower positive emotion strengths. According to these findings, we introduce six features describing emotional information and their strengths, including
the proportion of positive/negative emotions between a pair of usersi and j and the proportion of
positive/negative emotions between users i and j and the whole network.
To account for the findings of diffusion of innovation theory, we develop a group of two features
that is in accordance with the theory that users are likely to follow their friends’ behaviors in terms
of positive and negative link creation. These features are based on the behaviors of user ui ’s friends
(e.g., uk ) toward user uj , including the proportion of friends uk who have established positive and
negative links with user uj .
Last, we employ individual’s personality theory, which indicates the correlation between user’s
personality and positive and negative link formation. This leads to the introduction of the third
group of four features from personality information for each pair of users ui and uj , including
optimism and pessimism scores for each user. Again, the introduced features align well with the
theory, i.e., more optimistic (pessimistic) users are more likely to establish positive (negative) relations
than those with a low level of optimism (pessimism).
We have detailed how we capture our findings via social-theory-guided feature engineering
for the problem of positive and negative link prediction in social networks. A summary of all
introduced features is demonstrated in Table 5.
6 EXPERIMENTS
We first study how link analysis affects signed link prediction in signed social networks. Next, we
examine the robustness of the signed link predictor against the data sparsity challenge. Then, we
investigate the connection of the features to the theories. Finally, we perform feature importance
analysis to examine how much each category of the features and their combinations contribute to
the signed link prediction performance and how robust they are against the sparsity problem.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:16 G. Beigi et al.
6.1 Quality of Predicted Signed Links
We train two classifiers, i.e., Decision Tree and l2-Regularized Logistic Regression, on the set of
features to predict positive and negative links in the network (Figure 2(c)) . In all experiments, we
use 10-fold cross validation by treating one fold as the test set S, and setting Fij = 0,∀(ui,uj) ∈ S.
Note that Fij = 0 indicates the case where the information regarding the link between users ui
and uj is missing. We then feed new representation of F as the input to the predictor. We set the
probability estimation threshold for positive and negative links as ϵp = ϵn = 0.5. This means that
for a given pair of users, if the classifier probability estimation pc ≥ 0.5, then there is a positive link
between (u,v), and the link is negative otherwise. We recall that pc demonstrates the link strength
between two users. Therefore, we can consider a tighter bound for inferring signed links by increasing the difference between signed link thresholds ϵp and ϵc . Different values of thresholds ϵp
and ϵc can be examined in future.
Note that in the signed social networks, positive links are much denser than negative ones resulting in an imbalanced positive and negative links in both training and test sets. We employ
different metrics to assess the performance of positive and negative link predictor on predicted
values of links between pairs of users in the test set, {Fij ,∀ui,uj	 ∈ S}. These metrics include accuracy (ACC), area under the curve (AUC) [35], and individual precision (Precision+, Precision-),
recall (Recall+, Recall-), and F1-value (F1+, F1-) for positive and negative links. We compare effectiveness of our approach against following representative positive and negative links predictors:
• All23: This method [58] uses 23 different topological structure features of the network for
each pair of link between users based on the local relations of a node and balance theory.
The first group of features includes in-degree and out-degree numbers from positive and
negative links and the second group exploit balance theory to extract triangle-based features. We train the logistic regression and decision tree classifiers over these features.
• VOTE: This method [66] assigns a set of topological properties to each edge such as centrality measures (4 features), degrees (4 features), community measures (4 features), and
scale motif frequencies (13 features). After normalizing each attribute, AdaBoost classifier
is applied on features to predict positive/negative links for a given pair.
• CTMS: This method [56] uses tendency rate of triple-micro structures in signed networks.
It first extracts closed triple micro structures around a pair of users assuming the edge
between them is positive. It then repeats the same procedure assuming the edge between
two users is negative. The edge sign is then determined by the scenario that has greatest
tendency rate.
• SC: This method is a signed version of Laplacian matrix for signed network embedding.
We choose the top-d eigen vectors (d=20) corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues of
the signed Laplacian matrix as the low-dimensional node representations. Then, a logistic
regression classifier is trained using nodes’ embeddings to predict positive/negative links
for a given pair of users.
• DB/OP/RP: This method [82] first extracts two sets of topological-based features for each
pair of users: The first set consists of 7 degree-based (DB) features, and the second set contains 12 features describing user’s optimism/reputation (OP/RP), which are derived from
the links between users, a total of 19 features. Then, it trains a logistic regression classifier
using these features to predict positive/negative links for a given pair of users.
• TDP: This predictor treats positive and negative links prediction problem as the propagation of sequence of atomic operations [41]. In this method, positive link propagates multiple
steps while negative relation propagates only a single step.
• Random: This baseline randomly selects pairs of users with positive and negative links.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020. 
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:17
• Majority: This baseline assigns the sign with the majority number of edges to the given
edge. All edges will be considered as positive as positive is the sign with the majority label
in our datasets.
The purpose of this study is to investigate whether our signed link analysis can improve the
link prediction performance. In this experiment, we focus on feature engineering to capture our
observations. Note that there are other signed link predictor frameworks such as low-rank matrix
factorization, which could be deployed on the proposed features. In future, we plan to extend
matrix factorization by generating constraints and defining objective functions.
VOTE, CTMS, All23, SC, and TDP use topological network structure. Moreover, DB/OP/RP extracts users personality and reputation from network structure. We train both Decision Tree and
l2-Regularized Logistic Regression classifiers on the combination of our proposed features with
those of All23–hereafter referred to as All23+EI+DI+IP method. Note that we do not consider the
combination of our proposed features with TDP method, as it was already defeated by All23. The
comparison results are summarized in Table 6, and we observe the following:
• Decision tree and logistic regression classifiers have different learning biases that result
in different performances as expected, while the logistic regression always achieve better
performance. Results also show that high accuracy does not imply better performance in
predicting both positive and negative links. In other words, some methods (e.g., All23, and
TDP) have high accuracy but low recall and F1 for negative class. This confirms the effectiveness of AUC metric when we deal with highly imbalanced dataset.
• All23 outperforms Majority and Random as well as TDP. The reason for improvement of
All23 over TDP is that edge signs could be leveraged in positive and negative link formation
rather than requiring a notion of propagation from farther-off parts of the network as [41]
did. TDP cannot also handle the problem of imbalance distribution of positive and negative
links.
• All23 outperforms DB/OP/RP but is inferior to VOTE and CTMS have better results than
All23. The reason is that VOTE and CTMS consider the global trend and implicit forces that
direct the sign of each relation.
• Performance results of SC is comparable to All23 but cannot outperform VOTE and CTMS
methods. The reason is that VOTE and CTMS explicitly incorporate the global network information while SC does not. In particular, SC seeks to capture network’s properties, which
include the network sparsity and imbalance relationship between signed links. These properties are thus reflected in the learned nodes’ representations and final signed predictions.
• We train both classifiers on the combination of our features EI+DI+IP and those of All23. For
both datasets, All23+EI+DI+IP method outperforms other baselines, All23, SC, VOTE, CTMS,
and DB/OP/RP, using both logistic regression and decision tree classifiers. The reasons are
twofold. First, the task of feature extraction based on the solely topological structure of
signed networks may not be robust due to the sparsity of signed links, specifically negative
links. Thus, there might be even many pairs of users without features based on balance
theory [25]. Moreover, node embedding-based approach SC, seeks to capture network’s
properties, which include the network sparsity and imbalance relationship between signed
links. These properties are thus reflected in the learned nodes’ representations and lead to
poor signed predictions. In contrast, All23+EI+DI+IP method considers auxiliary user information related features other than topological structure. Second, the imbalance problem
of positive and negative links distribution cannot be handled by other approaches as well,
while exploiting additional resources in All23+EI+DI+IP mitigate the imbalance problem in
link distribution.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:18 G. Beigi et al.
Table 6. Link Prediction Performance for Epinions and Slashdot
(a) Epinions
AUC ACC Precision+ Precision- Recall+ Recall- F1+ F1-
All23+EI+DI+IP (LR) 0.8034 0.9451 0.9492 0.8195 0.9946 0.3377 0.9713 0.4759
All23+EI+DI+IP (DT) 0.7542 0.8897 0.9597 0.3637 0.9195 0.5192 0.9387 0.4215
EI+DI+IP (LR) 0.7830 0.9422 0.9461 0.8023 0.9941 0.2944 0.9695 0.4307
EI+DI+IP (DT) 0.7417 0.9318 0.9648 0.5392 0.9614 0.5629 0.9631 0.5508
All23 (LR) 0.7830 0.9282 0.9331 0.5865 0.9936 0.1127 0.9624 0.1890
All23 (DT) 0.6554 0.7294 0.9682 0.1886 0.7624 0.6885 0.8531 0.2961
SC 0.7682 0.8036 0.9012 0.7436 0.8741 0.2589 0.8874 0.3841
VOTE 0.7774 0.8873 0.8911 0.8677 0.8934 0.3118 0.8922 0.4587
CTMS 0.7458 0.8612 0.8802 0.8444 0.9271 0.2878 0.9030 0.4292
DB/OP/RP 0.5981 0.8979 0.9011 0.8218 0.9929 0.2034 0.9447 0.3190
TDP 0.5682 0.9254 0.9289 0.4815 0.955 0.0510 0.9611 0.0922
Random 0.4998 0.4999 0.9278 0.0722 0.5009 0.4952 0.6505 0.1260
Majority 0.5 0.9273 0.9273 0 1 0 0.9622 0
(b) Slashdot
AUC ACC Precision+ Precision- Recall+ Recall- F1+ F1-
All23+EI+DI+IP (LR) 0.9431 0.9412 0.9454 0.9252 0.9796 0.8162 0.9622 0.8673
All23+EI+DI+IP (DT) 0.9029 0.9266 0.9550 0.8375 0.9487 0.8548 0.9518 0.8459
EI+DI+IP (LR) 0.9343 0.9175 0.9248 0.8880 0.9711 0.7436 0.9474 0.8094
EI+DI+IP (DT) 0.8973 0.9343 0.9597 0.8539 0.9541 0.8701 0.9569 0.8619
All23 (LR) 0.8777 0.8370 0.8677 0.6992 0.9284 0.5402 0.8970 0.6094
All23 (DT) 0.8172 0.7994 0.9399 0.5487 0.7881 0.8364 0.8573 0.6627
SC 0.8219 0.8583 0.9236 0.7598 0.8925 0.3739 0.9077 0.5011
VOTE 0.9106 0.9196 0.9370 0.8859 0.9321 0.6052 0.9345 0.7191
CTMS 0.8798 0.8925 0.9078 0.8614 0.9286 0.5618 0.9180 0.6800
DB/OP/RP 0.6347 0.9173 0.9246 0.7506 0.9898 0.2527 0.9560 0.3781
TDP 0.6826 0.9254 0.9289 0.4815 0.9550 0.0510 0.9611 0.0922
Random 0.5024 0.4987 0.7231 0.2769 0.4980 0.5011 0.5898 0.3566
Majority 0.5 0.7255 0.7255 0 1 0 0.8409 0
Metrics are Area Under the Curve (AUC), Accuracy (ACC), individual precision, recall, and F1-value for positive/negative
links.
• For both datasets and classifiers, All23+EI+DI+IP achieves better performance over
DB/OP/RP, despite that both approaches leverage optimism/reputation-based features. The
reason is DB/OP/RP uses topological structures to extract these features and hence suffers
from the sparsity problem, similarly to All23. Simply put, there could be many pairs of
users with zero optimism/reputation, which make the optimism/reputation-based features
less useful in alleviating the imbalance problem of signed links distributions. In contrast,
All23+EI+DI+IP infers users’ personality information from their feedback on different issues
other than merely using signed links. All23+EI+DI+IP also exploits other sources of information inferred from non-structural source, i.e., emotional information, which can also help
in addressing sparsity of signed links.
• All23+EI+DI+IP and EI+DI+IP can better handle the problem of imbalance distribution of
signed links in comparison to other approaches. This is because of leveraging additional
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:19
resources of information that are not heavily imbalanced such as personality and emotional
information.
• For both datasets, all methods perform well in predicting labels for positive edges. The results of recall for negative class (i.e., Recall-) show that All23+EI+DI+IP (LR) has the best
results in predicting negative edges amongst all methods. These results indicate that high
performance in terms of accuracy (AUC), and F1+, does not necessarily indicate that the
method can perform well for negative class. All23+EI+DI+IP (LR) has the best performance
amongst all methods in terms of accurately predicting both positive and negative edges. This
is because other methods rely solely on structural data that is both imbalanced and sparse
while All23+EI+DI+IP leverages other non-structural sources of information for predicting signed links between users, i.e., emotional and personality information. These sources
provide more information about negative interactions and possible future negative links
between users and thus can handle the sparsity and imbalance challenge of signed link
prediction.
• There is not a significant difference between the performance of EI+DI+IP+All23 and
EI+DI+IP. The reason is that features corresponding to All23 are topological based and thus
are not robust to signed link sparsity problem. Therefore, adding them as additional features
to EI+DI+IP does not make any significant improvement.
Both of the two different classifiers achieved the same improvement when they were deployed on
the proposed features. This verifies the significance of social psychological theories for signed link
prediction. To recap, positive and negative link prediction based on additional user information
performs better than the representative signed link prediction approaches. Thus our findings in
link analysis can significantly improve the performance of link prediction in signed social networks.
6.2 Robustness to Data Sparsity
As discussed earlier, signed networks suffer from data sparsity issue. Our goal is to leverage additional resources such as user’s emotional information and personality to alleviate the signed
link sparsity problem. Here, we examine how social-theory-guided engineered features are robust
against data sparsity problem. Similarly to the previous subsection, we use 10-fold cross validation for evaluation. Each time, we hold 1 fold out and treat it as our test set. From the remaining
9 folds, we pick x% of positive and x% of negative links to construct the training set. We vary x as
{60, 70, 80, 90, 100} to investigate how well our signed link predictors perform with different sizes
of training sets and different sparsity scenarios, i.e., a smaller training set is a sparser scenario. We
report the AUC results in Table 7 to assess the performance of predictors. We use AUC, since it is
more effective than other metrics when dealing with a highly imbalanced dataset.
• In general, with the decrease of the training data, the performance of all methods deteriorates.
• EI+DI+IP+All23 and EI+DI+IP are more robust against different sparsity scenarios in comparison to other approaches. Their performance dropped less than 5% when x decreases from
100% to 60%, while performance of other signed link predictors decreases more than 10% in
terms of AUC. This is because other methods rely on topological features that get sparser
by reducing the size of training set. However, EI+DI+IP+All23 and EI+DI+IP leverage additional sources of non-topological information including personality- and emotional-related
features that are not heavily sparse in comparison to structural network data. These sources
provide more information in lack of enough signed network information and helps handling
sparsity problem.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:20 G. Beigi et al.
Table 7. Robustness of Positive and Negative Link Predictors to the Data Sparsity Problem
for Epinions and Slashdot Datasets
Epinions Slashdot
100 90 80 70 60 100 90 80 70 60
All23+EI+DI+IP (LR) 0.8034 0.7953 0.7880 0.7799 0.7705 0.9431 0.9386 0.9291 0.9217 0.9099
All23+EI+DI+IP (DT) 0.7542 0.7426 0.7373 0.7301 0.7256 0.9029 0.8939 0.8859 0.8792 0.8710
EI+DI+IP (LR) 0.7830 0.7722 0.7694 0.7618 0.7521 0.9343 0.9173 0.9089 0.8928 0.8793
EI+DI+IP (DT) 0.7417 0.7308 0.7225 0.7092 0.7014 0.8973 0.8893 0.8816 0.8700 0.8624
All23 (LR) 0.7830 0.7627 0.7514 0.7287 0.7099 0.8777 0.8582 0.8413 0.8163 0.7911
All23 (DT) 0.6554 0.6284 0.6066 0.5785 0.5711 0.8172 0.7924 0.7680 0.7504 0.7314
SC 0.7682 0.7443 0.7267 0.7011 0.6925 0.8219 0.8064 0.7756 0.7639 0.7471
VOTE 0.7774 0.7619 0.7489 0.7321 0.7156 0.9106 0.8863 0.8711 0.8598 0.8439
CTMS 0.7458 0.7197 0.7088 0.6944 0.6719 0.8798 0.8615 0.8523 0.8271 0.8037
DB/OP/RP 0.5981 0.5651 0.5387 0.5118 0.5029 0.6347 0.6199 0.5916 0.5638 0.5329
TDP 0.5682 0.5429 0.5179 0.4835 0.4862 0.6826 0.6549 0.6278 0.6015 0.5927
Area Under the Curve (AUC) is used as an evaluation metric.
Table 8. Logistic Regression Coefficients Based on Emotional Information Features on Epinions
Feature Emotional Information Coefficient Standard Error OR (95% Confidence Interval)
1 −1 −4.7308 0.0084 0.0088 ± 0.009
2 1 1.2127 0.0024 3.3621 ± 3.38
3 −1 −3.0833 0.0156 0.0458 ± 0.44
4 1 0.8192 0.0053 2.2684 ± 2.30
5 −1 −3.0234 0.0156 0.0486 ± 0.051
6 1 0.7818 0.0053 2.1852 ± 2.21
6.3 Connections of Features to the Theories
As discussed earlier, our goal is to explore how different theories can be deployed in positive and
negative link prediction. Here, we investigate how each social-theory-guided feature suggests evidence for the formation of positive/negative links. We study each group of features independently
and follow the same procedure in Reference [58] for analyzing balance and status theories. Using
logistic regression classifier, we compute each feature’s corresponding coefficient, odds ratio (OR)
and 95% confidence interval (CI). Signs of these coefficients indicate how the corresponding feature
is used by logistic regression classifier and suggest an evidence for establishing either positive or
negative links. In addition, the odds ratio value indicates a possible statistical relationship between
the feature and signed links—an odds ratio greater than 1 suggests higher odds of positive link for
classifier outcome, while an odds ratio less than 1 indicates higher odds of negative link. The 95%
confidence interval is often used as a proxy for the presence of statistical significant association
between the feature and expected outcome (either positive link or negative link) if it does not
overlap the null value, i.e., an odds ratio value of 1. A small interval indicates a higher precision of
odds ratio whereas a large interval indicates a low level of precision. These properties of logistic
regression provide a natural connection between each feature and its corresponding theory.
6.3.1 Emotional Information. We train logistic regression classifier on emotional features. Tables 8 and 9 depict the results for Epinions and Slashdot data, respectively. The first column
shows each feature number, and the second column indicates the expected link sign based on the
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:21
Table 9. Logistic Regression Coefficients Based on Emotional Information Features on Slashdot
Feature Emotional Information Coefficient Standard Error OR (95% Confidence Interval)
1 −1 −3.8398 0.0036 0.0215 ± 0.022
2 1 2.0061 0.0020 7.4333 ± 7.47
3 −1 −0.7053 0.0081 0.4939 ± 0.51
4 1 2.3801 0.0032 10.8033 ± 10.88
5 −1 −4.2080 0.0050 0.0148 ± 0.015
6 1 1.3159 0.0033 3.7277 ± 3.76
Table 10. Logistic Regression Coefficients Based on Diffusion of Innovation Features on Epinions
Feature Diffusion of Innovation Coefficient Standard Error OR (95% Confidence Interval)
1 −1 −0.6373 3.8354e − 04 0.52903 ± 0.53
2 1 0.2396 3.3364e − 05 1.2685 ± 1.27
Table 11. Logistic Regression Coefficients Based on Diffusion of Innovation Features on Slashdot
Feature Diffusion of Innovation Coefficient Standard Error OR (95% Confidence Interval)
1 −1 −0.1744 1.7605e − 04 0.8396 ± 0.84
2 1 0.0212 1.3364e − 05 1.02132 ± 1.022
emotional information theory. As we see, the signs of all learned coefficients are the same as the
expected signs for both data, thereby confirming the alignment of emotional information theory
with the learned model. Odds ratios for features that are positively associated with positive expected degree have values greater than 1, whereas the values of features associated with negative
expected degree are smaller than 1. The confidence interval for each feature does not contain the
null value (OR=1), confirming the significant association between features and expected outcome.
Moreover, small confidence intervals indicate the higher precision of odds ratio for each corresponding feature. These results show that proportion of positive/negative interactions between
the pair (ui,uj) as well as the proportion of positive/negative interactions source/target nodes
have with others are good predictors of the signs of potential links ui and uj are going to make
with others in future.
6.3.2 Diffusion of Innovation. Following the same procedure of what we have done for emotional information, we consider features of diffusion of innovation group. The learned coefficients
for this problem are shown in Tables 10 and 11 for Epinions and Slashdot, respectively. The signs
of coefficients are exactly the same as what we expected according to the theory of diffusion of innovation, discussed earlier. The odds ratio for feature number 1 is smaller than 1, which confirms
the feature’s association with expected negative sign. The odds ratio for the second feature is also
greater than 1, which indicates the positive association of corresponding feature with expected
positive sign. The confidence interval for both feature does not contain the null value (OR=1),
confirming the significant association between features and expected outcome. These results confirm that the behavior of ui ’s followees toward uj are good predictors of the signs of potential links
between the pair (ui,uj), and further demonstrate that these features align well with this theory.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:22 G. Beigi et al.
Table 12. Logistic Regression Coefficients for Individual Personality Features on Epinions
Feature Individual Personality Coefficient Standard Error OR (95% Confidence Interval)
1 1 1.2567 0.0137 3.5133 ± 3.61
2 −1 −0.5146 0.0104 0.5977 ± 0.62
3 1 1.6042 0.0113 4.9732 ± 5.09
4 −1 −0.7118 0.0111 0.4907 ± 0.51
Table 13. Logistic Regression Coefficients for Individual Personality Features on Slashdot
Feature Individual Personality Coefficient Standard Error OR (95% Confidence Interval)
1 1 0.3397 0.0098 1.4045 ± 1.44
2 −1 −0.1170 0.0033 0.8895 ± 0.90
3 1 0.3538 0.0098 1.4245 ± 1.46
4 −1 −0.1262 0.0033 0.8814 ± 0.89
6.3.3 Individual’s Personality. Results of training logistic regression on four features of this
group are depicted in Tables 12 and 13, which confirm the alignment of individual’s personality
theory with the learned model. Both first and third features have the positive coefficients with the
odds ratio greater than 1. Also, the confidence interval does not include a null value, which further
confirms the positive significant association of these features with potential positive expected link
between the pair (ui,uj). Coefficients of the second and last features are negative. Moreover, their
odds ratio values are smaller than 1 along with a confidence interval less than 1. These results
suggest the alignment of pessimism-related features with the potential negative expected link
between (ui,uj).
6.4 Feature Importance Analysis
We discuss how important our different sets of the features are in predicting positive and negative links in signed networks. We follow the same procedure in Reference [58] and train two
classifiers, random forest (with 200 trees) and logistic regression, over each category of features
independently. We also train a decision tree classifier on the datasets, and it achieves the worst
performance. Therefore, for brevity we only report feature analysis and classification results when
random forest and logistic regression are used. Results using 10-fold cross validation are shown in
Tables 14 and 15.
Logistic regression for the datasets using the emotional information features achieves AUC
scores of 0.7478 and 0.9085. This shows that these features are the most effective ones. They also
achieve the highest F1-scores, indicating the efficiency of emotional information in predicting negative links even when the dataset is highly imbalanced and sparse, specifically for negative links.
The next important feature is the feature of user’s friends’ behavior, while the individual personality is the least effective one. Another interesting observation is that the combination of all three
groups of features performs slightly better than the combination of each pair of features. This suggests that each feature, though different from the others, contributes almost equally to the signed
link analysis problem. Finally, the combination of three features performs better than All23. This
verifies that merely using topological information is not sufficient for signed link analysis due
to the sparsity of links, while auxiliary information can mitigate the sparsity problem in signed
networks.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
Social Science–guided Feature Engineering: A Novel Approach to Signed Link Analysis 11:23
Table 14. Performance for Analyzing the Importance of Different Combinations of Features for Epinions
Feature Group Logistic Regression Random Forest
AUC ACC F1+ F1- AUC ACC F1+ F1-
Emotional Information (EI) 0.7478 0.9227 0.9583 0.4048 0.7314 0.9611 0.9721 0.5622
Diffusion of Innovation (DI) 0.7390 0.9304 0.9636 0.3479 0.7146 0.9314 0.9688 0.4952
Individual Personality (IP) 0.6702 0.9254 0.9611 0.3887 0.6315 0.9411 0.9624 0.4385
All23 0.7830 0.9282 0.9624 0.1890 0.6777 0.7385 0.8716 0.3254
EI+DI 0.7842 0.9325 0.9635 0.5538 0.7586 0.9316 0.9714 0.4398
EI+IP 0.7554 0.9376 0.9673 0.5212 0.7327 0.9318 0.9718 0.4889
DI+IP 0.7162 0.9303 0.9636 0.1966 0.7216 0.9326 0.9684 0.4516
EI+DI+IP 0.7830 0.9422 0.9695 0.4307 0.7624 0.9508 0.9831 0.5718
All23+EI+DI+IP 0.8034 0.9451 0.9713 0.4759 0.7812 0.9007 0.9517 0.5974
The metrics are AUC, ACC, and F1-score for individual positive/negative classes.
Table 15. Performance for Analyzing the Importance of Different Combinations of Features for Slashdot
Feature Group Logistic Regression Random Forest
AUC ACC F1+ F1- AUC ACC F1+ F1-
Emotional Information (EI) 0.9085 0.9186 0.9337 0.7406 0.8694 0.9183 0.9473 0.8174
Diffusion of Innovation (DI) 0.8953 0.9628 0.9066 0.5673 0.8321 0.8752 0.92014 0.7174
Individual Personality (IP) 0.7248 0.8704 0.9155 0.7218 0.8229 0.8889 0.9288 0.7475
All23 0.8777 0.8370 0.8970 0.6094 0.8306 0.8479 0.8966 0.7119
EI+DI 0.9249 0.9271 0.9522 0.8464 0.9141 0.9480 0.9664 0.8850
EI+IP 0.9128 0.9414 0.9474 0.8108 0.8953 0.9371 0.9595 0.8594
DI+IP 0.8972 0.9635 0.9747 0.5650 0.8883 0.9315 0.9558 0.8472
EI+DI+IP 0.9343 0.9175 0.9474 0.8094 0.9151 0.9411 0.9671 0.8873
All23+EI+DI+IP 0.9431 0.9412 0.9622 0.8673 0.9277 0.9584 0.9731 0.9078
The metrics are AUC, ACC and F1-score for individual positive/negative classes.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we study how findings from social psychological theories can help mitigate the problem of signed link analysis by using auxiliary user information. This is specifically important as
signed link data are often sparse. Our unique contribution lies at the use of social psychological theories to exploit characteristics of signed networks rather than topological features. These
theories guide us to use auxiliary user information such as users’ personality and emotional information, which are available in the form of users’ opinions, likes, and postings. In particular, we
employ Emotional Information, Diffusion of Innovations, and Individual Personality for link analysis in signed networks by extracting three different categories of features. We further demonstrate
the connection of these theories to the signed link prediction problem. Extensive experiments in
signed link prediction show the significance of the social-theory-guided features for signed link
analysis. Our results show the importance of each feature as well as its role in the data sparsity
problem in signed link analysis.
In the future, we would like to study the evolution of users’ emotions and personality traits over
time and investigate whether dynamic signed networks can benefit from deploying these theories.
This could be done by exploiting the changes of the features over time in dynamic signed link
prediction [24]. Furthermore, insights from our work are directly useful in studying the growth of
signed social networks and constructing synthetic signed networks that reflect our findings from
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 11, No. 1, Article 11. Publication date: January 2020.
11:24 G. Beigi et al.
social/psychological theories. We also plan to extend this work to address the signed link sparsity
problem in the presence of partial and asymmetrical information.

