Abstract
Mobile displays provide operators in safety-critical systems with real-time information access when tasks require mobility in the working environment. Little empirical work has explored the impact of mobile displays on operator mobility or the impacts of operator mobility on operator performance and situation awareness (SA) in safety-critical settings. This work explores the impacts of head-mounted displays (HMDs) on operators in a real-time physical simulation of maritime navigation. HMD use significantly improved operator performance, SA, and mobility. These results suggest that the contextual information provided to mobile operators by HMDs may reduce information retrieval effort and allow operators to maintain SA without returning to fixed displays. This underscores longstanding training and domain requirements encouraging operator mobility throughout safety-critical systems, indicating a link between increased mobility and improved performance and SA that has not been empirically tested before.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Mobile displays

Operator mobility

Head-mounted displays

Wearable computing

Information access

Safety-critical systems

Acronyms
ARPA
Automatic Radar Plotting Aid

BRG
Bearing

CBSEM
Covariance-Based Structural Equation Modeling

CFI
Comparative Fit Index

COG
Course Over Ground

CPA
Closest Point of Approach

ECDIS
Electronic Chart Display and Information System

HDG
Heading

HMD
Head-Mounted Display

HUD
Head-Up Display

MANOVA
Multivariate Analysis of Variance

MITAGS-PMI
Maritime Institute of Technology and Graduate Studies – Pacific Maritime Institute

NSAP
Navigational Skills Assessment Program

RMSEA
Root Mean Square Error Approximation

SA
Situation Awareness

SRMR
Standardized Root Mean Square Residual

SOG
Speed Over Ground

TCPA
Time to Closest Point of Approach

TLI
Tucker-Lewis Index

XTE
Cross-Track Error

1. Introduction
Operator mobility within the working environment is essential to successful operator performance in many safety-critical systems, including nuclear power plants, offshore oil and gas, firefighting, disaster response, and emergency medicine. In these settings, real-time access to contextual information is crucial for mobile operator performance and situation awareness (SA) so that safe operations can prevent loss of life and environmental or economic consequences (Janssen et al., 2019; Mirbabaie and Fromm, 2019; Parasuraman and Wickens, 2008).

Mobile displays offer one solution to real-time information needs for operators who must maintain SA while moving in safety-critical work settings, performing multiple concurrent tasks (Klueber et al., 2019; Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019) and interacting with various devices and displays (Reinerman-Jones et al., 2019). Mobile displays can support SA, the perception, comprehension, and projection of changes to a system state (Endsley, 1995), as well as mobile monitoring, the observation and perception of changes to system state when operators are mobile (Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019). Mobile displays that support operator mobility may enhance human-computer interaction (Yang et al., 2019), and improve operator performance (Ehrler et al., 2018; Hsiao and Chen, 2019) and SA (Hong et al., 2016; Pascale et al., 2019). However, empirical evaluations of the impacts of the contextual information provided by mobile displays on operator mobility and SA are scant (Martin et al., 2019; O’ Connor and O’ Reilly, 2018; Prgomet et al., 2009), as many prior studies assume as self-evident the benefit of mobile displays.

This work addresses this gap, and presents an empirical study of the impact of aggregated, contextual information provided by a head-mounted display (HMD) on operator mobility and on operator performance and SA in one safety-critical system, marine transportation. Operators used mobile HMDs or conventional fixed displays in a real-time physical simulation of a ship navigation task. The results showed improved operator performance, SA, and mobility with the use of HMDs, and indicated links between increased mobility and improved operator performance that have been assumed previously but not empirically tested.

2. Background
2.1. Mobile displays
Mobile displays provide operators in distributed systems with real-time information when information must be gathered and actions must be taken at workstations from other locations (Gibson et al., 2018; Martinie and Palanque, 2015; Reuter et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019). The mobile displays allow operators to access decision-making information at the point of use, which is useful for operators who require information from distributed sources while in transit to or at a task location (Bardram, 2009; Lukosch et al., 2015). Mobile displays may also present information about distributed system components while operators are in motion within the work environment (Banerjee and Gupta, 2015; Monares et al., 2011; Reuter et al., 2019) allowing system monitoring and maintenance of SA from different task locations (Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019).

Mobile displays have taken a variety of forms in the past.  HMDs are a form of head-up displays (HUDs) that present visual information hands-free (Stewart and Billinghurst, 2016) to mobile operators (Rehman and Cao, 2017; Reuter et al., 2019); operators can then simultaneously view information co-located with a related real-world entity in the operator's direction of gaze (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Li et al., 2020; Wickens and Carswell, 1995).  Information relevant to the location or situation can be presented (Grubert et al., 2017; Schlosser et al., 2019), merging computer-generated information with views of the real world (Bajura et al., 1992; Blundell et al., 2020). HMDs may also combine information from several sources (Newman, 1995). These capabilities have been theorized to reduce operator cognitive load (He et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Thompson et al., 2010; Tsang and Chan, 2018) and to improve operator performance and SA (Blundell et al., 2020; Hong et al., 2016; Stanton et al., 2019), although concerns have been raised about operator distraction or overload (Li et al., 2020; Schlosser et al., 2019).

Understanding the contribution of HMDs to mobile operators in complex systems while those operators are simultaneously monitoring and controlling an emerging situation is of obvious research interest. Earlier assessments of HMDs in aviation and driving tasks did not address the mobile capabilities of HMDs (Li et al., 2020; Rash et al., 1996; Stanton et al., 2019) because operators in these tasks are stationary within their working environment. Other studies of HMDs with mobile operators, on treadmills or on foot, have not considered display impacts on mobility (Chan et al., 2019; Mustonen et al., 2013). Another stream of research assumed mobile information access would improve operator performance and SA, but did not measure those impacts or consider the possible drawbacks of increased mobility (Gibson et al., 2018; Klueber et al., 2019; Pascale et al., 2019). Thus, this work explores the impact of HMDs on operator mobility, as well as the impact of operator mobility on operator performance and SA during HMD use.

2.2. Mobile display impacts
Mobile displays provide salient information to operators who require the ability to move about the work environment, freed from tethers to conventional displays. Previous evaluations of handheld mobile displays showed that impacts fell short of expectations, with no observable impact on either operator mobility or performance (Sedgwick et al., 2017). This has raised questions about the utility of mobile displays (Blauhut et al., 2018; Rehman and Cao, 2017). In contrast, hands-free, wearable HMDs and HUDs showing relevant, organized information (Horrey et al., 2006; Rehman and Cao, 2017; Reuter et al., 2019) improved operator performance and SA in aviation (Stanton et al., 2019) and driving (He et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019). These improvements may be related to reducing cognitive load with context-relevant information (Reuter et al., 2019), preventing redundant processing (Andersen et al., 2009) and reducing operator effort (He et al., 2018). Information presented in close proximity to a relevant entity was shown to further reduce operator effort and improve information integration (Wickens and Carswell, 1995), aiding performance and SA in complex tasks (Li et al., 2020).

In safety-critical systems, HMDs that provide information in context to operators offer the promise of decision-relevant information in real-time and in context to the evolving situation (Li et al., 2020). Prior studies of HMDs in these settings have shown that they can improve operator performance (Hong et al., 2016; Stanton et al., 2019) and SA (Pascale et al., 2019; Stewart and Billinghurst, 2016), but also raise questions of operator overload (Hong et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2019), distraction (He et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020), and attention capture (Klueber et al., 2019), which can have dire consequences in safety-critical systems.

Earlier HMD studies explored the impact of mobile information access in stationary simulations of settings requiring operator mobility. Many of the studies either required but did not measure operator mobility (Follmann et al., 2019; Gibson et al., 2018; Harrison et al., 2010; Hong et al., 2016; Reuter et al., 2019; Thompson et al., 2010) or did not explicitly control mobility (Chan et al., 2019; Mustonen et al., 2013). Collectively these studies suggest that mobile information access may provide advantages, but due to their design were unable to conclusively show the impact of HMDs on mobile operators’ SA and operator performance in a safety-critical system.

No theoretical model directly addresses the impacts of mobile displays on operator mobility or the effects of operator mobility on operator performance and SA, but prior work exploring the impacts of new technologies on operators in safety-critical systems, and theories of how operators balance resource demands across multiple concurrent tasks, provide direction. The task-technology fit model (Goodhue and Thompson, 1995) considers the compatibility of technology capabilities with the task(s) in which they are to be used, positing that a technology will impact operator performance if an operator perceives that the technology is a good fit for the task, i.e., that the technology capabilities will aid the operator in completing the task (Hsiao and Chen, 2019). Good task-technology fit corresponds with performance impacts, as operators utilize technologies that are a good fit for a task.

3. Research model
The literature reviewed identifies a research gap surrounding our understanding of how mobile displays impact operator performance, SA, and mobility in safety-critical systems. Earlier work has provided a theoretical basis for expectations that these displays could support or hinder the real-time information and interaction needs of operators who must move in work environments, but previous studies have not sufficiently addressed how enhanced operator mobility could impact crucial measures of operator performance and SA in realistically complex settings.

In an effort to further our understanding of the impacts of HMDs on operator mobility, performance, and SA in safety-critical systems, two research questions are proposed: How do HMDs impact operator mobility, performance, and SA? And what are the impacts of operator mobility on operator performance and SA when mobile operators use HMDs in safety-critical systems?

This exploration of the research questions relies on an integration of earlier human-computer interaction theories, visualized as the Fig. 1 research model. Aspects of task-technology fit (Goodhue and Thompson, 1995) guide our understanding of how technology may directly impact operator performance and SA based on perceptions of how well the technology fits the task, as well as how this relationship may be moderated by additional task requirements such as operator mobility. Recent work in similar complex multitask settings (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Li et al., 2020; Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019) informs the proposed relationships among mobile displays, operator mobility, and operator performance and SA. Four hypotheses linking these theories to the research questions are mapped on Fig. 1 and are detailed below.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (239KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Research Model: Impacts of HMDs on operator performance, SA, and mobility.

Hypothesis 1

HMDs will enhance operator mobility.

Real-time information is required at the task location in many safety-critical systems (Monares et al., 2011), and mobility among task locations and working environments is often crucial (Ehrler et al., 2018; Schlosser et al., 2019). HMDs may support operator mobility and improve task-technology fit by allowing access to real-time information necessary to monitor (Pascale et al., 2019) and control a system (Andersen et al., 2009) when operator mobility and multitasking is required (Bardram, 2009). Hypothesis 1 (H1) explores the impact of HMDs on operator mobility duration, mobile monitoring, and mobile commands.

Hypothesis 2

HMDs will improve operator performance and SA.

Earlier investigations have shown that context-relevant information provided by HMDs may benefit operator performance (Blundell et al., 2020; Klueber et al., 2019; Stanton et al., 2019) and SA (He et al., 2018; Stewart and Billinghurst, 2016) in systems that do not require operator mobility by providing access to organized relevant information, thus reducing cognitive load (Li et al., 2020; Reuter et al., 2019). Some studies have suggested that HMDs will provide similar benefits and further increase task compatibility when operator mobility is required (Follmann et al., 2019; Gibson et al., 2018; Hong et al., 2016; Pascale et al., 2019). However, those studies have not explicitly considered operator mobility, nor the multitask processing demands placed on operators when mobility is necessary. Hypothesis 2 (H2) explores the impacts of HMDs on operator performance and SA in a safety-critical setting that requires operator mobility.

Hypothesis 3

Operator mobility will improve operator performance and SA.

Operator mobility among task locations is often required in safety-critical systems (Bardram, 2009; Lukosch et al., 2015; Schlosser et al., 2019). Real-time information available in context as provided by HMDs may prove beneficial (Banerjee and Gupta, 2015; Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Li et al., 2020) to  operator performance and SA (Pascale et al., 2019) during periods of required mobility. However, previous work that has either not measured or explicitly controlled mobility does not address how operator mobility impacts performance and SA (O’ Connor and O’ Reilly, 2018; Prgomet et al., 2009). Hypothesis 3 (H3) explores the impact of operator mobility on operator performance and SA in a setting that requires operator mobility (Blauhut et al., 2018; Gibson et al., 2018).

Hypothesis 4

Operator mobility will moderate HMD impacts on operator performance and SA.

In-context information provided by HMDs may improve operator performance and SA (Pascale et al., 2019) or distract and overload operators (He et al., 2018; Hong et al., 2016). Operator mobility with HMDs may improve operator performance and SA (Gibson et al., 2018), or it may impose additional demands on operator resources (Blauhut et al., 2018). Given these questions, Hypothesis 4 (H4) explores the moderating influence of operator mobility on HMD impacts on operator performance and SA in a setting requiring operator mobility.

4. Method
This section describes the method undertaken to explore the impacts of in-context information provided by HMDs on operator mobility, performance, and SA, and the impact of operator mobility on operator performance and SA. The operational setting and task requirements are described to contextualize the materials used, the qualifications of the subjects, and the experimental design and procedure of the experiment.

4.1. Operational setting: marine transportation
This work is set in the safety-critical setting of marine transportation, a complex (Hockey et al., 2003) setting that requires operator mobility. Ship operators must anticipate the movements of their own and other ships and enact decisions to avoid collisions. This process must be done well in advance of a predicted collision to account for the delays inherent in navigating large vessels underway in restricted waters (Hutchins, 1995; National Research Council, 1994). This requires operator movement to gather and synthesize information from several points around the vessel and the ship's bridge, including distributed information displays (Fig. 2) (Sauer et al., 2002), while integrating views of the environment outside the bridge windows and information from other agents (Sandhåland et al., 2015; van Westrenen and Praetorius, 2014). Ship operators must simultaneously manage vessel navigation, bridge administration, weather and voyage planning, as well as safety tasks (Hockey et al., 2003), while operating their vessel according to international law and the practice of good seamanship (International Maritime Organization, 1972).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (161KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Plan view of bridge.

4.1.1. Human-Computer interaction in marine transportation
Effective operator performance in this setting requires information retrieval and processing from a variety of sensors and systems; interaction with the environment; and decision-making in real-time (National Research Council, 1994). Multiple standards govern operator performance, including the International Rules of the Road (International Maritime Organization, 1972), local regulations, and norms and practices known as the practice of good seamanship (National Research Council, 1994). To meet these standards requires effective vessel course maintenance, known as trackkeeping (Gould et al., 2009); avoiding collisions with stationary and dynamic objects, known as threat avoidance (Hockey et al., 2003; Sandhåland et al., 2015); maintenance of SA by gathering information from distributed sources and agents (Sandhåland et al., 2015); and contending with inclement weather, restricted visibility, and other challenging environmental conditions.

These tasks also require operator mobility as operators must gather and process information from devices, agents, and locations distributed throughout the vessel (Stanton et al., 2006; van Westrenen and Praetorius, 2014), including navigational equipment on the ship's bridge (Fig. 2). Operators must access timely, accurate and task-relevant information as they move about the ship's bridge and vessel during ship navigation, docking, anchoring, and search and rescue evolutions, which often take place in inclement weather, restricted visibility, and other challenging conditions. Additional operator demands come from multiple competing tasks, new technologies, and the need to monitor multiple visual displays (Sauer et al., 2002).

4.2. Materials
4.2.1. Simulated bridge environment
This study was undertaken in a full-mission Class A ship simulator at the Maritime Institute of Technology and Graduate Studies – Pacific Maritime Institute (MITAGS-PMI) in Linthicum Heights, Maryland. The simulated bridge (Fig. 2) consisted of a 32-ft by 16-ft room configured as a typical navigational bridge and bridge wings, set within a 100-ft diameter, 270° cylindrical projection of the waterway and navigational channel. Fig. 2 shows a plan view of the bridge and the bridge wings with the distributed displays of navigational equipment (from left to right, the port side automatic radar plotting aid (ARPA), the port side electronic chart display and information system (ECDIS), the center bridge console, the starboard side ECDIS, and the starboard side ARPA). This configuration replicated an actual ship's bridge, and requires operator mobility to access the different displays, sensors, systems, and views of the operational environment important to ship navigation, through the bridge windows and on the wings of the bridge.

The navigational task required use of conventional navigational equipment, displays and paper charts distributed about the bridge, on the bridge wings, and at the navigation console. The console displays shown in Fig. 2 included ARPAs, ECDISs, and helm panel displays that were shown on overhead panels above the centerline of the bridge. Operators were required to stand and move about the bridge and outside the bridge to use the different displays; access and process navigational information; and interact with internal (the ship's captain) and external (shoreside vessel traffic services operators and other vessel operators) actors in the vessel's working environment.

4.2.2. Mobile display
The mobile display evaluated in this work was an HMD running GlassNav™, a Google Glass (Version 2, 2016) application developed by Le Moyne College researchers with support from the McDevitt Foundation. GlassNav™ displayed a subset of critical navigational information aggregated from the console ARPA, ECDIS, and helm panels (Fig. 2) in real-time, adding visual information about equipment status (i.e., ‘GPS FAIL’, Fig. 3) to audible alarms in the conventional display. This information was superimposed over, but not registered to, views of the environment, and traveled with an operator's head. Thus, the HMD displayed information available on several conventional displays dispersed throughout the bridge, but did so in a single, mobile display.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (343KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. GlassNav™ display superimposed over the view forward with approaching traffic.

Fig. 3 shows the HMD information superimposed on a view of the navigational situation as it appeared to the operator. Information repeated from conventional displays included cross-track error (XTE) in feet; own-ship heading (HDG) in degrees; bearing (BRG) of a radar target in degrees; own-ship course over ground (COG) in degrees; own-ship speed over ground (SOG) in knots; closest point of approach (CPA) to another vessel in nautical miles (nmi); and time to closest point of approach (TCPA) in minutes. This information was critical to the ship navigational task and was also available from conventional displays distributed across the console.

4.3. Experimental design
The experiment followed a between-subjects design, in which licensed ship navigators (n = 211) undertook one simulated ship transit under one of two display conditions (n = 140 HMD, n = 71 conventional displays). Each transit simulated the arrival or departure of a 725-ft, 35,000 deadweight ton container ship in New York harbor, and included vessel traffic, weather, and equipment conditions ranging from routine to non-routine. The task lasted approximately 30 min, the normal arrival or departure time for the New York harbor transit, and required operators to multitask and gather information from distributed displays and sources outside of the bridge (Fig. 2). These conditions replicated realistic operational conditions while reducing the possibility of learning effects and increasing verisimilitude. Data including simulator output of operator performance (XTE, CPA, TCPA), observations of performance and SA, and audio-video recordings of each 30-minute transit, were captured during simulated transits in weekly sessions over 18 months, pre-COVID-19 arrival in the U.S. Each operator participated in one transit, either inbound or outbound, that was randomly assigned by the research team.

4.4. Subjects
Subjects (n = 211) were U.S. Coast Guard-licensed Merchant Marine ship navigational officers attending federally mandated training courses at MITAGS-PMI who volunteered to participate following their daily training. All operators had considerable experience at sea (M = 13.56 years, SD = 11.29) and in the simulator (M = 65.67 h, SD = 138.57) at the time of participation. Statistics describing operator demographics are included in Table 1.


Table 1. Operator demographics by display condition.

Variable	Units	M	SD	Mdn	Range
HMD	Conv'l	HMD	Conv'l	HMD	Conv'l	
Age	Years	41.36	41.04	12.85	12.99	38	37	22–75
Operational Experience	Years	13.61	13.47	11.68	10.37	9	10.5	1–50
Simulator Familiarity	Hours	65.72	64.89	139.42	137.83	25	24	1–1000
Female	Male
HMD	Conv'l	HMD	Conv'l
Gender	11	8	129	63
4.5. Procedure
Operators were tasked with performing a typically rigorous 30-minute inbound or outbound New York arrival or departure transit in the simulator, with either the HMD or the conventional displays. Because of constraints on the availability of the simulator, data was collected for the HMD condition first, followed by the conventional display condition. Waning participation from the limited subject pool during the conventional display condition led to an imbalance in sample sizes across display conditions that was compensated for in analysis.

Each transit consisted of three legs that differed in environmental conditions. The first transit leg exposed operators to clear visibility, minimal current, functioning bridge equipment, and vessel traffic that adhered to the International Rules of the Road. The second leg was a transition from routine to non-routine conditions. The third transit leg required operators to navigate in reduced visibility, increased current, with failures of the bridge equipment, and other vessels maneuvering in unpredictable ways. These factors increased the range of difficulty and realism of the simulated task, while requiring operators to multitask and move about the bridge and bridge wings.

Prior to the task, operators were given a briefing on the purpose of the work and completed a survey that included informed consent and background information. Operators were then led to the simulated bridge, where they were oriented to the bridge equipment and the operational situation. Operators in the HMD technology condition were instructed in the use of GlassNav™. Once operators accepted responsibility for navigation, the simulation commenced. During the transit, operators were charged with carrying out the navigational task on the simulated bridge. Operators were observed and recorded over a closed-circuit audiovisual feed of the bridge. Operators utilized conventional navigational displays and navigational equipment distributed about the bridge, and communicated by voice with a helmsman on the bridge and by handheld radio with the ship's Captain, other vessels, and shoreside authorities. Following the transit, operators completed a post-transit survey and were interviewed and debriefed. They were asked not to discuss the transit or share details of their participation with others who would or might serve as subjects in this experiment.

5. Data
This research explored the impacts of context-relevant information provided by HMDs on operator mobility, performance, and SA, as well as the impacts of operator mobility on operator performance and SA in a safety-critical system that requires operator mobility. 211 expert operators volunteered to participate in a simulated ship navigational task in a full-scale, real-time operational ship simulator. Variables, operationalizations, and data sources are shown in Table 2. Licensed U.S. Merchant Marine ship navigational officers performed a ship navigational task using an HMD (n = 140) or conventional displays (n = 71), addressing questions of how HMDs impact operator mobility (H1) and operator performance and SA (H2), and how operator mobility impacts (H3) or moderates (H4) operator performance and SA.


Table 2. Data. Variables and operationalizations.

Construct	Variable	Definition	Operationalization	Source
Operator performance	Trackkeeping	Deviation from intended track (Gould et al., 2009)	Average cross-track error (XTE) in feet, measured at one-second intervals	Simulator
Operator performance	Threat avoidance	Maintenance of safe passing distances (Hockey et al., 2003)	Closest point of approach (CPA) in feet to another vessel	Simulator
Operator Performance	Practice of good seamanship	Norms and practices of ship management (International Maritime Organization, 1972)	Navigational skills assessment program (NSAP) items 5 & 7	Transit observation
Situation awareness	SA I: Perception	Perception of situation elements (Endsley, 1995)	Situation awareness global assessment technique (SAGAT), NSAP items 2 & 14	Transit observation
Situation awareness	SA II: Comprehension	Comprehension of situation elements (Endsley, 1995)	SAGAT, NSAP items 3 & 15	Transit observation
Operator mobility	Mobility duration	Movement among and time at working environments and devices (Bardram, 2009)	Time at different working environments & devices	Coded video
Operator mobility	Mobile monitoring	System monitoring while mobile (Pascale et al., 2019)	NSAP item 9: Alarm perception while mobile	Transit observation
Operator mobility	Mobile Commands	Task completion from a mobile location (Andersen et al., 2009)	Commands issued while mobile	Coded video
5.1. Operator performance and SA
Operator performance and SA data were gathered  from three sources: simulator data showing operator performance during the transit; in-task observations using a validated U.S. Coast Guard-approved navigational assessment tool known as the Navigational Skills Assessment Program (NSAP) (Murphy, 2015); and audio-video recordings of the bridge during the transit (Table 2). Operator performance was assessed using three domain-standard metrics: trackkeeping, threat avoidance, and the practice of good seamanship. Trackkeeping is maintenance of the vessel's intended track (Gould et al., 2009), evaluated as average XTE in feet, measured at one-second intervals throughout the transit. Lower XTE is considered better trackkeeping. Threat avoidance measures the distance between vessels at their CPA to another vessel (Hockey et al., 2003) and thus is measured as the minimum distance between vessels during vessel passing. Higher CPAs are considered better threat avoidance. Earlier studies of these performance metrics in maritime navigation have noted the relationship between trackkeeping and collision avoidance (Hockey et al., 2003). In this work, this potential conflict is reduced by the narrow-channel setting that limits tradeoffs between CPA and XTE. In a narrow channel, operators must adhere to the prescribed track and can experience small CPAs, which are permissible in restricted waters such as the entrance and departure channel to New York.

The NSAP is an array of 18 assessments conducted by a domain expert observing the transit, evaluated on a five-point scale from 0 (failure to demonstrate skill) to 4 (Excellent skill demonstration). NSAP assessments evaluate use of bridge equipment (items 1, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 18), making and conducting vessel passing arrangements by radio (items 2, 6, 7, 8, 16), traffic reporting and communication (items 3, 14, 15, 17), ship handling (item 5) and ship management skills (items 4). The practice of good seamanship describes qualitative ship management skills (International Maritime Organization, 1972), measured by two observations during the transit and evaluated using the NSAP. The scores of the two observations were added, and higher scores indicate better practices of good seamanship. SA was also evaluated with the NSAP, integrating Situation Awareness Global Assessment Technique (SAGAT) queries from the Captain (Endsley, 1995). SA was evaluated by the combined scores of two observations during each transit. Higher NSAP scores represented better SA.

5.2. Operator mobility
Operator mobility was evaluated in this study with three measures: mobility duration, mobile monitoring, and mobile commands. Mobility duration, an operator's time at each working environment or device (Bardram, 2009), was coded from audio-video recordings of the bridge during the simulated transit using a coding scheme developed from a study of mobile technology use in a hospital setting (Andersen et al., 2009). Mobility duration was coded as time in seconds at one of three working environments: at the console, moving about the bridge, or outside on the bridge wing (Table 3). Operators were considered at the console when standing at or interacting with navigational equipment on the console, and were judged to be mobile when they were in a working environment other than at the console. Operators were considered to be moving about the bridge when they stepped away from the console, such as when they moved to gain a different view of the environment, or to interact with equipment located on the bridge except that at the console. Operators were judged to be outside on the bridge wing when they stepped through the bridge wing doors, and stayed in this working environment until they returned to the bridge. Video coding was accomplished by the researcher and independently verified (Cronbach's α = 0.94) by a trained coder with a maritime background.


Table 3. Mobility coding scheme categories and definitions.

Working Environment	Definition
Console	Operator standing at or interacting with navigational equipment on the console
Bridge	Operator on the bridge, but not at the console
Bridge Wing	Operator outside of the bridge, on the bridge wing
Mobile monitoring is the perception of system state while mobile (Pascale et al., 2019), operationalized as perception of a GPS failure alarm. Each participant experienced a GPS failure while on the bridge wing, triggering an audible alarm within the bridge and a visual notification in the HMD. Perception of the alarm was measured by NSAP observation, then recorded as a binary factor measuring whether an operator perceived the alarm while mobile. Mobile alarm perception was considered acceptable mobile monitoring. Mobile commands measured the number of tasks completed from mobile working environments (Andersen et al., 2009), operationalized as the task of giving helm commands. Video recordings were used to count the number of helm commands issued from mobile working environments. More mobile commands were considered improved mobile commands.

5.3. Analysis
H1 considered HMD impacts on operator mobility. Data for n = 185 transits (n = 123 HMD, n = 62 with conventional displays) were coded. For each subject, data were collected from the ship simulator, in-transit observations, and audio-video recordings of the subjects. Some audio-video recordings were corrupted by a malfunctioning DVD recorder, leading to some data loss. Time stamps had to be carefully synchronized between the data streams for the remaining subjects, and unfortunately, this was only adequately accomplished for 185 of 211 (87.67%) subjects. This resulted in the exclusion of 26 (12.33%) of the subject transits. An α level 0f 0.05 was used to determine statistical significance for all tests. Operator mobility (H1) was measured with 2-sample t-tests comparing mobility duration in each working environment (console, bridge, bridge wing), as well as commands issued while mobile for each display treatment. The Welch-Satterthwaite correction to degrees of freedom was used to account for unequal variance in the unbalanced samples. Effect size was assessed using Cohen's d and f statistics, representing the proportional difference between sample means and variances. Mobile monitoring was evaluated by Fisher's exact test using a contingency table of display treatments and observations of alarm perception while mobile. Because of the distinct independent and dependent variables explored in each of these tests, no p-value correction was performed.

Further analyses considered HMD impacts on operator performance and SA (H2), operator mobility impacts on operator performance and SA (H3), and moderation of HMD impacts on operator performance and SA by operator mobility (H4). These hypotheses were tested using a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with two-way interaction using Type-II sum of squares to account for unbalanced samples. Pillai's trace was selected as a robust measure considering the imbalance in sample sizes. The data violates the assumption of multivariate normality for MANOVA, but the underlying F-tests are robust to this violation, and model residuals for each response variable are normally-distributed. Interaction between mobile monitoring and HMDs was omitted from the MANOVA due to the binary nature of the data for this measure. Finally, the research model was evaluated as a path model using covariance-based structural equation modeling (CBSEM) and product-indicator method interaction, with a robust weighted least squares estimator adjusted for mean and variance to account for categorical data.

Analysis was carried out on a Windows 10 computer running R version 3.6.1. Packages used included ‘gplots’ (ver. 3.0.1.1), ‘lavaan’ (ver. 0.6–5), and ‘psych’ (ver. 1.8.12).

6. Results
Table 4 shows descriptive statistics of the measured variables, categorized according to display: HMD or conventional. No significant distinctions in variable means were detected between inbound and outbound transits. Users in the HMD display condition showed increased operator mobility (H1, Table 5) and improved operator performance (H2, Table 6). The HMD results that showed improved trackkeeping and SA (H2) extend and affirm results of prior HMD evaluations in safety-critical systems of stationary operators (He et al., 2018; Hong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2020; Stewart and Billinghurst, 2016; Yang et al., 2019).


Table 4. Descriptive statistics of data.

Variable	Units	M	SD	Mdn	Range
HMD	Conv'l	HMD	Conv'l	HMD	Conv'l	
Trackkeeping	Feet	241.94	292.56	115.17	153.01	215.94	266.29	54.62–759.5
Threat Avoidance	nmi	.18	0.20	.14	.15	.13	0.15	.005–0.75
Practice of Good Seamanship	NSAP score	6.64	7.07	1.51	1.24	7	7	0–8
SA I	NSAP score	5.79	4.94	1.69	1.86	5	5	2–8
SA II	NSAP score	4.93	4.41	1.75	1.67	5	5	2–8
Mobility Duration: Console	Seconds	988.19	1056.05	148.46	139.4	992	1062	532–1363
Mobility Duration: Bridge	Seconds	236.2	182.97	111.96	101.89	219	167.5	20–618
Mobile Commands	Commands	3.46	1.06	2.61	1.91	3	0.5	0–13
Alarm detected	Alarm undetected
HMD	Conv'l	HMD	Conv'l
Mobile Monitoring	14	0	126	71

Table 5. H1 Results: HMD impacts on operator mobility.

Measure	Source	Method	Statistic	p-value	Finding
Console	Video coding	t-test	t = 3.06	p = .003	HMD use significantly decreased mobility duration: time at the console
Bridge	Video coding	t-test	t = 3.24	p = .001	HMD use significantly increased mobility duration: time moving about the bridge
Bridge Wing	Video coding	t-test	t = 1.76	p = .08	HMD use did not significantly increase mobility duration: time on the bridge wing
Mobile Monitoring	NSAP 9	Fisher's Exact Test		p = .002	HMD use significantly improved mobile monitoring
Mobile Commands	Video coding	t-test	t = 7.09	P < .001	HMD use significantly improved mobile commands

Table 6. H2 Results: HMD impacts on operator performance and SA.

Measure	Source	Method	Statistic	p-value	Finding
Trackkeeping	Simulator	ANOVA	F = 7.64	p = .006	HMD use significantly improved trackkeeping
Threat Avoidance	Simulator	ANOVA	F = 1.29	p = .26	HMD use did not significantly improve threat avoidance
Practice of Good Seamanship	NSAP 5 & 7	ANOVA	F = 3.28	p = .06	HMD use did not significantly improve the practice of good seamanship
SA I: Perception	NSAP 2 & 14	ANOVA	F = 9.22	p = .003	HMD use significantly improved SA I: perception
SA II: Comprehension	NSAP 3 & 15	ANOVA	F = 4.42	p = .04	HMD use significantly improved SA II: comprehension
HMD use significantly improved almost all aspects of operator mobility (H1, Table 5), including mobility duration, mobile monitoring, and mobile commands. HMD users spent less time at the console (M = 988.19) than conventional display users (M = 1056.05); t(129.55) = 30.6, p = .003, d = −0.47, and more time moving about the bridge (M = 236.2) than users in the conventional display conditions (M = 182.97); t(133.18) = 3.24, p = .001, d = 0.49. HMDs did not significantly impact the mean duration of operators’ time on the bridge wing (M = 51.32) compared to conventional display users’ (M = 42.89); t(99.49) = 1.76, p = .08, d = 0.3. However, operators using HMDs showed significantly improved mobile monitoring, with 10% (n = 14) of HMD users successfully perceiving a GPS failure from the bridge wing, compared to none of the conventional display users; p = .002, Fisher's Exact Test. HMD users also showed improved mobile commands, completing tasks from mobile locations more frequently (M = 3.46) than conventional display users (M = 1.06); t(159.33) = 7.09, p < .001, d = 1. The moderate to large effect sizes indicate that these results represent meaningful differences in the context of the maritime navigation task. Contrasts in operator mobility with HMDs and conventional displays are illustrated in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (533KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. H1 Results: Comparison of mean and standard deviation between display treatments.

HMD use was also associated with improved operator performance and SA (H2, Table 6), echoing results previously seen in HMD evaluations in aviation or driving tasks but extending these results to a task that utilizes the mobile capabilities of HMDs. Trackkeeping, a crucial task in marine navigation as well as in driving and aviation, was significantly improved with HMD use (SD = 115.17) compared to conventional display users (SD = 153.01); F(5, 179) = 7.64, p = .006, f = 0.43. Situation awareness, adequate in conventional display users, was also improved with HMD use. Both SA I: Perception (HMD SD = 1.69, conventional displays SD = 1.86); F(5, 179) = 9.22, p = .003, f = 0.48 and SA II: Comprehension (HMD SD = 1.67, conventional displays SD = 1.75); F(5, 179) = 4.42, p = .04, f = 0.33. The moderate to large effect sizes indicate that these improvements to trackkeeping performance and SA are meaningful in the context of the navigation task.

Although HMD use did not directly improve threat avoidance, threat avoidance was significantly improved for those operators who showed better mobile monitoring with HMDs (H3, Table 7); F(5, 179) = 10.21, p = .002, f = 0.5, and for those operators showing increased mobility duration (H4, Table 8); F(5, 179) = 4.58, p = .03, f = 0.34. The moderate to large effect sizes suggest that the observed differences are meaningful in the task.  These results provide empirical evidence for longstanding navigational training and domain requirements that encourage ship operators to move about the bridge, gathering information from various vantage points to assess unfolding navigational situations (Bowditch, 2017; National Research Council, 1994); thus HMD use that provided improved mobile monitoring and increased mobility duration (H1) improved operator threat avoidance (H3, H4), desirable effects in ship navigation.


Table 7. H3 Results: Operator mobility impacts on operator performance and SA.

Measure	Source	Method	Statistic	p-value	Finding
Console	Video coding	MANOVA	F = 0.38	p = .87	Console duration did not significantly impact performance and SA
Bridge	Video coding	MANOVA	F = 1.19	p = .32	Bridge duration did not significantly impact performance & SA
Bridge Wing	Video coding	MANOVA	F = 0.75	p = .59	Bridge wing duration did not significantly impact performance & SA
Mobile Commands	Video coding	ANOVA	F = 1.69	p = .14	Mobile commands did not significantly impact performance & SA
Mobile Monitoring	NSAP 9	ANOVA	F = 10.21	p = .002	Mobile monitoring significantly improved threat avoidance

Table 8. H4 Results: Operator mobility with HMD impacts on operator performance and SA.

Measure	Source	Method	Statistic	p-value	Finding
Console	Video coding	MANOVA	F = 1.09	p = .37	HMD use and console duration did not significantly impact performance & SA
Bridge	Video coding	ANOVA	F = 4.58	p = .03	HMD use and bridge duration significantly improved threat avoidance
Wing	Video coding	MANOVA	F = 0.75	P = .59	HMD use and bridge wing duration did not significantly impact performance & SA
Mobile Commands	Video coding	MANOVA	F = 0.66	p = .66	HMD use and mobile commands did not significantly impact performance & SA
To supplement the preceding analyses with hypothesized causal paths, a CBSEM was examined (Fig. 5). This model supported the MANOVA results that HMDs significantly impacted operator mobility; cov = −0.23, p < .001, providing evidence that HMDs contribute to operator mobility. However, the CBSEM analysis did not support the MANOVA results linking HMDs to operator performance and SA; cov = −0.03, p = .8, and did not provide strong evidence for causal links between operator mobility and operator performance and SA; cov = 0.04, p = .8. These results suggest that while HMDs may enhance mobility, the improvements to operator performance may not be directly attributable to either HMDs, enhanced mobility, or the interaction between these two factors. Along with a weak variance-covariance matrix fit; χ2 = 1102.76, p < .001, df = 83, the model showed fit statistics beyond the normally accepted range, including a  comparative fit index (CFI) of 0.55 (acceptable when ≥ 0.95), a Tucker-Lewis index (TLI) of 0.43 (acceptable when ≥ 0.95), a root mean square error approximation (RMSEA) of 0.26 (acceptable when ≤ 0.06), and a standardized root mean square residual (SRMR) of 0.13 (acceptable when ≤ 0.08). The measures used in the path model represent factors shaping ship navigation performance, but the poor fit of the path model suggests that other factors may be influential in understanding the relationships among technology, operator mobility, and operator performance and SA (Gefen et al., 2011).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (334KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Structural Model: Impacts of HMDs and operator mobility on operator performance and SA with interaction.

7. Discussion
This work found that HMD use enhanced operator mobility (H1), a result linked to improved performance (H3, H4). HMD use also improved operator performance and SA (H2). These results are important considering the scarcity of work measuring the impact of HMDs on operator mobility, performance, and SA in safety-critical systems where operator mobility is required. The H2 results are aligned with prior work for stationary operators in safety-critical systems (Blundell et al., 2020; Follmann et al., 2019; Stanton et al., 2019; Stewart and Billinghurst, 2016) and now contribute to our understanding of HMD impacts on operators in safety-critical systems where mobility is required.

Operator mobility was significantly enhanced with HMDs, suggesting that access to relevant information from distributed sources while mobile enhanced an operator's ability to effectively perform tasks that require mobility. Enhanced mobility was associated with improved operator threat avoidance, which supports domain training and practice requirements encouraging operator mobility in safety-critical settings (Bardram, 2009; Sandhåland et al., 2015). This may be because operators were better able to synthesize the collocated information presented in the HMD with the view of an approaching threat (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Gibson et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Mirbabaie and Fromm, 2019) without having to confirm that synthesis by integrating information from displays around the bridge. These results provide empirical evidence of a relationship between operator mobility and operator performance and SA that has been assumed but not investigated in earlier work.

Improved operator performance when using HMDs was associated with enhanced mobility duration and mobile monitoring, suggesting that operators with improved task performance leveraged the mobility aspects of the wearable displays to spend more time away from the fixed displays synthesizing and processing salient information available from the mobile displays and the external environment. The improvement in mobile monitoring suggests that the HMDs helped operators detect equipment failures in a way that was impossible without the HMD. Path model results did not confirm this as a causal link, suggesting that additional factors may influence this link. Future work could identify these factors, and explore the information access and processing activities associated with mobile monitoring to provide a clearer picture of how mobility impacts information processing and decision making. These are critical inputs to navigational trackkeeping, threat avoidance, and the practice of good seamanship (Bowditch, 2017; Hutchins, 1995).

Information provided by the HMDs improved operator trackkeeping performance, supporting findings from previous HMD evaluations in safety-critical systems (He et al., 2018; Stanton et al., 2019; Stewart and Billinghurst, 2016; Yang et al., 2019), some of which required, but did not measure, operator mobility (Follmann et al., 2019; Hong et al., 2016; Pascale et al., 2019). HMD use may have improved trackkeeping, crucial to the navigation task, perhaps due to the presented information's proximity to real world entities (Wickens and Carswell, 1995). HMDs presented trackkeeping information co-located with a view of the environmental situation, which has been shown to be beneficial to trackkeeping in other safety-critical tasks (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Li et al., 2020; Liggett et al., 1999; Tsang and Chan, 2018).

SA is similarly important in safety-critical systems and the improved SA observed here is consistent with prior HMD studies in safety-critical systems that require mobility (Hong et al., 2016; Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019). In ship navigation, SA requires mobility to gather information from the operational environment and distributed information sources (Sandhåland et al., 2015; van Westrenen and Praetorius, 2014). HMDs provide mobile operators with information co-located with views of the real world, reducing information retrieval effort (He et al., 2018), allowing operators to perceive and comprehend the situation without returning to fixed displays (Pascale et al., 2019). Displays presenting co-located information can also reduce processing load by decreasing redundant processing (Andersen et al., 2009; Reuss et al., 2004), possibly contributing to improved SA (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Li et al., 2020).  Mobile information displays may also explain the improved mobile command results, as operators were able to synthesize and react to HMD information while mobile.

7.1. Limitations and future work
This work explored HMD impacts on operator mobility, performance, and SA using a large sample of experienced operators in a real-time physical simulation of a safety-critical system. The results showed that in-context information provided by the HMDs significantly improved operator mobility, as well as operator performance and SA, and that the enhanced mobility related to improved operator performance and SA. Enhanced mobility and improved performance and SA are important in other safety-critical systems that require operator mobility, including nuclear power plants, hospitals, railway systems, offshore oil and gas installations, firefighting, space exploration, and emergency and disaster response systems. Several of these systems – railway systems, offshore oil and gas, and space exploration systems – share decision latency characteristics with the marine transportation system under study, meaning that decision and operator performance impacts may take some time to unfold. These results may also be of interest in aviation and aerospace systems, where trackkeeping and threat avoidance are crucial, and information and display impacts have long been of interest.

The HMD information presented one display treatment, mono-color text from the bridge navigational systems; no additional treatments (color text, graphics, icons, decision support) or a single display were presented or evaluated. This raises questions about whether other display treatments might have similar or different impacts, and about whether similar results could be obtained with other display configurations, such as stationary displays of integrated information, or more sophisticated graphics including colors or configural displays. Earlier work suggests that such conditions might have also reduced cognitive effort and workload. In this analysis, synchronization disconnects between the DVD and simulator data caused data loss, a difficulty in empirical studies in operational settings such as this. Similarly, this study did not mask the HMD treatment condition by providing all subjects with the HMD, some with the co-located text information displayed and others without. This approach might have limited Hawthorne effects associated with the new technology and provided a common viewing field for all subjects.

Several additional limitations suggest areas for further exploration regarding the generalizability of this work. The subjects had significant task and conventional bridge display experience and only limited experience with the HMD. This may have encouraged operators to use the conventional displays, even in the HMD condition. Future work could explore long-term use of the HMD, as well as HMD impacts on novice subjects, since the subject pool in this work was a convenience sample of highly-qualified experts and no pilot study or power analysis was conducted prior to the experiment. Future work could also undertake a similar study aboard an operational commercial ship, which could provide full ship bridge configurations and avoid limitations such as the 270-degree simulator views, limited 3D perceptions, and the inability to test the HMDs in sunlight.

Further study is required to fully understand the impacts of HMDs on operator mobility, performance, and SA in similar safety-critical systems. Experienced operators may have accomplished the task without fully utilizing the HMD, based on experience, and may have developed strategies or workarounds, perhaps because of a lack of technology trust or familiarity. Future explorations of HMDs could include measures of operator trust in and familiarity with the new technology, particularly over time; these and other factors might improve the fit of the path model.  Further trials could include longitudinal data that explore how HMD impacts change as operators gain trust and experience with the technology, or could consider a third technology condition of HMDs alone, without conventional displays. Other HMD displays could incorporate color and configural graphics to test the effect of advanced displays with sophisticated graphics.

8. Conclusions
This work explored HMD impacts on operator mobility, performance, and SA in the safety-critical system of marine transportation, showing results aligned with previous studies of HMDs in related systems (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Follmann et al., 2019; Hong et al., 2016; Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019). Enhanced mobility may be related to the HMD's ability to present task-relevant information to an operator anywhere in the work environment, improving system monitoring and SA (Pascale et al., 2019; Schlosser et al., 2019). Operator performance and SA improvements may stem from the operator's ability to view real world entities and relevant information together, helping to reduce and balance operator processing load (Gibson et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020) in a complex, multitask setting (Butkiewicz and Stevens, 2020; Tsang and Chan, 2018) requiring mobility.

These results address a gap in our understanding of how HMDs impact operator performance and SA in realistic settings (Blauhut et al., 2018; Prgomet et al., 2009), and provide empirical evidence of a link between operator mobility and performance previously theorized in many safety-critical and distributed systems (Andersen et al., 2009; Bardram, 2009; Ehrler et al., 2018). This work shows improvements to mobility and performance with HMDs, and also suggests future work exploring the nature of the link between operator performance and SA and the enhanced operator mobility afforded to operators when using HMDs in safety-critical settings requiring mobility.