Internet of Things (IoT) is one of the emerging technologies, which is expanding its wings day by day. Smart objects in the IoT system are the ultimate building blocks used in the development process of IoT-based smart pervasive frameworks. Healthcare is one of the essential and well-known application domains of IoT technology. IoT is giving a new shape to the modern healthcare system, which is defined as the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) with proficient technological, social, and economical prospects. In this paper, we have reviewed various advances in the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) technologies such as topologies, platforms/architectures, taxonomies, services and applications, industry trends, and the status of IoHT-based solutions. This paper also investigates various issues related to IoHT privacy and security structures from the perspective of smart healthcare, including security challenges, security requirements, and taxonomy of attacks. Further, this paper explores future research's direction by addressing issues and challenges of the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) based solutions. It also addresses various IoT-based health policies and regulations worldwide for determining the social and economic impact of sustainable growth.

Keywords
Internet of healthcare things (IoHT)

Internet of things (IoT)

Healthcare system

Sensors

Issues and challenges

Security

Services and applications

Smart healthcare

Wireless sensor network (WSN)

Industry trends and status

1. Introduction
IoT is one of the emerging technologies, which is being widely accepted all over the globe. With the immense power and capability of IoT, we can connect at anytime and anyplace to any network or service. IoT is becoming a superpower for next-generation machinery, and its impact has been visible in the current business spectrum. With the help of IoT, industries or researchers are developing solutions. They interact with smart devices and smart objects by integrating the existing internet infrastructure for proper utilization of resources. It is also capable of extending services and benefits for intelligent systems. The interests involved are beyond M2M (machine-to-machine) scenarios, including serial connectivity among networks and devices for providing extreme services (Hӧller et al., 2014). Therefore, automation can be possible in all IoT-based applications soon. IoT based application areas such as traffic congestion control, solution for smart cities, waste management, security, structural health, emergency services, retails, logistics, smart healthcare, and industrial control for which either smart solution is developed or will be developed in the upcoming future (Kortuem et al., 2009; Romer et al., 2010; Guinard et al., 2010; Tan and Wang, 2010).

Before IoT involvement in the healthcare domain or prior to the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT), patients were using traditional systems such as calling doctors, visiting doctor's clinics; communicate through text messaging, and so on. In these conventional systems, neither doctors nor hospitals could monitor or track patients' health in real-time, and real-time solutions to patients were also not possible because smart devices and their infrastructure in healthcare paradigms were not developed. However, after the involvement of IoT in the healthcare domain, things have been changed drastically. Not only it reduces the overall workload on health infrastructure but also real-time tracking and solution to patients are possible. Telemedicine and online/real-time monitoring and consultation are few examples to evident this vital change.

In Fig. 1, typical architecture of the IoHT system has been presented. It consists of three basic layers i.e., sensor layers (consist of heterogeneous sensors such as EEG, ECG, PPG, Motion, Temperature, and so on), personal server layers (consist of on-body coordinators and off-body coordinators), and medical server layers (consist of medical sever, telemedicine server, and medical professionals). These layers are totally different from conventional healthcare systems where real-time monitoring and consultation are not possible.

Fig. 1

Fig. 1. Architecture of IoHT systems.

Health care and medical care are an essential part of the IoHT domain (Pang, 2013). IoT-enabled devices have drastically changed the healthcare domain by giving some extreme powers like remote monitoring of patients and self-monitoring. The doctor can deliver excellent care to patients, and patients can also track their health status. According to health status, the patient can make further strategies and may take precautions accordingly. Due to IoHT, interaction among doctors and patients become more efficient and more straightforward as well as massive growth has been seen in patient's satisfaction and engagement level. A remote health monitoring system for patients can reduce the span of hospital stay and healthcare costs. It can also improve treatment results and prevents re-admissions of the patients to the hospital. IoHT is playing a vital role in healthcare industries by expanding the devices and effective people interactions. IoHT infrastructure is consists of various applications, and these applications are beneficial for patients, physicians, families, and hospitals (Vasanth and Sbert, 2016) (Hu et al., 2013).

IoHT for patients consists of various wearables devices, such as fitness bands, smartwatch, and other wireless-enabled devices (i.e., blood pressure monitoring, heart rate monitoring, glucometer, etc.), which are available in the market. These smart devices are used for personalized monitoring purposes. With the help of these intelligent devices, we can set reminders like calorie count in a day, exercise check-in, variations in blood pressure level, appointments, and so on. If we talk about IoHT for physicians, various wearables devices and home-based monitoring equipment are helping the doctor to keep track of patient's health more efficiently. In case of a medical emergency, information about the patient is forwarded to their family members as well to the doctor, which helps us in making the correct decision. In IoHT for families, the information about the patient is circulated to their family members in real-time. With the help of wearable devices and other smart wireless enables devices, we can track old age people and small children from any time, from anywhere. In an emergency condition, the information is shared in real-time so that we can manage and plan various preventive actions, and save the life of our family members. If we talk about IoHT for hospitals, we can automate multiple functionalities of the system using sensor-based smart equipment. The IoHT enables real-time tracking of medical equipment such as defibrillators, wheelchairs, oxygen pumps, nebulizers, and various other nursing equipment. We can also track medical staff in real-time. In IoHT infrastructure hygiene management is possible through hygiene monitoring devices, which will prevent patients from infections. Asset management, such as inventory control of drugs and environmental nursing like automatic refrigerator temperature and humidity control, is possible in the IoHT system (Sneha and Varshney, 2007; Milenković et al., 2006; Shnayder et al., 2005).

Typical IoHT infrastructure is consists of four stages, or we can say that the four-step architecture of typical IoHT is being used in medical solutions making. In Fig. 2, the basic IoHT system has been presented. Smart IoHT system should build in a way that data is sensed or processed at one stage and produced values in the subsequent stage.

Fig. 2

Fig. 2. Stages of IoT solutions.

In the first step, deployment and data collection of heterogeneous interconnected devices such as actuators, sensors, monitors, cameras, detectors, etc. Occur. In the second step, data is received from different sensors or sensor-enabled devices in analog or digital signal form, which is converted and aggregated into numerical form for further investigations. In step three, pre-processing and standardization of digitized and aggregated data are performed. Then, refined information is moved to the health database center or on the cloud. In the last step, advanced analytics is performed on processed data for effective solutions and effective decision-making (Alamri et al., 2013) (Hackmann et al., 2013).

Deep commitment from various researchers has been seen in IoHT in the last couple of years to address various practical issues and challenges. Resultantly, multiple services, prototypes, and applications are being offered to make the healthcare domain more efficient and easier to use. From the recent research trends on IoHT, it is clear that smart healthcare includes networking platforms and architectures, interoperability, new applications and services, and improved security mechanism. Various guidelines and policies are being made by several organizations and countries worldwide to deploy IoHT technology. Thus, the in-depth understanding of ongoing research on IoHT will probably be valuable for numerous researchers and stakeholders in forthcoming investigations (Bocca et al., 2011) (Jindal and Liu, 2011).

Wireless sensor network (WSN)(Srivastava and Mishra, 2021) technology was one of the crucial innovations in the information technology field and also contributing to its significant role in establishing the IoHT based services into reality (Ko et al., 2010) (Alemdar and Ersoy, 2010). However, the current trend in communication technology is moving ahead to develop and adopt energy-efficient communication technologies such as IP-based sensor networks based on 6LoWPAN (IPv6-based low-power wireless personal area network) (Mainetti et al., 2011).

This article inspected the current trends on the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) research and exposes several issues and challenges that require proper attention for integrating healthcare technologies with IoT modernization. In this respect, the article contributes –

•
To overview existing IoHT (Internet of Healthcare Things) system in terms of the network.

•
To discuss layer-wise taxonomy of IoHT system with in-depth classification of various layers and their subsets.

•
To provide an in-depth survey of IoHT services and application areas.

•
To spotlight current and future trends of various industries.

•
To address core technologies for IoHT that are taking smart healthcare to the next level.

•
To deeper insights into security and privacy issues in the IoHT system.

•
To address various challenges and issues of IoHT systems.

•
To address the prominence of IoHT policies and strategies in various countries.

In Fig. 3, a systematic outline of this review article is presented. Section 2, deliberates about existing surveys on IoHT. The overview of the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) system with its related background and advantages is presented in section 3. In Section 4, the layer-based taxonomy of the IoHT system is introduced and described. Section 5 consists of IoHT services and applications areas-based discussion. In Section 6, various industries that are making IoHT centric solutions with their current and future trends have been discussed. Issues related to security and privacy in the IoHT system are discussed in Section 7. In Section 8, various challenges and problems associated with the IoHT system are discussed. The prominence of IoHT policies and strategies in multiple countries is briefly described in Section 9, and finally, in Section 10, the conclusion of the review article is presented.

Fig. 3

Fig. 3. Outline of the paper.

2. Related work
In September 2018 working group of IEEE Point-of-Care device (PoCD) has been approved to standardize the architecture, communication, and QoS, for service-oriented PoCD and medical IT systems (Alam et al., 2018) (Sain et al., 2017). Although in day-to-day life the IoT has played a vital role not only in the other field but also in the healthcare domain, thus current literature review covers recent works and trends in the IoHT. Various exposure of IoHT has been covered in (Alam et al., 2018; Sain et al., 2017). In (Baker et al., 2017; Ahmadi et al., 2019) along with individual objectives the authors had also covered various associated technologies and different views of IoHT.

In (Alam et al., 2018) authors presented the state-of-the-art for application scenario of IoHT and also reviews various communication standards and protocols for IoHT. It also explores various communication technologies with their challenges and future scope. But security and privacy which were the most important aspects of IoHT have not been discussed in this paper. Along with this, recent technologies, machine learning in MAC, and emerging technologies have also not been discussed. In (Mutlag et al., 2019), fog computing has been discussed in detail with its application in IoHT. This paper discusses improvements in data, security, and reducing latency but does not cover the full potential of fog computing provided to IoHT. In (Baali et al., 2017) authors had thoroughly reviewed the sensors implemented in healthcare and their computing power. It also covers the wireless communication, pre-processing capability of sensors but the paper didn't cover security and network protocols. This paper also lacks to discuss emerging technologies such as machine learning, cloud computing, and edge computing in the healthcare system. In (Baker et al., 2017) authors had proposed a model for IoHT and also given an overview of the architecture and applications of IoHT. It is a comprehensive survey that discusses various applications(Ketu and Mishra, 2021)(Ketu and Mishra, 2021d), wearable devices (Ketu and Mishra, 2020a) (Ketu and Mishra, 2021a), cloud computing (Ketu and Mishra, 2021b), and big data analysis (Ketu and Agarwal, 2015; Ketu et al., 2015, 2020). But it didn't discuss the data privacy, security, network layer protocol, and machine learning aspect of the IoHT. The network management of IoHT was also not discussed in this paper.

In (Seneviratne et al., 2017), a comprehensive study about the wearable devices of IoHT including digital jewels had been discussed by the authors. It presents the security and energy aspects of these wearable devices at the commercial level and also discusses the computing capabilities of these devices. This paper discusses the security in short-range technologies such as Bluetooth low energy (BLE) but it didn't discuss security aspects for long-range technologies. In (Li et al., 2017) authors had discussed the feedback system for the healthcare domain but data integrity which is an important aspect has not been discussed. This paper did not cover the future aspects of the healthcare system which is the limitation of this study. In (Ahmadi et al., 2019), the authors had implemented IoT-based infrastructure from the perspective of health care system and also discussed its security aspect. This paper proposes a security model but it does not discuss risk management, the evolution of security, and possible risk according to the new condition of the system. It also does not discuss security acceptance in big data, cloud computing, edge computing, and new emerging technologies. In (Kurian and Divya, 2017), authors had discussed routing protocols for the IoHT and briefly discussed routing in Wireless Body Area Networks (WBAN) of the healthcare system. Currently, routing relies on multiple attributes but this is not discussed in the paper. In (Jijesh, 2017), authors had extended the survey about the routing protocol of WBAN in IoHT. It also discusses various methods used to implement the routing but its future aspect has not been discussed. In (Sain et al., 2017), authors had discussed the security at three-level i.e.: data level, device level, and network level. In (Yuehong et al., 2016), authors talked about the utilization of IoT in the medical care industry and recognizes the intelligent patterns with future directions. In (Dhanvijay and Patil, 2019; Tun et al., 2020; Tun et al., 2020, 2020; Shah and Chircu, 2018), authors had surveyed the basic application of IoT in healthcare services, most significant advancements in IoT, segments of IoT design in medical services, attributes of cloud-based engineering, security and interoperability issues in IoT engineering, and difficulties of IoT in medical care. In (Qi et al., 2017), authors had talked about various services of IoT-enabled healthcare systems up to the year 2017. In (Aceto et al., 2018), authors had talked about the prospective, taxonomy, and challenges of IoT-enabled healthcare systems. In (Asghari et al., 2019), authors summed up the characterization of IoT-enabled healthcare systems and applications up to 2018. In (Birje and Hanji, 2020) authors surveyed the state-of-the-art work on IoT-based distributed healthcare systems and their taxonomy. In (Qadri et al., 2020) authors surveyed the IoT-enabled healthcare system with the future direction for improving the Quality of services (QoS) (Aghdam et al., 2020). authors had talked about the taxonomy of IoT-enabled healthcare systems with future challenges. The comparison of the existing surveys is summarized in Table 1.


Table 1. Communication technologies for IoHT.

References	Overview	Taxonomy	Services	Applications	Industry Trends and Status	Security	Challenges	Issues	Health Policies	Publication Year	Covered Years
Network	Characteristics
Yin et al. (Yuehong et al., 2016)	✓										2016	2000–2014
Baker et al. (Baker et al., 2017)	✓				✓						2017	2000–2016
Senevirante et al. (Seneviratne et al., 2017)					✓						2017	2006–2016
Li et al. (Li et al., 2017)	✓				✓						2017	2010–2016
Kurian et al. (Kurian and Divya, 2017)	✓			✓							2017	2004–2016
Jijesh et al. (Jijesh, 2017)				✓							2017	2006–2016
Sain et al. (Sain et al., 2017)							✓				2017	2007–2016
Qi et al. (Qi et al., 2017)				✓							2017	2006–2016
Alam et al. (Alam et al., 2018)	✓	✓									2018	2006–2017
Baali et al. (Baali et al., 2017)					✓						2018	2007–2017
Aceto et al. (Aceto et al., 2018)	✓		✓					✓			2018	2007–2017
Ahmadi et al. (Ahmadi et al., 2019)	✓			✓			✓	✓			2018	2000–2016
Shah and Chircu (Shah and Chircu, 2018)					✓						2018	2007–2017
Mutlag et al. (Mutlag et al., 2019)	✓										2019	2008–2017
Dhanvijay and Patil (Dhanvijay and Patil, 2019)					✓						2019	2009–2019
Asghari et al. (Asghari et al., 2019)	✓				✓						2019	2011–2018
Soe Ye Yin Tun et al. (Tun et al., 2020)					✓						2020	2004–2019
Birje et al. (Birje and Hanji, 2020)	✓		✓								2020	2007–2020
Qadri et al. (Qadri et al., 2020)				✓	✓						2020	2016–2019
Aghdam et al. (Aghdam et al., 2020)			✓					✓			2020	2015–2020
This Work	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	2020	2010–2020
The literature survey presented in Table 3 shows that there is a need for the review article that covers all the important aspects of the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) and also covering the current trends in the same. This review paper gives the researcher a future aspect that can be done in the future. Some of the key features of our review paper are summarized below which makes it different from other reviews or surveys done earlier:

•
This paper gives a glimpse of recent work with current trends that leads to future scope in the healthcare system.

•
This paper covers IoHT based taxonomy, services, and applications together for a better understanding of the current issues and challenges which need to focus on.

•
This paper also covers security aspects, recent issues of healthcare, and data privacy with industry trends that are not covered in other surveys.

•
As today's multiple attributes need to be considered for the optimal solution, this paper addresses the same for benefit of future researchers of a similar domain.

•
This paper cover trends, technologies, architecture, and a detailed survey of all aspects which will also help in the pandemic (Ketu and Mishra, 2021c) (Ketu and Mishra, 2020b) situations.

3. Overview of IoHT
This section provides an overview of the IoHT system based on the primary infrastructure and its advantages. This part is broadly divided into two subsections. The former one, briefs about the basic building blocks of IoHT networks, such as topologies, architectures, and platforms. The later subsection incorporates the various advantages of the IoHT system.

3.1. IoHT networks
IoHT networks are one of the essential and very crucial elements of IoHT infrastructure, which acts as a backbone for IoHT by enabling healthcare communication, data transmission, and data reception among the various smart devices. An in-depth discussion about the IoHT topology, IoHT architecture, and IoHT platform has been performed in this section and is presented in Fig. 4 (Zhu et al., 2010) (Grønbæk, 2008).

Fig. 4

Fig. 4. Typical IoHT networks.

3.1.1. IoHT topology
IoHT topology alludes to the game plan of various IoT medical care components and shows situations of consistent medical care systems. Fig. 5 depicts how a heterogeneous computing framework gathers a gigantic number of indispensable signs and sensor data (i.e., body temperature, blood pressure (BP), oxygen saturation, electrocardiograms (ECG), Electroencephalography (EEG), Electromyography (EMG), insulin pump, motion sensor, and so on) and forms a typical IoHT topology. It transforms the heterogeneous storage and computing capability of mobile and static devices such as smartphones, medical terminals, and laptops into a hybrid-computing framework.

Fig. 5

Fig. 5. IoHT topology.

IoHT topology is one of the essential parts of the IoHT network. It is consisting of various tasks such as the physical configuration of the devices, their suitability to application scenarios, activates, and plan of work. As we know, the IoHT network is a collection of heterogeneous health devices connected via a central health server. The mode of connection can be either wired or wireless. These smart health devices make IoHT topology by interacting with each other in the same application domain to perform predefined or specific tasks. IoHT infrastructure may consist of many medical devices that work simultaneously to deliver their job by using a commutation channel. The data transmission and response can be recorded through these commutation channels. These communication channels are connected with the service providers. In other words, we can say that various service providers manage these commutation channels. These service providers offer services and proper security to the communication channels. Safety is an essential part of the IoHT network because data belongs to the person's eHealth records, which means personal information about individuals is recorded here and should not be publicly shared. The data which come from various health devices are analyzed at the service provider end, and information is shared with the appropriate authorities or users. The typical IoHT topology is made up of the sensors-based devices, their activities, and their workflow. These sensor-based smart devices are connected with the wired or wireless medium and communicate with each other devices through communication channels (Viswanathan et al., 2012a; Zhao et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2012; Imadali et al., 2012; Istepanian, 2011). In Fig. 4, IoHT topology has been presented, which is consisting of three providers' data, control, and resource.

Data provider means the data which has been generated by humans or patients, and control provider means the person or things who are managing data. Resource provider means the person or things who are providing resources to perform the analysis. Sometimes, the control provider and resource provider are the same, so in that case, only two-way communication is possible. Besides, this topology also includes real-time data monitoring and control. In the healthcare system, time management is critical, and any delay in the smart system can be a severe matter of concern. Therefore, we have to build a vast infrastructure that is focused on real-time data analysis and provides a fast and secure communication channel (Yang et al., 2014a; Jara et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2014).

Fig. 6 presents smart healthcare gateway-based IoHT topology. Here iMedPack (Intelligent Medicine packaging) is an IoT gadget that deals with the issue of medication abuse and ensures drug consistency too. The iMedBox (Intelligent Medicine Box) is viewed as a medical services passage with a variety of required sensors and interfaces of numerous remote standards. Different wearable sensors and IoT gadgets are connected wirelessly with the medical gateway, connecting the patient's current circumstance to the IoHT cloud. This lattice forms a heterogeneous network (HetNet) for clinical diagnosis and different examinations. The gateway itself can display, store, and investigate all collected data. Distinguishing related roles and activities in clinical benefits is a fundamental factor in developing the IoHT topology.

Fig. 6

Fig. 6. Smart Healthcare Gateway based IoHT Topology.

3.1.2. IoHT architecture
IoHT architecture is one of the essential parts of the IoHT network. This architecture consists of various tasks such as mapping physical configured devices to application software and building a suitable hierarchical model for the application-centric healthcare domain (Doukas and Maglogiannis, 2012) (Zhang and Zhang, 2011). IoHT basic architecture model is being shown in Fig. 7.

Fig. 7

Fig. 7. IoHT architecture.

In this primary archetype of the IoHT network, data is collected using various smart or sensor-based devices. Input data can be received from medical equipment, biosensors, wearable sensors, smart gadgets, and hospital eRecords. These inputs are in the form of psychological signals or patients records or from the health database. If the message comes directly from the device or is taken from health records, then a copy of that data is kept in the local or cloud database. After that, information is served to the central processing unit to perform computation tasks or result findings. The computation is performed using either machine learning algorithms or computation offloading methods. After completing the computation task, the result is communicated to either the health service provider or to the individual user. In all the levels starting from sensing or collecting level data to service level, we need proper security mechanisms because any unauthorized access may cause severe damage to the smart healthcare system as well as to the individual's health. So, we need adequate security from the physical layer to the application layer for keeping patient data safe and which makes the IoHT network easy to use (Shahamabadi et al., 2013; Istepanian et al., 2011; Bui et al., 2012; López et al., 2013).

3.1.3. IoHT platforms
IoHT platforms are one of the essential parts of the IoHT network. It facilitates various tasks such as setting the environment for the application, library's configuration on-board or the system, etc. The platform is responsible for implementing archetypes into reality by making a proper framework for the healthcare domain. Making blueprints and functioning of such a big network are not possible without an appropriate platform that can able to run the software and enable all the basic functionalities of the system. The platform should provide support from the physical layer to accessing layer or application layer. The platform is the only way by which we can integrate smart devices and communication channels on a single umbrella. The processing is performed under a functional environment. But all the intelligent machines and systems are configured according to use cases (Jara et al., 2013a) (Wang et al., 2011).

3.2. Characteristics of IoHT
IoHT is a promising resolution for the integration of physical healthcare devices and the internet world with numerous benefits. In this section, we are going to discuss the various advantages of IoHT.

3.2.1. Network integration
IoHT supports interoperability through cloud computing and wireless sensor network (WSNs) by giving compliance to the networking standards. It promotes interaction among several computational platforms through communication networks. The coordination among networks, fault tolerances, and control of network transactions is possible by exploiting media access control techniques of the network layer. The media access control method can also be implementable in the IoHT system (Pang et al., 2013) (Jia et al., 2012). Table 2 presents various communication technologies that have been used in IoHT paradigms.


Table 2. Communication technologies for IoHT.

Technologies	Year	Applicable	PHY/MAC Standard	Frequency	Transmission Rate	Transmission Range	Power Usages
MiWi	2018	WAN	IEEE 802.15.4	2.4 GHz	250 Kbps	10–80 m	Low
wifi-ah Halow	2016	WAN	IEEE 802.11ah	1 GHz	150 kbps-346 Mbps	1 km	Low
Thread	2015	WAN	IEEE 802.15.4	2.4 GHz	250 Kbps	10–100 m	Low
LoRaWAN	2015	WAN	IEEE 802.15.4	433–915 MHz	50–100kbps	2–5 km	Low
NFC	2015	WAN	ISO/IEC 14443	13.6 MHz	100-420 Kbps	10 cm	Low
NB-IoT	2014	WAN	IEEE 802.15.4	1 GHz	0.1–1 Mbps	1 km	Low
DASH 7	2011	WAN	ISO/IEC 18000-7	25–200 kHz	9.6–166 kbps	0–5 km	Low
BLE	2010	WAN	IEEE 802.15.1	2.4 GHz	1 Mbps	30 m	Low
wireless HART	2007	WAN	IEC 62591, IEEE 802.15.4	2.4 GHz	250 kbps	100 m	Medium
6LoWPAN	2004	WAN	IEEE 802.15.4	2.4 GHz	20–250 kbps	116 m	Low
RFID	2004	WAN	ISO/IEC 18000-7	2.4 GHz	1–200 kbps	3–10 m	Low
Zigbee	2003	WAN	IEEE 802.15.4	2.4 GHz	250 Kbps	10–100 m	Low
Z-Wave	2003	WAN	ITU-T G.9959	900 MHz	40-100 Kbps	30–100 m	Low
Wifi	1997	WAN	IEEE 802.11.1	2.4 GHz	54 Mbps	100 m	High

Table 3. Relevant Literature on Internet Healthcare Things (IoHT) based Services.

Year	Author	Aim	Advantage	Future Direction
2019	Vijayakumar et al. (Rahmani et al., 2015)	Fog computing-based healthcare system	Fog computing-based healthcare Monitoring.	Improvement is needed in the Real-time monitoring process.
2019	Shah et al. (Mehmood and Culmone, 2015)	Cloud-Assisted Respiratory Monitoring System	Cloud-Assisted Monitoring System.	Improvement is needed in the Real-time monitoring process.
2019	Zeadally et al. (Shen et al., 2015)	Improving Security	More secure with high rate seamless connectivity and low latency with high throughput.	Improvement is needed in connectivity and security mechanisms.
2019	Subramaniyaswamy et al. (Velrani and Geetha, 2016)	Personalized food recommendation system	Efficient Real-time Health Monitoring.	Improvement is needed in the real-time monitoring system.
2019	Rajan et al. (Kisseleff et al., 2016)	Patient Monitoring System	Easy to install, Scalable, and enrich Healthcare facilities.	Performance testing is required for batter ease of use.
2018	Subasi et al. (Jeong and Shin, 2018)	Activity Monitoring	Impact of data mining algorithm on the mobile healthcare system	Need to be generalized, not only application-specific.
2018	Djenna et al. (Al-Aubidy et al., 2016)	Improving Security	The reduction in computation overhead and mutual verification stuff is achieved.	Improvement is needed in Connectivity and security mechanisms.
2018	Oti et al. (Bhatia and Sood, 2016)	Real-Time Stress Monitoring	Easy to install, Scalable, and Enrich healthcare facilities.	Performance testing is required for batter ease of use.
2018	Verma et al. (Iqbal and Bayoumi, 2016)	Real-Time Health Monitoring	Efficient Real-time Health Monitoring.	Improvement is needed in the real-time monitoring system.
2018	Kumar et al. (Wu et al., 2016)	Cloud-based Disease prediction	Cloud-based Diabetes Monitoring.	Improvement is needed in the real-time monitoring system.
2017	Bal and Abrishambaf (Gope and Hwang, 2015)	Health Monitoring in Real-Time	Easy to install, Scalable, and enrich Healthcare facilities.	Performance testing is required for batter ease of use.
2017	Satija et al. (Bal and Abrishambaf, 2017)	Improving Quality of Service	Real-time EEG signal assessment and monitoring are possible.	Improvement is needed in source utilization and physical activity monitoring techniques.
2017	Deepu et al. (Satija et al., 2017)	Reducing Power Consumption	It offers local storage utilization with hybrid transmission mode and power-sensitive.	Improvement is needed to deal with power consumption issues efficiently.
2017	Wu et al. (Deepu et al., 2016)	Efficient Energy Consumption Mechanism	More power saver using Efficient Energy Consumption Mechanism.	Improvement is needed in Efficient Energy Consumption Mechanisms.
2017	Ara et al. (Wu et al., 2017)	Focus on Data Privacy and Confidentiality	It enables efficient privacy and security scheme for real-time data transmission with improved efficiency.	Improvement is needed in security and Connectivity related issues.
2017	Lal and Kumar (Ara et al., 2017)	Improving Security	More secure with high rate seamless connectivity and low latency with high throughput.	Improvement is needed in Connectivity and security mechanisms.
2016	Velrani and Geetha (Lal and Kumar, 2017)	Health Monitoring in Real-Time	High security, absence of nursing staff, compact size, easy to handle, and cost-effective too.	Improvement is needed for building an efficient healthcare informatics system.
2016	Kisseleffetal (Subasi et al., 2018)	Improving Quality of Service	Reduce SNR with Improved signals data rate quality.	Efficient Techniques are needed to deal with future IoHT.
2016	Jeong and Shin (Djenna and Saïdouni, 2018)	Improving Resource Utilization	Offers Emergency services while driving.	Improvement is needed in source utilization techniques.
2016	Aubidy et al. (Oti et al., 2018)	Improving Resource Utilization	Accurate in scanning, cheap, reliable in communication, and efficient monitoring with intelligent decision making.	Improvement is needed in Real-time source utilization techniques.
2016	Bhatia and Sood (Verma et al., 2018)	Improving Resource Utilization	Reduce mortality rate with accurate monitoring.	Improvement is needed to deal with the network overhead.
2016	Iqbal and Bayoumi (Kumar et al., 2018)	Improving Information Security	It offers extra secure communication, cheap and compact in size, and is also reliable in protecting health data.	Improvement is needed to deal with the network overhead.
2016	Wu et al. (Vijayakumar et al., 2019)	Improving Security	It achieves Minimal computation cost and secure authentication with fewer security problems.	Efficient Techniques are needed to deal with the securities problems IoHT.
2016	Gope and Hwang (Shah et al., 2019)	Improving Security	It achieves decrement in computation overhead and mutual verification stuff.	Efficient security mechanisms are needed in the Healthcare system.
2015	Rahmani et al. (Zeadally and Bello, 2019)	Improving Ubiquitous Healthcare	Robustness, Reduce data ambiguity and better-quality data with extended coverage	Integration is required in the generic library over a variety of nodes at different protocols.
2015	Mehmood & Culmone (Subramaniyaswamy et al., 2019)	Efficient Energy Consumption Mechanism	Extend the lifetime, High energy storage, No need for frequent battery replacement.	Improvement is needed for better connectivity and better battery life.
2015	Shen et al. (Rajan Jeyaraj and Nadar, 2019)	Focus on Data Privacy and Confidentiality	Better Privacy and Security, easy to implement, reduce power computation, efficient with minimal communication cost.	Improvement is needed for building a robust and secrecy-based Healthcare system
3.2.2. Interaction between system and human
With the help of IoHT, the system and humans can interact with each other. This is one of the essential powers of IoHT based systems. The devices and humans may interact with each other via the communication channel. Data in the health care domain is generated from various sensor-based devices used by users for their well-being. The whole process from data generation to solution finding comes under the IoHT domain. In a smart IoHT system, human-to-human interaction is possible only if the human-to-system interaction is possible. So, we can say that communication among the system and humans is possible in IoHT infrastructure.

3.2.3. Healthier system performance
IoHT is capable of providing improved or healthier system performance due to its closeness towards cyberinfrastructure and sensors. With the process of feedback and automatic redesign, we can improve smart healthcare system performance. IoHT with cyber subsystems and developed computational resources ensure numerous sensing objects, programming languages, multiple communication mechanisms, and maintenance, which may further enhance the overall system performance.

3.2.4. Scalability
IoHT infrastructure is scalable, which means we can scale up the system by adding several new resources as the demands increases. No new infrastructural reformation is required for any addition of resources in the system which helps in overall cost reduction. With the help of IoHT infrastructure, we can perform the various computational and physical dynamics processes on heterogeneous connected devices in the same connection space. In the physical domain, we can combine chemical processes, mechanical gesture control, human involvement, and biological processes. We can combine programming tools, networking infrastructure, and software modeling in the cyber domain.

3.2.5. Flexibility
IoHT based current system is more flexible than the earlier one in adopting technologies such as cloud computing and WSN (Wireless Sensor Network) with advanced functionalities.

3.2.6. Optimization
Due to the full range of cloud infrastructure and biomedical sensors, the optimization of Healthcare applications is quilt possible. This optimization capability unlocks the path towards the extensive range optimization for the IoHT system.

3.2.7. Quicker response time
With fast processing and communication ability on local as well as cloud infrastructure, the overall processing time of IoHT is minimized. This quicker response can efficiently utilize shared resources. It can also provide the early and fast detection of failures.

4. Taxonomy of IoHT
The layer-wise classification of IoHT is made up of four layers, such as Sensing Layer (consist of sensing and architecture), Network Layer (consist of communication and security), Processing Layer (comprised of data management and computation), and Application Layer (consist of control/actuation and application). This section discusses the layer-wise presented taxonomy of IoHT in detail.

4.1. Sensing layer
The sensing layer is the first layer of the IoHT system, which is made up of two elements, sensing, and architecture. All sensing-related activities are performed in this layer. These sensing-associated activities are nothing but the selection and deployment of the sensor on the appropriate prototype. The detailed discussions about each element are as follows:

4.1.1. Sensing
It is an essential physical entity of the IoHT system. The biomedical sensors or other sensor-based devices are responsible for collecting the vital physiological data from the patients, which are being further used in the processing and communication stages to find out the various solutions. It is also very useful in the decision-making process (Haque and Aziz, 2013). Sensing is an important concern for various healthcare applications because the sensed value acts as an input for the healthcare system or application. The sensing from the multiple sensor devices is a non-painful task, except few cases. For example, detection of blood glucose levels for diabetic patients is an unpleasant task because the sample is collected by pricking the needle in the patient's finger. Thus, a non-invasive method based on radio-based sensors is being used to detect glucose levels in the blood (Yilmaz et al., 2013). The sensing is consisting of various elements such as (a) sensor type, (b) parameter, and (c) method.

a)
Sensor Type

In smart healthcare, the number and types of the sensor can be application-specific, which means it can vary in different applications. Intelligent healthcare applications use numerous heterogeneous and homogenous kinds of sensors. For monitoring the patient's health status, we can use single or multiple parameters sensing systems based on application and sensor type. As we know, the IoHT system consists of a vast number of sensors. So, the system complexity depends on the nature of the sensing strategy used in the IoHT based applications. To enhance system performance and decision-making ability, it is crucial to efficiently analyze multidimensional information that is coming from sensors (Tang et al., 2012).

b)
Parameter

The parameter specification plays a vital role in making better communication and computation strategies. For personal healthcare applications, a single parameter system is well suited, but for detailed monitoring such as in the hospital, we need a multiple parameter system. With the help of wearable devices and other wireless sensors devices, we can monitor essential information such as oxygen level, heart rate (Jiang et al., 2011), blood flow, muscle activities, respiratory rate, body inclination, and movement patterns. These single input data are stored in the multi-parameter system. Monitoring of the health status based on various broad range sensor parameters such as schemes, metrics, and techniques is a crucial task.

c)
Method

The critical information about the patients can be collected with the help of biosensors (Arney et al., 2009). With the help of these sensors, we can obtain the patient's data from various locations such as home, office, or hospital, and this collected information can be stored either in the local databases or on the cloud database (Dargie and Poellabauer, 2010). Sensing of the data can be possible in both an active and passive manner. For example, Electrocardiography (ECG) data is obtained by active sensing, and getting the heart rate from the ECG data comes under passive sensing. So, for improving the efficiency of the IoHT system, we need a proper and well-defined sensing method (Kailanto et al., 2008).

4.1.2. Architecture
It plays a vital role in enhancing the performance and quality of the IoHT system. An architecture is required that can fulfill the medical domain's needs with the capability of system integration to facilitate the IoHT based smart applications. The architecture is consisting of various elements such as (a) infrastructure, (b) architecture type, and (c) system type.

a)
Infrastructure

Infrastructure for the IoHT system should be designed for supporting both cloud and server-based infrastructure. The cloud-based infrastructure is suitable for both large and small types of architecture, but the server-based infrastructure is only capable of small architectures. The server-based infrastructure needs proper maintenance, whereas cloud-based infrastructure provides some additional functionalities such as accessibility, cost-effectiveness, and scalability. Due to the limited resources and complications, the IoHT system is full of challenges in mapping the physical components to the cyber world. Therefore, we need some essential efforts while designing IoHT based smart applications (Meng et al., 2011) (Lounis et al., 2012).

b)
Architecture Type

IoHT architecture should capable of handling data management-related issues. The data from a sensor or other smart devices can be found in varying sizes and types. It depends on the sensor types and their application area, such as the temperature sensor generating the small sample data. In contrast, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) produces a larger size of image data. So, there is a need for such architectures that can able to support the processing of both light and heavily weighted data (Yilmaz et al., 2013).

c)
System Type

For parallel processing of both communication and computation processes, there is a need for IoHT enabled smart architecture. These intelligent architectures should alsobe capable of identifying application-specific composition for the healthcare system. Based on user requirements or system configuration, the applications should support both types of users, such as user-defined and automatic paradigms. For example, a user-defined smart checklist system has been proposed by Avrunin et al. (2012) for providing support and guide the users. Therefore, we need such architecture that can support both types of user-defined and automatic paradigms.

4.2. Network layer
The network layer is the second layer of the IoHT system, which is comprised of two elements communication and security. In this layer, all the communication and security-related activities, such as selecting appropriate protocols with proper security mechanisms, are performed. The detailed discussions about each element are as follows:

4.2.1. Communication
It is a crucial task in any smart system. Without it, neither can we interact among the devices nor transmit the data from source to destination. For the IoHT based system, communication becomes more crucial due to the heterogeneity of devices, sensors, and real-time data analytics. So, there is a need for such a communication mechanism that can cope up with these situations in the best possible way (Aziz and Pham, 2013; Pham and Aziz, 2011a, 2011b, 2013; Rasheed and Mahapatra, 2007). The communication process consists of two elements, (a) protocol type and (b) scheduling.

a)
Protocol type

The interaction or communication among heterogeneous sensors or devices is only possible with communication protocols. These communication protocols can be characterized into three types: centralized, decentralized, and hierarchical. As we know, the IoHT system may include a wide range of heterogeneous sensor devices. Thus, we require the appropriate communication protocol for establishing reliable and efficient communication.

b)
Scheduling

The process by which we can manage time-based resource communication is known as scheduling. It is one of the essential tasks in the IoHT system. It is used for performing communication tasks on time with a higher satisfaction level. The three pillars in the scheduling task are concurrency control, task scheduling, and data management. These pillars are responsible for performing the real-time transaction of biosensor data within the required time limit. Scheduling tasks can be classified as publish/subscribe scheduling and combined schedule. The publish/subscribe scheduling belongs to an asynchronous approach, while combined scheduling belongs to the synchronous method.

4.2.2. Security
It is a crucial matter of concern for securing patients’ personal and health-related sensitive data from ethical and legal perspectives. So, while scheming the IoHT architecture for healthcare applications, we have to give special attention to data privacy and security. The security consists of two elements, (a) encryption level and (b) privacy level.

a)
Encryption level

As we know in the IoHT based application has several users and clinicians, and establishing safe communication among them needs data encryption mechanisms. Depending upon the security requirement and application domain, the data encryption mechanism is chosen. Data encryption can be performed at both the network level and user level. If we are using cloud-based servers that are already secured by efficient security mechanisms, then we only need user-level security (Lounis et al., 2012). The encryption mechanisms like ABE (Attribute-based Encryption) can be used for encrypting the data, and only authorized personnel with proper keys can decrypt the data. Any exposure to a patient's personal or health-related data can cause legal and ethical issues. So, we need such a security mechanism that can deal with these challenges related to data security and data privacy in IoHT based applications.

b)
Privacy level

Three-way communication is possible in IoHT based applications. We can also say that the data is transmitted among the three levels, such as data level, application level, and service provider level. If we talk about the privacy of the data, we need security at two levels i.e., data level and application level. The data level consists of the patient's health records and personal information, either going to the application level directly or transmitted through the service providers. Thus, we need user-level security to secure the personal data of the patients. The application-level security consists of the findings based on patient's health records associated with personal information and either going to the user level directly or transmitting through the service providers. Thus, we need application-level security to secure the patient's personal information and critical finding (Poon et al., 2006).

4.3. Processing layer
The processing layer is the third layer of the IoHT system, which is made up of two elements data management and computation. In this layer, all the data management and computation-related activities such as extracting the data from its source and apply computation tasks on data, with the help of various data analytic techniques are performed. The detailed discussions about each element are as follows:

4.3.1. Data management
It is a crucial task and becomes more critical for smart healthcare because various sensor-based devices or biosensors generate real-time data. This data is floating in the communication medium for processing. Thus, the real-time management of the information is a very challenging task. The data management in IoHT based systems consists of predefined strategies applied to the collected data for fulfilling user requirements. The integration of information is also needed for future researches and uses. The data generated by sensors are in raw format and may not be useful until pre-processing, which requires efficient processing and massive bandwidth. Thus, data management strategies are essential and should be adequately applied (Diallo et al., 2012) (Kang, 2009). Data management is consisting of various elements such as (a) storage type, (b) processing medium, and (c) data integration.

a)
Storage type

The data management system's storage type means the data source where the data is going to store or from where the information is being extracted. Two types of data storage strategies are used, where the first one is the central storage scheme, and the second one is the distributed storage scheme. The difference among them is that in primary storage, data is captured/stored by the center health server, or we can say we are taking the data from the cloud or other health databases. While in the distributed storage, data is captured/stored from multiple devices/databases. Thus, we need proper management strategies at each storage type to make the system efficient and straightforward for real-time data processing (Diallo et al., 2012) (Kang, 2009).

b)
Processing Medium

If we talk about data processing in IoHT based system, there are three possible ways to do that. The first one is in-network-based data processing in which we have to provide the data from local datasets to a communication or processing channel, and that is responsible for data processing. The second one is base-station-based data processing, where we have to give the data from the dedicated healthcare centers or global health databases to communication or processing channels responsible for data processing. The last one is cloud-based data processing, in which we have to provide the data from cloud storage to communication or processing channels for data processing (Diallo et al., 2012) (Kang, 2009).

c)
Data Integration

Data integration is one of the critical processes of data management in IoHT based systems. The inclusion of data in IoHT based system is possible in two ways: combined integration and individual integration. In the combined integration process, data coming from heterogeneous sensors or sensor-based devices are captured and blended into a single file for further processing. In the individual integration process, different sensors' data is captured and stored on a single file for further processing. The information that is coming from the combined integration process is used in medical healthcare applications, which involve a numerous number of sensors and offer various services. The data coming from the individual integration process is used for personal healthcare applications (Zhang et al., 2013).

4.3.2. Computation
The computation specification plays a vital role in identifying the essential method incorporated and implemented in IoHT based applications. Some functionality, like real-time remote monitoring of patients, helps doctors and clinicians to take care of patients. This real-time tracking and monitoring facility has enhanced the computation power of the healthcare system. Integration with cloud computing gives an ability to perform large and complex computation tasks. Cloud computing technology can also support mobile devices' integration, high-performance computing, different operating environments, etc. (Rolim et al., 2010; Poulymenopoulou et al., 2011; Berndt et al., 2012). The computation consists of two elements, (a) Monitoring outcome and (b) Modeling type.

a)
Monitoring Outcome

Monitoring is important in IoHT based system toward problem-solving and result finding. The outcome of data in IoHT based system can be classified into three types: health status, intensive care, and daily living care. Health status consists of monitoring the average health of the patient, and it comes under personal monitoring, which means the person monitors their health status with the help of sensor-based devices. Intensive care is based on medical or hospital health monitoring with the help of various sensors and sensor-based equipment. Daily living care is nothing but monitoring individual health by itself with the help of smart sensor-based devices.

b)
Modeling Type

If we talk about the modeling type for the IoHT based system, the two kinds of modeling can be possible. The first one is static modeling, and the second one is dynamic modeling. In static modeling, the computation model is based on either user-specific or solution-specific modeling. The user-specific modeling means we can make the particular computation model for the patient to monitor their health. The application-specific model can be used for various patients dealing with the same diseases. In dynamic modeling, the model is dynamic as compared to static modeling. With this model, prediction and real-time monitoring are possible.

4.4. Application layer
The application layer is the fourth layer of the IoHT system, which consists of two elements control/actuation and application. In this layer, all the control/actuation and application-related activities i.e., decision making and controlling of the application, are performed. The detailed discussions about each element are as follows:

4.4.1. Control/actuation
In the existing healthcare system, we face limited effectiveness in detecting the emergency based on patient health records or data. Some alarm-based arrangements for patients have been made, and these alarm systems are activated when the input signal touches the threshold value. The control/actuation consists of elements such as (a) Mechanism type and (b) Decision making.

a)
Mechanism Type

Two types of control mechanisms are used in the IoHT based system that is automatic and manual. In the automatic mode, the system should be designed in a way so that all controlling-related tasks such as data processing and result finding can be incorporated. In automated systems, all solutions and recommendations are given by the system based on their past experiences and feedback. In the manual mode, all computation is performed on the doctor's side, and based on the doctor's findings, recommendations or suggestions are provided to the patients.

b)
Decision-Based On

If we talk about the decision-making in IoHT based system, it can be done based on two methods, i.e., single parameters and multiple parameters. As we know, the IoHT based system is a lattice of heterogeneous and homogenous smart devices or sensors. Thus, a massive amount of data can be generated and processed. But if we talk about the results, they can be evaluated using specific parameters. In the single parameter-based decision making only individual parameters are considered. In other words, we can say that decision-making is done based on the single sensor data such as measuring blood pressure, temperature, oxygen level, blood glucose level, and so on. But the multi-parameter-based decision-making is done based on various parameters, or we can say that the decision is made using multiple sensor data.

4.4.2. Application
IoHT based system offers a variety of applications such as assisted living, smart hospitals, and elderly care. The complexity of the system depends upon the functionalities of the applications. Control elements should be included in the architecture while building a critical environment in the intensive care unit for hospitals. Electronic components should also include architecture while building a personal application like a smart assisted home (Zhao et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2012; Imadali et al., 2012). The IoT-based application is divided into two areas: (a) user level and (b) advanced level.

a)
User Level

The user-level application consists of various solutions or applications that are being developed to assist the individual's health by improving the smart health monitoring devices and applications. Personal care applications, such as in-home healthcare monitoring systems, have been made for elderly living people and helps in real-time monitoring of older people. The recorded data is visible to patients, their family members, and associated doctors. The application should be designed in a way so that in case of a medical emergency, the information is delivered to family members and the concerned doctor.

b)
Advanced Level

The advanced level application consists of applications that are being used in hospitals or medical domains. These applications are made up of various heterogeneous and homogenous biosensors and other sensor-based systems or devices. Medical care applications consist of smart hospitals and smart intensive care in which the doctor can remotely monitor the patients’ health, as well as the doctor, can also interact with the nursing and other medical staff in any medical emergency. Other applications, like smart medication and inventory management for hospitals, are being made and benefitting hospitals and patients.

5. IoHT services and applications
The IoHT based system can be implemented into diverse fields such as care for elderly patients, child care, chronic disease supervision, personal healthcare, and fitness management. In this chapter, two aspects, services, and applications are taken to establish a better understanding of this wide-ranging topic. In the first aspect, various IoHT based services have been discussed, and the second aspect is further separated into two groups, i.e., single view and clustered view. In a single view, applications related to personal care or well-being have been taken. In the cluster view, the medical centric applications of public prosperity or welfare have been considered. This section explores the various services and applications of smart IoHT based systems, and their categorization is being illustrated in Fig. 9.

Fig. 9

Fig. 9. IoHT services and applications.

5.1. IoHT services
As we know, the smart healthcare field is vast. It is a set of complex systems, and healthcare integration for enabling the essential service, which is a very challenging task. The inclusion of the hospitals, patients, doctors, medical equipment, biosensors, and other medical staff, under a single umbrella, is an essential requirement of IoHT infrastructure. It will not be possible in one day; continuous and speedy development will make this type of infrastructure live in the upcoming future. Thus, every module of this system should be correctly constructed and deployed. Various research organizations have given solutions and services for the smart health domain, and they are widely adopted. This solution offers multiple services for patients in the form of apps, smart devices, sensors, and other intelligent equipment. However, much work is still left to make the healthcare system stylish by offering numerous services and functionality such as easy-to-use, secure, fast, and energy-efficient. In this section, we will discuss the various services based on the IoHT paradigms and are useful for public well-being.

Table 3 shows the relevant literature that has implemented the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) based paradigms and also offered numerous smart services.

5.1.1. Ambient Aided Living
It is one of the important services which is being offered by the IoHT based system. This AAL is handy for old age people, physically challenged, and people who are suffering from some acute diseases. Various devices and sensors are being used in different applications for enabling these services. In these smart services, various biosensors are being used to record the data of the patients. These biosensors can be mounted on any smart device, and with the help of these devices, we can get real-time data of patients. This data is transmitted from the patients to doctors and other family members in case of any unusual activities or emergencies. The communication channel used for data transmission should be secure with efficient security mechanism techniques. Thus, any unauthorized people will not be able to access the personal information of patients. With the help of this smart system, users can monitor their data and manger their lifestyle accordingly. Based on the results, the user can make their life smooth and normal. Various studies (Istepanian, 2011), (Zhang and Zhang, 2011), (Shahamabadi et al., 2013), (Dohr et al., 2010), (Gonçalves et al., 2013) are offering the Ambient Aided Living based services.

5.1.2. IoT based m-health (mobile health)
The IoT-based m-Health offers primary healthcare services on individuals' mobile phones with the help of biosensors or smart devices, which helps them to track and monitor their health in real-time. Real-time tracking and monitoring of personal health records help individuals to take preventive steps accordingly. The biosensor or other smart sensor-based devices are being used to get real-time data from patients. These intelligent devices can be mounted on an individual's body or enabled by various intelligent devices. This smart service also offers communication among the doctor and patients in case of any difficulties or emergencies. Doctors can remotely access patient's data and give a prescription based on recorded data. Various studies (Istepanian, 2011), (Shahamabadi et al., 2013), (Istepanian et al., 2011), (Istepanian et al., 2004) are offering the IoT-based m-Health (Mobile Health) services.

5.1.3. IoT based drug reactions control
As we know in the healthcare system, drugs play a vital role for individuals, and their correct intake can provide the best results, but any wrong consumption of medicine may cause complications. Various drugs have some adverse effects and are not suitable for some individuals. So, for dealing with these situations, the IoT-based drug reaction control system came into the picture. This drug reaction control system offers the power of IoT with proper and secure health services. With the help of an IoT-based drug reaction control system, we can communicate with doctors anytime from anywhere. We can extract some essential information about drugs and their intake, such as drug side-effects and which two drugs are not taken simultaneously. Various studies (Yang et al., 2014a), (Guidance, 1996), (Jara et al., 2010) are offering IoT-based drug reactions control-based services.

5.1.4. IoT based community healthcare
The IoT-based community healthcare system offers community-centric services, which means these services are only for some specific area. In this IoT-based community healthcare system, all the hospitals have been integrated for forming the smart healthcare system. Hospitals and users are integrated into the same system to take advantage of various healthcare facilities like consulting doctors, monitoring family person, child care, and so on. Real-time tracking and monitoring for individual attention or family care are possible with this system. Various studies (Jara et al., 2013a), (Rohokale et al., 2011), (You et al., 2011) are offering IoT-based community healthcare-based services.

5.1.5. IoT based child health informatics
IoT-based child health informatics system offers various services related to child care. With this smart informatics system, we can track and monitor the child from anywhere in real-time. In case of any emergency, we can effectively and instantly handle the situation by taking preventive measures. It is essential for security as well as for health monitoring purposes. With the help of these services, family members can track and monitor their child's activities from anywhere in real-time. Various studies (Day, 2014), (Vicini et al., 2012), (Vazquez-Briseno et al., 2012) are offering IoT-based child health informatics-based services.

5.1.6. IoT based smart wearable devices
IoT-based smart wearable devices are widely used and are becoming an essential part of an individual's life. It offers services for personal care, or we can say that it is developed for tracking and monitoring personal health with the help of sensors or other sensor-based smart devices. Smartwatches and smart bands are some of the widely used and widely accepted devices across the world. It offers various useful functionalities such as heart rate, blood pressure, amount of calory burn, sleeping time, etc., and we can also customize their setting according to our requirements. With the help of these smart wearable devices, we can monitor ourselves in real-time, and based on the health condition; we can make the chart to improve our health conditions. Various studies (Pang et al., 2013), (Chung et al., 2008), (Castillejo et al., 2013), (Sebestyen et al., 2014), (Bazzani et al., 2012) are offering the IoT based smart wearable devices-based services.

5.1.7. IoT based semantic medical access
IoT-based semantic medical access is an informative services-based system that offers medical information about diseases and their consequences. Thus, users can understand the underlying diseases, medications, precautions, and other related information. This useful information may help make a diet chart, exercise chat, sleeping time, etc. It may also help in the crucial things which are essential and notable, such as blood pressure, heart rate, ozone level, glucose level, and much more. Various studies (Xu et al., 2014), (Jia et al., 2012), (Dohr et al., 2010), (Burgun et al., 1999), (Zhang et al., 2012), (Miori and Russo, 2012), (Jara et al., 2013b) are offering the IoT based semantic medical access-based services.

5.1.8. IoT based emergency support
IoT-based emergency support provides the real-time information of individuals to their family members in case of emergencies. With the help of an IoT-based emergency support system, real-time tracking is possible so that, in the case of an accident or any other crisis, we can track the people and send immediate support, which will help save the lives of individuals. It is beneficial for old age people, children, or individuals suffering from some chronic diseases. The studies (Liu and Yang, 2011) and (Xiao et al., 2013) are offering IoT-based emergency support-based services.

5.1.9. IoT based embedded context
IoT-based embedded context is the security mechanism in which encrypted data is transmitted to a less secure communication channel or through a third-party service provider. This service offers better security to data, and without the security key, no one can decrypt this encrypted data. Thus, data integrity and confidentiality are achieved. Various studies (Mantas et al., 2010), (Viswanathan et al., 2012b), (Kiran et al., 2014) are offering the IoT-based embedded context-based services.

5.1.10. IoT based getaways for proficient healthcare
There is an essential requirement of generic frameworks that incorporate appropriate mechanisms for building IoHT based applications. This generic framework may solve data and communication-related issues. As we know in the IoHT based system, three-way communication is possible. This three-way communication consists of the three elements or subsystems such as user level, application level, and services provider level. The user-level and application-level can be managed and secured by the IoHT infrastructure, but they cannot secure the service provider. Thus, there is a need for efficient mechanisms on the service provider side, which could offer top-level security for data and communication channels. Various studies (Istepanian, 2011), (Nikolaevskiy et al., 2014), (Rasid et al., 2014) are providing IoT-based getaways for proficient healthcare-based services.

5.2. Prominent IoHT applications
IoHT applications play a crucial role in enabling IoHT based services in reality. Lots of works are going on for integrating various IoHT services. Patients directly use the applications, whereas applications allow the services. Thus, we can say that applications and services are user-centric and developer-centric, respectively. In this section, a detailed discussion about the various applications based on single and cluster views is presented.

5.2.1. Single view
The single-view application is designed for personal care or well-being, which means they are solution-specific and made to perform single tasks. Various single view or task-specific applications are being discussed in this section. Single view-based IoHT mobile applications have been shown in Fig. 10.

a)
Monitoring of Glucose Level

Fig. 10

Fig. 10. Single view-based mobile application for IoHT.

Diabetes is one of the metabolic diseases and in the current scenario it is a very common disease. In diabetes, the level of blood glucose (sugar) rises over a long period. A fast lifestyle doesn't leave enough time for visiting labs and does testing of blood glucose levels. This challenge motivates the researchers and organizations to build such a smart IoHT solution that can monitor the glucose level of individuals and which will further help the individuals to make the diet plan, medicine, and physical activities, accordingly. Various studies (Istepanian et al., 2011), (Guan, 2013a), (Wei et al., 2012), (Lijun, 2013) have deliberated about the IoT-based monitoring of glucose levels.

b)
Monitoring of ECG

ECG stands for electrocardiogram, one of the methods used to monitor the heart's health and also used in medical diagnostics of heart-related diseases. In a fast lifestyle, we don't have time to go to the hospitals and perform health check-ups. The person who is suffering from heart-related diseases needs time to time examinations. These problems motivate the researchers and organizations to build such a smart IoHT solution that can monitor the ECG signals and based on that, the health of the individual heart can be monitored. It also helps in the diagnosis of various heart-related issues such as prolonged QT intervals, myocardial ischemia, and multifaceted arrhythmias. Various studies (Yang et al., 2014a), (You et al., 2011), (Castillejo et al., 2013), (Jara et al., 2013b), (Rasid et al., 2014), (Drew et al., 2004), (Dash, 2002), (Agu et al., 2013), (Liu et al., 2012), (Xiaogang et al., 2011), (Yang et al., 2014b) have clearly deliberated about the IoT-based monitoring of ECG.

c)
Monitoring of Blood Pressure

Fast and stressful lifestyle needs smart monitoring devices or applications to monitor the blood pressure of individuals. In a busy lifestyle, we don't have time to measure our blood pressure levels. If we talk about hospital scenarios, there is a need for such a smart device that can monitors the blood pressure of critical patients. These shortcomings motivate the researchers and organizations to build such smart IoHT solutions that can monitor the blood pressure level of individuals and further help make the medicine and physical activities chart accordingly. Various studies (Dohr et al., 2010), (Puustjärvi and Puustjärvi, 2011), (Tarouco et al., 2012), (Guan, 2013b), (Xin et al., 2013) have clearly deliberated about the IoT-based monitoring of blood pressure.

d)
Monitoring of Body Temperature

These days monitoring the body temperature is a vital part of smart healthcare services. Thus, there is a need for intelligent monitoring devices or applications to monitor individuals' body temperature. In a busy lifestyle, we don't have enough time to measure body temperature regularly. If we talk about hospital scenarios, there is a need for such a smart device that can monitors the body temperature of critical patients. These challenges motivate the researchers and organizations to build such intelligent IoHT solutions that will able to watch the body temperature of individuals. Various studies (Istepanian et al., 2011), (Ruiz et al., 2009), (Jian et al., 2012), (In, 2014) have deliberated about the IoT-based monitoring of body temperature.

e)
Monitoring of Oxygen level

Monitoring of oxygen level is one of the important tasks for smart healthcare services. Thus, there is a need for smart monitoring devices or applications for monitoring the oxygen level of both healthy and ill people. In a speedy lifestyle, we don't have time to measure an individual's or ill people's oxygen level regularly. Hospitals also need smart devices that can continuously monitor the oxygen level of patients. These challenges motivate the researchers and organizations to build such smart IoHT solutions that will able to monitor the oxygen level of individuals in real-time. Various studies (Jara et al., 2013b), (Khattak et al., 2014), (Larson et al., 2012), (Larson et al., 2013), (Larson et al., 2011) have clearly deliberated about the IoT-based monitoring of oxygen levels.

f)
Smart Insulin

Diabetes is one of the metabolic diseases, and in the current scenario, it is a prevalent disease. In diabetes, the level of blood glucose (sugar) rises over a long period. Thus, a highly diabetic person needs insulin to control their diabetes levels, which requires nursing support who can give the correct insulin dose. It is a very complicated task, and that needs additional nursing support. The additional nursing support makes this healthcare system costly and nursing dependent. These challenges motivate the researchers and organizations to build such smart IoHT solutions by which the individual can able to take appropriate insulin. The studies (Veiseh and Langer, 2015) and (Rege et al., 2017) have deliberated about the smart insulin application.

g)
Smart Vision

The smart vision-based application is an assistant system for visually challenged patients. This smart vision will help the visually challenged patients assist, such as crossing roads, finding shops, tracking cabs, etc. It will also be beneficial for making the life of visually challenged people regular and straightforward. These issues motivate researchers and organizations to build smart IoHT solutions for visually challenged people. The studies (Du Buf et al., 2011) and (José et al., 2011) have deliberated about the smart vision application.

h)
Smart Hearables

The smart Hearables application is an assistant system for deaf and hard-of-hearing patients. The smart hearable will help deaf or hard of hearing person by providing new-age smart hearing aids applications and making their lives regular and straightforward. These issues motivate researchers and organizations to build intelligent IoHT solutions for deaf and hard-of-hearing persons. The studies (Rosa and Yang, 2017) and (Pu et al., 2018) have deliberated about the deaf or hard-of-hearing person-based smart application.

5.2.2. Clustered view
The cluster view application is designed for public well-being or welfare, which means they are medical specific and made for performing multiple tasks. It assists patients by connecting them to doctors and nursing staff. The various clustered view or medical-centric applications are being discussed in this section. Several cluster view-based IoHT applications have been shown in Fig. 11.

a)
Smart Rehabilitation system

Fig. 11

Fig. 11. Cluster view-based application for IoHT.

A smart rehabilitation system is beneficial for people who have physical impairments. This system also improves the functional ability of physically disabled patients and provides them a good quality of life. As it is based on the IoHT based paradigms, so it is also useful for overcoming the shortage of medical experts. In other words, we can say that a smart rehabilitation system is capable of remote monitoring and diagnostics and can overcome the shortage of medical experts. Due to the real-time analysis power, we can provide support and care to patients quickly and effectively. Various studies (Fan et al., 2014), (Tan and Tian, 2014), (Lin, 2013), (Guangnan and Penghui, 2012), (Yue-Hong et al., 2014), (Liang et al., 2011) have clearly deliberated about the IoT-based smart rehabilitation system.

b)
Smart Medication Management

Smart medication management is one of the most critical issues in the IoHT based application. It is vital because it is directly associated with human health, and escaping any dose of medicine can cause severe consequences. It can also help to track the effect of the drug on the patients' health. With this application's help, the patient and their family members can efficiently track medication timing and dose. The studies (Pang et al., 2014) and (Laranjo et al., 2013) have deliberated about IoT-based smart medication management.

c)
Smart Wheelchair Management

The smart wheelchair is one of IoHT based solutions for physically challenged people consisting of the basic functionalities of the wheelchair and various sensors. It can be linked with global or local health databases to monitor and manage individual health effects. With the help of heterogeneous sensors, we can track the person's location in an emergency. The smart wheelchair can be consisting of various functionalities such as behavior analysis, resource optimization, parameter optimization, strategy optimization, and subsystem optimization. Multiple studies (Yang et al., 2014b), (Kolici et al., 2014), (Simpson et al., 2004) have deliberated about IoT-based smart wheelchair management.

d)
Smart Imminent Healthcare

The intelligent imminent healthcare is based on medical-specific applications. It has been used to detect and monitor various health-related problems such as hemoglobin detection, detection of abnormal cellular growth, peak expiratory flow, cancer treatment, skin infection, and eye disorder detection. Remote surgery can be possible with some of the smart imminent healthcare applications that will be capable of integrating the medical equipment and doctors in the same system. Minor surgery can also be possible at a remote location in the case of a medical emergency. Various studies (Jara et al., 2010), (Gayat et al., 2011), (Pesta et al., 2013) have deliberated about the IoT-based smart imminent healthcare system.

e)
Smart m-Health Solutions

If we talk about the mobile application-based smart solution for healthcare, a variety of applications are present and are being used by individuals. In the last couple of years, we have seen tremendous growth not only in the smartphone market but also in the development of various healthcare applications. As technology grows, we are becoming smart, not only in daily life but also in the usability of various smart applications for tracking individual health. We have divided the different mobile health applications into six parts based on their application areas. The six areas for which the smart mobile health application has been made are diagnostic application, drug informatics application, health literature application, medical tutoring application, health calculator application, and clinical interaction application. Various studies (Mosa et al., 2012; Istepanian et al., 2006; Solanas et al., 2014; Whiteside, 2016; Istepanian and Woodward, 2016; Gallos et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2011) have deliberated about the IoT-based smart m-health solutions. In Fig. 12, various smartphone-assisting healthcare applications have been shown.

f)
Smart Diseases Diagnostic

Fig. 12

Fig. 12. Assisting healthcare applications for smartphone.

Disease diagnostic is one of the critical applications in IoHT based systems. With the help of smart disease diagnostic applications, detection of diseases is possible. Disease diagnostic is dependent upon patients' biosensors based on captured data. The application can diagnose the disease based on their knowledge and past experiences, but the final decision is done by a health expert only. It is also useful for managing the doctor's shortness and even capable of handling a system with limited resources. Based on real-time data collection, doctor and patient both can monitor the health progress in real-time. The interaction between doctors and patients can be possible via smart disease diagnostic applications. Various studies (White et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2012a, 2012b; Chen et al., 2012; Wadhawan et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2013) have deliberated about the IoT-based acute disease diagnostic system.

6. IoHT industry trends and status
In a couple of years, rapid growth has been seen not only in the numerous application area of IoT but also in the emerging IoHT. We have experienced a lot of activity and creativity in the field of smart care. The use of IoT in healthcare attracts various entrepreneurs to invest in making smart healthcare solutions. Due to the extensive use of intelligent devices, the firms are taking profits from it and are actively working to build some innovative and wellbeing solution for the human. We have seen some new start-up players in the market which are growing very fast and giving competition to the big players. In this section, we are going to discuss the current IoHT market with future status. In Fig. 13, the various players or firms that are building the various IoHT devices or solutions are presented.

Fig. 13

Fig. 13. IoHT players.

6.1. IoHT trends in 2019
In the year 2019, various start-ups have adopted and implemented IoHT systems worldwide. Resultantly, various smart health devices and applications are coming into the picture, such as wearables devices, surgical robotics, and integrating IoHT with prominent technologies (Saheb and Izadi, 2019; Nguyen and Simkin, 2017; Griffiths and Ooi, 2018; Thibaud et al., 2018; Solanas et al., 2017; Kim, 2017; Park et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017; Lund et al., 2014; Tayyaba et al., 2016; Blanter and Holman, 2020).

•
Wearables Devices: In the last few years, the market of wearables healthcare devices is on top. Due to rapid growth in the field of IoT technology, every country is using various smart gadgets. The big mobile companies are making intelligent healthcare devices for public well-being, and the public is also taking interested in these smart wearable devices. These wearables devices are becoming an essential part of human life and are being frequently used to track the individual's health-related records.

•
Surgical Robotics: Robotics technologies are commonly used to perform various surgeries in the healthcare domain. After the tremendous growth in IoHT based smart devices, the medical field is adopting robotics solutions not only for operation purposes but also for dealing with multiple patients at the same time. The massive risk factor is also associated with it. But still, the researchers are working to build solutions that will minimize the complications and make the system widespread and convenient.

•
Integrating IoHT with Prominent Technologies: There are many enabling technologies for building IoHT solutions. These technologies are like Artificial Intelligence (AI), Augmented Reality (AR), Big Data, Machine Learning (ML), Smart Contracts, Blockchain, etc. Integration of the IoHT system with these technologies will take the healthcare field to new heights. In Fig. 14, the various smart technologies for IoHT are shown.

6.2. IoHT IoT trends in 2020
From the last couple of years, massive growth has been seen in the uses of smart devices, or we can say the IoT-enabled devices are being used in all the application areas including the healthcare domain. At the end of 2020, the use of IoHT based devices across the globe will be 161 million, which means 161 million new units will be used by IoHT infrastructure. If we talk about the various countries then, approximately all the countries are adopting the IoT enables devices. Various countries are also planning to deploy these smart devices in houses and offices too. So, we can say that the upcoming future is very bright for IoHT and will be useful for public wellbeing. At the end of 2020, we can see various IoHT implementations such as smart hospitals, telemedicine, smart ambulance, smart surgeries, and intelligent diagnostics (Saheb and Izadi, 2019; Nguyen and Simkin, 2017; Griffiths and Ooi, 2018; Thibaud et al., 2018; Solanas et al., 2017; Kim, 2017; Park et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017; Lund et al., 2014; Tayyaba et al., 2016; Blanter and Holman, 2020). In Fig. 15, the bar chart is presented, which is based on the estimated IoHT devices installation and deployment in several years.

Fig. 14

Fig. 14. IoHT technologies.

Fig. 15
Fig. 15. IoHT based Smart Devices Across the Globe: A Quick Look.

7. Security in IoHT
The past few years witnessed rapid growth in the use of IoT-based smart devices not only in the healthcare domain but also in other sectors. The use of sensors in all the application domains makes IoT a rapidly growing technology. The adoption of the IoT-based system in the medical field is the witness of its widespread (Jara et al., 2012) (Djenna and Saïdouni, 2018). In recent days, the IoT has been used in various Healthcare applications, or we can say we are using the IoHT based system on a large scale. Heterogeneous smart devices in the healthcare system are globally connected and making the healthcare system interoperable. Thus, we can access the information any time from anywhere (Gonçalves et al., 2013) (Bazzani et al., 2012) (Liu and Yang, 2011). Private information flows over such a smart IoHT based system, and this private information contains the patients' health records. So, we need such type of security in the smart healthcare system, which can protect the private information or eHealth record of the patients and give assurance about data privacy and security to the user. It a very challenging task to detect and analyze the various security and privacy features in IoHT infrastructure (Nikolaevskiy et al., 2014) (Tarouco et al., 2012) (Wang et al., 2006). These security and privacy features will further help in the full adoption of the IoHT in the healthcare field. Thus, there is a need for security for the healthcare perspective at the various layers too, and which has been shown in Fig. 16.

Fig. 16

Fig. 16. IoHT security infrastructure.

In this section, we have characterized IoHT security into three parts. In the first part, the security requirement has described. In the second part, various security challenge has been discussed, and in the last section, the taxonomy of attacks on IoHT infrastructure has been discussed in detail.

7.1. Security requirement
The standard communication technologies are being used in IoT infrastructure, which has limited security features. So, there is a need for a proper security mechanism that can be widely accepted into smart healthcare systems. Thus, to build an adequate security mechanism, we need to emphasize the security requirements shown in Fig. 17. A brief discussion about each security requirement has been described in the below subsections.

Fig. 17

Fig. 17. IoHT security.

7.1.1. Authentication
Authentication in IoHT is nothing but a process of identifying the correct host with whom a patient is going to communicate and share the critical information.

7.1.2. Authorization
Authorization in IoHT is nothing but a process to ensure that only authorized nodes or authorized communication channels have been used throughout the communication.

7.1.3. Availability
Availability in IoHT is nothing but a process to ensure the survivability of services globally or locally for the user, even in the event of DoS (denial-of-service) attacks.

7.1.4. Confidentiality
Confidentiality in IoHT is nothing but a process for ensuring the inaccessibility of the medical information or patient's eRecords to unauthorized users, as well as resist revealing the confidentiality of text to eavesdroppers.

7.1.5. Data freshness
Data freshness in IoHT is nothing but a process for ensuring the real and fresh data coming from the IoHT devices because, in IoHT paradigms, the smart devices may provide some time erratic measurements. Therefore, it is essential to ensure that the message that is going to be used for further investigation is fresh.

7.1.6. Fault tolerance
The fault tolerance in IoHT is nothing but a process of providing consistent security services even in any software glitch or failure of a device.

7.1.7. Integrity
Integrity in IoHT is nothing but a process of ensuring the patient's medical record's integrity in any unfavorable condition. Therefore, it is essential to ensure that the truthfulness of stored content and the completeness of data should not be compromised at any cost.

7.1.8. Non-repudiation
Non-repudiation in IoHT is nothing but a process of indication that any node may not deny earlier sent messages.

7.1.9. Resiliency
The resiliency in IoHT is nothing but a process of protecting the information, devices, and network from attacks in the case of any negotiation among the interconnected devices.

7.1.10. Self-healing
Self-healing in IoHT is nothing but a process of enabling security to the other collaborating devices in the case of network and power failure.

7.2. Security challenge
As we know, traditional security methods are inefficient and unable to meet the IoHT infrastructure requirements. Thus, we need some new security methods which will be able to address all the security-related challenges.

7.2.1. Computational limit
All the IoHT devices are made up of low computation power, or we can say the low-speed processor is being used in IoHT devices. Therefore, the computation power of such smart instruments is shallow in terms of speed, and performing the operations using these devices is computationally expensive. So, it is challenging to build such a security solution that can efficiently reduce resource consumption with improved security services.

7.2.2. Memory limit
All the IoHT devices are made up of low on-device memory. We can say the little onboard memory has been embedded in IoHT devices in which the operating system, application libraries, and system software are also pre-installed. Therefore, we do not have insufficient space to apply complex security mechanisms or protocols.

7.2.3. Energy limit
A typical IoHT infrastructure is a lattice of various sensor-based smart health devices that are small and compact with limited battery power. When the sensor is in the ideal situation, these devices can save energy by going into the power saver mode and switch the operation on the low speed so that they can minimize the overall power consumption. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build such an energy-efficient security solution that can proficiently reduce battery consumption with improved security services.

7.2.4. Mobility
As we know in smart IoHT infrastructure, devices are connected from various networks and can be mobile in nature. These intelligent devices are linked through the internet using multiple service providers. For example, in the case of wearable smart devices such as heart monitors or temperature sensors, they are connected through the internet and keep sharing users' conditions to appropriate caregivers. These wearable intelligent devices are mobile means the users are moveable in nature, and the user's movement may change the location and network connection of the devices. Thus, the security settings and configurations may vary in various networks. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build efficient mobility-compliant security mechanisms.

7.2.5. Scalability
Rapid growth has been seen in the number of sensors used in the smart healthcare system or IoHT paradigms; therefore, a more significant number of devices are going to connect with the global network. Consequently, it is challenging to build a vastly scalable security mechanism by fulfilling advanced security requirements.

7.2.6. Communication channel
The IoHT devices can be connected locally and globally via communication channels by using an extensive range of wireless technologies, such as Z-Wave, Zigbee, Bluetooth, WiFi, Bluetooth Low Energy, GSM, 3G/4G, WiMax, and much more. Due to its wireless nature, wired security mechanisms become unappropriated. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build a comprehensive security mechanism or protocol which will be suitable for both wireless and wired technologies by fulfilling the advanced security requirements.

7.2.7. The diversity of devices
As we know, the IoHT is a lattice of homogeneous and heterogeneous devices, ranging from small to an extensive range of devices. These devices can be different in sizes, computation ability, power utilization, memory uses, and embedded software. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build a comprehensive security mechanism or protocol which will be suitable for all the type of device by fulfilling the advanced security requirements.

7.2.8. Dynamic topology of network
In the IoHT infrastructure, any smart device can be joined to the global or local healthcare network anytime, anywhere, and these intelligent apparatuses may also leave the system without notification (disgracefully) or with the proper information (gracefully). This spatial and temporal behavior of devices makes the network topology dynamic. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build a dynamic topology-based security model for the network, which will be suitable for all the variety of dynamic systems by fulfilling the advanced security requirements.

7.2.9. Multi-protocol networks
In the IoHT infrastructure, smart devices can communicate with each other by using a proprietary network protocol. The same intelligent devices may also communicate with IoHT service providers by using IP networks. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build a security solution for the network which will be suitable for all the variety of dynamic systems by fulfilling the advanced security requirements.

7.2.10. Dynamic security updates
To provide appropriate security in IoHT infrastructure, time to time updating of security protocol is a necessity. Therefore, it is a challenging task to build a dynamic security update model which will be suitable for the installation of security patches dynamically by fulfilling the advanced security requirements.

7.2.11. Tamper-resistant packages
In IoHT infrastructure, physical security is one of the crucial parts of smart healthcare devices. An attacker can perform the information tempering by hacking the smart devices as well as may extract the personal information of the user. The tamper-resistant packaging is a solution to deal with these issues, but its implementation on IoHT infrastructure is a challenging task.

7.3. Taxonomy of attacks
As new technologies are increasing, the number of attacks on the latest technologies is also growing at the same rate. If we talk about the IoHT infrastructure, smart devices and networking are the current targets of attackers. The threats can be found both inside and outside of the networks. If we talk about the threats, some of them are tangible, some are predictable, and many of them are very hard to predict. If the attack has originated from the smart health devices on the adjoining network, then it has a more severe impact. In the IoHT system, we are facing three types of attacks: Information disruption-based attack, Host properties-based attack, and Network properties-based attack. In Fig. 19, the three types of existing and potential attacks have been being shown.

Fig. 19

Fig. 19. Taxonomy of attacks.

7.3.1. Information disruptions based attack
The information disruptions-based attack is one of the acute attacks in which the attacker fetches the health data from the in-transit stage or stored stage. After that, the data is manipulated after removing or updating the information from the health records. Such types of attacks may consist of the following functionalities (Wang et al., 2006) (Zia and Zomaya, 2006).

•
Interruption: The interruption is nothing but is a denial-of-service (DoS) attack, which may cause the communication link or channel to be unavailable. This attack may cause a severe impact on network functionality, health service availability, and also on device responsibility.

•
Interception: The interception is nothing but stealing health records or information. In other words, we can say it is a process in which data confidentiality and privacy are being compromised.

•
Modification: The modification is nothing but illegal access to health records and tampers health records or information by modifying the original health records.

•
Fabrication: The fabrication is nothing but a forging of health messages. In fabrication, the information is modified by putting relevant information in the original health messages.

•
Replay: The replay is nothing but is a stolen of health replies or solutions by modifying the existing response with its adverse answer.

7.3.2. Host properties based attack
The host properties-based attack is one of the acute attacks, which is consists of three types of host properties-based attacks, such as the user side, hardware side, and software side. The attackers may attack over any type of host (Law, 2005).

•
User Compromise: In this user compromise, the attacker can attack the user side by accessing the user's networks and health devices. After obtaining access on the user side, the attacker discloses the user's sensitive information, such as cryptographic keys, passwords, and user records.

•
Hardware Compromise: In this hardware compromise, the attacker attacks the physical devices by extracting programs, data, and keys as well as modifying the code by reprogramming it.

•
Software Compromise: In software compromise, the attacker attacks the software side of the system and finds out the software glitches and vulnerabilities of the system. After that, it forces the devices to go into dysfunction or malfunction states.

7.3.3. Network properties based attack
The network properties-based attack is one of the acute attacks, which is consists of two forms: specific compromise and layer-specific compromise.

•
Standard Protocol Compromise: In this standard protocol compromise, the attacker attacks the standard protocols by violating or tampering with the security policies like message privacy service availability, authenticity, and integrity.

•
Network Protocol Stack Attack: In this network protocol stack attack, the attacker attacks the networking protocol by detecting various glitches and force the layers to perform malicious tasks (Internet Engineering Task, 2020).

8. Challenges and issues in IoHT
New technology adoption comes with the price of its challenges and issues. These challenges and problems can be found at various stages, from the development stage to the deployment stage. We are facing various challenges and issues in establishing the IoHT infrastructure, starting from the designing stage and going towards the deploying stage. Designing and deploying the IoHT infrastructure is an arduous and challenging task. It is full of various issues like system interoperability, software reliability, computational intelligence, context awareness, privacy, and security. Software is the first part of the medical domain that is responsible for making the interaction between the hardware and medical devices (Akyildiz et al., 2002) (Shaikh et al., 2006).

In this section, we have characterized the various challenges and issues into two parts. In the first part, we have further described the multiple problems into two categories, which are: global challenges and healthcare-specific. In the second part, the critical issues related to IoHT infrastructure deployment are being briefly discussed. In Fig. 20, the various problems and issues in IoHT are presented.

Fig. 20

Fig. 20. Challenges and issues in IoHT.

8.1. Challenges of IoHT
In this section, we have characterized the various challenges into two parts which are: global challenges and healthcare-specific challenges, with their brief descriptions.

8.1.1. General challenges
In this section, we have briefly described the global challenges which we have to be tackled while developing smart healthcare solutions.

a)
Lack of Standard

Building any new system is always a challenging and complicated task. It becomes more challenging when we don't have a particular standard that guides us through establishing a suitable and efficient system. In the healthcare domain, the three things: privacy, security, and safety measures, are crucial and should be adequately handled. The handling of these things is possible by using various standards. In context to the smart healthcare domain, as we know, the data is floated among the doctor and patient and is incorporated with multiple security levels on both sides. But the question is how we can decide which level the data privacy or confidentiality policy is being violated. So, there is a need for standardization that can efficiently tackle these situations.

b)
Shortage of Verification and Validation Tools

In the smart healthcare domain, we are facing various challenges related to the shortage of verification and validation tools. The integration among the WSN and cloud-based paradigm is possible through the ACPS (Advanced Cloud Protection System) application. There are various efficient domain-specific simulation tools present, but they are not appropriate for the IoHT infrastructure. So, we need practical tools that can able to deal with the sensor-based lattice of smart healthcare infrastructure, and which will help in building IoT-based intelligent healthcare systems or IoHT infrastructure.

c)
Time Synchronization in Architecture Design

The synchronization of time is one of the complex and essential tasks of the IoHT infrastructure. It is imperative just because, in the health care field every second are very crucial. It is complex because it is a collection of heterogeneous devices or sensors and is used with cloud integration. Due to the real-time data generated by the different sensors in IoT infrastructure, time synchronization has become a necessity. It will help in making an accurate healthcare application, which will further help in real-time analysis and give solutions over the internet to various patients.

d)
Design Level Challenges

For designing the IoHT architecture, we have to deal with the computing complexity and physical subtleties such as the structure of the system, time management, process integration, standards, and data correctness. Thus, we need such generalized architecture that can proficiently deal with these computing complexities and physical subtleties issues. It will play a crucial role in the future for building real-time-based smart healthcare solutions. Open challenges in designing IoHT architecture and possible remedies are summarized in Table 4.


Table 4. Open Challenges in designing IoHT Architecture and Possible Remedy.

Barriers	Impact	Performance Objectives	Activity	Possible Remedy
Time Management	
•
Simpler implementation

•
Guaranteed time synchronization

•
Easy deployment with reduced cost

•
Employing several types of testbeds

•
Increasing architecture extendibility

•
Handling sensor timing characteristics

•
Task and time synchronization and management

•
Accommodating models and maintaining time scales

•
Evolving protocol for the communal time requirement

•
Proper defining of timing characteristics

•
Estimation of cross-domain time synchronization

Infrastructure	
•
Innovative research directions

•
Upgraded CPS lifecycle

•
Reduced development cost

•
To demonstrate a standard IoHT archetype by utilizing plug and play sensors and cyber connectivity

•
Prototype design

•
Interface design

•
Grouping of distinct design communities

•
Integration of different services and tools

•
Integration of diverse evaluation methods

•
Developing suitable user interface

Standard	
•
More informative and comprehensible engineering resolutions and outcomes

•
More reliability

•
More fundamental understanding and dealing with complexity

•
Design decisions can be scientifically estimated

•
To be able to evaluate attributes of failure in a consistent and standardized manner

•
Be able to implicate and communicate with IoHT attributes

•
Integrating different models into an evaluation framework

•
System state differentiation

•
Understanding the complexity of automating the process

•
Evolving theories of combined reasoning over the existing model

•
Exploring present engineering practices

•
Validating the system by applying it to the real system

Data Correctness	
•
Improved safety, design time, robustness, and reduced cost

•
A known proportion of uptime, development time, and correctness

•
A proper description of the correctness and uncertainty of the system

•
Definition establishment and developing adaptation

System Structure and Process Integration	
•
Enhanced understanding of complex IoHT measurements

•
Reduced cost of actuators and sensors

•
Establishing quick IoHT applications from the standard plug and play components

•
Difficulty in determining system behavior

•
Integration of human module and incorporating stochastic prototypes in measurements

•
Developing structural design for IoHT

•
Designing universal language for sensors

8.1.2. Healthcare specific challenges
This section briefly describes the healthcare-specific challenges which have to be tackled while developing smart healthcare solutions.

a)
Reliability of Software

Software is an essential component of medical equipment or devices. With the use of software, we handle the functionality of tools and enable various functions too. Software is also used to ensures the alliance between the patients and medical devices. Thus, there is a need for capable software that can solve the problem of safety and is capable of enhancing the overall efficiency of the smart system.

b)
Interoperability of Medical Devices

The interoperability of medical devices is one of the critical challenges which should be expertly handled. Thus, there is a need to build a system where heterogeneous medical devices could be integrated in a way that they are also capable of exchanging information with each other. Various medical devices are using several communication interfaces.

c)
Data Extraction

Medical devices are used to collect numerous physiological parameters of patients. With the help of these physiological parameters, we can find information about patients. It is also useful in the early prediction of forthcoming illness with possible precautions to deal with an emergency. Thus, extracting the complex and meaningful physiological parameters of patients is a challenging task. The extraction of such parameters needs a well-designed system that may be able to deal with this issue.

d)
Privacy and Security

It is one of the critical and complex issues which has to be adequately taken care of while building the system. It is a complex issue because patients' data should be appropriately secured and kept private. The health records of any patients should not go outside the system. It should only be accessible to the patient and concerned doctors. Thus, we need two ways of security mechanisms: the first one on the doctor's end and the second one on the data communication channel. Lack of privacy may cause severe damage to the patients, and it comes under violation of ethical policies. Denial of service (Dos) attacks in IoHT paradigms at each routing layer are summarized in Table 5.

e)
System Feedback


Table 5. Attacks at each routing layer.

Layers	DoS Attacks
Physical Layer	Node tampering
Jamming
MAC Layer	Denial of sleep
Unfairness and collision
Network Layer	Hello floods
Wormhole, spoofing, and replaying
Homing
Transport Layer	De-synchronization
Flooding
Application Layer	Route-based DoS
Overwhelming sensors
Reprogramming Attacks
Towards building a stable version of the IoHT system, feedback plays an important role, and, without it, neither we can understand the system flaws, nor can we improve patient care. The smart alarming system is one of the best examples of an IoT feedback system. It plays a vital role in the case of a medical emergency or alerting the caregiver in any illness situation. However, for building the smart alarm system, challenges like system complexity, physiological limit, and implementation capability should be adequately addressed. Finding parameter that plays an essential role in identifying specific illnesses from a wide range of possible diseases is always a challenging task. In hospitals, this smart alerting system is working tremendously well, but we need some more feedback systems for nursing homes, or living assisted homes. Thus, building such a feedback system is still a very complex and challenging task.

f)
Complex Query Processing

Complex query processing is one of the challenging tasks related to power consumption and should be effectively handled. As we know, the IoHT infrastructure is the lattice of heterogeneous biosensor devices connected with a wireless or wired connection. The wireless sensor needs some battery for performing query tasks. At each query processing, some amount of battery is drained. Complex queries are also helping us in reducing the number of transmissions with context-centric predictions. With the help of complex questions, numerous physiological parameters are being accessed to predict possible illnesses. Thus, we need such a complex query processing system that can directly fetch the required data rather than search the whole.

g)
Shortage of Architecture Prototype in IoHT

In the current stage of the IoHT paradigm, we have a shortage of reliable and secure architecture prototypes for evaluation, testing, system developments, and healthcare devices. In this ambiguous environment situation, there is also a shortage of architecture prototypes, which may certify the accuracy of IoT-based architecture.

8.1.3. IoHT critical issues
From this study, it is clear that some critical issues can be found while implementing such a healthcare system and which should be handled efficiently. Thus, the overall performance of the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) based system will be increased. This section briefly describes the critical issues which is to be tackled while developing smart healthcare solutions.

a)
Parameter Variability Related Issues

In current scenarios, the IoHT based system has a smaller number of variables with their limited functionalities. As a result, fewer numbers of services are offered by IoHT-based systems. So, there is a need to update the various parameters that will enhance the overall functionality of such systems. In respect to the context-aware system, multiple settings play a vital role in increasing the system's overall credibility.

b)
Data Workflow Related Issues

Handling data workflow has always been a challenging task in all emerging technologies. It became more challenging in the healthcare domain because it belongs to the personal information of the individuals and cannot be shared publicly. So, keeping this into mind, the IoHT based infrastructure should be designed in a way so that it carefully handles the data workflow among the various IoT-based devices and systems. It will also help us to improve the overall performance of the system.

c)
Implementation Related Issues

If we talk about the various IoT-based healthcare architectures, they are in their initial stage. Lots of IoHT based infrastructures are in the design and implementation phases, and some are working with minimal facilities. Practical implementation plays a vital role in building advanced and effective solutions that give us a feel of real scenarios. It also helps us in indicating the open problem or issues which are free for further investigation. Cope up with real-time scenarios in day-to-day changing lifestyles is a challenging task because of its complicated nature.

9. IoHT health policies
For practically implementing any policies, the technologies and evidence-based strategies can play a vital role. In the upcoming decades, efficient regulations and policies will play an essential role in escalating the health sector to a new peak. As we know, the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) is a new burning area and is yet to be adopted by existing policies worldwide. Before adopting, any new health policies, the trial of those eHealth strategies and systems has to be conducted, and based on their suitability the appropriate legislation is formed. The organizations or countries that are amid to develop policies for IoT and eHealth can develop IoHT based healthcare services. In this section, we are going to describe the countries and organizations which are actively working on developing strategies and policies for both IoT and eHealth.

9.1. India
In India, the eHealth policy was adopted in the year 2002. The initiative had been started between the years 2000 and 2002 by promoting ICT (Information and Communication Technology) in the healthcare domain. After that, in the year 2003, IT (Information Technology) infrastructure in the healthcare domain has been introduced. It acts as a base strategy and recommendation system for the country. The task force for creating telemedicine had been formed in the year 2005 (Building Foundations For, 2020). The government of India has taken various initiatives under the program of Digital India. The primary aim of this program is to transform the country into a digital era. The basic idea of this transformation is to make India a digitally empowered country and establish a knowledge-grounded economy. India's government has allocated 70.6 billion rupees for developing smart cities (Ioolicy Document. Avai, 2020). The initial target is to build 100 smart cities by the end of 2020. The 1150 billion rupees have been allocated by India's government to develop the IoT-based smart industries (Government Aims to Make $, 2020). With the help of these initiatives and efforts, a boost in the IoHT (Internet of Healthcare Things) domain is expected.

9.2. Australia
In Australia, the strategic framework for eHealth had been developed at the starting of the year 2008. This framework was initiated by the Australian health ministers' advisory committee to boost the healthcare infrastructure and services. The advisory committee for finalizing the draft of the strategic framework had consisted of various members from various fields. These members were state representatives, commonwealth, territory governments, medical specialists, general practitioners, nursing staff, radiology representatives, pathology representatives, health information specialists, pharmacy sector persons, health service managers, scholars, researchers, and consumers (The National e-Health Str, 2020). Similarly, the government of Australia has devolved a strategic roadmap of IoHT too.

9.3. Japan
The Japanese government had been established the u-Japan policy at the starting of the year 2004. This policy was initiated by Japan's MIC (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications) to boost the access ubiquity of the network (The Internet of Things in, 1108). The eHealth-friendly system is being developed by the Japanese government to establish the bridge between healthcare and IoT, which will help in improving the clinical results as well as will be cost-effective too (Akiyama and Nagai, 2012).

9.4. France
The French government had established the ONS (Object Naming Service) based root server to encourage the IoT services in the year 2004 (Advancing the 'Internet o, 2020). GS1 France, a standardization organization, is used to share the information and trade of products worldwide for their unique identification. The detailed information regarding these various products can be fetched from the ONS portals or ONS nodes. It helps to convince the customers regarding product accurateness, uniformity, and authentications all over the country. Suppose we talk about the telemedicine facilities, which are widely used in France at the local levels thus the ONS plays an essential role in establishing a uniform eHealth system. In 2004, the EHR (Electronic Health Records) or eHealth record was established through legislation (Artmann and Empirica, 2010). The government of France is continuously working on improving the hospital infrastructure based on IoT and encouraging the public to use eHealth systems and tackle the various issues by emerging IoT-based solutions.

9.5. Sweden
The GS1 Sweden, a distributed standard organization of the Swedish government, had been announced that they are going to develop the ONS (Object Naming Service) based root server to encourage the IoT services in the year 2010 (Advancing the 'Internet o, 2020). This ONS has been used for enabling networking to all physical objects over the Internet (Advancing the 'Internet o, 2020). The ‘National Strategy for eHealth of Sweden’ is responsible for making the policies and action plans related to smart healthcare (Stroetmann et al., 2011).

9.6. Germany
In 2003, eHealth activities, which are a subset of the healthcare sector, were added to the legislation by the German government (Stroetmann et al., 2011). Germany is a leader in emerging technologies such as IoT and IoHT in all the application areas (Internet of Things Needs, 1316). These application areas are Smart Healthcare, smart manufacturing, smart agriculture, smart home, smart farming, etc. Industry 4.0 is one of the German government's strategic action plans, which has been targeted to complete in 2020.

9.7. Korea
In 2013, The Korean government had made a plan that they are going to extend their IoT-based domestic market from 2.3 trillion to 30 trillion KRW (The Korean Republic won) till 2020 (Internet of Things Needs, 1316). The IoT-based open ecosystem was established In, 2014 by the government of Korea by offering smart products and services. This ecosystem contains the platform, services, devices, and security-related concerns. The eHealth ecosystem was introduced with effective policies by the Korean government in 2008 for public welfare (Directory of e-Health Pol, 2020). In this era, ePrescription, medical records, and telemedicine were the key players that played an essential role by utilizing ICT (Information and Communication Technology) in the healthcare domain (Directory of e-Health Pol, 2020).

9.8. China
The Chinese MIIT (Ministry of Industry and Information Technology) had declared that they are going to develop an IoT-based national strategic plan to encourage IoT services in the year 2010. The government of China had also proclaimed that the MIIT is responsible for making the appropriate goals for establishing the IoT-based infrastructure with a clear position and roadmap through a practical timetable. This IoT-based infrastructure is being utilized in the commercialization, research & development, network connections, and the formation of foundational technologies. With the help of this infrastructure, the overall IoT-based program will be carried forward (Advancing the 'Internet o, 2020).

9.9. USA
The discussion about the IoT regulations and policies was discussed among the commissioners of FTC (Federal Trade Commission) in the year 2014. The two significant areas, such as data security and user engagement, were taken into consideration by the FTC. Data security means how the data that are transformed among the various IoT devices can be secured, and user engagement means how we can encourage people to adopt such services (Hamilton, 2013) (Building Foundations for, 2020).

9.10. Eu
RAND Europe had been formed by the request of the European Commission to make an IoT policy for Europe. RAND Europe is a research organization that is used for creating strategies and decision-making. This research group has evaluated the mid and long-term challenges for establishing the proper plan, and based on the evaluation result, the appropriate solution is suggested. This solution will directly be added to the policies for the effective implementation of IoT in Europe (Examining Europe's Policy, 2020). The resolution related to IoT establishment had proposed by the European Parliament in the year 2010. The proper assessment of the IoT technology's impact on privacy, health, and data security was recommended by the parliament of E.U. (Advancing the 'Internet o, 2020). Under the European Council, the first formal meeting had been held among all states and corporate members in the year 2004 for endorsing the action plan of the eHealth system (Stroetmann et al., 2011). A public discussion forum was launched by the European Commission in the year 2014 to address the issues and obstacles associated with the mHealth system of the E.U. (Policy: Green Paper Consu, 2020).

9.11. WHO
Mobile phones play a crucial role in smart healthcare initiatives for the public domain in both developed and developing countries. The effort to promote mHealth for developing countries was launched by the WHO in 2011 to control tobacco (Mobile Health (m-Health), 2020). The text messages (SMS) are being used by various mHealth related projects for spreading awareness campaigns regarding the diseases like Malaria, HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Viruses), and MCH (Macrocytic Anemia). As per WHO recommendation in the year 2021, all mark countries should be integrated with Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in their health framework and health information system (Hamilton, 2013) (Building Foundations for, 2020).

10. Conclusions
Researchers across the globe are developing numerous technological solutions. These technical solutions will help in boosting the smart healthcare facilities and solve the complication of existing healthcare services with the mobilizing power of the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT). This paper reviews the various characteristics of the IoHT technologies with the smart IoT architectures and platforms, which serve as a backbone for IoHT infrastructure and enables smart health data transmission and response. Extensive R&D efforts are going on for smoothing the functioning of IoHT services and applications. Apart from this, the article also explores the various research activities which are liable for addressing the IoHT opportunities such as elderly and pediatric care, supervision for chronic disease, fitness management, and private health management. This review article also offers profound insights into empowering technologies and industry trends by indicating the past current and future trends with the various ongoing advancements in the IoHT domain. It will motivate the industries to make affordable and user-centric healthcare gadgets and make the chain of smart sensor-based connected devices by enabling various services soon. For understating the complications of IoHT security, this article explores the flaws and challenges in privacy and security structures, which include the security challenges, security requirements, and taxonomy of attacks from the perspective of smart healthcare.

Furthermore, this paper explores the ways toward future research by addressing issues and challenges of the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) based solutions. It also addresses the various IoT Health policies and regulations worldwide for determining the social and economic impact of sustainable growth. In sum, this research article's findings will be beneficial for engineers, researchers, policymakers, and health professionals who are actively working in the IoT and IoHT domains.

