Abstract
In this study, we proposed and examined a theoretical framework for affective interactions with personal information management (PIM). Based on the literature, we identified seven salient affective aspects of PIM: anxiety, efficacy, frustration, desperation, belonging, dependence and loss of control. We examined their frequencies and identified individual differences for age, gender and the number of platforms people use to manage their personal information. Data were collected from 465 participants who filled in a questionnaire built and validated by the researchers. Findings revealed a complex and intense affective experience accompanying PIM that is characterized by anxiety and frustration on the one hand but by a sense of high efficacy and little desperation on the other. The affective experience was more intense for female participants, was correlated with the number of PIM platforms used and decreased with age. We offer various explanations of these findings and suggest implications for future research and platform design.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Personal information management

PIM platforms

Affective aspects

Feelings

Anxiety

frustration

1. Introduction
Jones (2007) defines personal information management (PIM) as the activities people use to acquire, save, organize and retrieve information. For example, people may create or receive an information item, name it, utilize filing and piling practices to save it, and retrieve it by navigating between folders or performing “search”. Personal information includes all the paper-based and digital-based information items people gather throughout their lives and save in their personal information spaces. The development of information and communication technologies (ICTs) has caused an abundant growth in the quantity of information and its accessibility (Jacob, 2013). Although most private people lack some of this accessibility, we can still observe a change in the manner in which they experience their information management (Jones and Teevan, 2007). Whereas in the past, PIM was confined to desktops and physical documents, it is now characterized by digitalization and fast personal accessibility to many information items, with people often managing numerous information items on different digital platforms (Luxon et al., 2019).

The intensive personal experience between people and information manifests itself in changes in PIM practices, as presented in various studies over the last few years (e.g., Dinneen and Julien, 2019; Jones et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2019). Another aspect that needs to be acknowledged when examining the interaction between people and information is the affective aspect, including the emotions and feelings that characterize this encounter, but research on this has gained little traction compared to other aspects of PIM (Cushing, 2012). Thirty years ago, Lansdale (1988) argued that "the management of personal information, by definition, involves psychological process." In a more recent study, Kaye et al. (2006) revisited this notion and emphasized the importance of paying attention to what personal information means to people. Cushing, 2011, Cushing, 2013 takes the concept further and demonstrates that people perceive their information collections as part of the self and identity. Studies on the affective experience of PIM state that some people have a sense of losing control of digital information (Odem et al., 2012), feel anxious and overwhelmed by the over-abundance of information (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016; Schull, 2018), find it hard to cope with the overload of information items (Hair et al., 2007; Hwang et al., 2015) and exhibit digital hoarding behaviors that cause them distress and anxiety (Phung et al., 2015; Sweeten et al., 2018).

While these studies suggest the emotional complexity of managing information in the digital era, they do not offer a theoretical framework able to capture a range of affective interactions between people and their information, let alone define the whole affective experience of PIM. Such a framework could be part of an empirical tool to measure affective experience more broadly. Previous studies have mentioned various emotions and feelings that arise during information management, but they have not suggested an empirical tool to measure the intensity of the affective experience and have simply described the experience. A few empirical tools are available to examine abnormal interactions between people and information (i.e., hoarding behaviors). These are used for diagnosis and treatment but are not suitable for people's daily affective interactions with information and information management. The development of a tool for this latter area would expand theoretical knowledge. In a more practical sense, it could assist designers of PIM platforms. If emotional experiences were addressed, the platforms would be more helpful – and more widely used.

In this article, we describe and justify our creation of a theoretical framework for the affective aspects of PIM. Then, we explain our development and validation of a questionnaire on the affective experience of PIM. We used the questionnaire to examine the affective experiences of male and female participants of various ages on multiple digital platforms and devices. As we explain in the conclusion, the findings have important implications for designing digital platforms.

2. Literature review
2.1. Affective experience of PIM
The affective experience of PIM refers to the emotions and feelings that accompany an individual's interaction with and management of personal information. According to Davidson, Scherer, and Goldsmith (2003), emotions are brief responses to external or internal events, and feelings are the subjective representations of emotions, both can be negative or positive. Based on this understanding, we defined the affective experience of PIM as people's extremely personal and subjective representation of their interactions with and management of their personal information. The feelings comprising an individual's affective experience remain more or less constant, as they tend to co-exist with the cognitive experience, but they may change over time (Savolainen, 2019). These changes may occur because changes in the nature of ICTs as described by Bergman and Whittaker (2018) and/or changes in the user's internal experience of this interaction. Despite the possible changes in people's affective experiences while interacting with technology, previous studies focusing on the affective aspects of interacting with ICTs, in different contexts, aimed to construct theoretical frameworks that outlined people's emotions and feelings while interacting with technology (e.g., Goebel and Maistry, 2019; Kort et al., 2001; Savolainen, 2019). We have a similar aim, looking specifically at the interaction between people and personal information. Although we know that this might change over time, we argue it is still important to capture people's affective interaction with personal information and examine how men and women of various ages experience it. In addition, our goal is to create a framework that could be adapted as technology evolves. It is important to construct a framework and measurement tools that put the experience of PIM in the center, since other frameworks and tools do not capture the precise affective experience of interacting with personal information and its management, as we will describe in the following section.

When we talk about interacting with personal information, we are referring to different types of information, both paper-based and digital-based, including electronic and paper files, emails, photos, videos, contacts and reminders (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016). Just as there are myriad types of information to be managed in many different ways, so too there are several approaches to understanding the affective experience accompanying these interactions. These include functional aspects of interaction with information management and the context in which people manage personal information in the digital era.

The first focuses on the functional aspects of the interaction; it considers PIM as the ability to save and organize information for later retrieval (Bergman, 2013). In this approach, emotional reactions to personal information and its management are understood to happen along the phases of PIM (Jones, 2007; 2008; Whittaker, 2011). These phases include finding/re-finding information, saving information items, organizing information in the personal information space and retrieving information when needed. These phases are not necessarily linear. People may skip some (e.g., never retrieve an information item) or repeat others (e.g., finding and re-finding an item, making several retrieval attempts). An emotional reaction to these phases happens mainly when something goes wrong (Lansdale, 1988).

The first interaction with an information item often occurs when it is created, received (e.g., via instant messaging, email or social network) or found in a public repository of information (e.g., the Internet) (Hardof-Jaffe and Nachmias, 2011; Whittaker, 2011). This phase could be characterized by an intense flow of information that needs to be addressed and managed. People may feel hopeless, stressed and anxious when coping with a large amount of information in a limited time (Hair et al., 2007), especially if information items are "actionable", meaning they require a certain action over a specific time (Barreau, 2008; Bergman and Whittaker, 2016). After creating, receiving or finding an information item, people need to make a saving decision, for example, whether to keep, discard or share it (Feng et al., 2015). They can save an item in a folder and/or pile, leave it "as is" in the platform in which it was created or received or delete it (Whitham and Cruickshank, 2017; Whittaker et al., 2011). The third phase involves organizing information items on digital devices and platforms. Jones (2008, p.131) described the emotional reactions accompanying these phases of finding, saving and organizing as: "Damned if you do, damned if you don't!" By this, he meant that no matter what people decide to do with their information items and how they decide to organize them, it is never good enough. According to Bergman et al. (2008), such feelings may evolve from the inability of ICT to provide users with a suitable interface for their PIM needs in these various phases. As a result, people struggle with the initial PIM process, finding it hard to decide in which folder, device or platform to save an information item (Odom, Sellen, Harper, & Thereska, 2012).

The retrieval phase also triggers emotional reactions. This phase involves two main practices: “navigating between folders” and “searching” (Bergman et al., 2019a). Emotional reactions during this phase mainly occur when retrieval fails, and the information item is not found (Lansdale, 1988). This may lead to frustration or cause anxiety about the stability of information and the ability to save it over the long term (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016).

Another approach to affective interactions focuses on the context in which people manage personal information in the digital era. This includes the growing amount of information and the changing nature of ICT (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016; Schull, 2018). The ease of keeping information items on digital devices, online data storage sites (e.g., Google Drive, Dropbox, One Drive) and social networks (e.g., Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram) has made personal collections larger and more divergent. People keep an abundant amount of information on multiple digital platforms and devices and avoid deleting their information, making it harder for many to manage it as time goes by Luxon et al. (2019) and Sweeten et al. (2018). In addition, digital devices and platforms are constantly changed and upgraded. While some people welcome upgrades and look forward to the new versions of software and devices, others may perceive changes as a burden and suffer psychological costs and cognitive overload (Bergman and Whittaker, 2018). These differences in the emotional reactions to change have been related to the ability to adopt new technologies: pioneers and innovators find it easy to manage information on changing platforms, but others may struggle (Maruping et al., 2017; Venkatesh et al., 2003).

Overall, the literature gives a good introduction to the affective experience of PIM. It frames PIM as a process that evokes a range of feelings because it is time consuming and complex, requiring considerable investment of effort. Additional challenges emerge when people tackle the mission of managing overloaded and divergent information spaces (Jones, 2008; Kaye et al., 2006; Lansdale, 1988). What is lacking is a solid theoretical framework linking the various approaches.

2.2. Theoretical framework for the affective aspects of PIM
2.2.1. The process of creating a theoretical framework
Our construction of a theoretical framework included several phases. We began with an initial definition of a possible theoretical framework based on the literature, examined its feasibility in two pilot studies and re-defined it based on the findings. The initial theoretical framework included eight affective aspects and relied on two models: “The affective model of interplay between emotions and learning” proposed by Kort et al. (2001) and the “Extended self” model created by Belk, 1988, Belk, 2013 and examined by Cushing, 2011, Cushing, 2013. We chose these models because they both focus on people's interactions with information and the affective meanings of these interactions and have been used in other PIM studies. Their use will help us establish a solid framework on the affective experience of interacting with personal information and its management.

Kort and colleagues’ (2001) model suggests a range of positive and negative emotions accompany learners’ interaction with ICTs. The model places these emotions on five continuums, defined as: anxiety-confidence, interest-boredom, frustration-satisfaction, desperation-hope, horror-enchantment. We chose to include the five continuums in our theoretical framework for two reasons. First, this model describes the affective aspects of learners’ interactions with ICTs, and PIM similarly involves interactions between people and ICTs. In addition, the model was previously used as a basis for qualitative research on students’ positive and negative PIM experiences (Hardof-Jaffe, 2013).

The “extended self” model suggests people perceive personal information as part of who they are. According to Belk, 1988, Belk, 2013 part of an individual's self-definition is his/her physical and digital possessions. The extension of the self beyond the mind is defined as an extended self. Importantly, personal information has been found to act as an extended part of the self (Cushing, 2011, Cushing, 2013). People can feel attached to and dependent on their information. For example, they may find it difficult to delete information items they feel attached to. Or they may feel things are out of control – too much information is bombarding them. Based on this model, we added three affective aspects to our model: belonging, dependence and loss of control.

Table 1 summarizes the eight affective aspects included in our initial theoretical framework.


Table 1. Initial theoretical framework.

Model	Affective aspects	Derived from
Affective model of interplay between emotions and learning	Anxiety-confidence Interest-boredom Frustration-satisfaction Desperation-hope Horror-enchantment	Kort et al., 2001
Extended self	Belonging Dependence Loss of control	Belk, 1988, Belk, 2013 Cushing, 2011, Cushing, 2013
We examined the feasibility of this theoretical framework in two qualitative pilot studies. In the first pilot study, we looked at the affective aspects related to the extended self: belonging, dependence and loss of control (Alon et al., 2019). We conducted in-depth interviews with seven knowledge-workers, i.e., those for whom information is the essence of their work, and examined their sense of the challenges of managing personal information. This pilot study showed that these three aspects were part of the affective interaction between knowledge workers and their personal information. Therefore, we included them in the final theoretical framework.

In the second pilot study, we examined the five continuums of emotions based on the “interplay between emotions and learning” model (Alon, Forkosh Baruch, and Nachmias, 2018). We analyzed 32 narratives of preservice teachers who were in the first year of their Bachelor's degree program, detailing references to and reflections on their PIM experience. We analyzed the narratives until the analysis reached saturation and we had crystallized the affective experiences of the students. Findings revealed that positive emotions (e.g., confidence, interest, satisfaction), as well as negative emotions (e.g., anxiety, frustration, desperation), characterized such interactions, as suggested by the model. However, the structure of the model was neither sufficient nor accurate enough to define the affective aspects of PIM. Problems included the unclear measurement based on continuums, not on fixed variables, and the lack of adequate fit between the model and the narratives’ content analysis.

In light of these difficulties, we decided to redefine the affective aspects that were based on this model. First, we defined specific variables (not continuums) that characterize people's interaction with personal information and its management. For this purpose, we re-analyzed the narratives and examined similarities with and differences from the model. We also looked at other studies in the field of PIM to determine whether the affective aspects we defined were consistent with the literature. Ultimately, we retained three affective aspects from the “interplay between emotions and learning” model (anxiety, frustration, desperation), and we defined a new one, efficacy, based on two previous continuums (interest and enchantment).

The final theoretical framework included seven affective aspects relevant to the interaction between people and their personal information: anxiety, efficacy, frustration, desperation, belonging, dependence and loss of control.

2.2.2. The affective aspects of the theoretical framework
In the following section, we address each of the seven affective aspects in the final theoretical framework, explain its meaning, present its key features, list the studies examining it and explain our reasons for including it.

The first affective aspect in the framework is anxiety. We defined anxiety following Kaye et al. (2006) as the "fear of a specific catastrophe involving the potential loss of irreplaceable information". A sense of anxiety can be part of an individual's daily interactions with personal information and is often characterized by fears about the stability of information, its long-term preservation and the safety of platforms (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016; Kaye et al., 2006). Anxiety may be triggered by thoughts about the possible loss of personal information, not being able to find it, not being able to understand it or not being able to make use of it (Bawden and Robinson, 2009; Sweeten et al., 2018). Based on the literature, our framework delineates several aspects of anxiety related to PIM (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016; Kaye et al., 2006; Sweeten et al., 2018): concerns about the long term preservation of information, concerns about the safety of information items and platforms and concerns about the need to back up work to avoid information loss. While anxiety is an intense emotion that frequently characterizes interactions with personal information, previous studies have not established tools for its measurement or examined its frequency among people who manage personal information.

The second affective aspect in our framework is efficacy. This refers to people's thoughts about their ability to manage information items in their personal information space. People who feel competent managing their personal information feel positively about the PIM experience and about their personal information more generally. They express pride in and ownership of their personal information (Barreau, 1995; Boardman and Sasse, 2004). Having a sense of efficacy may motivate people to find better ways to manage information, and they are likely to experiment using applications and innovative practices (Alon et al., 2019; Hardof-Jaffe, 2013). Following these studies, we defined efficacy in managing personal information as having a sense of competence in the management of information on multiple digital platforms. Efficacy is characterized in the framework as an individual's motivation to improve his/her PIM behavior, derive enjoyment from the interaction and feel competent to manage information. Efficacy is mentioned in the literature, but it is not well studied. There are no tools to measure it, and we do not know enough about people's sense of efficacy to manage personal information. Despite this lack of knowledge, we included efficacy in the theoretical framework to emphasize the positive emotions that could accompany the interaction with personal information as suggested by Kort et al. (2001) in the “interplay between emotions and learning” model. Following Kort and colleagues, then, our model goes beyond the emotions related to the “dark side of information” as described, for example, by Bawden and Robinson (2009) and Schull (2018).

The third affective aspect accounted for in our theoretical framework is frustration. This refers to people's concerns about their ability to cope with the PIM mission and is linked to an individual's dissatisfaction with his or her PIM behavior (Boardman and Sasse, 2004; Kaye et al., 2006). People are frustrated when they feel they cannot arrange information items in an effective way and struggle to accomplish goals related to information management, such as dealing with actionable information items (e.g., emails, to-do lists) (Ellwart et al., 2015; Eppler and Mengis, 2004; Feng et al., 2015). Frustration could be a result of clutter in the personal information space and futile attempts to arrange multiple devices and platforms that are already overloaded with information (Schull, 2018). Frustration could also be a result of large gaps between an individual's actual and ideal PIM behavior as he or she perceives it (Alon and Nachmias, 2020; Robinson and Johnson, 2012). We defined frustration as the inability to meet personal expectations of how information ought to be managed, including concerns about the amount of information and the inability to act. The literature notes that frustration commonly accompanies the PIM experience; however, as with the other affective aspects we have identified, previous studies have not established tools for its measurement or examined its frequency in the management personal information.

The next affective aspect included in our framework is desperation, referring specifically to a loss of hope in the ability to manage personal information. As a result of their desperation, people may want to discard information to avoid making saving decisions, give up on organizing personal information or simply feel horrified at the amount of information that is out there (Jones, Bruce, Klasnja, and Jones, 2008). Feelings of desperation are well described in the literature as far back as the early days of ICT (Barreau, 1995; Nardi, Anderson, and Erikson, 1995). However, with the growing amount of information and the numerous devices and platforms for PIM, people seem to feel more desperate. This has been described, for example, in the context of arranging digital personal photo collections (Whittaker, Bergman, and Clough, 2010). We included this aspect in the theoretical framework following Jones et al. (2008), who claim that giving up on the management of personal information could happen because of desperation and, therefore, this aspect of interaction with personal information should addressed when designing PIM platforms. However, despite its importance, we do not know enough about the frequency of desperation. Nor do we have an adequate way to measure it.

Belonging, dependence and loss of control are three additional affective aspects characterizing interactions with personal information. In a previous study, we identified these as important features of the experience of PIM (Alon et al., 2019). Belonging refers to the extent to which personal information items are a meaningful part of the self and distinguish one person from another (Alon et al., 2019; A.L. Cushing, 2013). People feel attached to their digital possessions containing information items. These information items are part of who they are and what they represent (Belk, 2013; Cushing, 2011) and are described by Floridi (2014) as an inseparable part of a person's body and mind. In our framework, belonging is characterized by feeling attached to personal information and perceiving information as part of one's identify.

Dependence on personal information refers to the extent to which people find it hard to be apart from their personal information and need it to be available. Dependency on personal information could be a part of the need to reach personal or work-related goals (Barreau, 2008; Gao et al., 2019) or people may feel that the information is an inseparable part of their past, present or future lives (Cushing, 2013). In that sense, personal information is central to well-being (Floridi, 2014; Luxon et al., 2019). We defined the sense of dependence as the feeling that it is hard to be apart from personal information, characterized by concerns about the availability of information and digital platforms.

Loss of control refers to the extent to which people feel they are capable of monitoring the clutter and fragmentation in their personal information spaces (Bawden and Robinson, 2009; Cushing, 2011). People often feel they are losing control of their digital information, especially the information saved in clouds or fragmented information spaces (Bergman et al., 2019b; Odom et al., 2012; Whittaker et al., 2010). The sense of losing control increases as the amount of information grows, and the personal information space is harder to manage (Luxon et al., 2019; Sweeten et al., 2018). Based on the literature, we defined loss of control as the struggle to monitor the clutter and fragmentation of the personal information (Alon et al., 2019), characterized by concerns about deleting irrelevant or duplicate information or losing track of the location of information items.

Table 2 summarizes the theoretical framework; it includes the affective aspects, their definitions, key features and the studies from which they were derived.


Table 2. Theoretical framework of PIM affective aspects.

Affective aspect	Definition	Key features	Used in
Anxiety	Feeling worried about the potential loss of personal information.	-Concerns about long-term preservation of information.
-Concerns about the safety of platforms.
-Urge to back up information to avoid its loss.	Bawden and Robinson, 2009
Bergman and Whittaker, 2016
Kaye et al., 2006
Sweeten et al., 2018
Efficacy	Feeling competent to manage information on multiple digital platforms for future retrieval.	-Motivation to improve PIM.
-Enjoyment from the interaction with information.
-Competency to manage information.
Alon et al., 2019
Barreau, 1995
Boardman and Sasse, 2004
Hardof -Jaffe, 2013
Frustration	Feeling unable to meet personal expectations of how to manage personal information.	-Concerns about the amount of information.
-Concerns about the failure to deal with information requiring action.
Alon and Nachmias, 2020
Boardman and Sasse, 2004
Ellwart et al., 2015
Eppler and Mengis, 2004
Feng et al., 2015
Kaye et al., 2006
Robinson and Johnson, 2012
Schull, 2018
Desperation	Feeling a loss of hope in the ability to manage personal information.
-Wanting to discard information to avoid saving decisions.
-Giving up on organizing personal information
-Horrified by the amount of information.
Barreau, 1995
Nardi et al., 1995
Jones et al., 2008
Whittaker et al., 2010
Belonging	Feeling information is a meaningful part of oneself and distinguishes one person from another.	- Feeling attached to personal information.
-Perceiving information as part of identity.
Alon et al., 2019
R.W. Belk, 2013
Cushing, 2011
A.L. Cushing, 2013
Floridi, 2014
Dependence	Feeling that it is hard to be apart from the personal information.	- Concerns about the availability of information.
-Concerns about the availability of digital platforms.	Alon et al., 2019
Barreau, 2008
Gao et al., 2019
Floridi, 2014
Luxon et al., 2019
Loss of control	Feeling that monitoring the clutter and fragmentation of personal information is a struggle.	-Concerns about deleting irrelevant or duplicate information.
-Losing track of the location of information items.	Alon et al., 2019
Bergman et al., 2019b
Bawden and Robinson, 2009
Cushing, 2011
Luxon et al., 2019
Odom et al., 2012
Sweeten et al., 2018
Whittaker et al., 2010
2.3. Individual differences in the affective aspects of PIM
Studies have established individual differences in PIM behavior, attributing them to personal characteristics, such as personality type (Massey, TenBrook, Tatum, and Whittaker, 2014), mood changes (Whittaker and Massey, 2020) and attachment to personal possessions (Cushing, 2011; A.L. 2013; Odom et al., 2012). We focused on three possible explanations of individual differences: number of platforms used for PIM, age and gender.

When we talk about the number of platforms people use to manage personal information, we are referring to all the digital platforms and devices in which they save personal information. We included this element because the literature has identified the growing amount of information saved on digital platforms and devices as a reason for feelings of being overwhelmed (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016). For example, Luxon et al. (2019) found higher levels of anxiety were associated with more digital items stored in personal information spaces. Alon et al. (2019) reported that people have negative emotions if they struggle to manage information on fragmented information spaces, including multiple devices and platforms. However, the role of the number of platforms in a person's affective experience has not been measured.

Nor have gender and age been related to the affective experience of PIM. Studies in related fields have found differences between males and females of various ages in their attitudes to the use of ICT and the emotions they experience (e.g., Cai et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2019; Maruping et al., 2017; O'Brien et al., 2017). For example, Lu et al. (2019) found using ICT was more likely to evoke negative emotions among females than males, because they felt less able to achieve their tasks, and Maruping et al. (2017) found older people had more negative emotions than younger ones when using ICT.

Another reason to examine gender differences was our previous finding of larger gaps between actual and ideal PIM behavior for females than males (Alon and Nachmias, 2020). We discovered women want to use different practices to manage personal information and set higher goals for the PIM mission. This gender difference is important because large gaps between actual and ideal behavior may cause negative feelings (Higgins, 1987). Therefore, in our analysis of the proposed framework, we examined the relations between gender and the intensity of the affective experience of PIM.

2.4. Research questions
To examine the affective aspects of the interaction between people and information in the context of PIM, following the theoretical framework, we asked the following research questions:

Research question 1: What are the characteristics of the affective experience accompanying people's interaction with personal information and its management?

Research question 2: How do individual differences (number of platforms used for PIM, age and gender) relate to the affective experience of PIM?

3. Methods
3.1. Participants
Participants were recruited to the research using snowball sampling via links posted on social networks and websites of higher-education courses. All participants were over 18 and lived in Israel. There were 465 participants, 114 male (aged 19–73, x̄=34.57, SD=11.30) and 351 female (aged 19–68, x̄=30.31, SD=9.11). Participants varied in occupation: 285 students (61.3%), 176 employees (37.8%) and 4 unemployed (0.9%).

All participants used digital platforms to manage personal information. The number of platforms varied from 3 to 10 (x̄=7.64, SD=1.83). To manage their personal information, participants preferred mobile phones (x̄=3.64, SD=0.74), email accounts (x̄=3.55, SD=0.78) and laptops (x̄ =3.40, SD=1.06). Usage of platforms was similar for male and female participants but differed across ages, mainly in decreased usage of mobile devices and online platforms for PIM among older persons.

3.2. Tools
We collected data using a questionnaire that we developed and validated for the study based on the theoretical framework presented in Table 2. The questionnaire included two parts: background information and the affective aspects of PIM.

3.2.1. Background information
This first part of the questionnaire included questions on age (year of birth), gender (male/female) and occupation (student/ employee/ unemployed/ other). We also collected information on the use of the following digital platforms: laptop, desktop computer, mobile phone, external memory devices, email, cloud, personal website, PIM apps, social network and personal pages on websites (e.g., YouTube, My Heritage). Each platform was assessed on a 5-point Likert scale according to its usage in the management of personal information: 0 (not relevant), 1 (not at all), 2 (a little bit), 3 (frequently), 4 (most of the time).

3.2.2. Affective aspects of PIM
The second part of the questionnaire was a self-report tool for the seven affective aspects. The development of the questionnaire included several phases to ensure its validity and reliability and to confirm its clarity. In the first stage, in accordance with the theoretical framework, we wrote the questionnaire's statements. Their phrasing was the result of two pilot studies as described in Section 2.2.1 (Alon et al., 2018, 2019), as well as the literature review on which we relied to characterize the key features of the affective aspects. We set 36 statements on a 5-point Likert scale related to the seven affective aspects described in the theoretical framework.

The first draft of the questionnaire was sent to five researchers in the field of PIM. We asked them to validate it and determine whether the statements were extensive and accurate. Based on the experts' comments, we re-arranged the questionnaire, eliminated three overlapping statements and clarified the phrasing. The second draft was distributed to a small sample group of 20 respondents, whose ages ranged between 32 and 65. The goal was to verify the clarity of the questionnaire and better adapt it to potential participants. After receiving the group's observations, we performed additional semantic editing to improve the simplicity of the questionnaire. The final version included 33 statements and opened with the question "How much do you agree with each of the following statements, from 1 (do not agree) to 5 (agree)?"

To ensure the validity of the statements for the seven affective aspects, we conducted confirmatory factor analysis using Varimax rotation and examined Cronbach's α. We ensured that each factor's loading was equal to or higher than 0.4, and correlations between factors were less than 0.7 to eliminate possible multi-collinearity (Heinström, Sormunen, Savolainen, and Ek, 2019). Table 3 presents the results of the factor analysis for each affective aspect according to its loadings, explained variance and Cronbach's α.


Table 3. Factor analysis of statements on affective aspects.

Affective aspect	Statements	Loadings	ֵExplained variance	Cronbach's α
Anxiety	I am afraid to lose my information.	.808	6.27%	.828
I am afraid that platforms in my information space will malfunction.	.770		
It is important to me to back up information to avoid its loss.	.587		
Efficacy	I am happy with the way I manage my information space	.801	9.02%	.744
I feel confidence in my ability to manage my information space efficiently.	.774		
I feel that I can organize an endless amount of information in my information space.	.655		
I have enough time to arrange information items that I create or receive.	.515		
It is important for me to give meaningful names to information items.	.438		
I am interested in applications that could improve my PIM.	.436		
I love seeing my information space filled with information because it reflects my work.	.406		
Frustration	I am not satisfied when I can't handle my emails on time.	.704	6.68%	.683
I feel frustrated if I cannot find a way to organize my information.	.637		
I feel overloaded by the amount of information that I create and receive.	.524		
I feel frustrated if I can't reach all the information that I receive.	.461		
Desperation	I want to erase all my information and start over.	.770	6.87%	.727
I want to delete information if I can't decide where to save it.	.746		
I feel desperate from the arrangement of my personal information space.	.587		
I am afraid to think of the amount of my information.	.490		
I feel bad when I have a lot of emails in my inbox.	.469		
Belonging	My information is an important part of my identity.	.808	8.70%	.833
My information characterizes me.	.807		
If my information was stolen, I would feel as if my identity was stolen.	.669		
My information distinguishes me from other people.	.612		
My identity is the sum of my information items.	.609		
Dependence	I feel that I can't function if information on the mobile phone is unavailable.	.787	9.59%	.815
I feel that I can't function if my email is unavailable.	.751		
I feel that I can't function if my information is unavailable.	.734		
I feel that I can't function if information on the cloud is unavailable.	.652		
I feel that I can't function if information on my computer is unavailable.	.574		
Loss of control	It is hard for me to decide to delete email messages.	.769	7.76%	.758
It is hard for me to decide to delete duplicate photos.	.736		
It is hard for me to decide to delete information.	.662		
I find information that I don't remember receiving or saving.	.621		
The factor analysis validated the seven factors we defined as comprising affective aspects of PIM. These components explained 54.89% of the variance between participants. Cronbach's α for all factors indicated good internal consistency.

3.3. Procedure and analysis
We collected data via online questionnaires using a link to Google Forms, as we wanted to reach a large number of respondents of various ages and occupations. We distributed the link by posting it on social networks (Facebook, WhatsApp) and on the websites of courses in higher-education institutes in Israel. When addressing potential respondents, we mentioned two mandatory criteria: being at least 18 years old and managing personal information on digital platforms. We received participants' consent to use their responses and information on age, gender and occupation anonymously.

In the introduction of the questionnaire, we stated that the study was on personal information management practices; one paragraph in the introduction briefly explained the meaning of personal information management practices and personal information spaces. The explanation of PIM practices was based on Jones (2007) who defined them as the activities people perform in order to acquire, organize, maintain and retrieve information for everyday use. Personal information spaces were defined following Bergman and Whittaker (2016) as digital platforms in which people save personal information.

After participants finished filling in the questionnaires, we asked them if they were willing to distribute the link to the questionnaire to other potential respondents who met the response criteria. A total of 471 people filled in the questionnaires over six months, from the second half of 2017 to the first half of 2018. We eliminated six responses because of incomplete questionnaires (four respondents) and youth (two respondents).

For the analysis, we used IBM-SPSS statistical software for descriptive and explanatory procedures, including Pearson correlations and t-tests for independent samples.

4. Findings
4.1. Characteristics of the affective experience of PIM
We examined the frequencies of the seven affective aspects as these appeared in the participants' self-reports. Table 4 summarizes the findings and presents the mean scores for the affective aspects and the statements from high to low.


Table 4. Mean score and SD of the affective aspects (N = 465).

Affective aspects x̄ (SD)	Statements	x̄ (SD)
Anxiety x̄=3.71(0.95)	It is important to me to back up information to avoid its loss.	3.82(1.08)
I am afraid to lose my information.	3.72(1.12)
I am afraid that platforms in my information space will malfunction.	3.59(1.14)
Frustration x̄=3.44(0.81	I am not satisfied when I can't handle emails on time.	3.78(1.13)
I feel overloaded by the amount of information that I create and receive.	3.40(1.08)
I feel frustrated if I cannot find a way to organize my information.	3.35(1.15)
I feel frustrated if I can't reach all the information that I receive.	3.23(1.18)
Efficacy x̄=3.28(0.71)	I feel confidence in my ability to manage my information space efficiently.	3.64(1.03)
I am happy with the way I manage my personal space.	3.50(1.08)
I feel that I can organize an endless amount of information in my information space.	3.48(1.06)
It is important for me to give meaningful names to information items.	3.42(1.18)
I am interested in applications that could improve my PIM.	2.93(1.32)
I have enough time to arrange information items that I create or receive.	2.77(1.04)
I love seeing my information space filled with information because it reflects my work.	2.68(1.23)
Belonging x̄=3.09(0.93)	My information is an important part of my identity.	3.52(1.16)
My information characterizes me.	3.35(1.17)
If my information was stolen, I would feel as if my identity was stolen.	3.17(1.26)
My information distinguishes me from other people.	2.98(1.20)
My identity is the sum of my information items.	2.40(1.22)
Dependence x̄=2.97(0.95)	I feel that I can't function if information on the mobile phone is unavailable.	3.32(1.28)
I feel that I can't function if my information is unavailable.	3.09(1.21)
I feel that I can't function if my email is unavailable.	3.08(1.23)
I feel that I can't function if information on my computer is unavailable.	2.99(1.29)
I feel that I can't function if information on the cloud is unavailable.	2.34(1.25)
Loss of control x̄=2.70(0.96)	It is hard for me to decide to delete information.	2.80(1.24)
It is hard for me to decide to delete duplicate photos.	2.76(1.40)
I find information that I don't remember receiving or saving.	2.74(1.14)
It is hard for me to decide to delete email messages.	2.51(1.27)
Desperation x̄=2.25(0.81)	I feel bad when I have a lot of emails in my inbox.	2.80(1.35)
I am afraid to think of the amount of my personal information.	2.64(1.19)
I feel desperate about the arrangement of my personal information space.	1.99(1.07)
I want to delete information if I can't decide where to save it.	1.91(1.14)
I want to erase all my information and start over.	1.87(1.11)
As Table 4 indicates, anxiety received the highest score and appeared to be the most salient of the seven affective aspects studied. Efficacy, frustration, sense of belonging and dependence were also relatively salient. The least important were loss of control and desperation.

4.2. Individual differences in the affective aspects of PIM
We also looked for individual differences (number of platforms used, age, gender). First, we used Pearson's correlation to look for correlations between the number of platforms, age and the affective aspects of PIM (Table 5).


Table 5. Pearson's correlation for number of platforms, age and affective aspects.

Age	Anxiety	Frustration	Efficacy	Belonging	Dependence	Loss of Control	Desperation
Age	1	−0.13⁎⁎	−0.12*	−0.24⁎⁎	−0.21⁎⁎	−0.12⁎⁎	−0.05	−0.07
# of platforms	−0.20⁎⁎	.19⁎⁎	.13⁎⁎	.19⁎⁎	.30⁎⁎	.24⁎⁎	.18⁎⁎	.19⁎⁎
⁎
p<.05,.

⁎⁎
p<.01.

We found significant positive correlations between the number of PIM platforms and the affective aspects of PIM. The more PIM platforms participants used, the more intense their affective aspects were. We also found significant negative correlations between age and anxiety, efficacy, frustration, belonging and dependence. Overall, the intensity of emotions decreased with age.

To look for possible differences between male and female participants, we conducted t-tests on independent samples (Table 6).


Table 6. Differences between male and female participants (N = 465).

Affective aspects	Male
N = 114X̄ (SD)	Female
N = 351 X̄ (SD)	t-test
Anxiety	3.42(0.99)	3.81(0.92)	−3.86⁎⁎
Frustration	3.25(0.78)	3.51(0.43)	−3.02⁎⁎
Efficacy	3.25(0.64)	3.29(0.73)	−0.53
Belonging	2.85(0.91)	3.17(0.92)	−3.15⁎⁎
Dependence	2.79(1.01)	3.03(0.92)	−2.29*
Loss of Control	2.44(0.93)	2.79(0.96)	−3.43⁎⁎
Desperation	2.15 (0.79)	2.28(0.82)	−1.60
⁎
p<.05,.

⁎⁎
p<.01.

Table 6 reveals significant gender differences for five out of seven aspects, anxiety, frustration, belonging, dependence and loss of control, but not efficacy and desperation. Female participants generally had more intense emotions than male participants.

Overall, the results for individual differences indicated that the number of platforms and gender both explained differences in the intensity of the affective experience of PIM.

5. Discussion
Our study focused on the interaction between people and their personal information in the context of PIM. We constructed a theoretical framework to examine the affective aspects of PIM reported by male and female participants of various ages. The findings shed interesting light on the complexity of people's affective experiences as they navigate PIM.

The most striking affective aspect was people's high levels of anxiety when thinking about a possible loss of personal information or a failure of their digital platforms. Anxiety about the stability of information has been described in previous studies (Bergman and Whittaker, 2016; Kaye et al., 2006), but the levels of anxiety have formerly been measured mainly among people with abnormal hoarding behaviors (Sweeten et al., 2018). Our study demonstrates that anxiety is a common phenomenon; it characterizes the everyday experience of managing personal information and is not confined to the abnormal end of the scale.

Anxiety has been defined as an irrational fear of a catastrophe that we cannot control (Kaye et al., 2006). Therefore, we suggest the high level of anxiety about the long-term stability of information and digital platforms can be traced to those characteristics of digital platforms and personal information collections that are beyond people's control. In this context, the constant changes and upgrades of software and devices (see Bergman and Whittaker, 2018) could cause anxiety, especially among those who struggle to adopt new technologies. Thus, anxiety about the long-term preservation of personal information may be inevitable and, as such, should be addressed in research and in platform design. Note that we did not examine the correlations between ICT proficiency and levels of anxiety; this should be probed in future studies.

Frustration was another important affective aspect. Participants had concerns about the amount of personal information they accumulated, and they questioned their ability to organize it. Similar concerns have been noted in studies of knowledge workers who encounter numerous information items as part of their daily work (e.g., Barreau, 2008; Hair et al., 2007; Hwang et al., 2015), but our findings suggest frustration characterizes routine interactions between people and personal information and is not limited to knowledge workers. Our participants were frustrated by their inability to handle actionable information items, mainly emails, something identified in other studies (e.g., Belloti et al., 2005; Gwizdka, 2004; Mark et al., 2016; Whittaker and Sidner, 1996; Whittaker et al., 2011). Our findings emphasize the high levels of frustration related to managing overloaded email accounts, even with the development of features enabling users to manage email more efficiently (e.g., tagging, reminders, filing). This should be addressed in platform design.

On a more positive note, our participants expressed a sense of high efficacy in managing their personal information. They also felt in control of their personal information and seldom felt desperation. The high levels of efficacy were interesting in light of the high levels of anxiety and frustration. Efficacy has not been measured in previous studies but has been described as a positive emotion about personal information (Barreau, 1995; Boardman and Sasse, 2004; Hardof-Jaffe, 2013), making our study and its findings unique. Interestingly, despite the challenges of PIM in a digital era, the majority of our participants felt competent managing their personal information, a competence reflected in their low levels of desperation.

We suggest two possible explanations of this somewhat surprising finding. The first is related to people's habit of collecting and organizing information items, even when the majority of information is available on public repositories such as the Internet (Hardof-Jaffe and Nachmias, 2011). The desire to manage information has long been recognized as an inseparable part of people's lives and routine human behavior (Dillon, 2019). Therefore, even when the challenges of PIM grow, people still have an inner motivation to cope and keep on managing information. The second explanation suggests that the rapid growth of information and the creation of multiple PIM platforms are relatively new phenomena (Jacobs, 2013). Not everyone encounters abundant amounts of information. It is possible that many people are not fully aware of a possible information overload and see themselves as able to cope with PIM challenges. Since our findings on efficacy are new, they need further examination in future studies.

The sense of losing control was lower than we anticipated based on previous studies (Odom et al., 2012; Sweeten et al., 2018). Participants felt able to delete unnecessary information and thought they controlled the location of information items in their information spaces. The nature of our study might explain the contradictions between our findings and those of previous studies. Odom et al. (2012) found the sense of losing control characterized the management of personal information on clouds; however, we tested the overall experience of managing information. Sweeten et al. (2018) examined loss of control as part of digital hoarding behaviors, while we examined it in the general population. The context of information management, e.g., managing work-related or personal information items, could also characterize the extent to which a person feels in control of his or her information items (Barreau, 2008; Bergman et al., 2008). Therefore, we recommend further studies to better understand the sense of controlling one's PIM.

We were not surprised to find participants had a high sense of belonging to their personal information and perceived it as an inseparable part of their identity. Cushing (2013) and Belk (2013) similarly found that personal information is considered an extension of the self, part of what defines a person's uniqueness. Our participants also reported a high sense of dependence on their information items, mainly those saved on mobile phones and email accounts. The findings substantiate the importance of personal information and suggest the need to acknowledge belonging and dependence when designing platforms.

Overall, our results point to a duality in the affective experience of managing personal information. Participants felt anxiety and frustration, but at the same time, they felt competent managing their personal information. These findings correspond with studies showing that interaction with ICT evokes a range of positive and negative emotions (e.g., Baker et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2019). As well as urging researchers to probe this duality theoretically, we suggest a practical need to address the negative end of the spectrum in platform design.

There were interesting individual differences in the intensity of the affective experience. The intensity of our participants’ feelings increased with the number of PIM platforms they used. In addition, the intensity of the affective aspects, mainly the negative ones, differed for male and female participants. Women were more anxious about the stability of information, were more frustrated with their PIM behavior and were more likely to feel they were losing control of their information. They also felt more dependent on their information and had a higher sense of belonging to it. By the same token, and as mentioned previously, Lu et al. (2019) found using ICT was more likely to evoke negative emotions among women, as they felt less able to achieve their tasks than men. Our present findings also correspond with a previous study (Alon and Nachmias, 2020) in which we found larger gaps between actual and ideal PIM behaviors among women than men. As Higgins' work on self-discrepancies between actual and ideal behavior has established (1987), larger gaps are associated with negative emotions, thus explaining the greater negative emotions among women. However, it is important to approach these findings on gender differences with caution, especially as our group of female participants was larger than the group of male participants. Our findings should be re-examined in future studies.

Surprisingly, age was correlated with some affective aspects, but less so than gender or number of platforms. Overall, our participants’ ages were negatively correlated with the intensity of their affective experience. Older participants were less anxious and less frustrated, had a lower sense of belonging to and expressed less dependence on personal information. These findings can be explained by the lower sense of belonging to and dependence on personal information demonstrated by older people more generally (Neave et al., 2019). At the same time, our older participants felt they managed their personal information less efficaciously. This could be explained by the difficulty experienced by older people in adopting new technologies and using them efficiently (Maruping et al., 2017). The nature of our study is another possible explanation of the lack of efficacy felt by older participants. We examined the affective aspects related to the management of digital information on digital platforms and did not address the management of paper-based information. According to Gulotta et al. (2013), older people find it difficult to conceptualize how their digital information is saved and managed on digital platforms. Some are more used to paper-based methods of managing information and find it difficult to manage things digitally. The ability to create a mental model of the personal information space is important in the management of personal information (Hardof-Jaffe and Aladjem, 2018). The decreased ability to do so could be associated with a sense of a lack of efficacy. Nevertheless, it is important to approach our findings with caution, as the majority of our participants were relatively young. In addition, our finding of age differences in the affective aspects of PIM relies on correlations. Further examination of age differences in PIM is certainly called for.

Our findings demonstrate the importance of focusing on people's affective experience while managing personal information in an era of abundant information, when digital platforms are constantly being changed and upgraded (Bergman and Whittaker, 2018). Our construction of a solid theoretical framework to examine the affective aspects of PIM, as well as the development of an empirical tool to measure it, places the affective experience in a more central place in PIM research. Our questionnaire should prove useful in future work on affective experience and may supplement other measures: semi-structured interviews, observations, data mining etc. The questionnaire's statements might need adjustment in future research, as affective experience is influenced by external events (e.g., changes in the nature of ICTs) (Savolainen, 2019). However, the seven affective aspects seem to be a solid part of a framework that could guide future research.

Our findings also have implications for platform design. Overall, our participants felt competent when managing their personal information and did not feel desperate about the challenges they faced. They also acknowledged the importance of their personal information, feeling they belonged to it and were dependent on it. We suggest designers embrace these positive aspects of people's affective experience with personal information and address the two main negative aspects, anxiety and frustration, to create affective-sensitive platforms.

Anxiety stood out among the affective aspects. Several innovations could address anxiety about the stability of information and PIM platforms. First, we suggest designing an interface that gives the user an overview of personal information spaces, including all the digital platforms and devices in which information is saved. This could reduce anxiety about the stability of information and enhance users’ ability to construct a mental model of their personal information space, an important element of effective PIM (Hardof-Jaffe and Aladjem, 2018). Second, software upgrades could include detailed explanations of the changes made. In addition, users should be able to “undo” these upgrades, as suggested by Bergman and Whittaker (2018). This was done, for example, in Google's last upgrade of Gmail. These design innovations could reduce users’ anxiety about stability. They could also reduce the cognitive effort associated with the adoption of new interfaces; this is particularly important for users who have difficulty adopting new technologies (e.g., older users). Third, users could be encouraged to manage information on online platforms accessible from various locations on various devices and to synchronize information items saved on devices. This could be done via software active suggestions to back-up information and via consumer training.

User frustration should be addressed in platform design as well, as it implies the gaps between actual PIM behavior and ideal PIM behavior lead to inarticulacy in organizing behaviors (Alon and Nachmias, 2020). We suggest designing platforms to assist users to better cope with the amount of information and to improve their ability to reach actionable items. This could be done, as Bergman et al. (2019) and Vitale, Odom and McGrenere (2019) suggest, via platforms that actively encourage people to organize information items. This may include reminders to use various organizing practices, such as filing, naming, tagging, backing-up etc. Information items that should be deleted (e.g., similar items, irrelevant items, old items) could be highlighted as well. Encouraging people to actively manage personal information and even use PIM practices that they may not have thought about could reduce the gaps between actual and ideal PIM behavior, along with the negative feelings associated with these gaps (Alon and Nachmias, 2020). Platforms should be able to remind users about needed actions, especially for emails, even if the item was not read. For example, the system could identify an invitation to a meeting listed in an unread email and actively report it to the user.

Admittedly, our study had a few limitations. One was the research method. We collected data using self-report questionnaires grounded in the characteristics of our era, with a different number of statements for each affective aspect. In addition, as we mentioned before, our questionnaire statements might need adjustment in future research. Another limitation was that we did not measure minute to minute changes of emotions, as was done, for example, by Whittaker and Massey (2020). Instead, we aimed to capture a more general affective experience in daily routine. Future studies could look for more specific experiences. The sample could also be problematic; we collected data using snowball sampling, a method that could affect the validity of the results, particularly in a descriptive study. In addition, the male and female groups were different in size, and there were fewer older than younger participants. Therefore, we recommend further studies to verify and expand the proposed theoretical framework. We also suggest examining the relations between the affective experience of PIM and people's actual PIM behavior (e.g., utilization of actual vs. ideal practices, patterns of software usage, digital hoarding behavior etc.). Such studies would enrich the limited empirical work and could suggest ways to improve the design of PIM platforms based on people's affective experiences.

