Technology integration in the classroom is seen as an important educational innovation to enhance teaching and learning processes in the 21st century. Teacher motivation has been seen as a critical prerequisite for successful technology integration in the classroom, particularly in early phases of educational innovation. However, whether teacher motivation is a stable versus variable construct in such innovation contexts and how teacher motivation is decisive for effective technology integration are open issues. Most previous studies relied on cross-sectional studies and were restricted to quantity measures which only investigated the mere usage of technology but not the quality of technology integration. Against this background, we implemented a web-based teacher diary for in-service teachers (N = 18) in the beginning of a government initiative in which classes were equipped with one-to-one technological infrastructure. By using a mixed method approach, we found considerable variability of teacher motivation, frequency, and quality of technology integration across lessons over a period of six weeks. More importantly, the variability of the quality of technology integration was explained by teachers’ technology-related utility beliefs, as a crucial facet of technology integration and specific factors within the different instructional contexts. The findings highlight the role of teacher motivation as well as the particular context in technological educational innovations.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Educational technology

Teacher diary

Teaching quality

Expectancy-value theory

Technology integration

1. Introduction
Integrating technologies into teaching has the potential to both support students’ learning and enable them to participate in a digitalized society (Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Duckworth, 2019; Mayer, 2019; OECD, 2015; U.S Department of Education, 2020). However, research has shown that using technologies is not generally effective for supporting teaching and learning processes but rather depends on how they are used during teaching (Chauhan, 2017; Stegmann, 2020; Tamim, Bernard, Borokhovski, Abrami, & Schmid, 2011). Therefore, it is frequently discussed that technologies should be used as cognitive tools to purposefully foster distinct deep-level learning processes (Jonassen, 2005).

Across educational systems, teachers on average have demonstrated that they rarely use technologies during teaching. For instance, findings of the International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS 2018; Fraillon et al., 2019) documented that less than 50% of the participating teachers reported that they used technologies frequently for teaching with large differences across educational systems. While teachers in South Korea and Denmark used technologies on a daily basis, teachers in Germany and Italy stated that they are more reluctant to use technologies frequently. Furthermore, the participating teachers reported that they exploit the distinct potential of technologies only to a limited extent and used technologies to substitute previous teaching processes, such as for presentations or as textbooks (Fraillon et al., 2019). To heighten teachers' adoption of technology, there is an increasing number of governmental initiatives and specialized programs across several educational systems which fund the technological infrastructure in schools (Scheiter & Lachner, 2019; Beauchamp, Burden, & Abbinett, 2015; Tamim, Borokhovski, Pickup, & Bernard, 2015). These initiatives often fund one-to-one equipment, in which both students and teachers receive a notebook or a tablet computer to regularly integrate technology during teaching. However, in a recent re-analysis of the ICILS 2013 dataset, Drossel, Eickelmann, and Gerick (2017) showed that the availability of infrastructure, as proposed by such governmental initiatives, only slightly explained teachers’ technology use. However, in phases of (technological) innovation, this finding is not surprising as research shows that motivation is particularly relevant (see Hussain et al., 2018; Lewin, 1947; Teo, 2011).

Besides the potential of educational technology to realize supportive and cognitively activating instruction, integrating technology can also be a burden for teachers, especially in the early stages of educational innovation. When adopting technology for the first time, teachers have to deliberately redesign and rethink the way of their teaching. In this way, teacher motivation can make the difference and is seen as critical prerequisite for technology integration. Previous research has demonstrated the crucial link between teacher motivation and the frequency (Petko, 2012; Taimalu & Luik, 2019; Vongkulluksn, Xie, & Bowman, 2018) as well as quality of technology use during teaching (Backfisch, Lachner, Hische, Loose, & Scheiter, 2020a). However, most of the previous research was cross-sectional, and based on self-reported survey data, which has not allowed researchers to investigate the variability and reciprocal relationships between teacher motivation and the quality of technology integration. Investigating reciprocal relationships is particularly important, as recent research demonstrated that teacher motivation as well as teacher behavior is largely contextual especially in early phases of innovation. Teacher motivation therefore could not (only) be regarded as a stable teacher characteristic but as a distinct state which varies across teaching situations (Fauth et al., 2019; Praetorius et al., 2017; Praetorius, Pauli, Reusser, Rakoczy, & Klieme, 2014).

Against this background, in the current study, we investigated the role of teacher motivation in technology integration in the context of a newly established one-to-one initiative. First, we examined whether and how teacher motivation and technology integration varied across lessons. Second, we investigated distinct relationships between teacher motivation and the quantity and quality of technology integration. Third, we explored the contextual factors which affected variations in teacher motivation and technology integration.

To investigate these research questions, we conducted a mixed method study with simultaneous collections of qualitative and quantitative data through a weekly web-based diary, similar to an experience sampling approach (see Endedijk, Brekelmans, Verloop, Sleegers, & Vermunt, 2014; Klassen & Durksen, 2014 for similar approaches). In a teacher diary, teachers rated their current motivation (i.e., their perceived utility-value and self-efficacy of teaching with technology) and documented one technology-based lesson per week. The resulting data were analyzed by applying a mixed method approach that allowed a comprehensive study of the obtained quantitative and qualitative data (McCrudden, Marchand, & Schutz, 2019).

1.1. Technology integration into classroom practice
Technology integration commonly refers to teachers' adoption of educational technologies during teaching and learning such as the use of distinct hardware (e.g., mobile technology, tablets; see Beauchamp et al., 2015) or software applications (e.g., tools, see Krauskopf, Zahn, & Hesse, 2012) to realize specific teaching processes (Danniels, Pyle, & DeLuca, 2020; Dukuzumuremyi & Siklander, 2018; Näykki & Järvelä, 2008; Paratore, O'Brien, Jimenez, Salinas, & Ly, 2016). The kind of technology integration during teaching can be conceptualized on a quantitative and a qualitative level.

1.1.1. Quantity of technology integration
On the quantitative level, technology integration commonly refers to the mere frequency of technology use during teaching. This frequency is, for instance, operationalized by simply counting how often technologies are generally used or which different types of technology applications were adopted during classroom teaching (e.g., Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Gebhardt, 2014). These quantity indicators give an overview regarding the general level of technology usage in schools, however, they do not cover in-depth qualitative aspects of technology integration which are presumably crucial for the effectiveness of technology integration (e.g., enhance teaching quality; OECD, 2015). Quantity measures allow to measure the overall coverage of technology use for teaching but do not allow to measure the quality of technology integration.

1.1.2. Quality of technology integration
Following Backfisch et al. (2020a) the quality of technology integration can be operationalized on two dimensions:

1.1.2.1. Level of technology exploitation
First, the level of technology exploitation refers to the extent to which technologies were used to transform and redefine the implemented learning activities through the use of the technologies. Therefore, technology exploitation captures teachers’ capability to implement the distinct potential of educational technologies and design an innovative learning environment (Endberg, 2019; Hamilton, Rosenberg, & Akcaoglu, 2016). One prominent model to describe different hierarchical levels of technology exploitation is the RAT-model (acronym for Replacement, Amplification, Transformation by Hughes, Thomas, & Scharber, 2006). This model comprises distinct levels of technology integration: At the lowest level, technologies are used to replace traditional technologies (e.g., reading a digital pdf document instead of reading a printed book). At the intermediate level, technology integration helps to implement more efficient teaching methods and serves to augment traditional teaching methods (e.g., using a live-synchronized collaborative digital whiteboard). At the highest level, the use of technology may allow teachers to transform their teaching methods that would be impossible without technology integration (e.g., using virtual reality to explore blood circulation).

Second, beyond these general levels of technology exploitation, there are distinct affordances of technologies that provide an innovative learning environment which may ultimately aid learning. For instance, technologies allow the use of multimodal representations, as information can be presented through multiple and simultaneous representations, such as text, pictures, audio or video (see multi-media principle; Moreno & Mayer, 2007; Renkl & Scheiter, 2017). Moreover, technologies can be used to increase the adaptivity of teaching and learning processes (Pielmeier, Huber, & Seidel, 2018; van de Pol, Mercer, & Volman, 2019) for instance by enabling formative assessment (e.g., using game-based learning platforms; Wang & Tahir, 2020; Zhu & Urhahne, 2018) or by providing individualized learning activities (e.g., using intelligent tutoring systems, Aleven, Roll, McLaren, & Koedinger, 2016). Additionally, using technologies for learning can enhance the interactivity both on the individual level (e.g., by means of students’ active interaction with the learning material by manipulating virtual simulations; Olympiou, Zacharias, & De Jong, 2013) and on the class level, by fostering collaboration among students (Chen, Wang, Kirschner, & Tsai, 2018; Sung, Yang, & Lee, 2017) and thereby increasing active participation during teaching.

1.1.2.2. Level of teaching quality
However, measures of technology exploitation provide insight only into whether teachers are able to take advantage of the innovative nature of technologies. As a result, only looking at technology exploitation does not allow to assess the quality of the underlying learning and teaching processes, as it does not take into account the complex structure of teaching in the classroom. This complex structure is described in general models of teaching quality (Brophy, 1999; Eccles & Roeser, 2009; Hamre & Pianta, 2007; Pianta & Hamre, 2009). Commonly, teaching quality can be described with respect to task-specific strategies, including cognitive activation and individual learning support, and task-general strategies, such as classroom management (Baumert et al., 2010; Fauth, Decristan, Rieser, Klieme, & Büttner, 2014; Hugener et al., 2009; Kunter et al., 2013; Praetorius, Klieme, Herbert, & Pinger, 2018). Cognitive activation refers to task-specific instructional strategies that trigger students' cognitive engagement during learning. Cognitive engagement can be enhanced, for instance, by providing cognitively challenging exercises which require students to thoroughly think about the subject-matter (Praetorius et al., 2018). In this regard, passive learning activities such as listening to a lecture seems less cognitively demanding than more constructive activities, such as providing explanations about the content of the lesson to a classmate (Chi & Wylie, 2014; Fiorella & Mayer, 2016). These generative activities require students to actively participate in the course of the lesson and build connections among different concepts, ideas, and conceptions in a self-regulated manner (Hugener et al., 2009). Additionally, individual learning support covers instructional strategies that aim at providing instructional guidance during knowledge construction (Kunter et al., 2013). Individual support comprises methods to assess students’ learning processes and understanding (i.e., formative assessment; Dennen & Burner, 2008; Hardy, Jonen, Möller, & Stern, 2006), as well as methods to provide individual feedback or contiguous adaptions of the learning activities during teaching (Kunter et al., 2013; van de Pol, Volman, Oort, & Beishuizen, 2015). In contrast to these task-specific aspects of teaching quality, classroom management is a task-general aspect of teaching quality. Classroom management refers to generic strategies that focus on establishing and maintaining the smoothness of teaching such as coping with potential disruptions during a lesson (Fauth et al., 2014; Kounin, 1970; Kunter et al., 2013).

These dimensions of teaching quality have been shown to be predictors of students' achievement and enjoyment of lessons (e.g., Fauth et al., 2014; Kunter et al., 2013; Wagner et al., 2016). For example, Kunter et al. (2013) investigated the relations of teaching quality with students' achievement and enjoyment in mathematics classes of N = 181 teachers and their N = 4,353 students. The authors assessed student and teacher ratings of teaching quality and analyzed the quality of the tasks to measure cognitive activation. Furthermore, students' mathematical achievement and enjoyment were assessed. The analysis showed that cognitive activation and classroom management predicted mathematical achievement, whereas instructional support was mainly related to enjoyment. This finding suggests that high levels of teaching quality are crucial factors determining students’ cognitive and motivational outcomes. Based on evidence from research on learning with educational technologies (Chauhan, 2017; Mayer, 2019; Zhu & Urhahne, 2018), it can be assumed that technologies can predominantly enhance task-specific teaching quality. Teachers can, for example, establish cognitively activating learning activities (e.g., virtual simulations; De Jong, Linn, & Zacharia, 2013), and at the same time provide students with adequate individual learning support (e.g., automated adaptive feedback; Aleven et al., 2016). However, it can only be speculated as to whether educational technology may affect task-general aspects of teaching quality, such as the smoothness of the lesson, as most research was not explicitly designed on the classroom level to examine such research questions.

1.2. Conditions for technology integration
Besides the potential of technology for enhancing teaching quality, first evidence on how technologies are currently implemented shows that teachers use technologies only occasionally and primarily substitute traditional approaches (Fraillon et al., 2014). Therefore, teachers often do not adopt technologies as cognitive tools to increase teaching quality (Jonassen, 2005); rather, they transfer their analogue teaching approach to technology-enhanced classroom without modifying or making use of the affordances of technology for teaching and learning (e.g., instead of reading a text on a paper, reading on a tablet computer). This finding might be due to the fact that the use of technologies for teaching is a very complex task that is constrained by diverse conditions (see, e.g., will skill tool model, Farjon, Smits, & Voogt, 2019; Knezek & Christensen, 2016; Petko, 2012). Whereas early research has mainly focussed on teachers’ professional knowledge as a crucial condition for technology integration (e.g., TPACK model by Mishra & Koehler, 2006), more recent research has addressed the role of teacher motivation (Backfisch et al., 2020a; Cheng & Xie, 2018; Ifenthaler & Schweinbenz, 2013; Petko, 2012; Scherer, Siddiq, & Tondeur, 2019; Scherer & Teo, 2019; Taimalu & Luik, 2019; Teo, 2011; Vongkulluksn et al., 2018). In line with the literature on organizational change processes (Hussain et al., 2018; Lewin, 1947), (teacher) motivation has demonstrated to be particularly important for the successful implementation of educational innovation, such as technology integration (e.g., Specht, Kuonath, Pachler, Weisweiler, & Frey, 2018; Wright, Christensen, & Isett, 2013), and sustainable educational change processes at schools (Eickelmann, 2011; Fullan, 2007).

1.2.1. Motivation as a crucial condition for technology integration
Teacher motivation is considered a crucial component of professional competencies for teaching that encompasses aspects of value beliefs and self-estimations, such as self-efficacy beliefs (Baumert & Kunter, 2006). Empirical research shows that teachers' expectancies and self-efficacy beliefs, as well as value beliefs are strong predictors of performance in the classroom and student achievement (Klassen & Durksen, 2014; Lauermann & König, 2016; Tschannen-Moran, Woolfok Hoy, & Hoy, 1998; Zee & Koomen, 2016). When technologies are newly introduced in the classroom, teacher motivation might be decisive as technologies induce change processes in teachers’ daily classroom practices. For example, teachers have to redesign their teaching methods to meaningfully enrich them with technologies (see Hussain et al., 2018; Lewin, 1947; Specht et al., 2018 for the role of motivation in change processes).

1.2.1.1. Motivation and quantity of technology integration
One prominent conceptualization to describe the relation of motivation and technology integration are the technology-acceptance models (TAM; Scherer et al., 2019; Teo, 2011). Since 2010, technology acceptance models, which were originally developed in consumer research and management information systems research (Davis, 1986), have been increasingly applied within teacher education research (see Scherer et al., 2019 for a systematic analysis). In this respect, TAM describes the extent to which teachers' acceptance of technologies, their behavioral intention to use technologies, and ultimately their use of technologies depends on their motivation (Imtiaz & Maarop, 2014; Pynoo et al., 2012; Scherer & Teo, 2019; Teo, 2011). For example, Scherer et al. (2019) aggregated the findings from 114 survey studies (N = 34,577 teachers) which used TAM as a theoretical framework and investigated the relation between teacher motivation (i.e., perceived usefulness of educational technologies, self-efficacy of using educational technologies) and their intention to use technologies as well as quantity indicators of technology integration (e.g., frequency of using technologies for teaching). The authors found that self-efficacy and perceived usefulness largely predicted teachers’ intention to use technology. Moreover, higher levels of behavioural intentions yielded higher degrees of technology integration (see Scherer & Teo, 2019; Wozney, Venkatesh, & Abrami, 2006 for related findings). From a psychological perspective, these findings can be interpreted in terms of expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002), which has gained considerable popularity in teacher education in recent years (e.g., Cheng & Xie, 2018; Green, 2002; Wozney et al., 2006).

Expectancy-value theory (EVT) claims that the successful realization of a task is largely affected by the individual expectancies toward successfully accomplishing a certain task (i.e., self-efficacy, Bandura, 2010) and the associated individual value beliefs towards the task (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). Eccles and Wigfield (2002) further differentiated value beliefs in four components: intrinsic value (as an affective value component), achievement value (as the personal importance of being good at a task), costs (as possible negative consequences of a task), and most importantly utility-value. Utility-value is closely related to the term perceived usefulness as it is used in the context of TAM. In EVT, utility-value is seen as a factor affecting the quality and persistence in a task, whereas perceived usefulness predicts behavioral intentions regarding the use of technology in an ambiguous future in TAM. As the present study focuses on the quality of technology integration (rather than merely its quantity), we use the term utility-value in the following.

First studies in the context of teacher motivation and technology integration based on the expectancy-value theory revealed no consistent picture: Wozney et al. (2006) investigated the relation of teachers' self-efficacy, value beliefs, and technology integration in a cross-sectional survey with primary and secondary school teachers (N = 764). The authors found in their study the hypothesized effect of both teachers' self-efficacy and utility-value on the self-reported frequency of technology use during teaching (see Joo, Park, & Lim, 2018 for related findings). Taimalu and Luik (2019) also investigated the relation of self-efficacy, value beliefs, and technology integration in a survey with teacher educators (N = 54). Contrary to the hypothesized assumptions, the authors found only effects of teachers’ self-efficacy but not value beliefs on their self-reported technology integration. However, it has to be noted that the presented studies investigated different samples and only took the quantity of technology integration into account, but not the quality of technology integration.

1.2.1.2. Motivation and quality of technology integration
Following expectancy-value theory, especially the quality of technology integration during teaching might be influenced by teachers' self-efficacy of using technologies for teaching and the perceived utility-value of educational technologies for teaching and learning processes¶. One of the first empirical studies which accounted for the quality of technology integration is the study by Backfisch et al., 2020a. In a relative expertise study, the authors asked teachers to answer a test measuring their professional knowledge and report their self-efficacy and utility-value regarding technology use. Additionally, the teachers provided a worked-out lesson plan on the introduction of the Pythagorean theorem. The authors found that teachers with higher levels of expertise (i.e., trainee teachers, in-service teachers) were more likely to integrate technologies in meaningful ways and provided lesson plans involving methods of higher instructional quality and greater technology exploitation than novice teachers. The effect of teacher expertise on the quality of the lesson plans could be explained by the perceived utility-value of technology integration, but not by the self-efficacy regarding using technology. Surprisingly, professional knowledge did not mediate the effect of teacher expertise on the quality of technology integration, indicating that predominantly teacher motivation accounted for the quality of technology integration. Despite this valuable finding, however, it has to be noted that the study by Backfisch et al. (2020a) was cross-sectional and conducted in a controlled, but relatively artificial setting, as it only described teachers’ potential technology integration by means of a scenario approach regarding one teaching task at one point in time. Thus, it is unclear whether the findings by Backfisch et al. (2020a) would replicate in more applied settings in which teachers were required to actually implement technology over a course of various lessons.

1.3. Variability of technology integration and motivation across lessons
There is considerable empirical evidence that generic teaching quality varies substantially across different teachers but also across individual teachers’ lessons (Praetorius et al., 2014; Seidel & Prenzel, 2006). For example, Praetorius et al. (2014) investigated the stability of teaching quality across lessons. By applying variance component analysis, the authors were able to identify stable and varying components of teaching quality measured by observer ratings. Whereas classroom management and individual learning support remained relatively stable across lessons, cognitive activation varied largely across lessons. Praetorius et al. (2014) concluded that this variability across lessons indicates that teaching quality is constrained by different instructional contexts. Instructional context encompasses all factors which affect the processes in the classroom such as differences in subject-matter content and different levels of teacher and student motivation (Fauth et al., 2019; Kunter et al., 2013; Praetorius et al., 2014; Turner & Meyer, 2000).

In line with recent motivational theories which highlight that motivational beliefs might rather be state than stable trait variables (Eccles, 2005; Reeve, 2016), teacher and student motivation might vary across lessons. Motivational beliefs might depend on distinct aspects of the task to be accomplished and contextual aspects determining the distinct tasks (Hidi & Harackiewicz, 2000; Su, Stoll, & Rounds, 2019). Klassen and Durksen (2014) investigated potential changes of pre-service teachers' self-efficacy over eight weeks during their first teaching experience by means of a mixed method study. In line with generic motivational theories, the authors found that teacher motivation varied over time. Whereas the quantitative findings showed that pre-service teachers' self-efficacy significantly increased over the eight weeks, the qualitative analysis highlighted the variability of self-efficacy potentially due to situational differences. Further studies, however, found that teachers’ generic self-efficacy was rather stable when investigating a potential one-year change with two measurement points (Holzberger, Philipp, & Kunter, 2013; Praetorius et al., 2017). Therefore, potential variability of teacher motivation might depend on the time frame and grain-size of empirical investigation.

The findings on generic teaching quality and self-efficacy provide valuable insights into how teacher motivation and teaching quality may vary across lessons. However, it is unclear whether these generic findings of variability would replicate in contexts of early stages of technology adoption. It could also be that teacher motivation is even more crucial and varies to a greater extent, since such educational changes may be characterized by perpetual disruptions of established teaching methods.

1.4. The present study: variability and relation of motivation and technology integration
We conducted a mixed method study in the context of the first phase of a governmental initiative, which equipped classes with one-to-one tablet computers to adopt technology for teaching. This particular context issued a challenge to the participating teachers to integrate technology, and as such, teacher motivation may be regarded as an important antecedent for the use of technologies during teaching. The unique research context allowed us to trace variations of teacher motivation (i.e., self-efficacy, utility-value) and technology integration (i.e., quantity, quality), as well as to examine reciprocal relationships among them. During the study, teachers regularly provided entries in a web-based teacher diary over a period of six weeks (for related approaches see Wäschle, Allgaier, Lachner, Fink, & Nückles, 2014). In each entry, teachers documented their lessons and reported their current self-efficacy and perceived utility-value regarding technology integration. Such diary approaches are related to experience sampling methods and are often applied within professional settings, like medicine or teacher education. These diaries do not interfere with daily professional practices (e.g., teaching), and as such, have been shown to be valid instruments to trace trajectories of professional behaviour and its underlying inter-individual constituents (e.g., Endedijk et al., 2014; Klassen & Durksen, 2014; Könings et al., 2016; Wäschle et al., 2014).

1.4.1. Research questions
Following the current debate within motivational research, we investigated whether technology-related self-efficacy and perceived utility-value beliefs vary (i.e., are state variables) or remain stable across lessons (i.e., are trait variables). Therefore, we investigated the variability and differences of motivation across entries:

Research question 1: Do teachers’ intra-individual technology-related self-efficacy (RQ1a) and utility-value (RQ1b) vary or remain stable across entries in the teacher diary?

Second, based on general findings regarding teaching quality (Praetorius et al., 2014), we also investigated potential variability of the quantity (i.e., RQ2a frequency of technology integration) and quality of technology integration (i.e., RQ2b technology exploitation and teaching quality).

Research question 2: Does the quantity (RQ2a frequency) and quality (RQ2b technology exploitation, task-specific, and task-general teaching quality) of technology integration vary or remain stable across entries in the teacher diary?

More importantly, we were interested in potential relations between teacher motivation (i.e., self-efficacy and utility-value) and the quantity and quality of their technology integration. Therefore, we examined whether intra-individual technology-related self-efficacy and utility-value beliefs accounted for the quantity (i.e., RQ3a frequency of technology use) and quality of technology integration across entries (i.e., RQ3b technology exploitation and teaching quality).

Research question 3: Does the individual level of self-efficacy and utility-value predict the quantity (RQ3a frequency) and quality (RQ3b technology exploitation, RQ3c task-specific and RQ3d task-general teaching quality) of technology integration?

2. Method
2.1. Research context
The current study was conducted within the context of a governmental initiative by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Youth and Sports of regional state in Germany. Within this initiative, 28 classes from seventh grade secondary academic track were equipped with mobile technology (i.e., tablets) and infrastructure (i.e., internet access). During the initiative, the teachers were asked to integrate technologies into their daily classroom practices when teaching the tablet classes of the initiative (i.e., the classes which were equipped with tablet computers for every student and every teacher). The teachers did not receive regular professional training on using educational technology in advance, which is similar to other governmental initiatives (see Tamim et al., 2015 for a critical discussion). The study was conducted in the beginning of the initiative which allowed to trace potential trajectories and relationships of teacher motivation and technology integration in the context of emerging educational innovations.

2.2. Participating teachers
All the teachers of the initiative were invited to participate in the study via the school coordinators, who were regular teachers at those schools and served as the local contact persons in the research program. Sixty-seven teachers originally agreed to participate in the study. However, given that the study was conducted on top of the regular teaching tasks (full-time), a large proportion of teachers only accomplished one or two entries (n = 49). To receive a longitudinal dataset with several measuring points, we decided to select only data from teachers who provided at least three entries across the six weeks. This procedure resulted in a sample of n = 18 teachers comprising 83 entries (M = 4.61 entries per teacher on average, SD = .78).

The teachers were teaching in the seventh grade academic track in German secondary schools. They were comparably distributed across different subjects (i.e., German, English as a foreign language, Mathematics, and History). The teachers had on average 14 years (SD = 7.91) of teaching experience and were 42 years old on average (SD = 8.55); nine teachers were female. All teachers were fully certified and had successfully graduated from the study phase of a university teacher education program (approx. 5 years of studies) and the mandatory and structured induction phase (approx. 2 years). At the time of their training, teaching with technologies had not been a mandatory part of German teacher education.

2.2.1. Systematic analysis of included and excluded teachers
The selection procedure could have resulted in biased data, as the included teachers could have been more motivated or younger than the excluded teachers. Therefore, as a further safeguard, we ran a set of χ2-and t-tests on critical confounding variables to ensure the validity of our findings, and we compared the included teachers of the current study to the remaining teachers of the initiative (see Klassen & Durksen, 2014 for a similar approach). Note that such comparisons with the larger reference group were possible by reanalyzing secondary data of the main initiative (see BLINDED link of the Website). None of the statistical tests approached statistical significance: The teachers of the current study did not differ from the overall teacher sample1 regarding their gender, χ2(1) = 0.17, p = .680; age, t(90) = −1.83, p = .071 and teaching experience, t(90) = −1.61, p = .112. Furthermore, the teachers’ perceived utility-value, t(88) = .49, p = .655 and their self-efficacy, t(86) = −1.42, p = .159 were comparable to the main sample of the (written in italics): tabletBW (see chapter 3.1 for the descriptive statistics), suggesting comparable initial states of teacher motivation.

2.3. Design
We implemented a mixed method study with simultaneous collection of qualitative and quantitative data through a weekly web-based teacher diary. Over a period of six weeks, teachers were required to make one entry into the teacher diary per week (i.e., documentation of one lesson, self-efficacy, and utility-value). Within the quantitative analysis, the dependent variables encompassed the quantity of technology integration (i.e., frequency of technology integration, type of technology integration), as well as the quality of technology integration (i.e., technology exploitation and teaching quality) of the documented lessons per entry. As predictors, we used teachers’ technology-related self-efficacy and perceived utility-value per entry, see Table 1 for an overview of all measures. Additionally, we applied qualitative content analysis (Mayring, 2015) to qualitatively describe the contextual aspects of the lesson documentations.


Table 1. Overview of all measures.

Definition	Example	Measure provided by…	Source	Role in research design
Teacher motivation
Technology-related self-efficacy	Confidence of teachers to be able to teach with technologies.	“In this week, I was able to cope with the demands of technology-enhanced teaching.”	Teachers, weekly self-assessment	Translated and adapted items from Rigotti et al., 2008	Independent variable
Utility-value of educational technologies	Perceived utility-value of educational technologies for teaching-related purposes	“In this week, I thought technologies were useful for my lessons.”	Teachers, weekly self-assessment	Translated and adapted items from Backfisch et al., 2020a; van Braak et al., 2004	Independent variable
Quantity of technology integration
Frequency of technology integration	Percentages of lessons taught with technologies relative to all lessons taught in the tablet classes	“I taught __ lessons this week and used technologies in __ lessons”	Teachers, weekly self-report	Created by the authors	Dependent variable
Type of technology integration	Frequency of different types of technologies applied during the documented lessons	Presentation tools, word processing software	Trained raters, lesson documentations	Inductively derived from lesson documentations	Exploratory variable
Quality of technology integration
Technology use
Technology exploitation	Innovativeness of applied technology-enhanced methods	Technologies used to automatically adapt learning activities	Trained raters, lesson documentations	Rating created by the authors. Based on Hughes, 2006	Dependent variable
Teaching quality
Task-specific teaching quality	Instructional quality of the teaching methods applied in the documented lessons	Technologies used to cognitively engage students	Trained raters, lesson documentations	Rating created by the authors. based on Authors, 20xx	Dependent variable
Task-general teaching quality	Smoothness of the documented lesson	“In this week, the technology integration worked smoothly.”	Teachers, weekly self-assessment	Rating created by the authors. based on Kounin, 1970	Dependent variable
2.4. The teacher diary
The web-based teacher diary was implemented in questback.de (Questback, 2017). The teacher diary was piloted with six teachers from the initiative (written in italics): tabletBW to determine the feasibility and technical implementation. Based on feedback of the teachers, we reduced the scales and re-formulated some of the instructions. None of the teachers who took part in the pilot phase participated in the current study.

In the teaching diary, we predominantly used short scales comprising a restricted set of items to measure one construct. This procedure was warranted, as we investigated very specific judgements of teachers’ concrete experiences within a distinct week (see Eddy, Herman, & Reinke, 2019; Ginns & Barrie, 2004; Paas, 1992 for single-item and short-scale approaches). Furthermore, this procedure kept the teacher diary concise to reduce the response burden on the teachers and at the same time enabled to assess different constructs across several weeks (see Klassen & Chiu, 2010; Klassen & Durksen, 2014 for similar approaches). As a safeguard, we conducted reliability analyses which showed high reliability of the implemented scales (see section 2.41). The set of variables can be seen in Table 1. The protocol of the overall structure of the teacher diary and all items can be found in the Appendix.

2.4.1. Motivation section
Based on expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002), we assessed teachers’ technology-related self-efficacy and their perceived utility-value regarding the use of technology for teaching as critical motivational states of technology integration.

2.4.1.1. Technology-related self-efficacy
To assess teachers' self-efficacy regarding the use of technology for teaching, we used four items adapted from Rigotti, Schyns, and Mohr (2008). This measure allowed us to examine self-efficacy in a situated manner and supported the teachers in relating their judgement to the distinct technology-related teaching experiences of the respective week (“In this week…:” “I could overcome potential obstacles during the technology-enhanced teaching”, “I was able to cope with the demands of technology-enhanced teaching.”; “I felt I was doing well with the use of the technologies.”; “I was able to use technology to encourage the learning of the students.”). The teachers rated the items on a 4-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). The reliability of the scale was good, Cronbach's α = .84.

2.4.1.2. Utility-value
We adapted two items from a study by van Braak, Tondeur, and Valcke (2004) that encompassed the utility-value of educational technologies for one's own teaching processes (i.e., “In this week, I thought technologies were useful for my lessons.”; “In this week, I really appreciated the added value of introducing technology into the classroom.”, see also Backfisch et al., 2020a; Sang, Valcke, van Braak, & Tondeur, 2010; Teo, Huang, & Hoi, 2018). Again, the teachers rated their perceived utility on a 4-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). The reliability of the scale was good, Cronbach's α = .85.

2.4.2. Lesson documentation section
2.4.2.1. Quantity of technology integration
To examine the quantity of technology integration, first, the overall frequency of technology use during teaching was assessed. To this end, the teachers were asked to indicate how many lessons they taught this week in total and in how many lessons they used technologies (“I taught __ lessons this week and used technologies in __ lessons”). Second, the frequency of different types of technology integration was coded based on the information provided in the lesson documentation (e.g., frequency of use of presentation tools, text reader, and exercise software).

2.4.2.2. Quality of technology integration
To obtain insights into the quality of technology integration, the teachers were asked to document one lesson that had been exemplary for the particular week by means of an open recall task: “Please describe one prototypical lesson which you taught this week”. To guide teachers in the documentation of the lesson, they received a set of prompts (“What were the central teaching objectives of the lesson?”, “Which instructional method did you use?”, “How did you use educational technology during teaching?”, “Did the educational technology assist you to achieve your teaching objectives, and if so, how?” see Backfisch et al., 2020a; Kramarski & Michalsky, 2010, for related approaches). The lesson documentations encompassed on average 110 words (SD = 81) and were used to rate the quality of technology integration (see 2.5.2). We decided to use an open in contrast to a stimulated recall task, as stimulated recall likely induced lower amounts of reflection processes (e.g., stimulated recall through video-based cues showed to lead to lower why and how information during recalling processes; Van Gog, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Witte, 2005). Therefore, our approach sought to constitute a parsimonious and unobtrusive measure of task-specific teaching quality.

Additionally, as an indicator of classroom management (i.e., task-general teaching quality) while using technology, teachers were asked to rate the smoothness (Kounin, 1970) of their technology integration within the described lesson on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (does not apply) to 5 (does apply; i.e., “In this week, the technology integration worked smoothly.”).

2.5. Coding
2.5.1. Quantity of technology integration
2.5.1.1. Frequency of technology integration
The frequency of technology-use across lessons was obtained by calculating the ratio of teachers self-reported amount of lessons taught with technologies divided by the overall lessons taught in a distinct week. This frequency ratio was then transformed to percentages of frequency of technologies used.

2.5.1.2. Type of technology integration
We analyzed the quantity of different types of applied educational technologies by implementing an inductive categorization process (Mayring, 2015). We identified nine dominant types of educational technologies within the lesson documentations (e.g., use of presentation tools; see Backfisch et al., 2020a for similar approach). The interrater agreement between the two raters for 39% of the lesson documentations was good with 87% of the total agreement ( = .57). Please note that Cohen's κ is less accurate when there are large variations between the overall occurrences of categories and therefore a difference between Cohen's κ and the exact agreement occurred (Wirtz & Caspar, 2002).

2.5.2. Quality of technology integration
2.5.2.1. Technology exploitation
To assess whether teachers were able to exploit the distinct functions of technologies, we analyzed the quality of technology exploitation within the documented lessons. We provided four subcategories to specify the judgements, see Table 2 for descriptions of each category and examples. These categories encompassed the level of technology exploitation within the lesson based on the hierarchical framework by Hughes et al. (2006), as well as the level of exploitation of distinct affordances of technologies based on research on technology-enhanced learning: application of adaptivity, application of multimodality, and application of interactivity. For each category, the teachers could receive 0 (i.e., subcategory not applied) to 3 points (i.e., subcategory ubiquitously applied), yielding a possible maximum score of 12. Two trained raters coded 20% of the lesson documentations. Interrater reliability was very good, ICC (2,1) = .81 (Koo & Li, 2016; Wirtz & Caspar, 2002). Thus, only one rater coded the remaining lesson documentations.


Table 2. Coding scheme for quality of technology integration.

Subcategories	Description	Examples of high qualitya (excerpts of lesson documentations)
Task-specific teaching quality
Provision of cognitively challenging tasks	The teacher provided tasks that prompted the students to deal with the learning subject more thoroughly	Students were provided with a map of our city [city of the school], displayed on GeoGebra. They had to determine the specific point that yielded the same distance from the houses of the three students to that point. By doing so, they explored the circumference of a triangle as the intersection of the two perpendicular bisectors (mathematics lesson).
Support of students' knowledge construction	The teacher supported the students in discovering the overall context of the various lesson contents on their own.	The students independently explored the differences between Protestant, Calvinist and Catholic dogma and summarized the results in a digital mind map. (history lesson)
Encouragement of students' participation	The teacher encouraged the students to recognize and explain connections between different concepts, ideas and conceptions.	Students watched an explanation video on the subject of relative clauses. They were asked to write down the respective grammatical rules on their own. The teacher then led a follow-up discussion based on the students' results. (EFL lesson)
Provision of instructional guidance	Teacher provided instructional guidance to enhance students' learning processes.	Students added information to a pre-structured timeline and received additional information via airdrop if needed. (history lesson)
Technology exploitation
Innovativeness of technology adoption	The technologies are used to make the procedure of the lesson more effective and enable a new way of teaching.	Students worked on an interactive task sheet that also offered hyperlinks to explanation videos and virtual simulations should the students need help. (mathematics lesson)
Usage of adaptive methods	The technologies are used to tailor the content to the knowledge of the students (e.g. through technology-based formative assessment)	Students used learningapps.org to practice specific (repetitive) tasks. The app offered immediate feedback to the students' input. In case of a mistake the technology offered additional information. (EFL lesson)
Application of multimodality	The technologies are used to present multiple forms of representation (e.g., video, audio, pictures).	Students had to invent a fictional story based on a given function graph. They were further asked to record an audio or video message of the story. (mathematics lesson)
Application of interactivity	The technologies are used to heighten students' interaction with the material as well as communication and collaboration.	Students worked simultaneously on an overview of the topic in a live synchronized document (google docs). Within the document, they could discuss results or remarks provided by others with ease through the chat function. (Latin lesson)
Note.

a
These examples received 3 points by the raters.

2.5.2.2. Teaching quality
In accordance with generic conceptualizations of teaching quality (Pianta & Hamre, 2009; Praetorius et al., 2018), teaching quality was assessed with respect to task-specific and task-general strategies. The task-specific teaching quality captured the quality of the initiated learning activities within the documented lessons and was measured with respect to cognitive activation and individual learning support. The raters had four subcategories available to specify their judgments, see Table 2 (adapted Backfisch et al., 2020a; Hugener et al., 2009; Kunter et al., 2013; Praetorius et al., 2018). For each subcategory, the teachers could receive 0 (i.e., subcategory not applied) to 3 points (i.e., subcategory ubiquitously applied). For example, a lesson documentation received 0 points in the category ‘provision of cognitively challenging activities’ if the teacher provided the students with an overarching explanation of every aspect of the topic in a lecture-like talk that was unlikely to cause the students to think about the topic themselves. One point was given, for example, if the teacher provided an explanation but also asked questions to the students. Two points were given, for example, if the teacher gave some introduction to the topic but the students had to elaborate on this explanation and were engaged to think further. Three points were given, for example, if the teacher provided a work sheet that encouraged the students to think intensively about the topic to understand it and to complete the task. The possible maximum score across the four subcategories was 12 points. To determine the reliability of our categorization, again, two trained raters coded 20% of the lesson documentations. Interrater agreement was very good, ICC (2,1) = .92. Thus, only one rater coded the remaining lesson documentations.

Additionally, as a proxy for the task-general teaching quality that captures the quality of the overall procedure of the lesson (i.e., classroom management), we used teachers’ self-ratings of the smoothness of their lessons. This was done in line with previous research suggesting that teachers are well able to assess their classroom management (Aldrup, Klusmann, Lüdtke, Göllner, & Trautwein, 2018; Wagner et al., 2016).

2.6. Analyses
To investigate our research questions, we followed a mixed method approach and applied quantitative and qualitative analyses (see McCrudden et al., 2019; Meyer & Schutz, 2020 for an overview on this approach in educational research).

2.6.1. Quantitative analysis
Regarding the quantitative analyses, we first investigated the variability of technology integration and teacher motivation across lessons by implementing variance component analysis (see Mantzicopoulos, French, Patrick, Watson, & Ahn, 2018; Praetorius et al., 2018; Praetorius, Lenske, & Helmke, 2012; Praetorius, Vieluf, Saβ, Bernholt, & Klieme, 2016 for recent applications). Second, we conducted linear mixed effect models to investigate the relation of teachers’ self-efficacy and utility-value as a function of their motivation with their technology integration (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015).

2.6.1.1. Variability of motivation and technology integration
First, we applied variance component analysis with the help of generalizability theory (cf. G theory) to investigate the variability of teachers’ self-efficacy (RQ1a) and utility-value (RQ1b), as well as the quantity and quality of technology integration (RQ2) across lessons (see Praetorius et al., 2018 for similar approaches). Variance component analysis allows the separation of different factors (i.e., variance components) which determine a distinct measure. Therefore, variance explained by intra-individual or inter-individual differences, and residual variance can be identified (see Praetorius et al., 2012; Praetorius et al., 2016 for application on teaching quality). The accumulation of the different variance components of the investigated factors equals 100% (including residual variance). The percentage of a distinct factor represents the magnitude of variance explained by this factor in the investigated outcome measure (i.e., 0% represents no variance explained by the respective factor, and 100% indicates that all of the variance in the outcome measure is explained by this factor). By applying variance component analysis based on G theory within the framework of multilevel analysis, the analysis accounts for the nested structure of longitudinal data (i.e., measuring points/entries nested within teachers). Therefore, in the current study, variance components can be separated due to differences between the teachers (i.e., variance explained by the teacher), differences across lessons (i.e., variance explained by the different lessons of one teacher), and unexplained residual variance. When distinct analyses show high proportions of residual variance, they indicate that a large proportion likely emerges due to other prevailing contextual differences which are not captured in the mathematical model (i.e., variance in technology integration that is not due to systematic differences between the teachers or across lessons). We applied the gtheory package (Moore, 2016) implemented in the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015) within R Studio (R Core Team, 2019).

2.6.1.2. Relation of motivation and technology integration
Second, we applied linear mixed effect models to investigate the relations between teacher motivation (i.e., self-efficacy and utility-value) and technology integration (i.e., quantity and quality). By using mixed effect models, we accounted for the nested data structure, as measurement points were nested within persons (Duckworth, Tsukayama, & May, 2010). The dependent variables comprised quantity and quality of technology integration (i.e., frequency, technology exploitation, task-specific, and task-general teaching quality). Entries (as a dummy-coded variable representing the different measuring points over time), self-efficacy, and utility-value were included as predictors, see Equation 1. For each variable, the (unstandardized) estimates, standard errors, and 95% confidence interval (CI) are reported. If the 95% CI did not encompass zero, the distinct predictor can be interpreted as being significant. We applied the lmer command of the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015) of R Studio (R Core Team, 2019) to build the linear mixed effect models and the MuMIn package (Barton, 2020) to extract the r-squares of the models. 
 

Equation 1. Equation of linear mixed effect model to investigate the relationship of teachers’ self-efficacy and utility-value on their technology integration  nested within persons (.

To account for the small sample size, we only report confidence intervals and not exact p-values. As a further safeguard, we conducted post-hoc power analyses with 1,000 simulated data sets based on the final models of the present paper (i.e., self-efficacy and utility-value as predictors nested within persons and the different measures for technology integration as outcome variables). The power was found to be sufficient with 0.825 for the task-specific teaching quality, 0.998 for the task-general teaching quality, 0.774 for technology exploitation, and 0.805 for the frequency of technology integration. This finding is not surprising as we found utility-value to be a significant predictor in all established models, and in reverse, the power had to be there to detect this effect.

2.6.2. Qualitative analysis
The quantitative analyses were accompanied by qualitative analyses to investigate potential accounts of the instructional contexts, which may have evoked potential intra-individual variability. Overall, the main aim of the qualitative analysis was to understand which contextual factors accounted for potential variability of teacher motivation and their technology integration across entries. Therefore, the analysis unit of the qualitative investigations was the open-ended lesson documentation section. We followed a criterion-based sampling approach and purposefully selected teachers that represented the diversity of all teachers (regarding variability, motivation, and technology integration; see White, DeCuir-Gunby, & Kim, 2019, for related approaches). Additionally, we took care of equally representing teachers’ demographics.

For the analysis, we followed the approach of qualitative content analysis (Cho & Lee, 2014; Mayring, 2015). First, we segmented the lesson documentations of each teacher in sequences and generalized each unit to a more abstract level with special focus on the particular technology integration, content taught, pedagogical approach, and important contextual factors. Second, commonalities and differences between the different units across the lessons of one teacher were identified and generalized at an abstract level. Based on this abstraction, we identified two lessons of each teacher with the largest discrepancies in their technology integration. Finally, commonalities and differences between the selected lessons across teachers were identified and conclusions were derived. To refine our analysis and ensure the rigor of our qualitative analysis, each step and especially the conclusions were discussed among the authors. Please note, that the specific identity of the teachers was, due to data protection regulations, not available to us, and thus we were unable to validate the qualitative interpretations with the specific teachers.

2.7. Procedure
First, we obtained ethical approval from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Youth and Sports of regional state. Then, we informed the teachers that the scope of the study was to investigate their technology integration and potential influential factors during teaching with technology. All the teachers who provided written consent to participate in the study received the link to the teacher diary via email. At the first log-in, the teachers provided information on their demographic data (i.e., age, gender). Afterwards, they were asked to provide one entry with one lesson documentation per week over a period of six weeks. One entry lasted approximately 15 min. At the end of the study, the teachers received a computer-based report about the central trajectories of their motivation, their technology application, and the self-assessed quality of technology-enhanced lessons as compensation.

3. Quantitative findings
3.1. Preliminary explorative analyses
As preliminary analyses, we investigated the overall number of lessons in which technologies were integrated dependent on the overall number of lessons. Furthermore, we captured the descriptive statistics of teachers’ motivation and their types of technology used across the six weeks. Across the six weeks, the teachers taught on average 2.6 lessons per week in the tablet classes. Of these lessons, on average 2.0 lessons (77%, SD = 32.85) were conducted using educational technology. As was also encountered in previous studies (e.g., Taimalu & Luik, 2019; Wozney et al., 2006), descriptive analyses across lessons showed that the teachers had rather high motivational beliefs (self-efficacy and value-beliefs above the mean), see Table 3. The teachers perceived the lessons to proceed very smoothly (see high mean of task-general teaching quality), however, showed rather high variability across lessons and teachers (see high standard deviation). Regarding the level of technology exploitation and task-specific teaching quality, the rather high standard deviations indicated a wide variation across teachers and across lessons. For an overview of the relations of the different measured constructs, see Table 4 that depicts the bi-variate cross-sectional correlations between the general means of the different constructs across lessons and across teachers. Whereas self-efficacy beliefs were only correlated with the task-general teaching quality, utility-value was correlated to all measures of quantity and quality of technology integration (i.e., frequency, technology exploitation, task-general, and task-specific teaching quality).


Table 3. Means and standard deviations of the variables across lessons.

M	SD
Motivationa
Self-efficacy	3.29	0.61
Utility-value	2.94	0.88
Quantity of technology integration
Frequency of technology useb	76.97	32.85
Quality of lessons
Technology exploitationc	1.92	0.68
Task-general teaching qualityd	4.10	0.99
Task-specific teaching qualityc	2.15	0.44
a
Values represent means of the rating from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree), teacher ratings ranged from 1 to 4.

b
Values represent percentage scores, frequency obtained from the ratio of teachers self-reported number of lessons taught with technologies divided by the overall number of lessons taught 0% (technology never used) – 100% (technology used in every lesson).

c
Values represent means of the rating 0 (subcategory not applied) to 3 (subcategory ubiquitous applied); range for technology exploitation was 0–3 and for task-specific teaching quality 1.25–3.

d
Values represent means of the categorization from 1 (does not apply) to 5 (does apply), teacher ratings ranged from 1 to 5.


Table 4. Bivariate correlations of the mean of the investigated variables across all entries.

1	2	3	4	5
1 Self-efficacy beliefs					
2 Utility-value	.677**				
3 Frequency of technology integration	.190	.282**			
4 Technology exploitation	.203	.400**	.173		
5 Task-general teaching quality	.486**	.520**	.195	.031	
6 Task-specific teaching quality	.181	.275*	.104	.848**	.037
Note. *p < .05. **p < .001.

Additionally, the analysis of the types of technology usage indicated that teachers most frequently used generic technologies, such as presentation tools (e.g., keynote, PowerPoint), e-text readers (e.g., e-books, pdf-documents), exercise software or file transfer services (e.g., airdrop, cloud services) see Fig. 1. However, teachers rarely used subject-specific tools, such as virtual simulations (e.g., GeoGebra), or formative assessment technologies, such as audience response systems (e.g., kahoot, socrative).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (176KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Type of used technologies within the documented lessons. Bar charts represent the frequency of use per teacher.

3.2. RQ1: intra-individual variability of motivation
To investigate the intra-individual variability of self-efficacy (RQ1a) and utility-value (RQ1b) across entries, we used variance component analysis to identify the variance explained by systematic differences between teachers, across lessons, and unexplained variance, see Fig. 2. We found that a considerable amount of variance of teachers' self-efficacy and utility-value could be explained by stable teacher traits (VC > 27%). The amount of variance explained by systematic differences during the course of lessons was relatively low (VC < 6%). This indicates that there were no systematic changes of teacher motivation over time across teachers. Most of the variability of teachers’ self-efficacy and utility-value was unexplained variance. These findings suggest that besides distinct motivational traits, a large proportion of variance were likely influenced by different non-systematic contextual factors.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (378KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Variance component analysis to investigate the variability across entries of teachers' self-efficacy (RQ1a, left) and utility value (RQ1b, right).

3.3. RQ2: variability of quantity and quality of technology integration
To investigate the variability of the quantity (RQ2a) and quality of technology integration (RQ2b), we again applied variance component analysis, see Fig. 3. We found low amounts of explained variance by teacher traits for the frequency of technology integration and the task-specific teaching quality (VC < 11%). For the smoothness of the lessons, as a proxy for task-general teaching quality, the amount of variance explained by the teachers (VC = 25%) was considerably larger than for the frequency of technology integration. This finding suggests that a significant proportion of the task-general teaching quality could be explained by relatively stable teacher traits. Again, only a small amount of variance could be explained by systematic differences between the lessons (ranging from 1 to 5%), indicating no systematic changes of the quantity and quality of technology integration over time. The highest variance component remained unexplained variance (ranging from 70 to 88%). The high residual variance across our measures of quantity and quality of technology integration demonstrated that most of the variability was not explained by systematic teacher traits or general time course, but highly depended on contextual factors emerging from the particular teaching environment. This dependence on individual experiences can also be seen when investigating the individual trajectories of the teachers over time, see Fig. 4. Whereas some teachers improved over time, others varied unsystematically presumably due to their individual contextual experiences.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (698KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Variance component analysis for the frequency of technology integration (upper left), level of technology exploitation (upper right), task-specific teaching quality (lower left), and task-general teaching quality (lower right).

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (500KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Plots of individual trajectories of the quality of technology integration (i.e., task-specific teaching quality (solid line) and technology exploitation (dotted line)) of the teachers. Task-specific teaching quality and technology exploitation was rated on a 0 to 3 scale each week across six weeks (y-axis). The selected teachers for the qualitative analysis are highlighted with a solid frame.

3.4. RQ3: relation of motivation and technology integration
To investigate research question 3, we analyzed systematic links of motivational states (i.e., self-efficacy, utility-value) and technology integration by applying linear mixed effect models to account for the nested data structure. First, we built a model with the frequency of technology integration as the outcome measure and self-efficacy and utility-value as the predictor variables (RQ3a). The analysis indicated that self-efficacy was not related to the frequency of technology integration as zero was included in the confidence interval, however, utility-value was, see Table 5. This finding can be interpreted to mean if teachers perceived the utility-value of educational technologies one point higher (rated from 0 to 3 points), they used technologies in their lessons about 12 percent more often (rating from use of technologies in 0–100% of the lessons).


Table 5. Linear Mixed Effect Models to Investigate the Relationship of Teacher Motivation and their Technology Integration.

Measures of technology integration as outcome measure	Self-efficacy	Utility-value	R2
Estimate	SE	95% CI	Estimate	SE	95% CI
Predictor variables
Model 1: Frequency of technology integration (RQ3a)	−11.069	5.837	−22.510, 0.372	12.271	4.007	4.416, 20.125	13%
Model 2: Technology exploitation (RQ3b)	−0.157	0.165	−0.481, 0.166	0.385	0.113	0.163, 0.607	19%
Model 3: Task-specific teaching quality (RQ3c)	−0.055	0.112	−0.274, 0.164	0.200	0.076	0.050, 0.350	17%
Model 4: Task-general teaching quality (RQ3d)	−0.562	0.212	−0.146, 0.977	0.310	0.144	0.029, 0.592	45%
A similar pattern emerged for the quality of technology integration (RQ3b): Model 2 with technology exploitation as the outcome variable showed that self-efficacy was not related to technology exploitation, however, utility-value was significantly related to the level of technology exploitation, see Table 5. This indicates that if teachers perceived the utility-value one point higher, they received a rating of their technology exploitation that was 0.385 points higher (= 13% higher technology exploitation, both rated from 0 to 3 points). Model 3 with task-specific teaching quality as the outcome measure (RQ3c) also revealed no significant relation with self-efficacy, however, again task-specific teaching quality was significantly related to utility-value. This finding indicates that if teachers perceived the utility-value one point higher, they received a rating of their task-specific teaching quality that was 0.200 points higher (= 7%). Interestingly, model 4 with task-general teaching quality as the outcome measure (RQ3d) showed that both utility-value and self-efficacy were significant predictors. This finding indicates the perceived utility influenced the task-general teaching quality by 0.310 points (= 6%, task-general teaching quality was rated from 0 to 5 points) and additionally, self-efficacy with an estimate of 0.562 points (= 11%) was strongly linked to maintaining high levels of classroom management in technology-based teaching environments.

We additionally provide the R2 of the models, which indicates how much variation of the outcome measures is explained by self-efficacy and utility-value, see Table 5. R2 ranged from 13% (frequency of technology integration) to 45% (task-general teaching quality). This indicates that for the frequency of technology integration, there might be additional predictors which cause variation in the frequency of technology integration, whereas for the smoothness of the lesson, almost half of the variation could be explained by the levels self-efficacy and utility-value.

The quantitative analyses suggest that teacher motivation and teaching quality can be regarded as variable states which are likely constrained by individual characteristics emerging from differences of the particular instructional context. Moreover, the linear mixed effect models show that the individual level of perceived utility was significantly linked to the quantity and quality of technology integration.

4. Qualitative analysis
The primary goal of the qualitative analysis was to understand potential characteristics and constituents of the variability of utility-value and its relationship to the quality of technology integration to get an idea for the potential underlying contextual factors. Therefore, we first identified teachers that represented the diversity of all teachers of the study regarding their level of variability, motivation, and technology integration: Klaus (44 years old, history teacher), Patrick (30 years old, mathematics teacher), and Anna (48 years old, English as Foreign Language teacher), see Figs. 4 and 5 for their trajectories of motivation and technology integration.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (221KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Plots of individual trajectories of perceived utility value (solid line) and self-efficacy (dotted line) of the exemplary teachers of the qualitative analysis. Utility value and self-efficacy was rated on a 4-point Likert scale per week (x-axis) across six weeks (y-axis).

4.1. Klaus: an example in history teaching
Klaus was a history teacher with 13 years of working experience who judged himself as a novice in technology integration. He showed reasonable variability of utility-value and variability of technology integration over time. In his first documented lesson, he showed low levels of utility-value. In this lesson, he planned a learning activity which aimed at fostering students’ critical thinking about the potential consequences of the early European exploration in the 15th century. To achieve this goal, he used Padlet (a live-synchronized whiteboard application to initiate collaborative learning activities) but had to stop the learning activity:

The formation of judgement should be supported by joint exchange using a Padlet. Two problems led me to break this off after a few minutes: 1) Apart from a few exceptions, the posts were extremely superficial, so that no process of judgement formation was recognizable. 2) (…) This was abused by a student to an offensive post about a not present classmate. (Klaus, entry week 1)

This documentation may be indicative that the given instruction during the collaborative learning activity was not clear enough which resulted in the superficial judgments. Furthermore, the low levels of classroom management resulted in an offensive post by a student. Klaus proceeded as follows:

Second, we prepared a panel discussion. One student suggested to film the subsequent panel discussion. I spontaneously agreed on that, however, the filming did disturb the students' discussion. Therefore, I stopped the filming and the students proceeded with the discussion. (Klaus, entry week 1)

The spontaneous addition of recording resulted in additional disturbances during the discussion which likely decreased the teaching quality of the lesson. Taken together, week one illustrates that Klaus' lack of preparation regarding technology integration and the resulting students' disturbances likely determined the low levels of perceived utility-value and quality of technology integration. Therefore, Klaus’ low perceived utility-value was likely related to the low quality of technology integration and vice versa.

In the fourth week, Klaus perceived high utility-value. In his lesson, he dealt with the German Peasants War. He used the mBook (BLIND link) which is a digital textbook that is comprised of digital learning activities based on multiple-source comprehension: “First, I showed a picture, then students worked out the connections of the Memminger Declaration and Reformation with the help of different texts in the mBook, and worked on tasks provided within the book.” (Klaus, entry week 4).

Relying on existing digital materials allowed Klaus to assure a smooth course of the lesson and to realize relatively high levels of teaching quality.

4.2. Patrick: an example in mathematics teaching
A similar pattern emerged in the case of Patrick, a mathematics teacher with four years of teaching experience, but who described himself as a pragmatist who likes to integrate technologies. In the second week, he had low utility-value regarding technology integration. In the described lesson, he aimed at using a collaborative whiteboard app to collect and categorize linear equations and their transformations. Similar to Klaus, the learning activity did not work and resulted in large disturbances among students, which led him to conclude: “It was totally chaotic, as also students deleted correct solutions.” (Patrick, entry week 2).

In line with Klaus’ lesson, the instruction of the learning activity was likely not clear enough, and students would have needed more guidance while using the technology in the collaborative learning activities. In contrast, in week 5, he used online learning material comprising of simulations, video explanations, and adaptive exercises with online feedback from the GeoGebra Materials Platform, an international repository enabling teachers to use comprehensive interactive learning and teaching resources, which resulted in a lesson of high teaching quality: “The students discovered the proof of the theorem with the help of a GeoGebra book [dynamic geometry software]- perfect simulation and visualization of the processes of the theorem – and documented it on a worksheet.” (Patrick, entry week 5).

This finding reflects the fact that high quality of technology integration requires teachers to thoroughly prepare their instruction. Additionally, the example highlights that the use of content-specific material for their lessons may assist teachers to more thoroughly integrate technology and heighten teaching quality.

4.3. Anna: an example in English teaching
Anna was an experienced English teacher with 21 years of teaching experience, describing herself as a pragmatist who likes to integrate technologies into her teaching. During the course of her teaching, the main theme was the textual analysis and interpretation of a specific narrative reading. In her first week, she reported high utility-value, which was also reflected in her lesson documentation: “Students explored the places where the protagonists live [with GoogleMaps Streetview], created screenshots, copied them into an Adobe Pages document, and described the district in which the main characters live.” (Anna, entry week 5).

By contrast, in the following week, she perceived low utility-value. “Using the PDF Viewer, the students created a graph to describe the evolution of the relationship between two characters of the book.” (Anna, entry week 6). In this lesson, Anna likely did not fully exploit the potential of educational technology, as she simply substituted analogous learning activities (i.e., drawing) with tablet-based activities. This finding suggests that besides general aspects of instructional quality, also the fit between the topic and educational technology affects the perceived utility and the quality of technology integration.

The qualitative analysis suggests it was easier for the participating teachers to teach with high teaching quality when using technologies if they used existing domain-specific applications. These applications already appropriately integrated the relevant pedagogy, content, and affordances of the technology. Therefore, in these cases, the teachers were not faced with the challenge of integrating generic applications in a meaningful way into their domain-specific lesson procedure. More importantly, our qualitative analysis suggests that teachers' motivation and technology-enhanced teaching quality may be reciprocally dependent on each other. To analyze this reciprocal relationship in an exploratory way, we provide all individual trajectories of the quality of technology integration and utility-value across time in Fig. 6. As the measures were assessed using different units of measurement, we z-standardized the measures for the plots. Therefore, only the trajectories over time and relative associations between the variables can be interpreted, but not their absolute values. In line with the qualitative analysis, these plots suggest that teacher motivation should not only be regarded as a source but also as the result of teachers’ actions in the classroom.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (516KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Plots of individual trajectories of the quality of technology integration (i.e., task-specific teaching quality (solid line) and technology exploitation (dotted line)) and utility-value (dashed line) of the teachers. All variables were Fisher z-standardized (y-axis). The selected teachers for the qualitative analysis are highlighted with a solid frame.

5. Discussion
5.1. Main findings
In the current study, we implemented a teacher diary to investigate trajectories and relations of in-service teachers' motivation and technology integration in the early phase of educational innovation. Our main findings were threefold: First, we showed that both motivation and technology integration were highly variable across the documented lessons, and therefore were highly dependent on contextual factors. Second, we found that part of the variability in the quality of technology integration was linked to individual differences of teachers’ perceived utility-value of technology integration. Third, our qualitative analyses highlighted the reciprocal relationship between utility-value and technology integration and their dependency on the instructional context in which technology was adopted. These different instructional contexts may have been responsible for the differences in motivation and technology integration.

5.1.1. Motivation is context-sensitive
As a first contribution, we found that teachers’ technology-related motivation varied across lessons. Even though approximately 30% of motivation could be explained by stable traits, 60–70% were determined by specific instructional contexts of the different lessons. Therefore, our findings contribute to general motivation research, which has emphasized the situated character of human motivation (Reeve, 2016).

5.1.1.1. Further interpretation and implications
Our results extend first findings on the variability of teacher motivation (see Klassen & Durksen, 2014) in the field of technology-enhanced teaching. In line with findings by Klassen and Durksen, who investigated the motivation of pre-service teachers across their first weeks of teaching experience, the motivation of the in-service teachers of the present study varied to a large extent. The variability of motivation within these two contexts might be due to the fact that in both cases teachers were confronted with new educational innovations (Specht et al., 2018). The pre-service teachers in the Klassen and Durksen study had just recently started to teach. The teachers of the current study were freshly equipped with educational technology in the context of a governmental initiative and had just begun to use technologies for teaching and were therefore required to realize distinct changes in their teaching habits (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010). As such, our teachers were confronted with having to adapt to distinct change processes which might explain the variability of teacher motivation, as well as its influence on the quality of technology integration.

5.1.2. Quality of technology-integration is context-sensitive
Moreover, we found high variability in the quality of technology integration across lessons, which is in line with findings on general teaching quality (Fauth et al., 2019; Praetorius et al., 2014). Additionally, the qualitative analyses suggested that when teachers had subject-specific technologies available, they perceived higher levels of utility, and at the same time, were more able to integrate these technologies during teaching. However, this finding should be further examined by confirmatory research.

5.1.2.1. Further interpretation and implications
As a practical implication, this finding suggests that particularly in early phases of technology integration, it may be a beneficial starting point to first provide teachers with subject-specific opportunities to integrate technology. With increasing expertise, teachers may become more apt to integrate more domain-general technologies and perceive the value of such technologies. From a theoretical perspective, the qualitative findings further add to the scarce evidence on the role of the instructional context on (technology-enhanced) teaching quality (Turner & Meyer, 2000).

5.1.3. Quality of technology-enhanced teaching is related to utility-value
As a second contribution, our findings extend previous research on the relations between teacher motivation and technology integration (e.g., Scherer et al., 2019). Despite the large variability in the key variables, perceived utility was significantly related to the quality of technology integration across lessons and contexts (see also Backfisch et al. (2020a)). By contrast, self-efficacy only accounted for task-general teaching quality and not for the quality of technology integration and task-specific teaching quality.

5.1.3.1. Further interpretation and implications
We attribute these particular findings to the context in which our study was implemented. As our study was implemented in the beginning of the government initiative, our teachers had to invest considerable additional efforts to deliberately integrate technology. In line with technology acceptance models (Scherer & Teo, 2019; Teo, 2011), the perceived value of a task may be the fundamental pre-requisite to realize these effortful actions of enriching one's own teaching with technologies. However, the role of self-efficacy beliefs in this early stage of technology integration should be further investigated. For example, whether and how utility-value and self-efficacy may interact as proposed by expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002) in more advanced phases of technology integration is an open issue.

The qualitative analysis suggests that the relation of teacher motivation and technology integration is more reciprocal in nature: If teachers perceived high utility-value, they integrated the technologies in a highly qualitative manner (e.g., used technologies to heighten students’ cognitive activation). Additionally, vice versa, if the teachers had positive experiences with technologies in the classroom, they perceived higher utility of educational technologies. Moving forward, the question should therefore be addressed whether this reciprocal mechanism holds true for larger teacher samples. It could also well be that a certain amount of general attitude towards the utility (as a trait component) is a necessary pre-condition for technology integration and a contextualized utility (as a state component) may depend on situational and concrete experiences during teaching with the technologies.

5.2. Limitations and future research
One central caveat refers to the fact that we realized a correlational design which does not allow for investigating the causal effects of utility-value on technology integration (or vice versa). Therefore, based on our study, it is unclear whether utility-value would be a concurrent facet of successful technology integration, a causal factor determining the quality of technology integration, or whether utility-value is a consequence of high quality of technology integration. As a further development of our study, we would experimentally manipulate teachers’ utility-value by inducing different levels of utility-value (see Brisson et al., 2017; Canning et al., 2018) to investigate whether utility-value would have a causal role in determining technology integration. Additionally, we see further improvement in validating our short scale measures in future studies.

Moreover, we relied on teachers' documentations and had no direct observations of technology integration, which may have affected our findings. Therefore, we see the need of replicating our findings in more contextualized settings, in which actual teaching behavior across multiple measurement points is analyzed, for instance by means of video-analyses. On the basis of these video-taped lessons, classroom management in technology-enhanced teaching could be further examined. In the present study, classroom management was only investigated based on teachers' self-assessment and therefore needs further validation. This validation could also be obtained through interviews with the teachers to gain more insights into their reasoning of how they behaved in the classroom and therefore obtain a more comprehensive picture of the diverse conditions for teachers' successful technology integration. Moreover, it would be valuable to also focus on the students’ viewpoint regarding the incorporation of technologies into teaching as they are also crucial stakeholders within teaching (Mulet, van de Leemput, & Amadieu, 2019).

Another limitation relates to the small sample of our study. Even though the sample of the current study was comparable to the bigger main sample of the overall BLIND NAME STUDY, it could be the case that our findings only emerged as we coincidentally obtained teachers with special characteristics. Therefore, it would be interesting to replicate our findings with larger sample sizes. Larger sample sizes would also allow for sub-group analyses of different teacher groups, for instance, by means of cluster analysis based on their different quality of technology integration and motivational beliefs. This could be achieved by extending the teacher diary with self-reflection prompts so that teachers also see a personal value through participating in the study.

6. Conclusion
To conclude, the present study helps to get a better understanding of teachers’ motivational states which enable them to integrate technology across situations. Our findings indicate that their motivation and particularly current perceived utility-value of educational technologies play a critical role in integrating technology in a qualitatively high manner that largely depends on the particular context. From a teacher education perspective, teachers have to be aware of the influence of contextual aspects such as their motivation, as well as the quality and quantity of their technology integration.

