Critical thinking is embedded in 2 dimensions, critical attitude and ability, which may or may not mutually affect students' self-confidence in science inquiry learning. To understand this issue, we designed a website called Enriched Thinking Cloud based on the predict-observe-explain (POE) model of inquiry-based learning by providing themes for students to learn about moon science concepts. Moreover, we calculated their critical performance based on object identification theory. Data collected from 163 participants were subjected to confirmatory factor analysis with structural equation modeling to test the prediction among paths of the research model. The results showed that attitude toward POE online inquiry learning can positively predict participants' self-confidence in using Enriched Thinking Cloud (hereafter “self-confidence”) and can also predict their critical attitude. Furthermore, self-confidence and critical attitude can positively predict their cognitive dimension of the critical thinking process. The results suggest that science teachers can design more POE inquiry models to enhance students’ critical ability and attitude in earth science learning.

Previous
Keywords
Human-computer interface

Improving classroom teaching

Teaching/learning strategies

1. Introduction
Critical thinking (CT) enables students to practice logical reasoning, and it has been shown to result in better learning (e.g.,Facione, 1990a, Facione, 1990b; Halpern, 2003a; Helsdingen et al., 2011; Pilgrim et al., 2019; Fitriani et al., 2020). Any conception of CT must include its dual dimensionality (i.e., cognitive skills and disposition to effectively fulfill pedagogical goals; Stapleton, 2011). The cognitive dimension of CT generally emphasizes reasoning and logical thinking, and focuses on an individual's ability to comprehend a problem and to generate reasonable solutions for the identified problem (Ku & Ho, 2010; Macpherson & Stanovich, 2007). Dispositions, on the other hand, have been defined as a constellation of attitudes, which Waterkemper et al. (2014) termed as critical attitude to describe the way to reason, argue, and make decisions (Facione et al., 1995; Perkins et al., 1993). There are ever-increasing efforts to foster students' critical attitude and ability through learning (Niu et al., 2013), especially through the integration of CT into online learning courses (Saadé et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2020). CT has been found to promote active learning behavior and to positively affect student learning outcomes (Saadé et al., 2012), but few studies have focused on the roles that critical attitude and ability play in online learning; thus, this is the topic of interest in this study.

Advances in information communication technology (ICT) have provided opportunities for online learning by interactivity (Baid & Lambert, 2010). Interactivity is perceived to be a driver for CT, as it offers new possibilities to explore innovative and pedagogical solutions that help students to develop their CT skills. Additionally, it is important to develop an appropriate, inquiry-based science program for students to promote their learning about science, including critical reasoning competence and attitudes in online science learning (Mantzicopoulos et al., 2008). However, Chen et al. (2018) stated that the use of guide representations has the potential to facilitate inquiry learning, especially hypothesis generation and scientific reasoning. Additionally, students have been found to be positive about the inclusion of technology-enhanced learning in supporting their development of critical thinking (Hong, Hwang, Tai, & Tsai, 2017; Swart, 2017). Considering this, we designed a website, named Enriched Thinking Cloud, for students to practice inquiry learning using “predict-observe-explain” as the guiding approach, and to understand how the two types of CT interact with students’ learning effect.

Ornstein and Hunkins (2004) associated the development of CT skills with Piaget's concrete and formal operations. From this perspective, students who have not reached the formal operations stage may not possess the cognitive skills necessary to use CT because they are unable to make sense of abstract ideas (Behar-Horenstein, 2009). Moreover, as identifying performance in inquiry-based science learning may be a complex process, there is a need to understand the role of self-confidence in the inquiry process (Köszegi, 2006; Weinberg, 2009), as it will prompt students to search information for reasons to support and summarize their ideas. Therefore, self-confidence as self-awareness of capability is important for practicing critical thinking in the inquiry process (Carin et al., 2005). According to the review of mobile inquiry-based learning by Suárez et al. (2018), there is a limited number of studies relevant to the correlation between self-confidence and critical thinking in inquiry-based science learning. Thus, the purpose of this research was to study the interrelationships of critical attitude and self-confidence (self-confidence), and to reflect on the cognitive dimension of the critical thinking process (CDCTP) when Enriched Thinking Cloud with predict-observe-explain was used to support students' science inquiry learning.

2. The Enriched Thinking Cloud website
2.1. The theoretical background of the POE model design adapted to Enriched Thinking Cloud
Most of the inquiry-based learning processes have proposed different learning activities to differentiate themselves from each other (Hong et al., 2019), which makes the inquiry sequences more complicated. Examples include the 5 E Inquiry Cycle (Engage, Explore, Explain, Elaborate, Evaluate); the ADDC Inquiry Phase (Ask questions, Design studies, collect and interpret Data, draw Conclusions); the QPEMA Inquiry Phase (Question, Predict, Experiment, Model, Apply) (Pedaste et al., 2015; White & Frederiksen, 2000; National Research Council, 1996; Llewellyn, 2002); CICD (Conceptualization-questioning, hypothesis generation), Investigation (observation), and Conclusion and Discussion (Pedaste et al., 2015); and Pegg's (2006) proposed inquiry model, predict-observe-explain (POE), which is designed to stimulate students' curiosity in relation to the problem at hand. After reviewing all of the inquiry-based learning phases, we summarized that different inquiry models are suitable for different types of learning content. For example, subjects related to Physics are tangible and so are suited to doing (D) experiments, whereas the learning content of Earth Science may focus directly on observation (O). Accordingly, Hong, Hwang, Liu, Ho, & Chen (2014) specified the content design processes of POE phases in mobile learning as follows: (1) The teacher poses a science question for students to predict the answer (predict/POE). (2) After viewing the clue offered by the system, if the student is still unable to answer the question, the system provides a website for the student to observe a demonstration of the particular science phenomenon or to read relevant information (observe/POE). Afterwards, the student is given the opportunity to answer the initial question again. (3) If the student is still unable to answer the question after observing the demonstration and reading relevant information, the system provides an explanation of the answer (explain/POE). As the learning content of the present study is focused on the moon, we adopted the POE phases based on the simulation core concepts for observation in the inquiry phase. An example is outlined below.

2.2. Course design
Many approaches to promoting students’ acquisition of CT skills have been incorporated into ICT to provide more communication options (Alberts, 2004). Accordingly, in this study, we designed Enriched Thinking Cloud for students to practice their CT skills in three Moon units (i.e., outlook of the moon, the changing location of the moon, the shape of the moon), for three nature science sessions. According to the school teaching schedule, the Moon units were to be taught in the spring semester. Therefore, to avoid the effect of pre-knowledge on this experiment, Enriched Thinking Cloud was designed for students to learn in the fall semester to promote their CT skills via POE inquiry-based learning.

2.2.1. Example
In order to provide a general direction for CT, the teacher first posed a simple question, “Does the Moon emit light on its own?” to guide the students to think critically. Then, the students were directed to use Google Earth to observe some of the Moon's landforms. Finally, the students had to search for information to prove how the bright or dark regions of the Moon have different landform characteristics.

A practical example was provided, as illustrated in Fig. 5. When light shines into the cave, certain regions of the cave are brighter than others. By providing students with practical examples and explanations, they could derive the correct answer from understanding the rationale behind the problem during the process of investigation.

3. Hypotheses
Moreno (2006) proposed that the cognitive-affective theory of learning with media (CATLM) can be used for examining students’ attitudes toward online learning and CT disposition; accordingly, the present study hypothesized the relationship between cognitive factors and affective factors in inquiry-based learning.

3.1. Attitude towards inquiry-based learning relevant to self-confidence and critical attitude
Attitude towards online learning (ATOL) can be defined as students' perceptions of the online learning experience and the perceived value of the education received while participating in online learning programs; this attitude further predicts academic success and retention (Ke & Kwak, 2013). As students' ATOL has been found to be largely stable throughout courses (Nistor, 2013), a longitudinal study by Otis et al. (2005) revealed that students’ different attitudes may have an ongoing impact on their learning behaviors, which may eventually influence their long-term learning progress or adjustment. Moreover, inquiry denotes an active learning process that allows students to answer research questions using data analysis and information exchange (Bell et al., 2005). In inquiry-based science learning, a higher level of the attitude construct could be a better predictor of cognitive and affective constructs in specific tasks (Stajkovic et al., 2015).

As an affective construct, self-confidence means that a person who knows what to do and how to do it believes that s/he can perform those tasks, maintains positive outcome expectations, and feels that s/he can bounce back if failure occurs (Stajkovic, 2006). Accordingly, confidence is a basic component of inquiry action (Greenwald, 2010). Moreover, the positive relationship between self-confidence and a controlled attitude towards learning may contribute to the learners' critical attitude (Procee, 2006). To understand the relationship between attitude and self-confidence in the POE inquiry model as the science inquiry learning approach, the present study adopted and extended ATOL with POE as “attitude towards POE online inquiry learning” (ATPOEOIL) to explore the relations between ATOL and self-confidence and critical attitude. That is, how ATPOEOIL can predict learners’ self-confidence and critical attitude was hypothesized as follows:

H1

ATPOEOIL can positively predict self-confidence.

H2

ATPOEOIL can positively predict critical attitude.

3.2. Self-confidence relevant to critical attitude and the cognitive dimension of critical thinking
Stankov et al. (2012) pointed out that confidence (1) has been the best predictor of achievement; (2) is related to both cognitive and self-belief measures; and (3) captures much of the predictive variance, such as learning interest. These variables manifest confidence in an individual who knows what to do and how to do it, believes tasks can be performed, and maintains positive outcome expectations (Stajkovic et al., 2015). Self-confidence in one's own belief is related to specific tasks (Ku, 2009), and the present study focused on students' self-confidence in practicing POE inquiry-based science learning via Enriched Thinking Cloud. Moreover, Waterkemper et al. (2014) highlighted that critical attitude is related to the willingness to engage in problem posing and solving. This standpoint sees the development of CT as an inquiry process in problem solving that relies on students' self-confidence traits. As such, critical attitude as motivational belief is related to students' self-competence (Simpkins et al., 2006; Simpson & Oliver, 1990). For example, high CT disposition scores were significantly related to high self-confidence ratings (Brown & Chronister, 2009). Thus, the hypothesis was as follows:

H3

Self-confidence can positively predict critical attitude.

Stankov et al. (2009) argued that individuals’ confidence levels depend on their previous experiences with similar tasks. Confidence is a strong factor in predicting learning outcomes (Stankov, 2013). Previous studies have revealed confidence as a predictor to evaluate the value of the cognitive dimension of CT (Çevik & Andre, 2013). For example, Cheng (2011) stated that students claimed if they had more confidence, they would ask more questions and be more likely to take the initiative to find data and read science books. Accordingly, how improved self-confidence influences the cognitive dimension of critical thinking progress (CDCTP) when engaged in POE inquiry science learning was hypothesized as follows:

H4

Self-confidence in online inquiry learning can positively predict CDCTP.

3.3. Critical attitude relevant to the CDCTP
Norris and Ennis (1989) pointed out that the elements of the inquiry learning process are 1) determining the credibility of sources and observations, 2) inferring and judging deductive conclusions, 3) definitions and identification of assumptions, 4) planning induction experiments and predicting probable consequences, 5) inferring and judging inductive conclusions, and 6) semantics. That is, the developments in thinking during the inquiry teaching process can improve the learners' critical thinking skills (Llewellyn, 2002), and indicating critical thinking can be activated by one's critical disposition, which implies having the required cognitive skills (Norris, 2003). This latter view is consistent support for the interplay of both a dispositional and a cognitive dimension (e.g., Ku & Ho, 2010; Macpherson & Stanovich, 2007). Thus, the relationship between critical attitude and CDCTP was hypothesized as follows:

H5

Critical attitude can positively predict CDCTP.

3.4. Research model
Moreno (2006) argued that affective factors mediate learning by impacting cognitive engagement, and Park et al. (2014) demonstrated that such an affective state can be beneficial to learning. To explore the interrelatedness among affective and cognitive factors, such as ATPOE, critical attitude, self-confidence, and CDCTP, the present study proposed the research model shown in Fig. 7.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (232KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Research model.

4. Method
In the present study, we used an experimental study and questionnaire survey to verify the research model. The details relevant to the procedure and participants are outlined below.

4.1. Procedure
The present study adapted an experimental study and administered Moon units for fifth graders to practice inquiry learning. This topic had not been previously taught by the teachers according to the school teaching schedule. Participants engaged in online learning with a tablet device and were required to complete it within 2 weeks at a time convenient to them (i.e., usually outside of regular class hours, for example, during the lunch break) and without the teacher's assistance. After the science questions were introduced in Enriched Thinking Cloud, the students attempted to define the problem and answer the questions.

Before the experiment, the participants were presented with an individual pre-quiz, and after each session of the experiment, a post-quiz was given to examine the cognitive dimension of their CT. In addition to a post-test, during the last session of the experimental study, a questionnaire relevant to ATPOE, self-confidence, and critical attitude was given to the research participants.

4.2. Participants
In this confirmatory study, fifth-grade students were selected as the research samples from three elementary schools in northern Taipei (i.e., one from a rural area, one from a suburban area, and one from the downtown area). The composition of participants included 30 students from the rural school and 75 students each from the suburban and downtown schools. A total of 180 students participated, and a questionnaire was distributed to every student. All but 17 of the 180 questionnaires were completed and returned, and the data from these 163 participants were subjected to confirmatory factor analysis with structural equation modeling. Based on the returned questionnaires, 95 participants (58.3%) were male and 68 (41.7%) were female; the average age was 10.2 years old.

4.3. Measurement
According to the literature review, in this study we developed questionnaire items that included self-confidence, ATPOE, and critical attitude to conduct confirmatory factor analysis. The questionnaire assessed three constructs using a 5-point Likert scale with response options ranging from completely agree (5) to completely disagree (1). The questionnaire items were adapted from previous theories or researchers and were obtained by professionally translating the original items into Chinese using the forward-backward method, which allows one to verify the accuracy and clarity of the translation to ensure face validity.

Self-confidence measurement: Self-confidence can be considered as state-like, which changes along with task-on-time (e.g., Fleeson, 2007). This study referred to Vealey's (1986) measurement of self-confidence, which stated that the degree of inquiry learning confidence is reflected in performance, and compared the difference in the participants' degree of confidence during their first engagement with learning science using Enriched Thinking Cloud to the degree of their confidence during the Enriched Thinking Cloud course.

Critical attitude measurement: The American Philosophical Association (APA, 1990) led a study to explore the notion of CT, and proposed 19 broad dispositions that critical thinkers are expected to possess. Drawing on the Delphi report, Facione and Facione (1992) proposed seven items of dispositional dimensions of CT (instead of the original 19), following an exploratory factor analysis. Thus, those items were referred to in this study for confirmatory factor analysis.

Attitude toward POE measurement: Remesal and Colomina (2013, p. 358) suggested that students may employ communication strategies that improve social presence and increase participation. Moreover, Jaime et al. (2013) argued that increasing participation eventually leads to more positive attitudes towards the learning environment or domain knowledge. Therefore, for the present study we designed a questionnaire to explore the effects of attitude towards POE online science learning as a subject-specific desired trait (McPeck, 1990).

4.4. Data analysis
To ensure the reliability and validity of a study, it is suggested that measurement reliability for reflective constructs be confirmed (MacKenzie et al., 2005). Therefore, the confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and goodness-of-fit (GoF) tests were utilized to determine the validity of all measurement items and the reliability of the first-order dimensions of the second-order constructs. Then, the partial least squares path modeling (PLS-SEM) was used to explore the influences according to the model. The GoF value of this model is 0.430, indicating a good GoFlarge model fit. Besides, the model fit testing result shows that SRMR = 0.06 and dUL = 0.34 for this model. As they are both less than 0.08, they meet the requirement (Henseler et al., 2016).

4.4.1. Scoring: using object identification theory to score critical ability
In order to identify students’ critical ability in this experiment, we referred to the object identification theory to develop the method to calculate their performance. In the theory of object identification (Leslie et al., 1998), object identification (OI) refers to the recognition of an object as a result of an object representation (OR); this is individualized identification. Following individualized identification, the identification requires a further step of entering information into the previously established OR (Káldy & Leslie, 2005); this is relationship identification. As a higher layer cognitive process of relationship identification, students are capable of identifying the relationships between objects according to different dimension features. Relationship identification is accomplished on the basis of the object-attribute-relation (OAR) model to interact with objects through searching, inferencing and so forth from identifying the perceptual objects (Wang, 2007).

Using OAR to correspond to two levels of object identification, the first OAR is subjected to attention with individual attributes; the second is linked to attention with relation based on the establishment of object representation (Critcher & Ferguson, 2011; Satpute et al., 2013). Moreover, relation may be simple or complex; thus, CT practice can be divided into three levels: (1) individual object identification (IOI); (2) simple attribute identification (SAI); and (3) complex relation identification (CRI), all of which affect students’ cognitive processes. According to the research design, in all three levels, the minimum score was zero; the highest possible scores of IOI, SAI, and CRI were 1, 2, and 3 points respectively. Based on this scoring scheme, the quiz was evaluated by three science teachers to ensure the consistency of the scoring (see Table 1).


Table 1. Examples of object-attribute-relation quiz items.

Type	True/False Questions
Single object identification (SOI)	Question statement: Taiwanese Lantern Festival is on January 15th of the Chinese lunar calendar; the full moon is supposedly at its brightest and roundest on this day.
Explanation: The earth orbits the sun and the moon orbits Earth. When the sun, earth and moon are in a straight line (i.e., 180°), this is when the moon is full (i.e., it is at its brightest and roundest). According to the Chinese lunar calendar, either the 15th or 16th of each month is the day of the full moon. Taiwanese Lantern Festival is always on January 15th of the lunar calendar, so this is why people believe the full moon is brightest and roundest on the day of Lantern Festival.
Simple attribute identification (SAI)	Question statement: On every December 31st, the brighter the fireworks, the clearer the moon.
Explanation: During every December 31st, the brighter the fireworks, the harder it would be for human eyes to see the moon because the brightness from the fireworks would cause the moon to appear more dull and blurry than the hazier moon.
Complex relation identification (CRI)	Question statement: Because the moon seems to be following me when I am riding my bike, the moon must be moving very fast. Thus, the moon is moving around Earth like I am.
Explanation: When we are riding on the street, we tend to see things next to us (e.g., power poles on the sidewalk) and we move past these objects next to us very quickly and they soon disappear from sight. However, our field of vision is limited in terms of a particular angle, so when an object is extremely far away (e.g., the moon), this object remains within our field of vision for longer because of the distance and angle. Therefore, we think that this object is following us.
Facione (1990b) defined CT as: “ …. purposeful, self-regulatory judgment which results in interpretation, analysis, evaluation, and inference … or contextual considerations upon which that judgment is based” (p. 3). As SAI and CRI are mental processes of judgment from context, this study addressed the ability of contextual object identification as the CT ability. Table 1 provides examples of the object-attribute-relation quiz items.

4.4.2. CDCTP analysis
It is often acknowledged that CT skills require time to develop (Dawson, 2008; Halpern, 2003b). In this study, the cognitive dimension of CT is a proxy for science reasoning, and indicates thought processes that require analysis and synthesis of information. In order to investigate the effect of CT in practicing inquiry science learning, we used a pre- and post-test with object identification theory as CDCTP, which required the students to recognize the errors within statements related to a Moon visualization.

In the scoring system, if the students could identify IOI and state it correctly, they scored 1 point for IOI; if they could identify SAI and state it correctly, they scored 1 point for SAI; and they scored 1 point for CRI for finding the CRI and providing the correct answer. For instance, a total of 2 points were given for finding SAI or a simple relation and providing the correct answer. Finally, if they could identify SAI or a complex relation, they scored a maximum of 3 points in each statement. Table 2 indicates that all three levels of object identification were improved by adapting POE inquiry practice.


Table 2. Critical thinking performance based on object identification.

Levels of	Pre-test	Post-test	t
CT	Minimum	Maximum	M	SD	Minimum	Maximum	M	SD
IOI	0	4.0	1.166	.8297	0	6.0	1.552	.9389	3.67***
SAI	0	3.0	1.574	1.0544	0	4.0	2.190	1.1348	2.33**
CRI	0	.5	.271	.2500	0	1.5	.387	.2682	2.17**
5. Results
The results were analyzed in three steps. In the first step, CDCTP was calculated by comparing the post-test scores to the pre-test scores. In the second step, the Visual PLS 1.04 software was used to test the reliability and validity of the questionnaire; and third, we explored the relationship between variables to verify the theoretical framework.

5.1. Reliability and validity analyses
First, internal consistency can be determined by the composite reliability (CR) of the constructs (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). All composite reliability values in the present study ranged from 0.91 to 0.93, which surpassed the suggested threshold value of 0.7 (Hair et al., 2009). Table 3 also shows that the mean values of each dimension were between 3.68 and 3.84, and the standard deviations were small, indicating a low degree of dispersion (Hair et al., 2009).


Table 3. Reliability and validity analyses.

Mean	SD	FL
Self-confidence: CR = .86, AVE = .77, α = .91, M = 3.68, SD = .95			
1. After practicing POE via Enriched Thinking Cloud, I have more confidence in my ability to master the science concepts.	3.68	.98	.83
2. After practicing POE via Enriched Thinking Cloud, I have more confidence in my ability to understand the cause-effect relationships of science principles.	3.69	.90	.95
3. After practicing POE via Enriched Thinking Cloud, I have more confidence in my ability to perform better on object identification.	3.67	.97	.86
Attitude towards POE: CR = .93, AVE = .70, α = .91, M = 3.84, SD = .86			
1. As compared to didactic-oriented learning, I prefer to use the Enriched Thinking Cloud inquiry learning system to learn new concepts.	4.04	.88	.84
2. I like to use the Enriched Thinking Cloud inquiry learning system to explore new domain knowledge.	3.81	.96	.86
3. When I engage in Enriched Thinking Cloud inquiry learning, I am always excited.	3.70	.83	.77
4. When I engage in Enriched Thinking Cloud inquiry learning, I feel that time passes by quickly.	3.77	.91	.82
5. Although it takes time to search for information, I still like to use the Enriched Thinking Cloud inquiry learning system.	3.91	.83	.86
6. I prefer to learn new information from POE online inquiry learning to printed materials.	3.81	.74	.86
Critical attitude: CR = .92, AVE = .65, α = .89, M = 3.77, SD = .85			
1. I like to work hard to critique science issues by searching the web.	3.78	.73	.76
2. I try to critique answers proposed by others on the website.	3.78	.85	.82
3. In order to gain more perspectives, I often post my questions on the website to evoke others' opinions.	3.86	.83	.87
4. I try to reason why others think differently if I do not agree with their point of view.	3.90	.99	.85
5. I like to critique others' opinions to help all participants understand science concepts more clearly.	3.69	.79	.73
6. I like to point out any conflicting issues on the website to enhance my understanding of science concepts.	3.59	.90	.81
Second, convergent validity refers to the degree to which multiple items measure one construct. Convergent validity in the present study was evaluated by verifying whether: (1) the average variance extracted (AVE) values were above 0.6 (Fornell & Larcker, 1981) and (2) the factor loadings (FL) of all items were significant and above 0.6. All of these conditions were met, indicating acceptable convergent validity (Hair et al., 2009).

Third, to evaluate the consistency of the variables, the reliability of the questionnaire was assessed using Cronbach's α. According to Hancock, and Mueller (2013), a Cronbach's α value above 0.6 indicates an acceptable level of reliability. Table 3 shows that all Cronbach's α values were above 0.6. The results indicated that the alpha values for the three constructs were 0.91, 0.89 and 0.86, respectively, which suggests that the variables were reliable (Byrne, 2001). In addition, Table 3 shows that all factor loadings were statistically significant (i.e., above 0.7) and ranged from 0.73 to 0.95.

5.2. Path analysis
Structural equation modeling (SEM) has evolved into a mature and popular methodology for investigating model-derived structural hypotheses (Hershberger, 2003). Fig. 8 shows the results of the path relationship among the hypotheses with Visual PLS 1.04. According to Hamdan et al. (2011), it is evident that Hypotheses 1 through 5 were validated. In this study, GoF (Goodness of Fit) value was used to measure the model fit. The GoF value of this model is 0.430, indicating a good GoFlarge model fit (Wetzels et al., 2009). Besides, the model fit testing result shows that SRMR = 0.06 and dUL = 0.34 for this model. As these values are less than 0.08, they meet the requirement (Henseler et al., 2016). Fig. 8 shows that ATPOE positively predicts self-confidence (β = 0.725, t = 15.552***), ATPOE positively predicts critical attitude (β = 0.483, t = 5.052***), self-confidence positively predicts CDCTP (β = 0.212, t = 2.080*), critical attitude positively predicts self-confidence (β = 0.258, t = 2.280*), and critical attitude positively predicts CDCTP (β = 0.236, t = 2.710*), with standard regression coefficients (SRC). According to Chin (2007), the values of SRC were above the 0.001 significant level, indicating that the five hypotheses were supported.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (268KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Verification of the research model.

The direct effect from ATPOE to self-confidence was 0.725, and the indirect effect of self-confidence through critical attitude was 0.102. The direct effect from ATPOE to critical attitude was 0.483. The direct effect from self-confidence and critical attitude to CDCTP was .258 and .236. The indirect effect from ATPOE through self-confidence to CDCTP was .187. The indirect effect from ATPOE through critical attitude and self-confidence to CDCTP was .103. Finally, the indirect effect from ATPOE through critical attitude to CDCTP was .114.

In addition, the explanation power (R2) of ATPOE for self-confidence was 48.1%; the explanation power of ATPOE on critical attitude toward using Enriched Thinking Cloud was 52.6%; and the explanation power of self-confidence and critical attitude on CDCTP was 26.1%. These values were more than the recommended threshold value of 10% proposed by Falk and Miller (1992). Therefore, all variables of this research had good predictive power (Hair et al., 2012). Besides, the f2 effect size is used to estimate the model with constructs; it is 0.07 for this model which is interpreted as a small f2 effect size (Hair et al., 2017).

6. Discussion
Mamun et al. (2020) found that minimal guided inquiry learning did not benefit learners, while scaffolding did. On the other hand, more is not always better (Teig et al., 2018). To address this difference, the present study enriched the distinctions between the two aspects of CT (i.e., cognitive skills and disposition) to determine the depth of students’ attitudes toward CT (Stapleton, 2011). Based on CATML, the hypotheses between ATPOE, critical attitude, self-confidence and CDCTP were verified and are illustrated below.

Hypothesis 1 was proposed to test the prediction of ATPOE to self-confidence. The result indicated that the prediction was positively supported. Students' ATPOE has been found to predict their online learning experiences and skills (Schumacher & Morahan-Martin, 2001). Moreover, Heijltjes et al. (2014) and Marin and Halpern (2011) supported this assertion and indicated that an inquiry learning environment and students’ attitudes toward exploring knowledge can activate confidence of reasoning during CT practice.

Hypothesis 2 was proposed to test the prediction of ATPOE to critical attitude, and the result revealed that the prediction was positively supported. As online learners’ attitude is a major factor affecting their attitudes toward thinking practice (Liaw et al., 2007), the results of this study revealed that students with a high level of ATPOE also had a high level of critical attitude. This result supports those studies by Şendağ and Ferhan (2009), and Newby and Bill (2008), who found that ATPOE had a significant effect on improving CT skills and attitudes.

Hypothesis 3 was proposed to test the prediction of critical attitude to self-confidence. The result indicated that high CT disposition scores can positively predict students' high self-confidence ratings. This is supported by Brown and Chronister (2009) and Heijltjes et al. (2014) who investigated the impact of CT dispositions and instructions on students' reasoning skills. They found that dispositions predicted reasoning skills that enhanced students' self-confidence with instructions on performance. The present study followed the evolution of students’ critical attitude in practicing self-confidence in Enriched Thinking Cloud to science inquiry learning, and revealed their ability to identify those errors in the quiz statements and to give correct reasons; this consequently challenged their understanding of science domain knowledge and promoted their consciousness of self.

Hypothesis 4 was proposed to test the prediction of self-confidence to CDCTP. Results of studies measuring self-confidence gained through media learning have been fairly consistent in showing a positive prediction of CT development (e.g., González-González et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2008). Jeffries and Rizzolo (2006) found that students have a significantly greater degree of confidence in their ability to perform through online learning. As shown through the example of the position of the Moon, Enriched Thinking Cloud encouraged students to reason and to solve science problems, and the present study showed that students’ self-confidence can positively predict their CDCTP.

Hypothesis 5 was proposed to test the prediction of critical attitude to CDCTP. The present study found that by using Enriched Thinking Cloud, the average of students' critical attitude was moderately high (M = 3.77, SD = 0.85). The affective dimension of CT can positively predict the cognitive dimension of CT, where key CT usually includes the ability to recognize the points of issues, make inferences, and evaluate arguments (e.g., American Philosophical Association, 1990, p. 315423; Halpern, 2003b). This is consistent with the study of Bensley and Spero (2014), who suggested that effectively infusing CT into students’ course work through critical arguments can ensure CT development.

7. Conclusion
To explore how critical thinking attitude and ability can be developed in online inquiry science learning, the present study designed a website called Enriched Thinking Cloud for fifth-grade students to engage in science inquiry learning. The results revealed that increasing ATPOE will increase students’ critical attitude and self-confidence, which in turn increases performance of attribute, relation identification, and error correction. Taken together, the findings of this study provide a principal contribution. Enriched Thinking Cloud provides a form of CT practice and paves the way for students to enhance their science inquiry learning. Thus, such a system can be considered as an effective learning tool.

This study underscores the importance of relational dynamics in critical attitude and self-confidence concerning CT practice. The results discussed here show that when students with strong critical attitude have a high degree of self-confidence as the basis of using Enriched Thinking Cloud, they perform better on the CT quiz. In this regard, critical attitude (M = 3.77, SD = 0.85) showed an above average level, which is an important implication for teachers using Enriched Thinking Cloud, as it may be expected to influence students’ critical disposition.

The findings of this study suggest that students' CT ability improved by using Enriched Thinking Cloud, and this result also indicated how both students' ATPOE and critical attitude enhance their self-confidence in learning science (M = 3.68, SD = 0.95) after practicing inquiry-based science learning. In line with this, educators can design additional online inquiry-based science learning content based on the POE model to provide more effective learning and to promote students’ critical attitude and ability in online science learning.

8. Limitations and future study
Several promising areas of future research are suggested by this study. First, this research provides a better understanding of why students can have better CT skills based on object identification levels in the context of science inquiry learning. According to the exemplary definition, CT is based on intellectual transaction to subject matter divisions: clarity, accuracy, precision, consistency, relevance, sound evidence, good reasons, depth, breadth, and fairness (González-González et al., 2014). However, by using object identification related to judgment, this study was limited to asking students to practice the above transactions. Future studies may apply this transacted definition to develop the science learning and to identify how critical attitude and ability can promote students’ science learning.

Second, while different conceptualizations of CT have shed considerable light on the nature and meaning of CT, at the same time, it is often acknowledged that CT skills require time to develop (Dawson, 2008; Halpern, 2003b; Kuhn, 1999). The results of this study are limited to those participants who used Enriched Thinking Cloud to learn science concepts related to the moon. Future studies may involve using Enriched Thinking Cloud to learn different science concepts, such as how plants grow, to examine the change in critical attitude and ability.

Kuo et al. (in press) compared male and female students’ motivation and engagement in guided inquiry science learning, and found that males benefited more than females in terms of their motivation and engagement in learning science from the inquiry approach. However, gender difference was not compared in this study. Future studies may consider the learning effect of using Enriched Thinking Cloud on male and female students as they are involved in practicing critical thinking.

