In recent years, due to the advancement of digital learning and flipped learning (FL, a student-centered approach that reverses traditional pedagogy by providing students with content usually taught in class for their learning in advance), there have been some major changes in teaching models for various disciplines. Learning can be ubiquitous through utilization of technology so teaching is no longer limited by time, space, psychological state, or geopolitical borders. This is helpful for learners to form a habit of lifelong learning. In this study, we applied technology and the strategy of digital instruction to dance curricula, integrating blended learning (BL, which combines online and face-to-face classes) and FL for the purpose of making comparisons with the traditional teaching method (C). A 10-week experiment was performed with 290 participants from 6 amateur dance classes. The researchers investigated, via quasi-experiments, the effects of BL and FL on developing students' learning effects and physical activity class satisfaction in this online dance course. A 2 (Taiwanese students vs. foreign students) × 3 (BL vs. FL vs. C) design, as well as factorial pretest/posttest design, was employed in this experiment. The selected course for the experiment is titled “Physical Education: Dance”, a one-semester, required course for the four involved classes of students at a comprehensive university. All students in this study came from non-dance departments. The purpose of this experiment was to explore the influences of different teaching methods on the effectiveness of learning dance skills among Taiwanese and foreign students as well as their satisfaction with this approach in a physical activity course. The results and conclusions of this research are that, compared to those taught with the traditional method, the Taiwanese students taught with the BL approach achieved higher learning effects in dance skills and were more satisfied in the aspects of cognitive development, fun, degree of enjoyment, diversified experience, and degree of relaxation in this physical activity course. Moreover, compared to those taught with the traditional method, the ones taught with the FL approach were more satisfied in the aspects of teacher's instruction, cognitive development, physical health condition, improvement in physical capability, diversified experience, and degree of relaxation. As for the foreign students, compared to those taught with the traditional method, the ones taught with the BL approach or the FL approach achieved higher learning effects in dance skills. However, there was no significant difference found in their satisfaction with this physical activity course. Finally, this study suggests that teachers who teach dance-related classes consider integrating the BL approach or the FL approach based on the backgrounds and characteristics of their students, in order to improve their learning effects and increase their satisfaction with various aspects of physical activities.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Cultural and social implications

Distance education and online learning

Media in education

Teaching/learning strategies

1. Introduction
In teaching, the most direct impact of the advancement of technology is the influence on students' focus in class. Based on attaining educational goals, one of the issues teachers are concerned with is how to prevent their students from being engrossed in their smart phones and the Internet while in class. Teachers should make good use of digital technology to create higher learning flexibility and better learning effects for their students. For dance courses in universities, classes with many students but just one teacher are common. Each student can receive a very limited amount of guidance and attention from their teacher. There are also limitations on classroom space and students' line of vision, so that students may not be able to see their teacher's demonstration clearly and they may be too embarrassed to ask their teacher questions (Hsia, Huang, & Hwang, 2016b). Therefore, the current common goals for schools and teachers regarding improving students' learning effects are to apply online learning and develop educational technology (Tsai, Shen, Chiang, & Lin, 2017). In higher education in Taiwan, more and more institutions are encouraging their faculty to teach online. Most faculty members are more likely to prefer blended learning (BL), which combines online and offline classes (Klimova, 2021), or flipped learning (FL), which refers to a learner-centered teaching strategy that promotes participation by providing learning content that students must review, review, or learn before class (Park & Kim, in press), over distance learning as a starting point for the transition of their teaching models (Bojović, Bojović, Vujošević, & Šuh, 2020). In addition, it is indicated that FL can not only improve the teaching in dance education, but also facilitate students' dance performance (Lin, Hsia, & Hwang, 2021; Ma & Guo, 2019). Moreover, it also found that more and more teachers apply technology in their dance courses (e.g. Hsia & Hwang, 2020; Lin et al., 2021). Thus, the authors in this study integrated educational technology with FL and BL in a dance course, and investigated their effects on enhancing learning performance and satisfaction of students from different socio-cultural backgrounds.

According to some published studies, BL (Berga et al., 2021; Chango, Cerezo, & Romero, 2021; Yang, Carter Jr, Zhang, & Hunt, 2021) and FL (Chiang, Yang, & Yin, 2019; Hsia, Hwang, & Lin, in press; Lin, Hsia, Sung, & Hwang, 2018; Roach, 2014) are proven to have positive influences on students' learning effects and satisfaction. Kirch (2012) and Hsia et al. (in press) suggested that, when using FL, if the Watch-Summary-Question (WSQ) approach can be applied to guide students to pay attention to key points, make summaries, and ask questions while watching a video, it would be helpful in the aspect of dance skills to improve students' knowledge of choreography, techniques, performance skills, and overall capabilities. Moreover, Lin et al. (2018) argued that if FL is adopted in an inappropriate way, it may not result in positive influence on students’ learning effects.

However, in the aspect of dance instruction, past studies focused more on the learning effects in relation to FL. Through BL, students can receive their teacher's instruction online and they are more likely to have a chance for face-to-face discussions with their teacher. Compared to students in pure online learning without any chance for face-to-face discussions, learning effects in BL are higher (Shea & Bidjerano, 2012). Some studies have proven that BL is better than the traditional teaching method in terms of effectiveness (Ever & Dimililer, 2018; Ghazizadeh & Fatemipour, 2017; Shorey et al., 2018; Ustun & Tracey, 2020), yet most of the related studies focused on teaching academic subjects. There are very few studies available on dance instruction in physical education, which is one of the key issues discussed by our study.

Furthermore, this study explored the differences in learning effects on students of different nationalities in different learning environments (with BL, FL, and traditional teaching methods). Overall, in this study, there were three dance classes completely taught in English and three in Chinese. Over 20% of the participants taught in English were foreign students from various countries around the world while the rest were Taiwanese students. Therefore, besides exploring the influences of integrating technology and the strategy of digital teaching on learning effects and satisfaction with a dance course among university students, as the participants were from different backgrounds, this study further discussed the influences of nationalities and cultural backgrounds on how the students used technology and the digital learning platform. For this reason, this study is the first pragmatic study on a university dance course to take three learning models and different student backgrounds into consideration.

The purpose of this research was to explore the effects of different teaching methods on the learning performance of dance skills among Taiwanese and foreign students as well as their satisfaction with this approach in a physical activity course. The research questions are listed below.

In the aspect of dance skill learning effects:

(1)
Could BL or FL lead to students having better learning effects in dance skills compared with those who received traditional teaching method?

(2)
For Taiwanese students, which teaching method is the most effective and appropriate?

(3)
For foreign students, which teaching method is the most effective and appropriate?

In the aspect of satisfaction with this physical activity dance course:

(1)
Would students who received BL or FL be more satisfied with this physical activity course than those received traditional teaching method?

(2)
Which teaching method is most effective in improving Taiwanese students' satisfaction with this physical activity course?

(3)
Which teaching method is most effective in improving foreign students' satisfaction with this physical activity course?

2. Literature review
2.1. Teaching characteristics of dance courses
The original meaning of “dance” is “extension” and “tension”. It is an art that allows the body to move with feeling. Through dance, body movements can be extended to form different series of combinations for the purpose of communicating or expressing emotions. According to Encyclopaedia Britannica, “dance is the movement of the body in a rhythmic way, usually to music and within a given space, for the purpose of expressing an idea or emotion, releasing energy, or simply taking delight in the movement itself.” Dance is a kind of full-body coordination exercise, focusing on the accuracy and precision of movements (Hsia, Huang, Hwang, & Wei, 2015). Thus, both dance instruction and physical education instruction are unique in their own ways. Traditionally, when teaching dance, the teacher gives descriptions and demonstrates movements to guide the students to experience the essence of dance skills. And then, through repeated practices of movements, the students can memorize the rhythms and movements of the choreography. Although improving skills and techniques is still the main goal of dance education, students must learn not only how to apply skills and techniques in class but also how to perform higher level art with them (Lin et al., 2018). Therefore, besides practicing over and over to master dance skills, students also need to develop their own distinguishing dance characteristics (Sööt &Viskus, 2014), ability of self-examination (Leijen, Valtna, Leijen, & Pedaste, 2012), creativity, and ability of adding value (Sööt & Leijen, 2012). Dance courses are categorized as physical education courses as they involve learning physical techniques and skills. The difference between them and courses of other subjects is that movement skills are included in the teaching process of dance courses. The first step of learning a movement is to receive information in order to perform the movement. The learner must observe and imitate. Through repeated practice, the learner would be able to internalize the movements learned and those movements would become natural reactions. Skills are learned through practice and accumulating experiences. The process of learning dance is composed of the cognitive phase, the associative phase, and the autonomous phase. Thus, in an activity for dance instruction, the teacher must focus on explanation, movement decomposition, and movement demonstration. However, a previous study on information processing indicated that short-term memories lasting for less than 3 s are easily forgotten. Consequently, applying novel learning approaches and strategies is a challenge that all dance teachers must face (Lin et al., 2018). As a result, a learning environment integrating digital teaching materials with teaching aids is of extra importance. The teacher can make instructional videos for students to preview before the class or review afterwards. Moreover, with the convenience of digital technology, besides teaching them skills, the teacher can pass on correct health knowledge and sports science information to students in order to improve their self-learning capability and increase their desire to seek knowledge, to approach the originally set teaching goals and expected learning effects.

2.2. Digital learning and the use of mobile technology
The development of mobile learning, smart phones, and computers has facilitated changes in teaching models in all disciplines. With the application of technology, teaching is no longer limited by time, space, psychological state, or geopolitical borders. This way, one can learn anywhere and form the habit of lifetime learning (Xu, 2019). Many domestic and foreign universities have built their own online teaching platforms in recent years, making use of the features of the Internet and digitalization to provide learners an interactive and personalized learning channel that is not limited by time and space for autonomous learning (Cornali & Cavaletto, 2020; Rapanta, Botturi, Goodyear, Guàrdia, & Koole, 2020).

One of the fastest growing trends in technical education is online learning (Kalpokaite & Radivojevic, 2020). It has been shown that students learn new knowledge through instructional videos which include both auditory and visual content (Lehmann, 2019). In this way, the limited time in class can be mainly used for teaching activities employing two-way interaction or communication, such as practices, problem solving and discussions, to increase learning effects and carry out the idea of learner-centered education (Shen, Wu, & Lee, 2017). Moreover, with digital materials, learners can learn repeatedly anytime, anywhere. It is a good opportunity for them to adjust their learning pace (Lai, Hwang, & Tu, 2018), which is one of the features of digital instruction.

New opportunities have been emerging for digital learning in physical education. With the functions of modern mobile devices, teaching content can be expanded, and quality and efficiency of the teaching process can be improved, benefitting both the teacher and the students (Pan, 2017). Many studies focus on the influences of developing visualization teaching tools and multimedia equipment on movement learning and related applications (Lan, Wang, & Chen, 2010). Thus, teachers and researchers in the fields of physical education and education have also paid much attention to studies on the application of technology in physical education courses (Dania, Hatziharistos, Koutsouba, & Tyrovola, 2011; Hastie, Casey, & Tarter, 2010; Papastergiou, 2010).

In actual teaching practice, over half of students (53%) were found to like to acquire knowledge online, and over 58% of students believed that teaching through the Internet helped to improve their learning effects (Yang & Tsai, 2002). Currently, in Taiwan, university students’ concepts regarding online learning can be categorized into the following categories: information search (30%), self-regulated learning (25%), increasing knowledge (18%), review (12%), one-way learning (10%), and comprehension (5%) (Shen et al., 2017). Based on the research findings discussed above, students do prefer digital instruction which is beyond the traditional teaching framework and can expand their international views. Thus, it can be inferred that adopting the model preferred by students for teaching should be able to efficiently increase their learning motivation and improve their learning effects. This is a good way for teachers to achieve their teaching goals effectively (Lin & Chang, 2012).

Although there have been many studies suggesting that teaching sports with the help of technology and media may improve students' learning effectiveness, there are still disadvantages. For example, when there is no movement decomposition or demonstration from various angles of view in a teaching design, students' learning of movement essentials and details may be influenced (Leser, Baca, & Uhlig, 2011). The presentation of the teaching content is only associated with students' self-control of learning progress and observation of movements from different angles. The problem is that there is no real-time feedback (Hung, Huang, & Chen, 2015), which is very important for new learners. When new learners learn a new movement for the first time, their learning model tends to be observing their teacher's demonstration while physically practicing the movement. They are not familiar with the process of the movement as well as what needs to be done in the process. They can only observe by watching the videos of the movement. When they are not able to monitor their own movement and make corresponding adjustments, it will be difficult to improve their learning effects (Shea, Wright, Wulf, & Whitacre, 2000).

There is only limited time in a physical education course. If cognition, affection, and skills must all be taken into consideration, how can a teacher pass on health information, in addition to skills, to students efficiently before, during, and after class? In this case, the use of mobile technology is of extra importance. With digital teaching materials, students can preview before the class. Then, by integrating BL, FL, innovative teaching design with in-class interactions, teaching activities with two-way communication can truly be implemented to increase students' learning effects. In this model, students must shoulder the responsibility of learning and the teacher's function may shift from dominating to guiding and assisting with their learning, which is the core spirit of teaching.

As previously described, it is still not clear whether integrating teaching methods using digital technology into university physical education curricula would influence students' learning effects. Using online dance training in dance classes is a promising direction (You, in press). Especially for regular dance classes in higher education, it is popular for students to learn dance by watching dance demonstration videos (Li, Zhou, & Teo, 2018). In addition, whether these methods would influence students' satisfaction with the teaching is also an issue this study would like to address. Therefore, this study aims to explore whether integrating digital teaching or distance teaching into a university physical education curriculum would positively influence students’ learning effects (in the aspects of cognition, affection, and skills) and their satisfaction with a physical activity course.

2.3. Blended learning
BL is highly valued in various fields (Bruggeman et al., 2021). This research field has been very active in recent years, with many papers published, now known as the most recognized teaching mode in the world (Rasheed, Kamsin, & Abdullah, 2020). It is a teaching approach that combines technology-based learning and face-to-face learning, as well as a diversified teaching model that facilitates learning (Yen & Lee, 2011). By adopting BL for a course, a part of the traditional classroom framework can be replaced with a learning environment based on the concept of a virtual classroom (Madison, 2013). The integration of the Internet with the face-to-face teaching model results in great advantages (Nguyen, 2017; Wai & Seng, 2015). However, unlike the traditional teaching methods with demonstrations, there is no teachers' on-the-spot monitoring in online learning. It requires students to be highly concentrated with very high self-regulation capability (Anthonysamy, Koo, & Hew, 2020; Zhu, Au, & Yates, 2016). This is a great challenge for teachers. So far, there is no standard or definition regarding the appropriate number of sessions and frequency for online courses. In practice, teachers often decide to teach 30%–80% of their course online. There has been research showing that students' learning effects can be increased by 5%–10% through using BL instead of face-to-face learning. In BL, the key to success is students’ active learning, meaning that they do not completely rely on what their teacher has taught them to acquire new knowledge.

There are still disadvantages and limitations of adopting BL. For example: (1) There are basic requirements for digital learning. Students must have 3C devices, Internet access, and information literacy to be able to start learning using information technology in a short time. (2) Learners must have the capability of autonomous learning. For students not enthusiastic about learning, this is a good chance to goof off (Tsai, Shen, & Tsai, 2011). (3) Technology may lead to the feeling of distance. Teachers need better communication techniques to reduce this feeling. Thus, this study aims to explore whether students learning through BL would achieve better learning results (in the aspects of cognition, affection, and skills) and have higher satisfaction for a physical activity course.

2.4. Flipped learning
FL is a learning approach with pre-recorded teaching materials (for teaching of knowledge and skills) available for students to prepare before the class (Kraut, 2015), so that they can preview or learn on their own according to their needs and there will be more time during the class for more activities such as practices and interactions among peers or with the teacher (Danker, 2015; Lo, Hew, & Chen, 2017; Smith, 2015), in order to develop higher-level cognitive process and to master skills (Hwang, Lai, & Wang, 2015). More and more attention has been paid to this approach in the recent years. However, there have not been many real cases of applying FL to teaching of physical education, or dance, as this kind of application is still in the initial stage (Lin et al., 2018). FL helps to develop students' problem-solving capability and high-level thinking capability (Heo & Chun, 2017) with rather good teaching effects (Chang & Hwang, 2018; Chiang et al., 2019; Hwang & Lai, 2017). Moreover, if the teacher can teach students how to appreciate dance pieces and criticize each other's performances, it would be helpful to facilitate students' self-examination capability and improve their learning performances (Hsia et al., 2015; Hsia, Huang, & Hwang, 2016a). However, there may be students who are not willing to spend extra time learning before the class. Teachers' ability to prepare online teaching materials is also an issue. And there are negative voices regarding the extra loading in terms of time and money (Lo et al., 2017). Therefore, this study aims to explore the influences on the students of applying FL to a dance course. In other words, it discusses whether the students learning through FL would achieve better learning effects (in the aspects of cognition, affection, and skills) and have higher satisfaction with this physical activity course.

3. Material and methods
3.1. Experimental design
The purpose of this study was to investigate the influences of three different instructional models (BL, FL, and traditional teaching methods) on the dance performance and satisfaction with the physical activity portion of a university dance course among students of different nationalities at a university in Taiwan.

Participating students were divided into six groups for this study based on their nationality, the language of instruction and the instructional model applied. Local Taiwanese students with Chinese as the Medium of Instruction (CMI) comprised three groups, while foreign students with English as the Medium of Instruction (EMI) comprised another three groups. The first group comprised Taiwanese students who adopted BL, the second Taiwanese students who adopted FL and the third group Taiwanese students who received traditional instruction. The fourth group comprised Foreign students who adopted BL, the fifth group Foreign students who adopted FL, and the sixth group Foreign students who received traditional instruction. Fig. 1 shows the experimental group arrangement.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (104KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The experimental group arrangement.

3.2. Participants
A total of 290 students from 6 different dance classes (3 EMI classes and 3 CMI classes) taught by the same teacher participated in this study. Though from different departments, their backgrounds, current learning phases, and learning abilities were similar. The students averaged 18–20 years of age. The three EMI classes were randomly assigned as the blended learning group (BL group), flipped learning group (FL group), and control group that received the traditional teaching method group (C group). And the same assignment process was performed for the three CMI classes. Before the experiment began, all the participants understood the process of this study and completed an informed consent form. The demographic information of the participants is summarized in Table 1.


Table 1. Summary of participants’ demographic information.

Group	Taiwanese students (n)	Foreign students (n)	Age (yr)
BL	96	28	19.78 ± 1.35
FL	68	21	19.78 ± 1.38
C	58	19	18.69 ± 1.38
3.3. Learning activity design and experimental process
All the participants in this study took the same dance course (2 h a session, one session a week for ten weeks) and were taught by the same faculty member. There were exams, questionnaires, and interviews during this period of experimental instruction. During the first week, the teacher illustrated the process of the experiment, asked the participants to sign the informed consent, explained how to use the interfaces of the TronClass teaching platform, grouped the students into peer teams (5–8 students per team, 10–15 teams per class, with students choosing their own teammates freely), and performed a pre-test with a questionnaire. From the second week to the sixth week, the faculty member taught the classes using the teaching methods previously determined. The teams rehearsed during the seventh and eighth weeks. In the ninth week, the learning effect test was conducted. The teams had to evaluate each other and fill the post-test questionnaire. The data were uploaded to the TronClass teaching platform so that the teacher could offer feedback. Lastly, in the tenth week, a sampling was conducted and the selected students were interviewed. The total length of the teaching experiment was ten weeks. Fig. 2 shows the teaching and experimental process.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (323KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The teaching and experimental process.

The students from the BL and FL groups could use the TronClass course website and could access the videos of the digital teaching materials and learning activities related to this course. The records of the students’ clicks on the platform were used to monitor their learning progresses for the sake of follow-up face-to-face teaching and to control the precision of the experiment.

Based on the suggestions of Tsai et al. (2011), the students from the BL groups had a face-to-face session after completing each online learning session, so that the teacher could adjust their learning schedules according to their progress and test results. Therefore, the teacher alternated between an online session and a face-to-face session every other week. The students from the FL groups could receive the teaching content, related videos, and activity information every week before class through the TronClass teaching platform, so that they could make preparation before the face-to-face session in the classroom. After every session, they would receive the videos related to that session for the purpose of review. The students from the C groups were taught using the traditional face-to-face teaching method without any teaching materials or videos. Table 2 provides brief descriptions of the teaching models applied to the groups.


Table 2. Brief description of the teaching models applied to the groups.

Group	Entity face-to-face course	Online non-synchronized course	Digital teaching material	Digital learning activities	Homework
BL	V	V	V	V	V
FL	V	N	V	V	V
C	V	N	N	N	N
∗V = Executed; N = Not executed.

3.4. Measurements
3.4.1. Dance skills learning effectiveness test scoring method
Because the degree of difficulty differs from dance piece to dance piece, for the purpose of consistency, some songs were specifically selected for teaching and exams for this teaching experiment. The students were only allowed to choreograph the solo parts of the songs. Moreover, some professional dance teachers were hired to grade the students' performances on site, rather than the course instructor grading them. The students' performances for the exams were recorded and uploaded to the TronClass platform to make sure that their skills and learning effects were assessed objectively. As they learned more, they had to display their own and their team's various capabilities (mastery of movements, choreography, formation, teamwork, etc.) in the exams. Their performances in various aspects were graded based on well thought-out pre-defined assessment rubrics.

The grading criteria for group dance performances used in this study were based on the criteria proposed by Rcampus (2017). A 5-point scale was applied (with 5 points = perfect; 4 points = good; 3 points = acceptable; 2 points = partially acceptable; 1 point = minimally acceptable). The aspects being graded included knowledge of choreography, technical skills, performance skills, and music and rhythm.

3.4.2. Physical activity class satisfaction
The questionnaire used in this study to explore the students’ satisfaction with this physical activity course was the Physical Activity Class Satisfaction Questionnaire (PACSQ) designed by Cunningham (2007). It comprises 32 items in total for nine factors, namely Teaching, Normative Success, Cognitive Development, Mastery Experiences, Fun and Enjoyment, Improvement of Health and Fitness, Diversionary Experiences, Relaxation, and Interaction with Others, with a 7-point Likert scale (from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). The overall reliability of the questionnaire is 0.78.

3.4.3. Interviews with students
After the course was over, focus group interviews were conducted. Each team (for the exams) was considered as a unit. For each class, students of different races were sampled randomly to be interviewed after they completed their learning. About 20 students were selected from each class for an interview lasting for 10–15 min. The interviews were recorded and then transcribed for follow-up analyses. The interviews were conducted based on these questions: (1) What were the students' original habits when it came to learning dance? (2) Was there any influence on the convenience of learning after comparing the perception of the students from different classes with different teaching models? (3) What were the most common difficulties encountered while learning dance through watching the digital teaching materials? How were these difficulties solved? (4) Were the students’ learning habits changed? Fig. 3 is a side shot from a live recording of one interview.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (811KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. A side shot from a live recording of one interview.

3.5. TronClass teaching platform environment
The TronClass teaching platform used in this study was developed by Taiwan Wisdom Garden. It is an immersive and interactive teaching management platform focusing on teachers, students, and academic administration. Students can connect to the Internet using their digital devices such as smart phones, iPads, and PCs and log in with the student IDs and passwords they created for the online teaching platform for autonomous learning and accessing information related to instructional activities. Fig. 4 shows the TronClass teaching platform interface.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (902KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The TronClass teaching platform interface.

4. Results
4.1. Influences of different teaching models on the learning effects of students of different nationalities
This study applied ANOVA and discovered that there were significant differences in dance skills learning effects among different teaching models for both the Taiwanese students (F = 7.841, p = .001 < 0.05) and the foreign students (F = 7.376, p = .001 < 0.05). The results of the Scheffe post hoc comparisons showed that when it came to learning dance skills, for the Taiwanese students, the learning effects of the BL group were better than the FL group (p = .025 < 0.05) and the C group (p = .001 < 0.05) (see Table 3). As for the foreign students, the learning effects of the BL group (p = .016 < 0.05) and the FL group (p = .016 < 0.05) were both better than the C group (p = .002 < 0.05) (see Table 4).


Table 3. The effect of different teaching methods on the dance skills of Taiwanese students.

Groups	N	Mean	SD	F	Post hoc test (Scheffe)
BL	96	17.90	2.16	7.841*	BL > FL; BL > C
FL	68	16.87	1.95		
C	58	16.43	3.07		
*p < .05.


Table 4. The effect of different teaching methods on the dance skills of overseas students.

Groups	N	Mean	SD	F	Post hoc test (Scheffe)
BL	28	17.14	2.14	7.376*	BL > C; FL > C
FL	21	17.67	1.91		
C	19	15.47	1.39		
*p < .05.

4.2. Influences of different teaching models on the satisfaction with a physical activity course among students of different nationalities
4.2.1. Taiwanese students
ANOVA was applied to explore the satisfaction with the physical activity course among the Taiwanese students from the groups taught with different teaching models. The results showed that there was no significant difference in three of the aspects or variables, namely Normative Success (F = 2.631, p = .074 > 0.05), Mastery Experiences (F = 1.441, p = .239 > 0.05), and Interaction with Others (F = 2.400, p = .093 > 0.05). The other 6 aspects or variables, namely Teaching (F = 3.146, p = .045 < 0.05), Cognitive Development (F = 5.208, p = .006 < 0.05), Fun and Enjoyment (F = 4.885, p = .008 < 0.05), Improvement of Health & Fitness (F = 3.303, p = .039 < 0.05), Diversionary Experience (F = 3.954, p = .021 < 0.05), and Relaxation (F = 5.436, p = .005 < 0.05), were significantly different (see Table 5).


Table 5. The effects of different teaching methods on Taiwanese students’ physical activity class satisfaction.

Factors	Groups	N	Mean	SD	F	Post hoc test (Scheffe)
Teaching	BL	96	18.20	2.93	3.146*	FL > C
FL	68	18.54	2.54		
C	58	17.28	3.27		
Normative Success	BL	96	17.20	3.35	2.631	–
FL	68	17.15	3.14		
C	58	16.03	3.27		
Cognitive Development	BL	96	29.67	4.98	5.208*	BL > C
FL	68	29.43	4.97		FL > C
C	58	26.97	6.12		
Mastery Experiences	BL	96	15.32	4.54	1.441	–
FL	68	15.50	3.97		
C	58	14.33	3.75		
Fun and Enjoyment	BL	96	17.90	3.23	4.885*	BL > C
FL	68	17.57	3.11		
C	58	16.24	3.45		
Improvement of Health & Fitness	BL	96	29.36	5.55	3.303*	FL > C
FL	68	29.91	4.78		
C	58	27.57	5.53		
Diversionary Experiences	BL	96	23.65	4.31	3.954*	BL > C
FL	68	23.56	4.17		
C	58	21.71	4.91		
Relaxation	BL	96	17.43	3.25	5.436*	BL > C
FL	68	17.68	3.06		FL > C
C	58	15.83	4.01		
Interaction with Others	BL	96	18.10	2.94	2.400	–
FL	68	17.69	3.10		
C	58	17.00	3.09		
*p < .05.

Then, the Scheffe post hoc comparisons were performed for the aspects with significant differences. The results showed that in the aspect of teaching, FL group was not significantly better than the C group (p = .054 > 0.05). In the aspect of Cognitive Development, BL group (p = .010 < 0.05) and FL group (p = .036 < 0.05) were both significantly better than the C group. In the aspect of Fun and Enjoyment, BL group (p = .010 < 0.05) was significantly better than the C group. In the aspect of Improvement of Health & Fitness, FL group (p = .050 < 0.05) was significantly better than the C group. In the aspect of Diversionary Experiences, BL group (p = .033 < 0.05) was significantly better than the C group. In the aspect of Relaxation, BL group (p = .020 < 0.05) and FL group (p = .011 < 0.05) were both significantly better than the C group (see Table 5).

4.2.2. Foreign students
ANOVA was applied to explore the satisfaction with the physical activity program of the foreign students from the groups taught with different teaching models. The results showed that there were no significant differences in any of the aspects or variables, namely Teaching (F = 0.535, p = .588 > 0.05), Normative Success (F = 0.103, p = .903 > 0.05), Cognitive Development (F = 0.615, p = .554 > 0.05), Mastery Experiences (F = 0.251, p = .779 > 0.05), Fun and Enjoyment (F = 0.578, p = .564 > 0.05), Improvement of Health & Fitness (F = 0.813, p = .448 > 0.05), Diversionary Experiences (F = 0.025, p = .976 > 0.05), Relaxation (F = 0.207, p = .814 > 0.05), and Interaction with Others (F = 1.429, p = .247 >0 .05) (see Table 6).


Table 6. The effects of different teaching methods on foreign students’ physical activity class satisfaction.

Factors	Groups	N	Mean	SD	F	Post hoc test (Scheffe)
Teaching	BL	28	18.36	2.38	0.535	–
FL	21	18.52	3.06		
C	19	17.63	3.40		
Normative Success	BL	28	16.96	3.32	0.103	–
FL	21	16.90	3.90		
C	19	16.47	4.41		
Cognitive Development	BL	28	29.04	4.96	0.615	–
FL	21	29.19	4.93		
C	19	27.53	6.07		
Mastery Experiences	BL	28	14.79	4.88	0.251	–
FL	21	15.00	4.98		
C	19	15.74	3.66		
Fun and Enjoyment	BL	28	17.39	3.00	0.578	–
FL	21	17.76	3.19		
C	19	16.74	2.94		
Improvement of Health & Fitness	BL	28	29.18	4.85	0.813	–
FL	21	28.71	7.31		
C	19	26.89	6.58		
Diversionary Experiences	BL	28	22.25	4.62	0.025	–
FL	21	22.52	4.64		
C	19	22.26	4.59		
Relaxation	BL	28	17.11	3.14	0.207	–
FL	21	17.48	3.41		
C	19	16.79	3.68		
Interaction with Others	BL	28	17.00	3.06	1.429	–
FL	21	18.24	3.00		
C	19	16.58	3.863		
*p < .05.

4.3. Students’ learning experiences and perspectives regarding different teaching models for the dance course
The students' feedback was summarized and it was found that the students from the BL groups were very happy with the advantages from combining the traditional face-to-face teaching method with Internet learning, as they could arrange their schedules more flexibly based on their learning progress; there was no pressure from learning in the classroom, and they could watch the videos and practice repeatedly until achieving mastery. Of course, there was also negative feedback. Some students found the autonomous learning by watching the videos in BL quite challenging. For example, there was no interaction while watching the videos, and the videos were 2D. Moreover, they didn't have a mirror at home big enough for them to check if their movements were accurate. When they encountered problems, they couldn't ask their teacher or classmates right away as they did in the classroom. These were the issues that troubled the students.

The following is an example from the collected qualitative data, which is a description of the experience during the experiment from one of the students.

In my opinion, online learning was very convenient for me to arrange our learning schedule based on our progress to achieve better learning results. The videos shot by the teacher were very clear and comprehensible. Although the teacher wasn't physically there to teach me, I could still grasp the key points. Especially, the idea of going from 80% speed to 100% speed allowed me to further learn the movements. In the process of autonomous learning, I could practice at my own pace and play some parts of the videos over and over if necessary. In the classroom, sometimes my vision would be blocked by the people in front of me. Online learning makes it easier. And I enjoy getting to know my own body through autonomous learning. In the classroom, I usually can't keep up with others. This way of practice is more convenient for me with less pressure. Therefore, I hope this method can be used in more courses in the future!

As for FL, most of the students thought the preparation before the class helped them to be more familiar with the movements in advance so they would have a greater sense of security as they already knew about the content to be taught. And in the class, they could get into the mood of learning immediately so that their teacher could make better use of the time in the class and there would be more time for team rehearsals. This feedback is consistent with the finding of Hsia et al. (in press). However, there were still some students who considered the preparation before the class a kind of invisible pressure. Sometimes, they just didn't have that much time to watch the videos and make preparation. Especially, they didn't think preparation was necessary for a physical education course. Yet, they still hoped that the teacher could provide the videos, but for after-class reviews only.

In one of the interviews, a student described the experience as below:

Preparation is essential for all kinds of courses. No matter if you are a fast learner or a slow one, preparation gives you at least some impressions. Dance has never been my strong suit, and I had never learned dance before taking this course. I could never keep up in the class, so preparation was helpful. If I found something I didn't understand, I could pause the video to spend more time on that part. I found it interesting and it made learning easier for me. Moreover, the preparation could remind me of the last session and offer me a preview for the next session. This way, I was more likely to keep up in the class and to learn and memorize the movements.

For the C group, the students' feedback regarding the teaching were mostly negative as they are already used to acquiring knowledge using technology. For example, they hoped that the teacher could just provide them the videos for preview or review at home or they could record the teacher's demonstrations in the class so that they would have something to watch at home for practice. Otherwise, a huge part of what they had learned in a session would be forgotten by the next session the following week.

5. Discussion and conclusions
In step with changes in social media, the development of higher education systems around the world has been vigorous (Leidl, Ritchie, & Moslemi, 2019, p. 104318). There have been deficiencies in traditional learning resources being made up for using online videos and related technologies (Nagy, 2018). In higher education, a BL environment is often considered as the best environment to increase students’ participation and to help them be more successful in learning (Picciano, Dziuban, & Graham, 2013). There are also related positive influences on reducing drop-out rates and increasing pass rates on examinations (López-Pérez, Pérez-López, & Rodríguez-Ariza, 2011).

This study applied BL, FL, and traditional teaching methods to a 10-week university physical education dance course. By analyzing the collected qualitative and quantitative data, this study explored the differences on the learning effects and satisfaction among these three teaching approaches.

As mobile technology is becoming more and more popular, students now have increased opportunities to learn in more convenient ways before, in, and after classes (Hwang & Wu, 2014). The thinking and practicing during the process of learning dance can help to facilitate students' creativity (Yams, 2018). DeWitt et al. (2013) once proposed that through face-to-face teaching in the field of arts, problems can be discovered in time and corrected; thus teaching quality can be improved. One of the main findings of this present study is that applying BL instead of the traditional teaching method could indeed improve the Taiwanese students' learning effects regarding their dance skills and their satisfaction with this physical activity course in the aspects of cognitive development, fun and enjoyment, diversionary experiences, and relaxation as well as the foreign students' learning effects regarding their dance skills. In other words, for both Taiwanese students and foreign students, the teacher could help the students to achieve better learning effects regarding their dance skills by applying BL for dance skill instruction. This teaching design went beyond the limitations of space and time, allowing the students to learn in a convenient and flexible way while still having the opportunity for face-to-face communication (Valtonen et al., 2020). That's why the students preferred this learning model. This finding is consistent with what Akbarov, Gönen, and Aydogan (2018) proposed, which is that there are great advantages of applying a teaching method which integrates online learning and face-to-face teaching. The most significant difference between BL group and the C group is that online learning is performed in an isolated environment without any teacher's on-site help (Staker & Horn, 2012; Yang, Carter, Zhang, & Hunt, 2021), while learning through a teaching platform allows students to watch tutorial videos repeatedly if necessary and to make adjustments based on the feedback from their peers and teacher on the assignment they submitted (Hsia et al., 2016b). This argument is consistent with the feedback obtained through the interviews of this present study. With regard to their feelings and experiences related to BL, most of the students, especially those who hadn't done well in dance before and the beginners, mentioned that what they liked about Internet learning was that it made it easier to arrange their learning schedules and they could watch the videos repeatedly. It is worth noting an issue that some of the students referred to, which is that although having online sessions every other week felt great, too many online sessions could lead to a sense of distance between the teacher and the students, influencing the learning effect in a negative way. Tsai et al. (2011) discussed this in their study, noting that BL is best applied with online sessions every other week, so that, while students can learn autonomously, once they encounter a problem, the problem can be solved in face-to-face sessions. This way, the influence of the problem on their learning progress can be minimized as the problem can be solved in the shortest time possible.

FL is an approach that provides students with Internet learning resources so that they can watch videos before the class and then the time in the class can be used in a more efficient way, where they can acquire knowledge through collaboration and team discussions (Sams & Bergmann, 2013; Smith, 2015). In recent years, there have been studies showing that FL can efficiently improve students' abilities in skill-related disciplines. For example, dance skills, self-efficacy, satisfaction (Lin et al., 2018), English capability (Chen Hsieh, Wu, & Marek, 2017), economics-related capability (Roach, 2014), and math-related capability (Hwang & Lai, 2017) can all be improved this way. However, according to the findings of our study, the learning effects were different between the Taiwanese students and the foreign students in the FL groups. For the Taiwanese students, the learning effect of FL group was not significantly different from that of the C group while it was only slightly lower than that of BL. As for the foreign students, the learning effect of FL was significantly higher than that of the C group while it was not significantly lower than that of BL. However, the Taiwanese students' satisfaction in the aspects of teaching, cognitive development, improvement of health and fitness, and relaxation in the case of FL was significantly higher than that of the C group. Through the interviews, this study found that the students believed that the teacher could make better use of his/her professional knowledge through FL and the students could learn the teaching content more effectively. Moreover, the students would be more likely to acquire successful experiences and thus be more satisfied. In this way, their cognitive development and fitness could be improved. Eventually, they could achieve the state of physical and mental relaxation by participating in the physical education course. We infer that one possible reason for this result is the difference between the students' past education environments. In Taiwan, the emphasis on, and concepts regarding, physical education are quite different from that in many other countries. Because of the academic exams, the numbers of sessions of physical education and arts-related courses are often influenced, indirectly affecting the amount of exercise students get. Some students may even stay in their classrooms all day long without going out. Due to these old concepts, Taiwanese students don't take physical education courses very seriously. As a result, some of the students in this study couldn't accept that pre-class preparation was needed for a physical education course. This is consistent with the research finding of Lo et al. (2017), who mentioned that not all students prefer this teaching model. Especially, for students who are not familiar with FL, this model can be a huge challenge.

According to the research findings and discussions of this study, applying either BL or FL to the dance course was more effective than the traditional teaching in C group. To learn movements effectively, repeated visual stimulation plays an essential role. Students can watch tutorial videos to observe and learn, as well as to imitate the teacher's technical skills and ideas (Morrison, Reeve, & Harrison, 1992). This is worthy of notice for teachers of physical education courses such as dance or those that require highly technical skills.

Lastly, this study proved that, compared to FL group and the C group, applying BL could more efficiently improve dance skill learning effects among Taiwanese students and their satisfaction with this physical activity course in the aspects of cognitive development, fun and enjoyment, diversionary experiences, and relaxation. Moreover, compared to the C group, applying FL was shown to more efficiently improve the Taiwanese students' satisfaction with this physical activity course in the aspects of teaching, cognitive development, improvement of health and fitness, and relaxation. As for the foreign students, compared to the C group, applying either BL or FL could more efficiently improve the students’ dance skill learning effects. However, there was no significant difference found regarding their satisfaction with this physical activity course among these three teaching models.

This study covered dance instruction only and thus has its limitations. The findings may not be applicable in other fields. Moreover, this study suggests that when teaching Taiwanese students and foreign students in dance courses, teachers can consider applying BL to improve their learning effect and satisfaction. However, if all the students are from overseas, faculty may also consider including FL as an auxiliary for BL, as it might lead to better teaching results and quality.

