Flipped learning emphasizes substantial peer interaction, and most teachers use groups for discussions or to assign tasks. The purpose of this study was to develop and test a student behavioral engagement model in a group-based flipped learning context by drawing on expectancy-value theory (EVT) and an interactional psychology perspective. Since interactional psychology considers human behavior a function of interaction between an individual and an encountered situation, we developed and tested a research model to explore interactions between the subjective (interest and utility) value of courses, expectancy beliefs (perceived task difficulty), and a group factor (group peer interaction) and their association with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. Based on data from a survey of 276 students in 78 groups in 8 classes of 2 management courses at a Taiwanese university, we used moderated multiple regression (MMR) to examine the study hypotheses. The results showed that (1) interest value and utility value were positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement, (2) the positive association between interest value and students’ behavioral engagement was weak under conditions of high perceived task difficulty, (3) a negative linear relationship existed between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement, and (4) group peer interaction was positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement. Additionally, group peer interaction moderated the nonlinear relationship between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement, in that, when group peer interaction was high and perceived task difficulty was moderate, students’ behavioral engagement was high, and (5) the positive association between utility value and students’ behavioral engagement was strong under conditions of high group peer interaction. Based on the findings, we provide suggestions for teachers intending to use group-based flipped learning.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Improving classroom teaching

Pedagogical issues

Teaching/learning strategies

1. Introduction
Due to advances in online resources and information technology, flipped learning has become an important trend in education in recent years. However, although the model has been promoted, relevant empirical research on flipped learning is still rare (Abeysekera & Dawson, 2015; Araujo, Otten, & Birisci, 2017). The flipped learning model originated in 2007 with two high school teachers, Jonathan Bergmann and Aaron Sams (Sohrabi & Iraj, 2016), but nowadays, higher education is gradually accepting flipped learning as an instructional method that provides opportunities to update and expand course activities, is student-centered, and enables students to learn independently and participate actively (O'Flaherty & Phillips, 2015; Steen-Utheim & Foldnes, 2018). There are several synonyms for flipped learning, such as inverted classrooms (Strayer, 2012), flipped classrooms (Bishop & Verleger, 2013), and flipped teaching (Lai, Hsiao, & Hsieh, 2018). This study used the term flipped learning. The core concept of flipped learning is student-centered learning based on constructivist learning theory, which assumes that learning is actively constructed (Burke & Fedorek, 2017). In the traditional lecture model, teachers primarily serve as knowledge repositories and transmitters, but in the flipped learning model, students interact with their peers most of the time (Brahimi & Sarirete, 2015). Bishop and Verleger (2013) proposed a definition of flipped learning consisting of two components: interactive group learning activities in the classroom and direct computer-based individual instruction outside the classroom. The Flipped Learning Network (2014) defined flipped learning as a type of instructional method in which teachers move direct instruction from a group learning space to an individual learning space, so that the group learning space is reserved for dynamic and interactive learning. Most flipped learning requires students to complete pre-class activities, such as watching videos, in their own time. When students return to the classroom, they then engage in cooperative learning tasks (Abeysekera & Dawson, 2015; Munir, Baroutian, Young, & Carter, 2018), and the classroom facilitates interactive learning activities between teachers and students or peers (Lo, 2018).

There are two research gaps in the existing literature: First, previous studies (e.g., Elmaadaway, 2018; Hodgson, Cunningham, McGee, Kinne, & Murphy, 2017; Subramaniam & Muniandy, 2019) have focused on comparing the traditional lecture model with the flipped learning model regarding students’ behavioral engagement, rather than examining the determinants of behavioral engagement in the flipped learning model to improve students’ sustained involvement in learning activities. In-class and out-of-class behavioral engagement is an important issue in flipped learning (Wang, 2017, 2019); thus, it is important to investigate what determines students’ behavioral engagement in a flipped learning context. Second, in a recent study, Cheng, Hwang, and Lai (2020) pointed out that group discussion and problem-solving are the most commonly used learning strategies for promoting peer interaction in classes. In practice, flipped learning refers to students completing pre-class activities, individually or in groups, and then completing small-group learning activities in the classroom. This study chose flipped classrooms as group-based flipped learning contexts, but such contexts are challenging for research and practice due to inherent personal and situational factors (e.g., the group context), which require insight into the interactions between students and their peers.

Accordingly, the purpose of this study was to develop and test a student behavioral engagement model, based on expectancy-value theory (EVT) and an interactional psychology perspective, in a group-based flipped learning context. Eccles et al.’s (1983) EVT is a well-known theory that seeks to explain people’s motivational foundation for learning by examining the “subjective value of behavioral outcomes and the expectancy or probability to conduct the behavior successfully and achieve outcomes” (Sun, Fang, & Lim, 2012, p. 14). In EVT, task value includes four components: interest value, utility value, attainment value, and cost (Eccles et al., 1983; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). The three types of value represent the positive consequences of tasks, and the fourth component represents the negative consequences of tasks (Schnettler, Bobe, Scheunemann, Fries, & Grunschel, 2020 ). Task value and expectancy beliefs directly influence choice, persistence, and performance (Eccles et al., 1983). Researchers have also found that adding interaction terms for value and expectancy increases the validity of predicting achievement-related outcomes (Trautwein et al., 2012).

Another lens through which to consider flipped learning is interactional psychology. Terborg (1981) explained that human behavior is a function of a person, a situation (environment), and their interaction. According to interactional psychology, people interpret and respond to environmental stimuli differently; hence, many scholars have examined how personal and environmental factors influence human behavior and outcomes. Albrecht and Marty (2020) examined the effect of contextual factors (e.g., job resources) and individual differences (e.g., personality and self-efficacy) on engagement, affective commitment, and turnover intentions. McCormick, Guay, Colbert, and Stewart (2019) explored group moderators (e.g., leadership and climate) of the relationship between proactive personality and proactive behavior. Pee and Min (2017) assessed the effect of person–environment fit and misfit on employees’ affective commitment and knowledge-sharing behaviors. Thus, investigating personal and environmental factors can potentially lead to a fuller understanding of these factors. Personal and situational factors may promote student engagement (Wang & Eccles, 2013), and exploring the interaction between them can help us understand the complexity of the learning process (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004).

It is important to consider peer-to-peer interaction in a flipped learning context (Lo, 2018; Tsai, Liao, Chang, & Chen, 2020). Drawing on EVT and an interactional psychology perspective, we examined how the subjective (interest and utility) value of courses, personal expectancy beliefs (perceived task difficulty), and a group factor (group peer interaction) related to students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. In particular, based on EVT, we explored the interaction between the subjective value of courses and expectancy beliefs. From an interactional psychology perspective, we explored the positive interaction between the subjective value of courses and group peer interaction, as well as the positive interaction between expectancy beliefs and group peer interaction, in relation to students’ behavioral engagement. We aimed to answer the following research question: “What determines students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context?”

2. Literature review
2.1. Behavioral engagement via flipped learning
The value realized from flipped learning depends on teachers’ and students’ ongoing engagement. Student engagement refers to students’ active involvement in learning tasks and activities (Lei, Cui, & Zhou, 2018), including three different types of engagement: cognitive, behavioral, and emotional (Fredricks et al., 2004). According to Fredricks et al. (2004), behavioral engagement, including participation in courses, social activities, or extracurricular activities, is considered essential for achieving good grades and reducing dropout rates. Behavioral engagement manifests in effort and persistence during learning activities (Meyer & Turner, 2002). Recently, researchers have decomposed behavioral engagement into in- and out-of-class activities (Ranellucci et al., 2021; Wang, 2019). In a meta-analysis, Lei et al. (2018) found that the correlation between behavioral engagement and academic achievement was higher (r = 0.35) than that for emotional (0.22) and cognitive engagement (0.25). Consequently, to understand students’ sustained involvement in flipped learning, the present study focused on behavioral engagement in activities in and outside the classroom.

Increasingly, scholars are using various research methods to address issues that influence students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning; for instance, in an exploratory study that used log files on the Moodle platform, Wang (2017) noted that self-assessment and self-reflection activities in flipped learning could facilitate student engagement in online courses, social interaction, problem-solving activities, and formative assessments. Furthermore, Wang (2019) found that in-class behavioral engagement was critical because it could trigger continued behavioral engagement outside the classroom. Ranellucci et al. (2021) used a longitudinal survey and found that in-class positive activated emotions (e.g., enjoyment or hope) were positively related to in- and out-of-class behavioral engagement. Out-of-class positive activated emotions were also positively related to in- and out-of-class behavioral engagement. Moreover, the authors found that behavioral engagement outside the classroom predicted academic achievement in flipped learning. A quasi-experimental research study by Elmaadaway (2018) showed that engagement via a flipped learning model was considerably greater than via a traditional lecture model.

Other scholars have been skeptical about these positive findings regarding flipped learning and behavioral engagement; for example, in an observational study of behavioral engagement in mathematics classrooms, Hodgson et al. (2017) analyzed the engagement ratings of two observers and found that there was no significant difference in behavioral engagement between flipped learning and non-flipped learning; therefore, the authors suggested that behavioral engagement depends not only on whether learning is flipped or not, but also on the complex combination of teaching strategies, teachers’ abilities, and students’ characteristics. Subramaniam and Muniandy (2019) also found that there was no significant difference in behavioral engagement levels between a flipped learning model and a traditional lecture model.

Table 1 summarizes recent quantitative research exploring students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning, which has several limitations. First, the literature provided limited information about the determinants of students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning. Most studies have compared the effects of traditional lecture and flipped learning models on students’ behavioral engagement (e.g., Elmaadaway, 2018; Hodgson et al., 2017; Subramaniam & Muniandy, 2019). Second, examples of in-class activities usually included problem-solving in groups (e.g., Ranellucci et al., 2021; Wang, 2017, 2019). Few researchers have addressed the complexity arising from the personal and group factors of students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context; thus, we investigated the promotion of students’ behavioral engagement in group-based flipped learning.


Table 1. Summary of recent quantitative research on the determinants of students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning.

Study	Participants	Examples of in-class activities	Examples of out-of-class activities	Method	Measure of behavioral engagement	Determinants
Ranellucci et al. (2021)	269 undergraduate students on one large anatomy course	Brief lectures, clicker activities, and problem-solving in groups	Watching videos	Longitudinal survey	In- and out-of-class behavioral engagement	In-class positive activated emotions (+), in-class positive deactivated emotions (ns), in-class negative activated emotions (ns), in-class negative deactivated emotions (ns), out-of-class positive activated emotions (+), out-of-class positive deactivated emotions (ns), out-of-class negative activated emotions (ns), out-of-class negative deactivated emotions (ns)
Subramaniam and Muniandy (2019)	84 pre-university students on computer science courses	Best-answer bidding game, presentation, Kahoot	Watching videos	Quasi-experiment	Behavioral engagement	Flipped classroom vs. traditional lecturea
Wang (2019)	431 undergraduate students on 9 programming-related courses	Problem-solving in groups, finishing assignments	Pre-studying the online content, social interaction	Logged file data from the Moodle platform	Engagement in out-of-class problem-solving	Engagement in in-class problem-solving (+), engagement in in-class online study (−), engagement in out-of-class online study (+), engagement in in-class social interaction (+), engagement in out-of-class social interaction (+)
Elmaadaway (2018)	58 male fourth-year undergraduate students on Blackboard management courses	Problem-solving, quizzes, feedback	Watching videos, writing down comments and questions	Quasi-experiment	Behavioral engagement	Flipped classroom vs. traditional lectureb
Hodgson et al. (2017)	77 students and 3 teachers in algebra and mathematics	Taking notes, discussion, complete math activities	Watching videos	Direct observation recorded	Behavioral engagement	Flipped classroom vs. non-flipped classrooma
Wang (2017)	488 undergraduate students on 10 programming-related courses	Problem-solving in groups, peer review, quizzes	Pre-studying the online content and asking questions	Logged file data from the Moodle platform	Behavioral engagement in online courses	Self-assessment and self-reflection activities (+)
Notes: (+) positive effect; (−) negative effect; (ns) non-significant.

a
no significant difference.

b
The behavioral engagement in flipped classroom groups was significantly higher than in traditional lecture (non-flipped) groups.

2.2. Expectancy-value theory
Motivation is an indispensable factor for effective learning (Schnettler, Bobe, Scheunemann, Fries, & Grunschel, 2020). A long-standing motivation view is that of Eccles et al.’s (1983) EVT, which was based on Atkinson’s (1957) expectancy-value model and pointed out that whether one can successfully perform a task (i.e., expectancy beliefs) and whether the task is important (i.e., subjective value) are significant determinants of a person’s motivation, affecting their task and activity choices, performance, and engagement in the chosen activities (Eccles et al., 1983; Eccles & Wigfield, 2002, 2020). According to EVT, the expectancy and value components are positively related, and they are directly associated with achievement-related choices and performance (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). However, motivation is not solely determined by personal expectancy or value but also by complex interactions between the expectancy and value components (Feldon, Callan, Juth, & Jeong, 2019). Shah and Higgins (1997) found a positive interaction between expectancy and value regarding goal commitment; that is, the higher the expectation, the higher the value, and the higher the commitment to the goal. Putwain, Nicholson, Pekrun, Becker, and Symes (2019) found a negative interaction between expectancy of success and behavioral engagement; that is, the relationship between expectancy of success and behavioral engagement was stronger for low attainment value.

According to EVT, the value components of an individual engaging in an action include interest (or intrinsic value), utility (or usefulness of the task), attainment (or importance), and relative cost (Eccles et al., 1983; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). Interest value resembles Deci and Ryan’s (1985) intrinsic motivation—an individual engaging in an activity because of his/her interest in the activity. Utility value is similar to Deci and Ryan’s (1985) extrinsic motivation—the specific outcome or reward occasioned by an individual’s engagement in an activity. These types of value are subjective because individuals evaluate the same activity differently (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Wigfield & Cambria, 2010). The present study did not consider cost (meaning the sacrifice of other valuable things or developing a negative emotional state; Hulleman, Barron, Kosovich, & Lazowski, 2016; Marchand & Gutierrez, 2017), such as anxious anticipation or losing time for rest or fun (Eccles, O'Neill, & Wigfield, 2005). In this study, we examined the subjective value of courses according to two components: interest value and utility value. Attainment value (i.e., the importance of grades) was included as a control variable.

Expectancy beliefs refer to whether a person believes that they can perform a given task or activity (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). According to Atkinson (1957), an expectancy is a cognitive anticipation, and the strength of an expectancy aligns with the subjective probability of a consequence, given a specific act (p. 360). He defined subjective expectancy and “objective” task difficulty (for individuals and compared to others) as synonymous and operationally defined expectancy in terms of the probability of success in the task (Eccles et al., 1983; Eccles & Wigfield, 1995). In EVT, expectancy of success is conceptualized as a task-specific belief in the success of future academic tasks (Trautwein et al., 2012). Tasks with equivalent levels of difficulty can be evaluated quite differently by different people (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020); hence, in the present study, perceived task difficulty was used to represent expectancy beliefs and evaluate students’ perceptions of completing tasks successfully in a flipped classroom.

A growing body of literature has addressed factors predicting academic outcomes in learning environments based on EVT. These studies have mainly investigated the effects of expectancy components, value components, or both on various academic outcomes; for instance, Trautwein et al. (2012) used a large sample of upper secondary school students and found that value, expectancy, and the expectancy ✕ value product term positively predicted achievement. In their study, task value combined all four components: attainment value, intrinsic value, utility value, and cost. Priess-Groben and Hyde (2017) used data from 125 adolescents who completed three assessments in Grade 9, Grade 12, and college. The authors found that intention to take high school courses and the high school courses taken positively predicted the number of mathematics courses taken during college, whereas intention to take high school courses and mathematics achievement positively predicted intention to take college courses. Ninth-grade utility value and high school achievement were marginally significant predictors of higher utility value in college. Jiang, Rsoenzweig, and Gaspard (2018) used two data sets regarding middle and high school students and found that task value was the strongest predictor of mastery approach goals and positive classroom affect. Cost was the strongest predictor of avoidance goals and negative classroom affect. In their study, task value combined three components: attainment value, interest value, and utility value. Deemer, Yough, and Morel (2018) used data from 1443 undergraduate science students and found that performance-approach goals were significant negative predictors of academic procrastination only for the high-difficulty group but not for the low- and moderate-difficulty groups. Grade point average was a significant negative predictor of academic procrastination only for the moderate-difficulty group. Putwain et al. (2019) examined expectancy of success, attainment value, and their interaction in relation to behavioral engagement and mathematics achievement. The authors found that expectancy of success was positively related to mathematics achievement, both directly and indirectly, and mediated by behavioral engagement. Expectancy was a stronger predictor of behavioral engagement at a low attainment value.

The mentioned literature highlighted expectancy and value as two main constructs in EVT that can affect academic outcomes in various educational environments. We used EVT to address our objective of understanding how students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning can be promoted, which we considered by examining the subjective value of courses (in terms of their interest and utility value), expectancy beliefs (i.e., perceived task difficulty), and the joint association of such factors with behavioral engagement.

3. Research model and hypotheses
3.1. Research model
Based on EVT and an interactional psychology perspective, we examined students’ valuation of their course, students’ perceived task difficulty, and group peer interaction in a linear or nonlinear manner to examine behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. The resulting research model is shown in Fig. 1. “Perceived task difficulty squared” means that we used a quadratic term to model the nonlinear relationship between perceived task difficulty and behavioral engagement.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (320KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Research model.

3.2. Research hypotheses
3.2.1. Perceived task difficulty
According to Sun et al. (2012), expectancy perceptions reflect the probability of achieving an intended outcome (p. 13). Perceived task difficulty can be viewed as an expectancy belief and was defined as students’ perceptions of the difficulty of completing a task in a flipped learning context (Yeo & Neal, 2004). The majority of task difficulty in flipped learning is due to the high volume of pre-class videos, the huge amount of online educational material, the difficulty of frequently coordinating with group members, and the need to complete class assignments and discussions with group members within a limited time frame. Successful flipped learning depends on student engagement, and the course task is the basic component of flipped learning (Karaaslan & Çelebi, 2017). When the course task is difficult, individuals’ probability of successfully completing the task decreases (Atkinson, 1957; Sun et al., 2012). Tasks that are too difficult result in lower rates of teacher-assigned task behavior (Umbreit, Lane, & Dejud, 2004). Due to the increased difficulty level, students may become frustrated and actually become less engaged (Cornelisz & Klaveren, 2018). Therefore, in a group-based flipped learning environment, a negative linear relationship may explain the association between task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement, and we thus proposed the following:

H1

Perceived task difficulty is negatively associated with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.

Task difficulty is one of the main course variables and is highly associated with behaviors in the classroom (Umbreit et al., 2004). Linear models have been widely used to explore hypothesized relationships between the constructs of the structural model, and researchers have developed approaches to include nonlinear relationships (Henseler, Hubona, & Ray, 2016). EVT assumes that humans are rational decision makers (Weiner, 1992) who would prefer to have satisfactory results in a complex environment, rather than pursue the best results (Simon, 1991). Another scholar posited that a nonlinear relationship (e.g., a quadratic or cubic term) might better explain the association between task difficulty and strength of motivation (Atkinson, 1957). Blume, Schmidt, Kramer, Schmiedek, and Neubauer's (2021) recent research found a negative quadratic association between perceived task difficulty and daily learning independence during the COVID-19 homeschooling period. They found that daily learning independence was lower in situations where the learning material was either too easy or too difficult. The relationship between task difficulty and behavioral engagement via flipped learning was similar. When there is low task difficulty, a task can be easily resolved (Chae, Seo, & Lee, 2015); students may not need to preview or discuss the task with their group members, so the degree of behavioral engagement decreases. Conversely, when there is high task difficulty, the probability of failure also increases (Lynch, Patten, & Hennessy, 2013). Once failure is seen as a highly likely outcome, students may become disengaged (Bandura, 1986). A task that is too difficult provides aversive stimulation, and students may choose to escape it (Umbreit et al., 2004). In summary, when tasks are perceived as too difficult or easy, behavioral engagement is likely to be low. We argued that when students perceive the task difficulty as intermediate, they will expect to complete the task successfully, and their behavioral engagement will be high; therefore, we hypothesized that there may be a negative quadratic (inverted U-shaped) relationship between perceived task difficulty and behavioral engagement and proposed:

H2

There is a nonlinear relationship (i.e., a negative quadratic term) between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.

3.2.2. Interest value
Interest value is defined as students’ perceptions of enjoyment, liking, and interest in a course (Andersen & Chen, 2016). This value has a powerful influence on attention, goals, and learning (Hidi & Renninger, 2006). Intrinsic value is, like intrinsic motivation (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000), a prerequisite for learning (Spinath & Steinmayr, 2012). Interest is the predisposition to reengage with learning content in and outside the classroom (Hidi & Renninger, 2006). By contrast, if there is a lack of excitement about a course, there is lower engagement in learning (Gasiewski, Eagan, Garcia, Hurtado, & Chang, 2012). Accordingly, we argued that when students have high interest value, they will be willing to engage in activities in and outside the classroom. When students feel that the course tasks are too difficult, it is more difficult for them to become competent (Sun et al., 2012). Students’ perceptions of high task difficulty may limit their behavioral engagement; even if they are interested in the course, their level of behavioral engagement is likely to decrease. Accordingly, we proposed the following hypotheses:

H3

Interest value is positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.

H4

The positive association between interest value and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context is weak under conditions of high perceived task difficulty.

3.2.3. Utility value
Utility value is defined as students’ perceptions of the usefulness of a course for a future career (Andersen & Chen, 2016), such as taking a math course to meet the requirements for a science degree (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). A course can have positive value for a student because the course facilitates important future career goals. Utility value resembles extrinsic motivation in that a task is performed to achieve a desired outcome (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). Previous studies have found that utility value can stimulate students’ attention, help students develop deeper interests, and stimulate students’ efforts and persistence (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009); thus, utility value leads to students’ behavioral engagement and high levels of activity in and outside the classroom. EVT indicates that expectancy and value exert interaction influences that determine students’ achievement-related choices (Putwain et al., 2019; Trautwein et al., 2012), and the relationship between utility value and students’ behavioral engagement is moderated by perceived task difficulty. According to Trautwein et al. (2012), “if a student did not expect to succeed on a task, even high value beliefs could not compensate for this low expectancy of success” (p. 764). When course tasks are too difficult, students may feel that their chances of success decrease (Atkinson, 1957; Sun et al., 2012); thus, the positive relationship between utility value and behavioral engagement is weak and, based on the above theories, we hypothesized:

H5

Utility value is positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.

H6

The positive association between utility value and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context is weak under conditions of high perceived task difficulty.

3.2.4. Group peer interaction
Group peer interaction is defined as the extent to which students perceive that their group members interact and learn from each other (Schwarzenberg, Navon, Nussbaum, Pérez-Sanagustín, & Caballero, 2018). Learning is rarely isolated (Wan, Compeau, & Haggerty, 2012), and learning with peers is the most effective aspect of flipped learning (Bond, 2020; Strayer, 2012). Peer interaction can promote more active and fruitful idea exchanges (Driscoll, 2000) for better understanding of a topic (Subramaniam & Muniandy, 2019), reduce feelings of isolation, and increase learning satisfaction (Wan et al., 2012). In a group-based flipped learning context, students have more opportunities to interact with their peers (Kong, 2014), and they discuss issues, assign homework, and report in group mode. Consequently, when students believe they interact substantially with their peers, their level of behavioral engagement increases; thus, we proposed:

H7

Group peer interaction is positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.

As stated, there is a negative quadratic relationship between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. However, the relationship is likely to be contingent on group peer interaction. A group-based flipped learning context emphasizes considerable peer interaction in a group, including receiving help and feedback from peers (Munir et al., 2018). When group peer interaction is high and students feel the task difficulty is intermediate, their behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context is likely to be high. Conversely, when group peer interaction is low and students feel the task difficulty is intermediate, they may not consider group collaboration an acceptable activity, which, in turn, may cause them to be sensitive to the effort required to interact in and outside the classroom, consequently decreasing their level of behavioral engagement; thus, we proposed:

H8

The nonlinear relationship between perceived task difficulty and behavioral engagement in H1 is moderated by group peer interaction, in that when task difficulty is intermediate, it can facilitate students’ behavioral engagement under conditions of high group peer interaction rather than low group peer interaction.

Students who perceive high subjective value may have high engagement (Hulleman et al., 2016; Wang & Eccles, 2013); however, their motivation based on subjective value might be reinforced or undermined by their peers (Ryan, Stiller, & Lynch, 1994). Human behavior is a joint function of personal and situational factors (Terborg, 1981). A group-based flipped learning context emphasizes peer interaction in groups and completion of course tasks by groups; therefore, we expected that in the group-based flipped learning context, students would complete a task using peer interaction, which would promote the students’ behavioral engagement. If students feel that group peer interaction is high, it should strengthen the positive relationship between subjective value and behavioral engagement in activities in and outside the classroom. By contrast, if students feel that group peer interaction is low, even if they perceive high interest or utility value, because their peer group is not helpful, the students may be unwilling to engage in activities in and outside the classroom; thus, we proposed the following hypotheses:

H9

The positive association between interest value and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context is strong under conditions of high group peer interaction.

H10

The positive association between utility value and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context is strong under conditions of high group peer interaction.

4. Method
4.1. Data collection and participants
Data were collected by distributing a questionnaire survey in eight classes of two management courses across four semesters. The respondents were college students who had participated in flipped learning. The classes had the same teacher, and all used group-based flipped learning. During the last class at the end of each semester, the questionnaire was distributed by a student group leader, and students were encouraged to complete it. Those who completed the questionnaire had the chance to participate in a lottery. The student group leader recorded the students’ group numbers and member numbers. The student group leader and the students were instructed not to discuss the questionnaire, and they did not know the research hypotheses. A total of 284 students answered the questionnaire. After 8 invalid responses were eliminated, 276 valid samples were collected from 78 groups. The groups totaled two to five people. Since we measured individual perceptions within the groups, a pair was included as a valid unit. The demographic information of the 8 classes and 276 students is shown in Table 2.


Table 2. Demographic information of the classes and the students.

Classes (N = 8)
Course title	Business intelligence (2)
Internet marketing (6)
Pre-class tasks	Video lectures
In-class tasks	Group problem-solving, group discussions, group learning, cross-group learning, projects, and group presentations
Group assessment mechanisms	Peer review, teacher rating, magnet scoring, online assessment platform (e.g., Mentimeter, school LMS), online test platform (e.g., Zuvio, Quizizz, school LMS)
Students (N = 276)
Demographic variable	Count	%
Course title	Business intelligence	70	25.4
Internet marketing	206	74.6
Group size	Two persons	26 (13)	16.7
Three persons	69 (23)	29.5
Four persons	116 (29)	37.2
Five persons	65 (13)	16.7
Gender	Male	155	43.8
Female	121	56.2
Year	Third	70	25.4
Fourth	206	74.6
Experience with flipped learning and MOOCs	One course	45	16.3
Two courses	115	41.7
Three courses	116	42.0
Note: MOOCs–massive open online courses; LMS–learning management system. The number of classes is in parentheses in the classes section, whereas the number of groups is in parentheses in the student section.

We also performed post-hoc analysis to examine potential common method bias by running a Harman’s single-factor test using principal component analysis (PCA; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003). The largest factor accounted for 43.53 % of the variance explained, meaning that no single factor explained the majority of variance in the indicators, indicating minimal common method bias.

4.2. Procedure for conducting group-based flipped learning
The purpose of conducting group-based flipped learning in two management courses (business intelligence and Internet marketing) was to provide students with more diverse teaching activities. The teacher designed practical problems for the classroom and encouraged students to conduct group discussions to cultivate students’ active learning, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. In particular, the teacher set a timer and strictly adhered to the time limit so that students had to complete the group task within a tight deadline. The teacher believed that a group-based learning context is better for completing course tasks than an individual learning context; that is, one person cannot brainstorm, but when group members engage in discussion, they can brainstorm and thus reduce their anxiety about completing the course task within the time limit. Examples of group-based flipped learning contexts for two management courses are shown in online supplementary Appendix A.

Conducting group-based flipped learning mainly involved three steps, which are discussed in detail below.

Step 1: creation of groups.

At the beginning of each semester, the teachers asked the students to divide into groups of two to five people per group. The students were free to choose their group members. The teacher explained that the flipped learning method would be adopted.

Step 2: pre-class tasks.

During each semester (3 months), before class, students watched a video lecture prepared by the teacher or a custom online video provided by the teacher, which lasted about 5–20 min. The videos were posted on the university’s LMS or directly through YouTube channels. The video lecture included the textbook, supplementary materials, or software. Because the video lectures could relate to follow-up in-class course tasks, students were encouraged to watch the videos before class.

Step 3: in-class tasks and learning assessment.

During each semester (3 months), during class time, the teacher required all groups to solve problems, discuss issues, complete projects, make presentations, and so on—course tasks that were highly related to the pre-class videos or textbooks. At the end of the course, students were evaluated based on the group output, except for midterm and final exams. For the group assessment, peer review, teacher ratings, magnet scoring, an online assessment platform (e.g., Mentimeter.com or school LMS), and an online test platform (e.g., Zuvio.com.tw, Quizizz.com, or school LMS) were used.

4.3. Measurement
To ensure the content validity of the questionnaire, most of the items were adopted from the literature (see Appendix B) and adapted to the new context. The questionnaire was pretested by five e-learning and information management teachers. We sought comments to ensure the questionnaire items were appropriate and understandable when translated from English to Chinese, to reduce ambiguity in the items, and to clarify the wording. Consequently, items were added, modified, and deleted following the pretest. All variables were measured using a five-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, 5 = strongly agree), except for students’ behavioral engagement and perceived task difficulty. Students’ behavioral engagement, which reflected the extent to which students participated in individual and group flipped learning activities in and outside the classroom, was measured using a five-point scale (1 = never; 2 = seldom; 3 = sometimes; 4 = often; 5 = always). The first three questions were used to measure behavioral engagement in the classroom, and the remaining two questions were used to measure behavioral engagement outside the classroom. Perceived task difficulty reflected the extent to which students found it difficult to complete flipped learning tasks (e.g., assignments, discussions, and projects; (Sun et al., 2012). One question measured perceived task difficulty with a five-point scale (1 = very easy; 2 = easy; 3 = neutral; 4 = difficult; 5 = very difficult); the two other questions used the previously mentioned five-point Likert scale.

We controlled for the effects of several control variables, such as teacher–student interaction, flipped learning experience, and the importance of grades, which might influence students’ behavioral engagement in a flipped learning context. First, teacher–student interaction was defined as the degree to which students agreed to interact and discuss issues with their teachers (Blasco-Arcas, Buil, Hernández-Ortega, & ). Researchers have shown that teacher–student interaction promotes learning engagement (Martin & Rimm-Kaufman, 2015); thus, it was included as a control variable. Second, research on information systems suggested that previous experience is a positive predictor of human behavior (Taylor & Todd, 1995); that is, experienced users learn from previous experience and form behavioral intentions (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). Many teachers use MOOCs, such as Coursera, in flipped learning (Brahimi & Sarirete, 2015). This means that the flipped learning experience, which reflects the amount of flipped learning and other MOOC experiences, may affect students’ behavioral engagement. Therefore, flipped learning experience was included as a control variable. Third, students focused on their grades because they were directly related to learning performance (Symes & Putwain, 2016). The importance of grades reflected the subjective importance of achieving high grades for students (Eccles, O'Neill, & Wigfield, 2005). If students thought it was important to obtain good grades, it could affect their behavioral engagement; thus, we included the importance of grades as a control variable. Before the formal questionnaire was distributed, a pilot test was carried out. Forty-one students on an industrial management course who had participated in group-based flipped learning were recruited for the pilot test. Reliability and validity analyses were conducted for the pilot test, and questions with low reliability and low validity were deleted or reworded. The final questionnaire items are shown in Appendix B.

5. Results
5.1. Reliability and validity
Cronbach’s alpha and composite reliability were used to assess internal consistency for all variables. As shown in Appendix B, Cronbach’s alpha for all variables was between 0.823 and 0.925, exceeding the threshold of 0.70 (Nunnally, 1978). Composite reliability for all variables was between 0.805 and 0.928, surpassing the acceptable value of 0.70 (Fornell & Larcker, 1981); thus, all measures showed satisfactory reliability. AMOS software was used to perform confirmatory factor analysis to verify the convergent validity and discriminant validity, and χ2/df was 3.396, which exceeded the threshold value of 5 (Wheaton, 1987). In addition, the comparative fit index (CFI) was 0.909, which exceeded the threshold value of 0.9 (Browne & Cudeck, 1993). The goodness of fit index (GFI) was 0.833, falling within an appropriate range (Doll, Xia, & Torkzadeh, 1994), and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) was 0.093, which was lower than the threshold of 0.10 and fell within the moderately suitable range (Browne & Cudeck, 1993). As shown in Appendix B, the factor load exceeded the threshold of 0.5 (Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 2006), and the average variance extracted (AVE) was greater than 0.5 (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). Consequently, convergent validity was demonstrated. Table 3 shows the correlation coefficients, with the diagonal representing the square root of the AVE, which was greater than the correlation coefficient between the two variables; thus, discriminant validity was confirmed (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).


Table 3. Descriptive statistics and discriminant validity.

Variables	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
1. Teacher–student interaction	0.87							
2. Flipped learning experience	0.05	1.00						
3. Importance of grades	0.51**	0.01	1.00					
4. Interest value	0.62**	0.05	0.58**	0.77				
5. Utility value	0.68**	0.03	0.54**	0.69**	0.83			
6. Group peer interaction	0.25**	0.16**	0.19**	0.16**	0.18**	0.80		
7. Perceived task difficulty	−0.42**	−0.24**	−0.42**	−0.50**	−0.56**	−0.16**	0.87	
8. Behavioral engagement	0.49**	0.02	0.48**	0.54**	0.53**	0.15	−0.42**	0.83
Mean	3.43	2.26	3.54	3.28	3.26	3.00	2.67	3.06
Standard deviation	0.89	0.72	0.97	0.81	0.89	0.86	1.07	0.85
Skewness	−0.73	−0.43	−0.98	−0.60	−0.58	−0.22	0.03	−0.17
Kurtosis	0.59	−0.99	0.42	0.44	0.05	−0.16	−1.10	−0.59
Note: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01. The diagonal elements (in bold) represent the square roots of the AVEs. The non-diagonal elements represent correlations between the variables.

5.2. Hypotheses testing
Moderated multiple regression (MMR) was used to test the hypotheses. MMR is appropriate when there are multiple moderating variables (Kankanhalli, Tan, & Wei, 2005; Sun et al., 2012). Before we conducted MMR, we assessed the assumptions for the regression and tested multicollinearity, normality, variance homogeneity, and residual autocorrelation. The variance inflation factor (VIF) values, the skewness/kurtosis test, Levene’s test, and Durbin–Watson statistics were examined in related tests. The VIF values were between 1.148 and 3.239, which were lower than the threshold value of 10, indicating acceptable collinearity (Myers, 1990). In the assessment of the multivariate normality of the data, the absolute value of the skewness coefficient was less than 2, and the absolute value of the kurtosis coefficient was less than 7 (Curran, West, & Finch, 1996). The results showed that the absolute values of the skewness coefficient were between 0.03 and 0.98, while the absolute values of the kurtosis coefficient were between 0.05 and 1.10. Thus, the data were in line with multivariate normality. Levene’s test showed that the variances of student engagement met the homogeneity of variances (p > 0.05). The Durbin–Watson statistic was 2.03, which, being close to 2.00, meant that the independence of the error terms was acceptable.

To mitigate collinearity problems in MMR models, according to Cronbach’s (1987) suggestion, the values of the independent variables and moderating variables in this study were mean centered; the interaction term was then calculated. MMR is a hierarchical procedure, and in this study, three hierarchical regression models were utilized to test the proposed hypotheses. The three control variables were input for Model 1, and the independent variables and the moderating variables were entered for Model 2. The two-way interaction terms, computed by multiplying an independent variable and a moderating variable, were added in Model 3. We observed the R2 value, adjusted R2, R2 change, and F change of Model 3 and the standardized beta coefficients for each variable. The R2 value and the adjusted R2 of Model 3 were 0.418 and 0.387, respectively, which had good explanatory power, indicating that Model 3 was suitable for explaining student engagement via flipped learning.

The MMR results are summarized in Table 4. Perceived task difficulty had a linear relationship with students’ behavioral engagement (β = −0.124, p < 0.05) but not for the quadratic terms and students’ behavioral engagement (β = 0.010, p > 0.05); thus, H1 was supported, and H2 was not supported. H3 was supported because the association between interest value and students’ behavioral engagement was positive and statistically significant (β = 0.174, p < 0.05). To better interpret the interaction effect, Fig. 2 shows that when perceived task difficulty was high, the interest value reduced students’ behavioral engagement; thus, H4 was supported (β = −0.174, p < 0.05). H5 was supported, since the association between utility value and students’ behavioral engagement was positive and statistically significant (β = 0.176, p < 0.05). However, the interaction terms for utility value, task difficulty, and students’ behavioral engagement were not statistically significant (β = 0.099, p > 0.05); thus, H6 was not supported. H7, stating that group peer interaction is positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement, was supported (β = 0.167, p < 0.05). H8, which stated that when group peer interaction is high and task difficulty is intermediate, students’ behavioral engagement is high, was also supported (β = −0.198, p < 0.01). We graphed the two-way interaction between the quadratic term (perceived task difficulty) and the linear moderator (group peer interaction). As shown in Fig. 3, when group peer interaction was high, and the task difficulty was moderate, students’ behavioral engagement was high.


Table 4. Results of moderated multiple regression analysis.

Variables	Model 1	Model 2	Model 3	Hypothesis test
Control variables
Teacher–student interaction	0.329***	0.128+	0.142*	
Flipped learning experience	0.002	−0.035	−0.049	
Importance of grades	0.310***	0.160*	0.159*	
Independent variables
Interest value (IV)		0.207**	0.174*	H3 was supported
Utility value (UV)		0.158*	0.176*	H5 was supported
Moderators
Perceived task difficulty (DIFF)		−0.117+	−0.124*	H1 was supported
Perceived task difficulty squared (DIFF2)		0.049	0.010	H2 was not supported
Group peer interaction (PEER)		0.004	0.167*	H7 was supported
Interaction terms
IV × DIFF			−0.174*	H4 was supported
UV × DIFF			0.099	H6 was not supported
DIFF × PEER			−0.025	
DIFF2 × PEER			−0.198**	H8 was supported
IV × PEER			−0.083	H9 was not supported
UV × PEER			0.136+	H10 was supported
R2	0.309	0.383	0.418	
Adjusted R2	0.301	0.365	0.387	
R2 change	0.309	0.075	0.034	
F change	40.507***	6.459***	2.574*	
VIF range	1.004–1.356	1.039–2.696	1.148–3.239	
Note: Perceived task difficulty squared is a quadratic term for perceived task difficulty. The results did not change in direction or significance when the class number (β = 0.031, p > 0.05) was included. Standardized coefficients are reported. +p < 0.1; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (206KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Interaction between interest value and perceived task difficulty in behavioral engagement (H4).

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (209KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Interaction between perceived task difficulty and group peer interaction in behavioral engagement (H8).

Surprisingly, for H9, which stated that the interaction between interest value, group peer interaction, and students’ behavioral engagement would be strong, the interaction terms were not statistically significant (β = −0.083, p > 0.05); thus, H9 was not supported. For H10, which stated that the interaction between utility value, group peer interaction, and students’ behavioral engagement would be strong, the interaction terms were positive and statistically significant (β = 0.136, p < 0.10); thus H10 was supported. We graphed the two-way interaction between utility value and group peer interaction. Fig. 4 shows that the slope for high group peer interaction was steep, meaning that when the level of group peer interaction was high, students who perceived high utility value had higher behavioral engagement in activities in and outside the classroom. Furthermore, the control variables—teacher–student interaction (β = 0.142, p < 0.05) and the importance of grades (β = 0.159, p < 0.05)—were associated with students’ behavioral engagement, while flipped learning experience was not associated with students’ behavioral engagement (β = −0.049, p > 0.05). Fig. 5 graphically illustrates the hypothesis testing.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (218KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Interaction between utility value and group peer interaction in behavioral engagement (H10).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (274KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Summary of results.

6. Discussion and implications
6.1. Key findings
In this study, we examined students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context by proposing interest value, utility value, perceived task difficulty, and group peer interaction constructs. The major findings were as follows: First, the results showed that interest value and utility value were positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. As became evident from the literature, task interest and usefulness have the potential to promote students’ behavioral engagement, and task interest can help explain students’ decisions to initially engage in the process, whereas task usefulness is critical in sustaining effort during the process (Cornelisz & Klaveren, 2018). The study results not only confirmed previous findings but also highlighted the important role of interest value and utility value in promoting university students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.

Second, perceived task difficulty weakened the positive relationship between interest value and students’ behavioral engagement; that is, when perceived task difficulty was high, the positive relationship between interest value and students’ behavioral engagement was weak. Hidi and Renninger (2006) showed that interested students have stored knowledge and positive feelings, enabling them to deal with difficulties that might arise. A possible explanation is that, if the course task is difficult, students must make an increased effort to complete it; for example, students with high interest usually spend time discussing or looking for information. When there is a lack of balance, students may feel that they cannot succeed, which may lead to an intense negative mood and unwillingness to engage. This result indicated that students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning is characterized by a trade-off between the effort of being involved and the interest benefits.

Third, a negative linear relationship existed between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement, meaning that the more difficult the course task, the lower their behavioral engagement. This finding was consistent with previous research showing a negative relationship between homework task difficulty and student engagement (Lynch, Hurley, Cumiskey, Nolan, & McGlynn, 2019). The level of increased task difficulty caused students to reduce their voluntary participation in tasks (Lynch et al., 2019).

Fourth, the results showed that group peer interaction was positively and directly associated with students’ behavioral engagement, and a nonlinear interaction was found between perceived task difficulty and group peer interaction. The results implied that group peer interaction plays a powerful moderating role in the relationship between task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement. This research suggests that compared to low group peer interaction, when group peer interaction is high and course task difficulty is moderate, students’ behavioral engagement is high.

Finally, group peer interaction moderated the positive relationship between utility value and students’ behavioral engagement, and the positive relationship was strengthened by high group peer interaction. The results suggested that high group peer interaction and utility value have a cumulative effect on students’ behavioral engagement.

6.2. Theoretical implications
This study makes several important contributions to the literature on group-based flipped learning contexts and EVT. First, many studies have adopted EVT to predict academic outcomes based on expectancy and value components (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). Interactional psychology considers the person and the situation (e.g., in a group context) as joint determinants of behavior. However, few studies have explored the interaction of subjective value, personal expectancy beliefs, and group factors in relation to students’ behavioral engagement. The examination of subjective value, perceived task difficulty, group peer interaction, and their interactions allowed us to empirically investigate students’ motivations in a group-based flipped learning context. The present study’s results indicated that subjective value, perceived task difficulty, and group peer interaction are not only directly associated with students’ behavioral engagement, but that the interplay between them is critical. Second, previous studies noted that the lack of a theoretical framework was a concern when discussing educational science and technology issues (Bond, 2020; Crook, 2019). Therefore, based on EVT and the interactional psychology perspective, we proposed a behavioral engagement model, which can be used to predict students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. Third, the results confirmed that there is a linear relationship between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. We further examined and confirmed the moderating role of group peer interaction via a nonlinear relationship between perceived task difficulty and students’ behavioral engagement. This study constitutes a preliminary investigation of these relationships. We proposed the “perceived task difficulty” construct to predict students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context, which may inspire future researchers to explore task difficulty in flipped learning contexts. Finally, we focused on a group-based flipped learning context. Group learning is one of the teaching strategies often used in flipped learning today. Although EVT has acknowledged the importance of the learning environment and the specific characteristics of the social environment (Chirinos, 2017; Leaper, 2011), previous studies have not considered the role of group peer interaction in students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context, either theoretically or empirically. The present study’s results provide more evidence of the role of group peer interaction in students’ behavioral engagement in a group setting.

6.3. Practical implications
This study yielded several practical guidelines for promoting students’ behavioral engagement in group-based flipped learning contexts. First, this study showed that students’ perceptions of course task difficulty were negatively associated with their behavior in a group-based flipped learning context. We suggest that teachers should moderate the course task based on students’ perceptions of task difficulty to reduce the difficulty. Several researchers have suggested that instructional design must be carefully considered when teaching difficult subject matter (Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005). We recommend that teachers fully understand students’ views on the course and let students know how the teacher has adjusted the instructional design accordingly. Second, interest value was positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement, but the positive relationship was weakened when perceived task difficulty was high. Surprisingly, we found that when perceived task difficulty was high, the interest value could hinder rather than foster students’ behavioral engagement. Interest value and perceived task difficulty are like two ends of a seesaw, and students will judge whether they balance; thus, we recommend that teachers consider task difficulty in flipped learning. Third, utility value was positively associated with students’ behavioral engagement, and high group peer interaction strengthened this positive relationship. Therefore, we suggest that teachers should establish incentives to promote group interaction and create better mechanisms for rewarding group output. Also, individual accountability within a group is an important element of group cooperative learning, and each group member should be responsible for their own performance (Laal, Geranpaye, & Daemi, 2013). We suggest that before each course task, the teacher should reduce non-contribution by discussing the divisions of labor among the groups. We also suggest that at the end of each semester, students who have made the most effort in the groups should be publicly rewarded. Finally, a high degree of group peer interaction and a moderate degree of perceived task difficulty led to high students’ behavioral engagement via flipped learning. Previous studies showed that students enjoy interactive classroom activities (Bishop & Verleger, 2013); for example, cooperative technology can contribute to student engagement (Bond, 2020). The study results suggested that it is important to promote high interaction among group members in flipped learning; for instance, by using online cooperative technologies, such as social learning platforms (Google classroom, Moodle, and Edmodo) and cloud tools (Google Docs). Also, group members should operate as a unit and recognize that the efforts of each member are crucial to the group’s success (Laal et al., 2013). At the same time, teachers should evaluate the difficulty of the flipped learning task. They should also provide students with guidance and help.

6.4. Limitations and future research
The present study had several limitations. First, although our sample size was adequate for testing the proposed model, students from only eight management classes were surveyed. Some of the findings may not extend to highly technology-oriented courses (e.g., programming and database design), since such courses typically have less group peer interaction and teacher–student interaction, with most of the in-class time being used for individual thinking and programming. However, it would be useful to apply the proposed model to other courses to obtain findings that are more generalizable. Second, to control the instructional design for the group-based flipped classroom context, we collected data from one university and one teacher who adopted group problem-solving, group learning, group issue discussions, and group presentations. In a study that reviewed the top 100 most highly cited papers on flipped learning, Cheng et al. (2020) argued that “one of the main streams of flipped learning studies is to compare the performances of adopting different flipped learning modes to find more effective flipped learning approaches” (p. 11). Therefore, it would be interesting for future researchers to explore different flipped learning approaches (e.g., game-based learning or doing exercises). Third, it is possible that other types of subjective course value, such as attainment and cost, may influence students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. Cost refers to how the decision to engage in one activity restricts access to other activities, the evaluation of this effort, and its emotional cost (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). Future researchers could explore the negative relationship between cost and students’ behavioral engagement. Attainment value is defined as the personal importance of doing well on a given task (Eccles et al., 1983). We included the importance of grades as a control variable, and we found the importance of grades was statistically significant, implying a need for further investigation of this important issue. Fourth, a cross-sectional and self-report study design was used to capture students’ behavioral engagement in pre- and in-class activities in a group-based flipped learning context. Despite the weaknesses of self-reported measures, they are particularly useful in research on human behavior (Howard, 1994). Future researchers could conduct a longitudinal study and consider system log profiles for a more objective assessment of students’ behavioral engagement. Fifth, the proposed model focuses on students’ behavioral engagement. For some students, ongoing frustration can trigger disengagement (Kahu, Stephens, Leach, & Zepke, 2015). It would be interesting to examine the extent to which students are likely to give up or disengage from their flipped classroom tasks in response to frustration. Finally, we used behavioral engagement as a measure that combined pre- and in-class activities. Wang (2019) and Ranellucci et al. (2021) suggested that behavioral engagement can be divided into engagement in and outside the classroom. Other researchers divided student engagement into four categories: general, cognitive, behavioral, and emotional (Qureshi, Wall, Humphries, & Balani, 2016). Therefore, it would be interesting if future researchers incorporated several types of engagement or divided the proposed model according to pre- and in-class engagement to fully understand how different types of engagement are promoted in group-based flipped learning.

7. Conclusion
Successful flipped learning requires students’ behavioral engagement. The group approach is a common instruction strategy in flipped classrooms, but it is uncertain what determines students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. To this end, we developed a model that drew on EVT and an interactional psychology perspective to argue why and how subjective course value (interest and utility value), expectancy beliefs (perceived task difficulty), and a group factor (group peer interaction) may interact with students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. Importantly, this study contributes to theory and practice in three ways. First, the proposed model provides an understanding of the relationships between interest and utility value, perceived task difficulty, and group peer interaction in relation to students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. The model clarifies some of the processes by which personal and group factors relate to students’ behavioral engagement and enhances understanding of how to improve students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context. Second, we proposed how perceived task difficulty and group peer interaction operate in conjunction with subjective course value and students’ behavioral engagement. Third, we surveyed 276 students in 78 groups in 8 classes of 2 management courses at a Taiwanese university to test the hypotheses. The proposed model provides more explanatory power; thus, the results provide insights for university teachers to devise effective teaching strategies to increase students’ behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context.


Appendix A.
Examples of a group-based flipped learning context for two management courses (supplementary data).

Appendix B.
Variables and items.

Variable	Item	Factor loading	Source
Interest value (CA = 0.823, CR = 0.805, AVE = 0.585)		
IV1	I like this course.	0.733	Berger and Karabenick (2011)
IV2	This course is exciting to me.	0.629
IV3	This course makes me feel interested.	0.906
Utility value (CA = 0.881, CR = 0.874, AVE = 0.689)		
UV1	I believe this course is valuable because it will help me in the future.	0.913	Berger and Karabenick (2011)
UV2	I believe this course will be useful for me later in life.	0.801
UV3	I believe that doing well in this course will be useful when I get a job or enter graduate school in the future.	0.787
Group peer interaction (CA = 0.835, CR = 0.842, AVE = 0.643)		
PEER1	I interact with my peer group and receive help from them.	0.850	Adapted from Schwarzenberg, Navon, Nussbaum, Pérez-Sanagustín, & Caballero, 2018
PEER2	I discuss and exchange ideas with my peer group.	0.885
PEER3	I feel that the structure of the course allows me to learn from my peer group.	0.651
Behavioral engagement in a group-based flipped learning context (CA = 0.913, CR = 0.915, AVE = 0.685)
The degree of involvement in tasks or assignments in your group …
ENG1	I ask questions in class.	0.825	Gasiewski et al. (2012)
ENG2	I discuss grades or assignments with my teacher or peers in class.	0.893
ENG3	I participate in the group discussion in class.	0.892
The degree of involvement in pre-class activities …
ENG4	I preview the materials before class.	0.830	Gasiewski et al. (2012)
ENG5	I discuss my grades or assignments with my teachers or my peer group before class.	0.679	Self-developed
Perceived task difficulty (CA = 0.889, CR = 0.899, AVE = 0.752)
DIFF1	I find completing tasks in flipped learning: 1 = very easy, 5 = very difficult.	0.944	Sun et al. (2012)
DIFF2	Completing the tasks in flipped learning is challenging.	0.951	
DIFF3	I find the classroom tasks for flipped learning (such as assignments, preview content, reports) very complex.	0.678	
Teacher–student interaction (control variable) (CA = 0.925, CR = 0.928, AVE = 0.762)
TSI1	Using the flipped learning model facilitates interaction with my teacher.	0.888	Blasco-Arcas et al. (2013)
TSI2	Using the flipped learning model gives me the opportunity to discuss with my teacher.	0.874
TSI3	Using the flipped learning model facilitates dialog with my teacher.	0.910
TSI4	Using the flipped learning model makes it easier for me to exchange views with my teacher.	0.818
Flipped learning experience (control variable)
Number of flipped learning courses and MOOCs that students have attended.		Self-developed
Importance of grades (control variable)
It is important to achieve good grades in this course.		Eccles et al. (2005)
Note: CA: Cronbach’s alpha; CR: composite reliability; AVE: average variance extracted.

Appendix C. Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:Download : Download Word document (24KB)

Multimedia component 1.

