The Fourth Industrial Revolution (IR 4.0) is characterized by rapidly changing technologies and workforce demands. Educational systems seek to respond to these changes. Little is known about ways in which Teacher Training Institutions (TTI) are preparing preservice teachers to address these educational demands. This scoping review examines the high-quality literature with respect to initial teacher training activities and challenges, specifically focusing on 21st century skills and technology integration in the context of IR 4.0. The results show TTI requires coherence throughout the organization to effectively respond to shifting needs and contexts. The development of IR 4.0 technologies move swiftly, providing new opportunities for developing preservice teachers' 21st century skills. Such technologies could reframe the role of TTIs and teacher educators. Contrastingly, the pressure for TTI and teacher educators to maintain required skills increases alongside technologies. This scoping review concludes that research on this topic remains valuable and critical to further inform initial teacher training in IR 4.0 to facilitate the development of preservice teachers’ 21st century skills.

Previous
Keywords
Preservice teachers

Initial teacher training

21st century skills

Technology integration

IR 4.0

1. Introduction
The Fourth Industrial Revolution (IR 4.0) has catalyzed previously unimaginable change in industrial and technological activity (Prause, Atari, & Tvaronavičienė, 2017), necessitating new ways of considering and using human labor and skill (Oztemel & Gursev, 2018). This industrial revolution blurs the lines between physical, digital, and spheres (Shahroom & Hussin, 2018), leading to a paradigm shift across industrial sectors (Hariharasudan & Kot, 2018; Karagözoğlu, 2017). That being said, whilst Manufacturing & Technology have led the IR 4.0, other industries have been impacted unevenly (Ellahia, Khanb & Saha, 2019; Karagözoğlu, 2017). Education is one sector that has experienced rapid change (Ellahia, Khanb, & Shaha, 2019). With the swift development of technologies, the way teachers engage with technology has become a focus for educational systems across the globe (AITSL, 2014; Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation, 2014; Kelentric et al., 2017; National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, 2011; Pedersen, 2003). Teacher training institutions (TTI), as influencers in the future of both teachers and young people, need to support preservice teachers in both developing 21st century skills, and later, fostering these skills in their students (Subramaniam, 2013).

Additionally, as automation becomes increasingly sophisticated (Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2015), so-called 21st century skills are becoming crucial for young people entering the labor market (Binkley et al., 2012; van Laar, van Deursen, van Dijk, & de Haan, 2017). 21st century skills are those skills, thinking, social, attitudinal, and emotional, needed to work and live in the 21st century (Lamb & Doecke, 2017). Specific skills under debate will be revisited later in this paper. To prepare their own prospective school students for future work, preservice teachers require preparation for IR 4.0 to facilitate the development of 21st century skills. In order to understand this topic, the present study employed a scoping review methodology, a process of mapping the available literature to reinterpret the literature (Levac, Colquhoun, & O'Brien, 2010). This scoping review examines the impact that IR 4.0 is having on the initial training of teachers, given the unprecedented changes defining this revolution. The present study consequently poses the following research questions:

(1)
How are teacher training institutions preparing preservice teachers for the soft skills and proficiency arising from the context of IR 4.0?

(2)
What key challenges do teacher training institutions face in the context of IR 4.0?

To answer these two research questions, the present study utilizes the methodology of a scoping review (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005; Saldaña, 2013), wherein a conceptual framework will be presented. In the first section, the context of the present review will be discussed in detail, including IR 4.0, Education in IR 4.0, the role of initial teacher training, and teacher training organizations. In section two, the present review and the methodology will be discussed. The third section will explain the results of the scoping review, whilst the fourth section, the discussion, will explore the potential ramifications and implications that can be found in the results. Finally, we will relay the limitations of the present study and then conclude.

1.1. The Fourth Industrial Revolution (IR 4.0)
Previous industrial revolutions have resulted in massive paradigm shifts (Ferrari, 2017). Although the industrial revolution took place in the 18th century, the 20th century was characterized by the second and third industrial revolutions, with the former revolutionizing manufacturing through assembly lines and the latter revolutionizing automation through computing and information technology (Karagözoğlu, 2017). The third industrial revolution rewarded workers with technological and engineering skills and, through introducing technologies that aim for more human-free manufacturing (Oztemel & Gursev, 2018), the exponential development and adoption of technologies have far-reaching consequences, some of which have not yet been fully understood (Hariharasudan & Kot, 2018; Karagözoğlu, 2017; Oztemel & Gursev, 2018).

A specific definition of IR 4.0 has been elusive; however, it is characterized by a shift from machine-dominant manufacturing to digital and human-centric production utilizing sophisticated automation (Oztemel & Gursev, 2018). As a result of the lack of consensus on what IR 4.0 constitutes, the technologies that have become prominent are, among others, based on the Internet of Things (IoT) and Cyber-Physical Systems (Hariharasudan & Kot, 2018; Monostori, 2014; Schwab, 2017). The IoT refers to a connection between sensors and actuators, which are implanted into physical objects. The sensors and actuators are then linked and interact with each other through networks (Kipper, 2013). The IoT is said to be one of the most important functions of IR 4.0 (Hariharasudan & Kot, 2018), allowing devices, sensors, actuators, smartphones, and smart appliances to be interconnected, creating communications via the internet (Talari et al., 2017). Cyber-Physical Systems are systems of collaborating computational entities which are in intensive connection with the surrounding physical world (Monostori, 2014). The potential of IR 4.0 to significantly change the lives of those impacted by it is evidenced in the technology arising from Cyber-Physical Systems, such as autonomous cars, robotic surgery, and implanted medical devices (Monostori, 2014).

Technologies associated with IoT and Cyber-Physical Systems include virtual reality, augmented reality, artificial intelligence, cloud computing, and 3D printing, just to name a few (Hariharasudan & Kot, 2018). The sophisticated nature of these technologies, including machines’ abilities to communicate with each other via the IoT, has drastically impacted the capabilities of automation (Karagözoğlu, 2017; Oztemel & Gursev, 2018). This upsurge in automation may have contributed to social inequality with people being displaced with increasingly sophisticated automation (Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2015). The present labor market means that young people face higher rates of unemployment and underemployment and are more likely to be disproportionately impacted by the pace of IR 4.0 (International Labour Organisation, 2020). Mayhew and Anand (2020) note that while there will be a demand for skilled employees, whether the skills available will match the skills required remains an issue. The context of IR 4.0, along with the emerging labor market shock (International Labour Organisation, 2020), underscores the crucial need to develop 21st century skills, such as innovation, critical thinking, and ICT capabilities. The swift improvements and inventions of technology that characterize IR 4.0 have impacts on human life, business, manufacturing, and, by extension, education that has experienced several technological innovations over the last decades (Karagözoğlu, 2017; Oztemel & Gursev, 2018).

1.1.1. Education in IR 4.0
The education sector has a crucial role to play in preparing young people for the uncertainty surrounding IR 4.0. One challenge in the rise of technology is that workers are being forced to find jobs that cannot be easily automated (Karagözoğlu, 2017). The list of jobs becoming automated is growing as automation becomes increasingly intelligent, responsive, and interconnected (Oztemel & Gursev, 2018). Forces such as this, evident in IR 4.0, provide an uncertain environment for future workers (National Skills Commission, 2020). Artificial intelligence and the rise of sophisticated automation means the expectations for workers are shifting away from repetitive tasks which can be easily automated and more human-centric tasks requiring collaboration and other 21st century skills (Karagözoğlu, 2017; van Laar et al., 2017). With an earlier prediction that the number of robots in manufacturing was to rise to 2.4 million in 2018 and that by 2020, 59% of manufacturers in the United States of America will be using robotic technology (Oztemel & Gursev, 2018), there are potential mismatches of supply and demand in the labor market (National Skills Commission, 2020). There is a clear role for the education sector to provide an adequate, 21st century education to prepare young people for the uncertain and ever-evolving requirements of future work (Lamb & Doecke, 2017). Young people will need flexible skills and attributes to respond to this new environment (van Laar et al., 2017). The realities of future work invariably affect the teaching and learning needs of young people as well as the educational systems that are aimed at preparing them (van Laar et al., 2017).

The effects of IR 4.0 on education in general and how teaching and learning processes are designed in particular are unclear, and so is the role of new technologies for defining skill demands and ultimately for influencing the development of curricula in educational systems (Ellahia et al., 2019). Nevertheless, both students and teachers are required to develop skill sets that enable them to deal with the technological complexities of the 21st century, so-called “21st century skills” (Binkley et al., 2012, p. 18). 21st century skills are skills that are linked to the new economic and social developments of the 21st century as an industrial mode of production (van Laar et al., 2017). Those who are proficient in 21st century skills are able to work in fields that are harder to automate as they engage with uniquely human skills (Ra, 2018), such as thinking skills, emotional and social skills, and attitudinal skills (Lamb & Doecke, 2017). In the context of IR 4.0, mastering these skills has become a key job requirement, especially for working on non-routine and cognitive tasks (Ra, Shrestha, Khatiwada, Won Yoon, & Kwon, 2019), such as a process of efficiently selecting knowledge from a broad range of information, effectively applying this knowledge in a person's professional and personal life (van Laar et al., 2017). Processes like that discussed by van Laar et al. (2017) demonstrates the level of sophistication that workers will require in order to remain competitive in future labor markets (Lamb & Doecke, 2017; National Skills Commission, 2020) Described as higher-order cognitive and soft skills, 21st century skills are less at risk of being replaced with automation (Ra, 2018).

Given the swift pace at which IR 4.0 has made its mark, it is perhaps not surprising that there is no consistent definition of what 21st century skills are, despite the discussions of these skills in the extant literature (Binkley et al., 2012; Dede, 2010; Farrington et al., 2012; Kim, Choi, Han, & So, 2012; Lamb & Doecke, 2017; Lamb, Jackson, & Rumberger, 2015; Miguel-Revilla, Martínez-Ferreira, & Sánchez-Agustí, 2020; Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012; van Laar et al., 2017). A recently conducted systematic review of 21st century skills identified two key elements: Digital competencies, such as the selection and use of technologies, and soft skills, such as communication skills, creativity, critical thinking, collaboration, and problem-solving (van Laar et al., 2017). A definition for digital competencies has most notably been discussed through the International Computer and Information Literacy Study (Fraillon, Ainsley, Schulz, Friedman, & Duckworth, 2018), the European Union's Digital Competence Framework for Citizens (DigComp 2.0; Vuorikari, Punie, Carretero, & Van den Brande, 2016) and the DIGICOMP Framework for educators (Redecker, Carretero, Vuorikari, & Punie, 2017). ICILS 2013 focused on a form of digital competencies described as ‘computer and information literacy’ (CIL). CIL was defined as “an individual's ability to use computers to investigate, create, and communicate in order to participate effectively at home, at school, in the workplace, and in society” (Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Gebhardt, 2013, p. 17) and was reiterated by Fraillon et al., 2018. The European Union's DigComp 2.0 framework identifies five key components of digital competence: information and data literacy to locate, retrieve, and evaluate digital data, information and content; communication and collaboration through digital technologies; digital content creation to create and edit digital content; safety to protect devices, content, personal data, privacy in digital environments; and problem-solving to identify problems, and to resolve them within digital environments.

Soft skills are the skills that complement, but do not necessarily underpin, digital competencies (van Laar et al., 2017). Skills identified by van Laar et al. (2017) include communication, collaboration, and creativity or those categorized by Binkley et al. (2012) into ways of thinking (e.g., creativity, problem-solving), ways of working (e.g., communication, collaboration), tools for working (i.e., digital competences previously discussed) and living in the world (e.g., personal and social responsibility including cultural awareness). Soft skills are crucial to a changing world, where before middle-class successes could be achieved through manual labor, this will no longer be the case as increasingly, these jobs are being performed through automation (Binkley et al., 2012). Put differently, simply using technology (digital competencies) is not enough to ensure one's desired outcomes (Binkley et al., 2012; van Laar et al., 2017).

Both digital competencies and soft skills are required for successful ways of working across multiple careers and job requirements (Binkley et al., 2012; Lamb; et al., 2015; van Laar et al., 2017). The different competencies can be seen in Table 1, which provides a synthesis of Binkley et al. (2012) and van Laar et al. (2017). Table 1 provides both digital competencies and soft skills considered through Binkley et al.’s (2012) groupings (ways of thinking, ways of working, tools for working and living in the world). The table presented here is by no means an end of the debate on what constitutes 21st century skills. What is clear, however, is that soft skills both in concert with technology and without, are important for students and, therefore, for the teachers themselves.


Table 1. A synthesis of the 21st century skills discussed by Binkley et al. (2012) and van Laar et al. (2017).

Ways of Thinking	Ways of Working	Tools for Working	Living in the World
Creativity and innovation/Creativity
Critical thinking
Problem Solving
Learning to Learn, Metacognition/Lifelong learning	Collaboration Communication	ICT literacy/Technical
Information literacy/Information management	Citizenship/Ethical Awareness
Life and Career
Personal and social competence
Cultural awareness
Flexibility
Self-direction
Note. Most skills discussed by both authors are comparable. Contributions from Binkley et al. (2012) are in italics, van Laar et al. (2017) are bolded, and those identified by both frameworks are both italicised and bolded.

1.1.2. Initial teacher training in IR 4.0
Teacher training institutions (TTI) need to support preservice teachers in developing 21st century skills to later foster these skills in their students (Subramaniam, 2013). There is an acknowledgment in the literature of teachers as the “key element” (Almerich, Orellana, Suarez-Rodríguez, & Díaz García, 2016, p. 111) in realizing the potential of educational technologies given that the responsibility is assumed primarily by teachers (Ertmer, 2005; Pelgrum & Law, 2003; Stensaker, Maassen, Borgan, Oftebro, & Karseth, 2007; UNESCO, 2011; Voogt, Knezek, Cox, Knezek, & ten Brummelhuis, 2013). Developing 21st century skills for preservice teachers is complicated by a double challenge (Lund & Erikson, 2016) in the way they must use technology: firstly, in their personal use of technology to encourage students to adopt this use, and secondly in a pedagogical way where they are required to make judgments on extending learning in their students (Krumsvik, 2008, 2014; Redecker et al., 2009).

Many TTIs acknowledge their role to effectively prepare preservice teachers with digital competencies in the classroom (Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018; Koc, 2013; McGarr & Gavaldon, 2018; McGarr & McDonagh, 2020; Sadaf, Newby, & Ertmer, 2012). In recent years, 21st century skills have been a focus in Preservice Teacher Training (PTT) as a result of industry conceptualizing and prioritizing these skills in the workforce, as discussed in the previous section. Whilst most preservice teachers could be classed as digital natives; it is important to note that this does not necessarily translate to digital competence in the classroom. (Chen, Lim, & Tan, 2010; Engen, Giæver, Hilde, & Mifsud, 2015; So, Choi, Lim, & Xiong, 2012). Counter to the assumptions of digital nativity; technology is underused by preservice teachers (Agyei & Voogt, 2011; Chien, Chang, Yeh, & Chang, 2012; Sadaf et al., 2012). There are critiques, however, that TTIs do not sufficiently bridge the ‘knowing/doing gap’ (Allen, 2008; Kennedy, 2010; Yeigh & Lynch, 2017) or link fieldwork components more explicitly to the theory covered in coursework (Yeigh & Lynch, 2017) and presupposing students can automatically translate theory covered in coursework into practical classroom experiences (Ingvarson et al., 2014; Kennedy, 2016; Yeigh & Lynch, 2017). As the transformations resulting from IR 4.0 are realized, these existing challenges are likely to be exacerbated further.

Previously mentioned knowledge and skill components are represented in the Technological, Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK) framework (Mishra & Koehler, 2006; Koehler, Mishra, & Cain, 2013)—a framework outlining the types of knowledge teachers are encouraged to acquire to successfully integrate and teach with technology (Voogt, Knezek, et al., 2013). TPACK is an influential framework in the ways teachers – preservice and in-service – use technology. As such, it features as one of the search terms for this scoping review. As a result, a clear understanding of the framework will inform findings later in this paper. The TPACK framework focuses on three core domains: pedagogical decision making and understandings, specific content knowledge for a given subject or topic, and understanding of how to select and use technology to facilitate student learning (Mishra & Koehler, 2006; Herring & Smaldino, 2015). Often represented in a Venn diagram (Fig. 1), it considers the “thoughtful interweaving” of all three key sources of knowledge: technology, pedagogy, and content (Mishra & Koehler, 2006, p. 1029). This framework has received significant attention from researchers (e.g., Abbitt, 2011; Bibi & Khan, 2017; Chai, Koh, & Tsai, 2013; Koehler, Shin, & Mishra, 2012; Voogt, Knezek, et al., 2013) as it conceptualizes teacher knowledge of technology, pedagogy, and subject-specific content to inform authentic technology integration (Voogt & McKenney, 2016). TPACK has provided a way for researchers to examine the effectiveness of authentic technology integration in teacher education (Koehler et al., 2013).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (487KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. TPACK framework with respective components (source: TPACK.org).

The development of TPACK was aimed to respond to the rapid change in technology and, as a result, education (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). There is a strong acknowledgment in the literature that effective technology integration is crucial for 21st century educators (Chai et al., 2013; Shafie, Abd Majid, & Shah Ismail, 2019; Voogt, Knezek, et al., 2013; Zhang, 2011), which reflects the focus on digital competence as a 21st century skill found in the literature (Binkley et al., 2012; Fraillon et al., 2013; Lamb; et al., 2015; van Laar et al., 2017; Vuorikari et al., 2016). Integration of technology is a unique challenge for future educators (Krumsvik, 2008; Lund & Erikson, 2016), necessitating both a well-structured (Koehler et al., 2013) but flexible (Mishra, Koehler, & Henriksen, 2010) framework which can be used in various educational contexts (Mishra et al., 2010; Mishra & Koehler, 2006).

TPACK remains a strong framework to consider the concepts of 21st century skills and technology integration. Scholarship continues to grapple with other ways to consider these skills. Such constructs include the PEAT model (McGarr & McDonagh, 2019), a synthesized model of digital competence that acknowledges the role of cyberethics (McGarr & McDonagh, 2020), and the Technology, Pedagogy, Content, and Space TPeCS knowledge framework (Kali, Sagy, Benichou, Atias, & Levin-Peled, 2019), which aims to expand on existing TPACK frameworks. This is not an exhaustive list of emerging frameworks, and IR 4.0 will likely elicit other such frameworks. At the time of the present review, there were no articles within the search parameters that explicitly used these frameworks. Mishra and Koehler's (2006) analogy, when initially discussing the need for TPACK of fitting together pieces of a puzzle to see the bigger picture (p. 1080), still resonates in the challenges of IR 4.0. As TTIs have a responsibility to address the increasing need to develop preservice teachers in integrating technology into their teaching (Romeo, Lloyd, & Downes, 2013; Sang, Tondeur, & Chai, 2014; Sweeney & Drummond, 2013; Tondeur, Aesaert, Prestridge, & Consuegra, 2018; Voogt et al., 2014), TPACK remains a relevant focus for these institutions and this review.

The TPACK framework is flexible enough to be linked directly to the development of 21st century skills in preservice teachers (Mishra et al., 2010; Shafie et al., 2019; Valtonen et al., 2017), even as technologies rapidly change (Kontkanen et al., 2015; Lee & Tsai, 2010; Valtonen, Kontkanen, Dillon, Kukkonen, & Väisänen, 2014). But this flexibility has also been debated in regard to how TPACK could be operationalized (e.g., Angeli & Valanides, 2009; Brantley-Dias & Ertmer, 2013, Graham, 2011; Schmid Brianza & Penko, 2020) (see Fig. 1). The literature provides two contrasting views: integrative and transformational (Schmid, Brianza & Penko, 2020). The integrative view (Graham, 2011) considers TPCK as an integration of teacher knowledge in other domains and would then be constituted by high levels of TPK, TCK, PCK, TK, PK, and CK (see Fig. 1). The transformational view sees that this intersection of knowledge “gives rise to unique bodies of knowledge” (Schmid, Brianza, & Petko, 2020); in this sense, TPACK may represent more than an integration of components. Such a debate may impact how teacher training institutions adopt the TPACK framework as a response to the prevalence of technology.

1.1.3. Teacher training organizations
Teacher Training Institutions (TTI) provide entry-level training for students entering the teaching profession. In most countries, the successful completion of a qualification is a requirement for teacher registration or a teaching license (Adey, 1998; Musset, 2010; Solbrekke & Sugrue, 2014; Yeigh & Lynch, 2017). University TTIs often provide undergraduate-level training for students without a prior degree (Yeigh & Lynch, 2017). Countries such as Australia (AITSL, 2015), Botswana (Batane & Ngwako, 2017), England (Haydn, 2014), and Ireland (Thompson, Long & Hall, 2015) provide postgraduate-level courses for students who have a three-year degree or equivalent in another area. These courses range from a one-year postgraduate diploma (Batane & Ngwako, 2017; Thompson, Long & Hall, 2015) to a Master's degree (Admiraal et al., 2016; AITSL, 2015). Study usually comprises of study in education (Ingvarson et al., 2014; Yeigh & Lynch, 2017) covering educational theory, policy, and skills alongside a fieldwork component in schools or educational settings (Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership [AITSL], 2015; Ingvarson et al., 2014; OECD, 2019; Yeigh & Lynch, 2017). These TTIs, often universities, can share characteristics (Yeigh & Lynch, 2017) but have notable differences (Ingvarson et al., 2014). For example, until 2018 in Flanders, adult educational institutions that were not universities could also provide Initial Teacher Training (OECD, 2019). TTIs represent diverse contexts and diverse systems that provide different learning options for preservice teachers.

The broad contexts that these TTIs attend to require a strong vision, planning, and monitoring, referred to as ‘coherence’ (Ingvarson et al., 2014). As the options for technologies grow and with the needs of TTIs in IR 4.0 poorly understood, a lack of coherence threatens. Research early in the 21st century identified that characteristics of strong teaching programs were poorly defined, relying on different measures (Cochran-Smith & Zeichner, 2005; Wilson & Floden, 2003). The rise of teaching standards (e.g., AITSL, 2015) has meant that teacher education programs can deliver programs targeted towards these standards (Ingvarson et al., 2014). Coherence, whilst informed by these standards, emerged as a theme more complex than simple compliance (Ingvarson et al., 2014). Incoherence can happen when program design happened piecemeal without a thought of how individual components could come together. Coherence can be impacted by rapidly moving circumstances (Ingvarson et al., 2014), such as those that characterize IR 4.0. Levine (2006), in a major review of teacher education in the US, argued that this lack of coherence led to disjointed and conflicting programs which can impact. Coherence (Ingvarson et al., 2014; Korthagen, Loughran, & Russell, 2006; Tatto et al., 2012) and consistency (Liu, 2016; Nelson, Voithofer, & Cheng, 2019) have been recommended as a goal since Levine's (2006) report.

Overall, this topic is far from mature with a potentially urgent context. TTIs provide a crucial role in preparing educators and, through them, young people who require an education to prepare them for a world that may not yet exist. It is possible that, through misunderstanding or misjudging the context of IR 4.0, TTI and teacher educators provide insufficient or misaligned preparation for preservice teachers and their future students. The aim of this review is to provide clarity around the realities and challenges of preparing preservice teachers for IR 4.0.

The following conceptual framework (Fig. 2) is informed by the literature review and reports the findings from this review. This conceptual framework sets out the contexts that have both a direct and indirect impact on the teacher education of individual preservice teachers (students) by placing them in layered areas of influence. The macro can be considered in the context of IR 4.0 with the shifts in manufacturing and move to the predicted human-centric future of work necessitating 21st century skills. The areas of influence for TTIs include attempts at coherence in policy especially related to the context of IR 4.0. Finally, the micro-interactions between teacher educator and preservice teacher, including instruction in frameworks such as TPACK, are influenced by both the institution and how it mediates the impacts of IR 4.0. These layers have helped inform this review whilst the relationships and contexts of specific contexts such as TPACK have been located in areas of influences. The findings that link to this conceptual framework are discussed in more detail in Section 3.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (606KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. A proposed framework for considering Teacher Training Institutions and related concepts in IR 4.0.

2. The present review
The present review aims to clarify how the contexts of IR 4.0 are being dealt with by TTIs. Several studies (Ellahia et al., 2019; Karagözoğlu, 2017; Oztemel & Gursev, 2018) warn that during IR 4.0, the demand for required skills may outpace the time it requires to train workers appropriately, leading to skill scarcity. There is research that indicates that to address the skill development required in teacher educators, institution-wide policies and supports need to be in place (Becuwe et al., 2017; McKenney & Voogt, 2017; Mengual-Andrés, Roig-Vila, & Mira, 2016; Voithofer, Nelson, Han, & Caines, 2019) and that there are barriers in engaging teacher educators in upskilling in technology integration (Tondeur et al., 2013). In the context of IR 4.0, the challenges and opportunities may eventuate far quicker than TTIs are prepared for. What is currently unclear is to what extent and in what ways preservice teachers are being prepared for IR 4.0. The short time between the prediction of IR 4.0 (Kagermann, Lukas, & Wahlster, 2011) and today has left little time for studies to be conducted, published, and disseminated.

The pace with which new and relevant skills are required could have far-reaching implications not just for educational systems but the future workforce that they develop. Hence, understanding how preservice teachers are prepared for the realities of a swiftly changing world is key to shaping Initial Teacher Training in IR 4.0. In response to this context, the present study examines the intersection between preservice teachers, TTIs, 21st Century skills, and IR 4.0.

2.1. Methodology
Considering the researchers' aim to map key concepts emerging from this topic, the present study adopted a scoping review methodology (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005). Due to the narrow scope of the review in time, focus, and the resultant smaller sample, a scoping review methodology was preferred over a systematic review. With the novelty of IR 4.0 and the lack of complete literature or systematic reviews on this topic, it was pertinent to first identify the extent, range, and nature of the literature in high-impact journals (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005). Arksey and O'Malley's (2005) seminal four-step methodological approach formed the framework for this scoping review.

Whilst the chosen approach is uniquely suited for scoping and understanding a field quickly, systematic approaches to reviewing literature have been criticized. Narrow epistemological approaches are one such critique, often emphasizing cumulative or teleological approaches (Oancea & Pring, 2008). This is certainly a limitation of a scoping review methodology in understanding the rich diversity in educational practice (Oancea & Pring, 2008). Given the rapidity of IR 4.0, however, and the urgent need for understanding, a scoping review provides crucial discussion on the nature of high-quality research in this topic. This review aims to identify both research gaps and opportunities and timely summaries and analyses for stakeholders in a critical moment (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005).

2.1.1. Step 1. identify the research question
We chose the two research questions outlined earlier to identify the intersection of IR 4.0, 21st century skills, and the preparation of TTI, which set the scope for our inquiry. Initially, we asked one overarching question. However, when reviewing the data, we decided to revise our question to fit the data we collected to elicit the specifics of our research focus (Daudt, van Mossel, & Scott, 2013) instead of revising our question and literature search to get different data that could elicit the specifics of our interest.

2.1.2. Step 2. identify the relevant studies
Through this scoping review, the researchers searched for relevant peer-reviewed articles in identified high-impact journals relevant to the study based on their rankings at the time of the review (Table 2) in the second half of 2019. Arksey's and O'Malley's (2005) methodology recommended searching key journals as one strategy to identify relevant studies. As such, journals were identified as significant contributors to the field of educational technology (Fig. 3 and Table 2). Journals consulted in this search strategy were identified as high-quality journals on the SSCI list focusing on educational technology to ensure the quality of the studies (Tricco et al., 2016). Search terms included: Fourth Industrial Revolution, IR 4.0, Initial Teach*, Pre-Service Teach* (and Preservice Teach*), 21st Century Skill, 3D Multi-User, and TPACK. Boolean connectors (AND, OR) were used to enhance the search by combining search terms (e.g., Pre-Service Teach* AND 21st Century Skill). Sources differ on when IR 4.0 was first mentioned in 2011 or 2013 by Kagermann et al. (2011), and so after confirming one mention, only studies conducted after 2011 were included.


Table 2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria.

Inclusion criteria	Exclusion criteria
English publication in relevant journals:
Computers and Education
British Journal of Educational Technology
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology
Interactive Learning Environments
The Internet and Higher Education
International Journal of Computer-Assisted Learning
Learning, Media and Technology
Computing and Higher Education
Journal of Research on Technology in Education
Full paper accessible
A study conducted after or in 2011
Study focus relates to:
Initial Teacher Training
21st century skills OR technology integration
Technology is evidently aligned with IR 4.0 (e.g., virtual reality, augmented reality, cloud computing, and 3D printing)
The development of preservice teachers in these skills
An empirical study using a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed-methods approach	Non-English publication
Literature found outside of relevant journals
Articles where:
21st century skills not aligned with IR 4.0
No initial teacher training focus
Focus Technologies, not IR4.0 aligned (e.g., spreadsheets, interactive whiteboards)
Not an empirical study
A study conducted before 2011
Not clear whether aligned to IR 4.0
Not developing Preservice Teachers (e.g., a focus on developing teacher educators OR only reporting on TPACK skills)
Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (487KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Prisma Flow Chart of the Searching, Screening, and Coding Processes in this Scoping Review.

2.1.3. Step 3. study selection
Of the entries generated from searches from the searches, 127 publications were shortlisted after initial exclusions. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were agreed upon amongst the researchers (Table 2). Following a review of the initial 629 abstracts for relevance to the research question and by removing duplicates, 127 journal articles were read in full to further consider their relevance (Fig. 3). Through this process, an additional 88 articles were removed against the exclusion criteria (Table 2). Thirty-two studies were excluded as a result of the studies being conducted before the advent of IR 4.0 (Kagermann et al., 2011), even if they appeared in journals within the search parameters. Twenty-six studies were excluded for not focusing on initial teacher training. For example, some studies studied characteristics of preservice teachers’ digital competence, digital nativity, or 21st century skills and did not focus on how to develop preservice teachers in these skills (e.g., Ayala-Perez & Joo-Nagata, 2019). Moreover, studies that were not aligned with IR 4.0 technologies (n = 16; Fig. 3) or focused on the use of technology by preservice teachers but not on Preservice Teacher Training (PTT) with these technologies (n = 26) were excluded. Papers were excluded in areas with abundant literature that did not relate to the context of IR 4.0 (e.g., Scherer & Teo, 2019).

2.1.4. Step 4. coding the data
Once the included studies were identified, the characteristics of each study were coded (Levac et al., 2010). These characteristics included descriptions of the study participants, whether the study was qualitative or quantitative in approach, the research methodologies, and the research foci (Levac et al., 2010). The specific 21st century skills discussed in each study were also coded (Appendix A).

2.1.5. Step 5. collating, summarizing, and reporting the results
After the study characteristics were coded, open coding (Saldañ;a, 2013; Strauss, 1987) and categorical coding (Saldañ;a, 2013) were employed with consideration of IR 4.0 and 21st century skills evident in each study (Appendix A). Emerging codes were discussed and refined with the research team when considering the research questions (Daudt et al., 2013). Broader themes were identified in the second cycle of coding by considering how codes and categories were connected and the larger ideas they belonged to. The themes were placed within a taxonomy with specific codes and categories beneath (Saldañ;a, 2013). The taxonomy was then summarized and crafted into the reported findings.

3. Results
The review identified a total of n = 18 papers that discussed initial teacher training, 21st century skills, or technology integration within the context of IR 4.0. Whilst soft or generic were referenced in studies, digital competencies dominated the studies (n = 16). The skills discussed by each of the studies are summarized in Appendix A, using Table 1 as a framework. It is worth noting that only one study (Hong, Lin, Chai, Hung, & Zhang, 2019) covered 21st century skills without discussing digital competencies. The limited timeframe undoubtedly contributed to the small number of articles as 32 studies were excluded from the screened 127 studies for not being conducted after 2011. The first article to specifically reference the ‘21st Century Teacher’ and the use of an IR 4.0 technology was published in 2013 (Kim & Blankenship, 2013). Although there are more studies after 2013, there was no evidence for a steady increase in the number of publications year by year. An overview of the findings of the 18 identified papers follows.

As a response to our first research question on what is known about the ways in which TTIs are preparing preservice teachers for IR 4.0 and the associated soft skills and proficiency with technology, we propose the conceptual framework in Section 1 (see Fig. 2).

This conceptual framework explores each theme as a result of our analysis. Teacher training institutions' coherence and collaboration can be seen in the domain of Leadership (here meaning the leadership of the TTI). Planning for coherence has influence over both the teacher educator's instruction, access to technology, and, ultimately, the students' experiences and development. Teacher educators as role models can be seen in the two major roles of the teacher educator: as an instructor for 21st century skills and digital competence. Pedagogical considerations refer to such as the use of constructivism - the most common approach found in this study - or the understanding and integration of concepts such as TPACK. The teacher educator here is also being reframed as a skilled user of technology and someone sophisticated in the Selection of technology and its implementation. For example, explicitly connecting technology to authentic practice and authentic spaces such as school environments is one strategy found in this study. Additional challenges discussed later in the Discussion section are highlighted in blue.

3.1. Teacher training institutions’ coherence and collaboration
The studies in this review occasionally investigated multiple sites or identified their sample as institutions (e.g., Tondeur et al., 2017, Tondeur et al., 2018; see Appendix B). Thirteen of the studies (72%) included TTIs, which were universities’ whilst five of the studies (27%) included other institutions. Four studies (16%) did not specify the TTIs. One study report noted that the study program was accredited. Studies focused on secondary education (17%), primary education (11%), mathematics education (22%), English or language arts education (11%), science education (11%), English as a foreign language (16%), and educational psychology (5.5%). Five studies investigated undergraduate students, six studies investigated postgraduate students, one study focused on a training program emphasizing fieldwork in 120 out of 180 days of instruction, and seven studies did not specify the program their students were in. Several studies included multiple countries representing Europe, the United States of America, and Taiwan.

The role of the TTIs was discussed by five studies with many of these sharing authors. These studies indicated that cultures and processes at the administration level could have important ramifications for preservice teachers' preparation for the context of IR 4.0. Nelson et al. (2019), in a study on an accredited PTT program for an unspecified qualification, found that TTI could improve outcomes for preservice teachers’ TPACK. They identified that teacher educators who had stronger perceptions of institutional support reported higher Technological Knowledge and TPACK with similar aspects. Arguably, the identified institutions provided differentiated support for teacher educators developing TPACK and technology integration (Nelson et al., 2019). As previously mentioned, coherence and consistency throughout a TTI have been a strong recommendation from the literature (Ingvarson et al., 2014; Korthagen et al., 2006; Levine, 2006; Liu, 2016; Nelson et al., 2019; Tatto et al., 2012). Ingvarson et al. (2014) found that coherence in a TTI was crucial for the effective design, delivery, and assessment of programs and was a clear example of best practice.

Studies also indicated that TTIs could improve preservice teacher learning outcomes by approaching teacher education professional development in a consistent way (Liu, 2016; Nelson et al., 2019) and through institution-wide initiatives (Becuwe et al., 2017). A Delphi study (Becuwe et al., 2017) examined the effect of teacher educator design teams to improve ICT integration. Teacher educator design teams familiarize themselves with components of TPACK in order to (re-)design teacher education courses to include ICT integration. The study identified a consensus that policy should support institution-wide approaches to ICT integration. Additionally, structural supports such as allowing for time and opportunity for teacher educators to implement their designs within the institution would lead to more successful technology integration. Findings of the Delphi study (Becwe et al., 2017) are supported by Liu's (2016) study, which found that teacher education programs had the most substantial influence on the implementation of technology integration, more than field experience or psychological factors.

Scholars in multiple studies also agreed that integration of technology needs to be embedded across the institution and within the program of initial teacher training (Becuwe et al., 2017; Tondeur et al., 2016, 2018). This finding echoes the need emphasized in policy and research for partnerships between TTIs and the schools to effectively bridge coursework and fieldwork (AITSL, 2015; Ingvarson et al., 2014; Kennedy, 2016; Yeigh & Lynch, 2017). In addition, coherence and a strong core curriculum (Invarson et al., 2014) are essential for success for TTIs in IR 4.0.

Collaboration between institutions was also considered important. Two studies agreed that collaboration across institutions could provide opportunities to triangulate which methods work best and contribute shared vision (Tondeur et al., 2018; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016). As these studies were conducted in Flanders, collaborations across TTIs may have been more important as universities, university colleges, and, at the time, adult education centres, were all potentially delivering teacher education programs (OECD, 2019). These studies also suggest that the cohesion within TTIs, as advocated by Ingvarson et al. (2014), may be valuable across institutions as well.

The findings from these studies indicated that all levels of university TTIs, from the administrative and leadership level to the teacher educators themselves, have much to contribute to initial teacher training and the development of preservice teachers in technology integration. A theme of coherence is consistent throughout the investigation of TTIs, especially for universities (Ingvarson et al., 2014). The studies included in this review emphasize both the theme of coherence within and through a university TTI as well as the role teacher educators play in preparing preservice teachers for IR 4.0.

3.2. Teacher educators as role models
Teacher educators can become role models for the authentic integration of technology through which includes careful scaffolding in both face-to-face and virtual environments. Nine studies discussed teacher educators as role models (Esteve-Mon, Cela-Ranilla, & Gisbert-Cervera, 2016; Haydn, 2014; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Oner, 2020; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras, Doleck, Huang, Li, & Lajoie, 2017; Tondeur et al., 2018; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016) and found that the role of the teacher educator is crucial to preservice teachers' success in technology integration. In the studies conducted by Tondeur et al. (2018), Tondeur, van Braak, et al. (2016), and Oner (2020), the teacher educators were role models for the effective and authentic use of technology. In Tondeur et al.’s (2016) study, the authors found that teacher educators were insufficiently equipped to inspire preservice teachers to use technology. They found that using a teacher educator as a role model for technology integration was important to their students' success. Conversely, in a study by Tondeur et al. (2018), preservice teachers' exposure to teacher educators' modeling of ICT use was an important motivator for their later ability to use technology in their own teaching. In Oner's (2020) study, mentors were present in a virtual environment where students could develop TPACK in an authentic setting. The mentors prompted students to connect the various components of TPACK in progressive ‘rooms,’ allowing more independence in each new ‘room.’ These mentor teachers were found to be crucial to the success of the project. In situations where there was a successful presence or a lamented lack of role models, these studies provide a case for teacher educators as role models for technology integration. Other studies delved into how this may look in practice.

Three studies explored how teacher educators could encourage technology integration. Kim and Blankenship (2013) and Tondeur, van Braak, Siddiq, and Scherer (2016) discussed scaffolding as an approach to encourage technology integration. Tondeur, Pareja Roblin, van Braak, Voogt, and Prestridge (2016) synthesized findings from 19 qualitative studies. As a result of their findings, they included scaffolding of authentic technology as one of their six strategies to support preservice teachers to design ICT-rich lessons. Kim and Blankenship's (2013) study was structured around a constructivist approach to virtual reality. ‘Dr. Marquis’ was positioned as the expert and the preservice teachers as the novices. The aim was to scaffold tasks and environments to develop further independence using a virtual environment. The infancy of the technology, both as a tool and in relation to theories of using virtual reality as an educational space, led to mixed results. Whilst students engaged in a virtual environment and some development in technology integration was observed, the virtual environment itself provided distractions (such as clunky interactions with the environment) in addition to new ways of working (Kim & Blankenship, 2013). Virtual reality has provided challenges to the role of teacher educators as role models. Kim and Blankenship (2013) noted that existing ways of interacting and teaching cannot be simply placed into a virtual environment. There is often a period of adjustment for both the teacher educator and preservice teacher.

These studies lacked specificity in the kinds of TTI the teacher educators worked through and for. However, in recognizing the roles of both the TTIs and the teacher educators, new ways of considering the roles and responsibilities within IR 4.0 emerge. These will be discussed in-depth in the discussion section.

3.3. Pedagogical considerations and dialogues in formative assessment for accurate self-assessment
Across the studies, the dominating pedagogical approach was that of constructivism. Four studies mentioned constructivist approaches (Haydn, 2014; Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016). Studies either explicitly discussed constructivist theory (Kim & Blankenship, 2013) or implied it (Haydn, 2014). In the studies which discussed pedagogy, teacher education was student-centred (Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013), and teacher educators served as facilitators (Haydn, 2014; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016).

Assessment is crucial to understanding the needs and development of preservice teachers' development. This makes formative and dialogic assessment both an example of constructivist approaches and a possible vehicle to gain an understanding of preservice teachers’ needs in IR 4.0. The value of dialogue in effective formative assessment and self-reflection for preservice teachers were discussed in some way by eight studies (Boloudakis, Retalis, & Psaromiligkos, 2018; Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Oner, 2020; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras et al., 2017; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016). These studies broadly examined the assessment of 21st century skills, with some focusing on digital competence (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Poitras et al., 2017; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016), TPACK (Oner, 2020), or generic or soft skills (Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015).

During self-assessments, preservice teachers may overestimate their digital competence with technology (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016), which provides a potential impediment to further development of digital competence. A dialogue between assessors and preservice teachers allows for new avenues of assessment and feedback. Tondeur, Pareja Roblin, et al. (2016) identified feedback quality as one of the key issues in PST in IR 4.0 contexts. However, the same study asserted that feedback is also considered an effective way to develop preservice teachers in self-reflection.

3.3.1. Dialogue and feedback to develop soft skills
Whilst it has been noted that during self-assessments, preservice teachers may overestimate their digital competence with technology (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016), the lack of feedback could also impair soft skills development. A dialogue between assessors and preservice teachers allows for new avenues of assessment and feedback. Tondeur, van Braak et al. (2016) identified feedback quality as one of the key issues in PST in IR 4.0 contexts. However, the same study asserted that feedback is also considered an effective way to develop preservice teachers in self-reflection. Self-reflection or self-assessment have been proposed as 21st century skills (Mengual-Andrés et al., 2016; van Laar et al., 2017), potentially useful for preservice or beginning teachers. Self-reflection could also help to develop metacognition (Binkley et al., 2012; van Laar et al., 2017), personal and social competence (Binkley et al., 2012), and self-direction (van Laar et al., 2017) and, potentially, improve understanding of their actual level of competence with technologies. Thus, dialogue with teacher educators can leverage 21st century ways of thinking discussed by scholars like Binkley et al. (2012), such as critical thinking, problem-solving, and metacognition, through the tools for working (i.e., technology).

Boloudakis et al. (2018) studied a process that included a dialogue about the variation between preservice teachers' self-assessed scores and their teacher educator's assessment against a rubric on technology integration. Over time and through a dialogue between preservice teachers and experts, preservice teachers' self-reflective rubric scores became more consistent with those of the experts. This finding is echoed in Hong et al.’s (2019) study on design-oriented collective reflection in preservice teachers. The study found that the reflection which was most effective was founded on a dialogue between a marker and preservice teacher, allowing the student to progressively reflect more on integrated than basic teaching knowledge and considering the use of integration of technology in a deeper way (Hong et al., 2019). Their development reflected a more integrated TPACK knowledge and an improving design knowledge, reflecting not just digital competence but also effective self-reflection and personal competence. Other studies proposed models which integrated feedback as a part of their process in order to develop accurate self-reflection (Boloudakis et al., 2018; Bower & Vlachopoulos, 2018; Oner, 2020). Formative assessment, which provides opportunities for dialogue between assessors and preservice teachers, offers one way for TTI to overcome the issue of feedback quality identified by Tondeur, van Braak et al. (2016).

Finding purposeful assessments of skills related to IR 4.0 remains challenging. Some of the identified studies aimed to develop and assess some of these skills, including independence or autonomy (Kim & Blankenship, 2013) or innovation and creativity (Poitras et al., 2017). Pellas and Boumpa (2015) found that purposeful formative assessment could improve skills in teachers who initially achieved lower ability scores. Esteve-Mon et al. (2016) argued that formative assessments need to be held to a high standard: internationally recognized, evidenced-based, whilst facilitating preservice teachers' skills. While the development and use of assessment by the research community is strong, TTIs could consider dialogic formative assessment in order to develop preservice teachers’ technological and soft, or generic, skills in the context of IR 4.0.

3.4. Selection of technology
Whilst the purposeful selection of technology was discussed by six studies (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Haydn, 2014; Ke & Hsu, 2015; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras et al., 2017), the guidance to support teacher educators in using them was identified as an area in need of development. Earlier frameworks supporting developing digital competence, such as those in the United Kingdom, centred around coverage models where students cover specific technologies, programs, and apps. Haydn (2014) feared a narrow view of what defines ICT capabilities. Given the speed with which new and existing technologies are being created and adopted, Haydn's (2014) caution appears well-founded and opposes newer ideas about 21st century skills already discussed in this paper. With these coverage models, for TTI to be effectively stocked with relevant technology would be challenging and costly.

According to Haydn (2014), before IR 4.0, there was an emphasis on expensive objects like interactive whiteboards. According to some participants in the study, costly items had questionable pedagogical utility prompting a cautioned to move away from “expensive kits” (p. 462), such as interactive whiteboards. The participants identified low-cost or free apps which had been utilized more effectively in the long run. Haydn's (2014) discussion reveals that once-adopted technologies, such as interactive whiteboards, can date rapidly and require significant maintenance. Esteve-Mon et al. (2016), in their building of a virtual environment, focused on bandwidth capacity and speed, or investment into clean graphics rather than the “expensive kit” referred to by Haydn (2014, p. 462). Other studies follow suit with four additional studies also using low-cost or free apps, software, and programs (Ke & Hsu, 2015; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras et al., 2017). The findings from these studies reflect a potential challenge of IR 4.0: As technology develops, it is possible shifts in Technological Pedagogical Knowledge (TPK) (Schmid et al., 2020) could alter the perception or use of technologies. Whilst ideas are emerging on problematic gaps in the selection of technology, there are few answers found in the review. The situation is compounded by the rapid development of technology which can be best seen in the following example.

3.5. The rapid development of technology: an example
This review previously discussed the increasing rate at which technologies are currently evolving. The identified studies provided a key example of this development, namely, the use of Virtual Environments (VEs). Four studies published between 2013 and 2020 used VEs for preservice teachers to engage them in virtual reality (VR) (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Oner, 2020; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015). The improvement of the technology is evident even in this timeline with a similar improvement in its effectiveness in developing 21st century skills. The careful selection, development, and refinement of VEs and the way teacher educators use VEs appears to be a central component of their success, made possible by the rapid advancement of the technology.

Kim and Blankenship (2013) used the VE Second Life, a platform that allows user-created avatars to explore or build virtual environments, in this example, a classroom. Second Life is an example of a pre-IR4.0 technology that shares features with IR4.0 technology. Kim and Blankenship's (2013) study emphasized the possibility of VE use for professional development in technology for preservice teachers. Students developed their ability to interact with each other and the environment to develop technology integration skills useful for teaching foreign language students. There were significant barriers to further success as a medium for collaboration. The difficulty in moving the avatar and interacting with the environment was a significant barrier for the preservice teachers. Participants recommended a more well-developed virtual world training environment. Whilst the participants eventually developed positive attitudes towards Second Life, the researchers admitted the potential of VE was not realized. Both teacher educators and preservice teachers participating in this study experienced a lack of immersion and clear barriers between their avatars, their cyber selves, and their physical selves. This indicates a clear difference from using a pre-IR4.0 version of a VE and later platforms which proactively aim for a blurring of virtual and physical worlds and selves (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Oztemel & Gursev, 2018).

In 2015, Pellas and Boumpa's study of another form of VE, Sloodle and Open Sim, revealed the resolution of many of the core issues experienced by participants in Kim and Blankenship's (2013) study. Preservice teachers were provided opportunities to develop their technological skills in a visually rich, collaborative environment. In comparison to Kim and Blankenship's (2013) VE, Pellas and Boumpa's (2015) VE was far more sophisticated, allowing for interactions with artifacts, visual presentation of abstract concepts, and the opportunity to work collaboratively with others in a manner similar to Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPG). These functionalities contrasted with the clunky nature of Second Life in Kim and Blankenship's (2013) study where the difficulties in ‘driving’ the VE had negative impacts on the educational outcomes of the preservice teachers through clear boundaries between the cyber and physical worlds. Pellas and Boumpa (2015) found that the use of virtual workspaces fostered interaction and collaboration in the VE. Open Sim shared some of the impracticalities in Kim and Blankenship's (2013) study, impacting participant experiences. These were partially remedied by the inclusion of Sloodle (Pellas & Boumpa, 2015), demonstrating a significant improvement in VE functionality and integration with other apps or software. Pellas and Boumpa's (2015) study found significant and persistent learning gain across three activities. These findings showed that learning activities using Sloodle and Open Sim were beneficial to all preservice participants. Particularly interesting is that the normalized learning gain, the calculation of learning gained against the amount of possible learning (Nelson et al., 2009), was found to be significantly higher for preservice teachers with low initial achievement. This study provides an important result of significant improvement in technology integration for those commencing with poor technological literacy. This indicates that disadvantaged students can be supported effectively through the use of IR 4.0 technologies to develop 21st century skills.

In 2016, Esteve-Mon et al. found that a VE for preservice teachers needed to be realistic and graphically sophisticated in order to be immersive and therefore effective as a medium to develop digital competence. Further, the gamification of the space through activities that encourage interaction, communication, and competition allows for a sense of immersion and motivation, which are powerful educational characteristics. The immersion resulting in the blurring of cyber-physical boundaries demonstrates an improved functionality of the system evidenced in Kim and Blankenship (2013) and Pellas and Boumpa (2015). This blurring of cyber-physical boundaries allows for more sophisticated considerations on how to best engage and educate the preservice teachers within a VE. As this blurring occurs, it allows for an immersive experience and thus unlocking a key potential in using VEs.

More recently, Oner (2020) conducted a study on VEs for virtual internships for preservice teachers. She conducted a virtual internship, a series of ‘rooms’ with progressively more autonomy and less support. She found that with progressively more autonomy and less support, preservice teachers' demonstrations of TPACK became more complex over time. Preservice teachers' pedagogical considerations became more sophisticated, and the connections between these and technology and content were strengthened. This suggests that teacher educators can take advantage of virtual internships to support preservice teachers' TPACK development. In this study, she discusses the inclusion of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to replace the currently human mentors who prompt and support the virtual interns. Once again, the sophistication of the 3D MUVE has developed, including multiple ‘rooms’ with varying scopes and supports with future directions involving, even more, IR 4.0 technological developments.

The role of the educators in virtual environments requires significant skills developed in teacher educators, both in technology and in teaching skill. Technological skills required to develop or maintain an effective virtual environment are crucial to facilitating the adoption of the virtual environment by preservice teachers (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016).). The tasks of the teacher educator in virtual environments include the development or the maintenance of the virtual environment so that students can interact with these environments purposefully. Teacher educators also clearly define the scope and size of any virtual environment, including the number and presentation of interactive objects. They also decide where scaffolding exists and how supportive each environment is, for example, the progressively harder rooms in Oner's (2020) virtual internship. These are crucial to preservice teachers' effective use of VE. Providing a clear scope and scaffolded supports as preservice teachers develop their skills at technology integration allows preservice teachers to engage meaningfully with the process and the virtual environment (Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras et al., 2017).

This overview of a seven-year process of a single kind of technology—Virtual Environments—demonstrates the rapidity with which technology is developed, adopted, and utilized in PTT. VE provides a characteristic example of the realities facing TTI, the opportunities and challenges which face them, and the potential inequity facing teachers who cannot access an education aligned with the requirements of the IR 4.0 context. Whether TTIs remain up to date with technological tools and the ways in which they can be used could have far-reaching consequences for the teaching profession.

3.6. Authentic practice and authentic spaces
The authenticity of ways in which technology integration is practiced was discussed by seven articles (Batane & Ngwako, 2017; Boloudakis et al., 2018; Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Hong et al., 2019; Oner, 2020; Tondeur et al., 2016, 2018). Preservice teachers were found to better develop skills at integrating technology authentically where tasks were reflective of a real-world problem or challenge (Boloudakis et al., 2018; Oner, 2020; Tondeur et al., 2016, 2018). Opportunities and challenges exist in the context of IR 4.0, the emerging technologies, and the complexity of the teaching profession.

Boloudakis et al. (2018) found that, through individual, collaborative, and sharing phases of engaging with learning design, participants experienced improvements in their ability to design Moodle-based units of learning, posited as an authentic challenge for novice teachers. Both Esteve-Mon et al. (2016) and Kim and Blankenship (2013) agree that providing opportunities for authentic practice of technology use and integration was important. Esteve-Mon et al. (2016) found that simply practicing daily-technology use was not sufficient to develop technology integration skills in preservice teachers. Integration of new technologies into teaching practice required an authentic learning environment to be successful. The knowledge-building pedagogy utilized by Hong et al. (2019) provided students opportunities to design, teach and reflect on a lesson. Embedded within this process were idea generation, idea enactment, and idea diversification (to give or receive feedback or ideas from others for teaching improvement) which reflects an authentic problem they will face as educators (Hong et al., 2019). It is worth noting that these students were also preparing for their internship after completing theory-oriented classes. Kim and Blankenship (2013) also found that authentic learning environments facilitated connections between the technologies used in their teaching, personal lives, and those previously covered in education courses. These findings confirmed by Tondeur et al.’s (2016) suggested strategies for preparing future educators: learning how to use technology by design and scaffolding authentic technology experiences.

Authenticity can be realized in Virtual Environments. VE must be realistic simulations of real-world environments to be immersive and engaging (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Oner, 2020). The structuring of real-world challenges in virtual worlds can provide much-needed scope and motivation for preservice teachers in the virtual environment (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Oner, 2020). However, in virtual environments, students must be provided time and opportunities to practice operating avatars, interacting with objects in the VE and other users before engaging with any tasks (Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015).

Spaces can be authentic in both ‘real life’ or virtual reality, with a blend of both offering new opportunities. In both research and policy, there is an agreement on the importance of relationships between schools and TTIs (AITSL, 2015; Ingvarson, 2014; OECD, 2019). Schools can provide much-needed opportunities for preservice teachers to engage in the process of enacting theoretical understandings and practical skills, which are often neglected even in fieldwork (Yeigh & Lynch, 2017). Studies are beginning to explore scaffolded environments for preservice teachers to develop their skills and reconcile theoretical understandings with the realities of the teaching profession. Even a blend of virtual and ‘real life’ spaces (Boloudakis et al., 2018; Oner, 2020) can provide this level of authenticity. However, it is the authenticity of these spaces which remains a critical feature (Boloudakis et al., 2018; Oner, 2020; Tondeur et al., 2018; Tondeur, van Braak et al., 2016).

4. Discussion
This section discusses the implications of the results in relation to the foci of the research questions: how TTIs are preparing preservice teachers for IR 4.0 and the key challenges facing TTIs in this context. TTIs have addressed the shifting contexts of IR 4.0 through partnerships with other institutes, using technologies to reframe the teacher educator's role and adopting constructivist pedagogies. However, there remain significant challenges that TTIs face in the context of IR 4.0. Primarily, identifying the needs of preservice teachers remains crucial. For this to be realized, theoretical and assessment frameworks need to be developed, in the case of existing and emerging frameworks, or entirely developed in others. Finally, finding the balance between keeping up with advancing technologies with sustainable practices is an ongoing challenge for TTIs.

4.1. Responses from teacher training institutions
A recurring theme from the literature reviewed is the theme of coherence. TTIs face an unprecedented challenge in preparing for IR 4.0. To prepare preservice teachers for IR 4.0, clear planning and careful implementation will be required. Whilst there is a move away from the “expensive kit” (Haydn, 2014, p. 462), it is not an insignificant task to identify, trial, and embed less expensive or open-source options. The process of identifying the technological tools, training teacher educators to use them whilst embedding them within programs will likely take time. With the findings of multiple studies emphasizing the need to embed the integration of technology across the institution (Becuwe et al., 2017; Tondeur et al., 2016, 2018), there will be a need to make informed plans on with a measure of flexibility in order to stay current. These plans need to consider the skills of teacher educators. Studies where teacher educators have implemented IR 4.0 technologies, provide an informative vignette of the demands on both TTIs and teacher educators (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Oner, 2020). In addition, when considering technology integration through the lens of the transformational view on TPACK (Angeli & Valanides, 2009; Koehler, Mishra, & Yahya, 2007), other facets of the TPACK framework may also be influenced, as was seen through the emergence of VE. Maintaining coherence based on a common clear goal and grounded in an understanding requires dialogue and partnerships both within and without the institution.

Partnerships with schools and other TTIs provides one way to ensure TTIs remain relevant and up to date. The importance of TTIs to link with other TTIs and partner with schools is not limited to the literature of this review (Ingvarson et al., 2014). With the planning required to prepare both institutions and preservice teachers for IR 4.0, partnerships provide one way to share expertise (Tondeur et al., 2018). There are indications that effective TTIs are conscious of integrating technology in an authentic way, either through tasks or supporting students with opportunities to practice (Hong et al., 2019). As such, strategies for connecting with other institutions and schools are an effective strategy already used in IR 4.0.

4.2. A shifting role of teacher educators
There is a fundamental shift in IR 4.0 towards tasks becoming increasingly nonroutine, cognitive, and collaborative. The literature indicates that this is reflected in effective teacher education in IR 4.0 (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Oner, 2020; Poitras et al., 2017; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016). Whilst technology provides incredible opportunities for preservice teachers; it can also provide teacher educators more time and space for human-centric tasks – a finding in line with existing literature on the shifting nature of work in IR 4.0 (Oztemel & Gursev, 2018). The consequences of pedagogy revolving around collaboration, dialogue, effective formative assessment, and feedback necessitate an investment of time from both TTIs (Becuwe et al., 2017; Liu, 2016; Nelson et al., 2019) and teacher educators (Admiraal et al., 2016; Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Haydn, 2014; Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Oner, 2020; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras et al., 2017; Tondeur et al., 2016, 2018).

What is made possible by the technologies presented in this review, however, reframes the role of teacher educators. Several studies provide potential solutions through the technologies of IR 4.0. Oner's (2020) use of virtual internships as the result of the rapid development of VEs, illustrates how VEs could be used to develop crucial skills and knowledge for teaching. With Oner's (2020) theorizing of the role of AI to support students through the virtual “rooms,” the shift could support directing valuable teacher education time and knowledge towards human-centric tasks such as dialogue, feedback, and social constructivist approaches. Similarly, Poitras et al.’s (2017) use of the ‘nBrowser’ open-ended learning environments (OELE) identifies another potential way to engage preservice teachers with 21st century skills via automation and technology. Considering the role of teacher educators in both roles—as facilitating development in 21st century skills both through technology reflective of IR 4.0 and through human-mediated learning—appears to be a clear indicator from the literature.

A consistent pedagogical approach evident in this review is constructivism. Constructivist approaches have been acknowledged for their alignment with developing 21st century skills in other studies (Anagün, 2018; Kim, Raza, & Seidman, 2019). This may not indicate the complete superiority of a constructivist approach for technology integration, but the prominence of this pedagogical approach in the identified literature merits further investigation. From the present review, it seems that constructivist approaches are uniquely suited for developing 21st century skills. Elements of constructivism align with the knowledge building discussed by Hong et al. (2019) and the dialogue for the purposes of assessment as discussed earlier (Boloudakis et al., 2018; Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Hong et al., 2019; Kim & Blankenship, 2013; Oner, 2020; Pellas & Boumpa, 2015; Poitras et al., 2017; Tondeur, van Braak, et al., 2016). This review provides further evidence that constructivist approaches should be implemented with the view to developing the soft or generic skills required in preservice teachers in IR 4.0.

Whilst strategies for upskilling teacher educators were not discussed in detail in the studies reviewed; there are some indicators for what TTIs can do. One study emphasized the need for collaborative teams to support the development of teacher educators (Becuwe et al., 2017). This is supported by earlier findings that partnership between TTIs can support improvement in teacher educator skill. It is worth noting that institutional support was also seen as an effective influence on some elements of TPACK in teacher educators (Nelson et al., 2019). This is also supported by the previously noted need for coherence and the potential impact this could have on teacher educator development in IR 4.0. Kimmons, Millar, Amador, Desjardins, and Hall (2015) painted the development of teacher educator skill in two broad categories – amplification and transformation. This could indicate that TTIs may be able to ‘triage’ teacher educators. For example, teacher educators who need amplification could represent an effective use of resources to quickly upskill with longer-term plans being made for those who need a more significant transformation.

4.3. Key challenges for teacher training institutions
The positioning of teacher educators as both digitally competent in the technologies of IR 4.0 and as facilitators or models of 21st century skills and innovative practitioners provides both a possibility and a challenge. The findings of this review revealed several of these several challenges:

(1)
Identifying the needs of preservice teachers in the context of IR 4.0

(2)
Identifying and developing theoretical frameworks and tools for IR 4.0

(3)
Reviewing the ways in which IR 4.0 technologies can support PTT whilst remaining sustainable given the rapid changes that characterize this context.

Identifying preservice teachers' needs is key to responding to IR 4.0. In order to identify and address the needs of preservice teachers, further development or refinement of frameworks and assessment tools is required. There are some examples of refining existing frameworks for the 21st century, such as the TPACK21 developed by Valtonen et al. (2017). Whilst many existing assessment tools are based on TPACK, the context and technologies of IR 4.0, along with a consideration of the so-called ‘21st century skills’, are not yet explicitly considered in a sufficient number of them. Learning frameworks that consider the integration of technology is also far from mature in the context of IR 4.0 (Bower & Vlachopoulos, 2018). In the literature in this review there are no processes identified to guide TTI, teacher educators, or preservice teachers in the purposeful selection of technology.

In addition, many of the core concepts explored in this review are not necessarily being examined in the context of IR 4.0. Existing concepts such as ‘digital competence,’ ‘21st century skills’, ‘ICT capabilities,’ and ‘TPACK’ used by studies in this review, along with the many which were outside the scope of this review, are only now beginning to be considered in the context of IR 4.0. From theoretical concepts to ways to assess preservice teachers, there is little to support current practice in PTT in IR 4.0. Concepts, such as 21st century skills, and how to explicitly develop these in PTT have limited research, evidenced in Appendix A. Whilst integrating technology is evidently the center of much research, both consider the context of IR 4.0 and which provide direction on how to select technologies purposefully or how to design or select assessment tools, especially those which develop transferable skills (Bower & Vlachopoulos, 2018). Without a clear idea of the soft, transferable, or ICT skills preservice teachers need, frameworks to guide teacher educators towards purposeful learning in technologies or assessment to guide preservice teachers towards 21st century skills, this leaves a dangerous gap of knowledge. As the exponential development of new technologies only widens this further, this gap in knowledge makes it difficult to prepare preservice teachers for the career that they will soon enter. Without the theoretical underpinnings to allow TTI to understand how to respond to IR 4.0, it leaves many institutions in the dark and preservice teachers potentially unprepared.

The literature in this review seems to acknowledge the issue of sustainability in the face of rapid changes resulting from IR 4.0. There is an emphasis on low-cost or open-source technology which uses hardware already available to TTI. This approach provides one strategy to keep up with the technological marvels of IR 4.0 without an inordinate budget to keep up. Furthermore, with the advent of virtual reality, augmented reality, and artificial intelligence, there is an emphasis on finding ways to use face-to-face time with teacher educators efficiently. The innovative use of new technologies to deliver quality initial teacher training provides many opportunities. Additional supports may be available through the use of augmented reality or artificial intelligence for preservice teachers to develop skills with technology in multiple spaces (Esteve-Mon et al., 2016; Oner, 2020). While, as discussed previously, technologies that are improving and interconnecting may change the ways in which teacher educators are used, the issue of sustainability against the constant development and adoption of new technologies is one that has potential opportunities and challenges.

This study has shown that there are exciting and potentially revolutionary technologies being developed and utilized for PTT in IR 4.0. The volume of studies required in order to prepare TTIs, however, is currently not sufficient. There is an urgent need for research into the gaps in knowledge discussed here to conceptualize key concepts, respond to the needs of industry, and prepare preservice teachers for the new realities facing education.

5. Limitations
The research team acknowledges limitations in this paper. By intentionally scoping for literature from high-quality journals, the number of eligible publications was limited, and so are the opportunities to draw inferences on the generalizability of our findings across study contexts. A broader database search may result in more articles on this topic being found. The limitations of a scoping review methodology also necessitate a teleological viewpoint (Oancea & Pring, 2008) which may limit the diversity present even within TTIs. Additionally, some of the studies looked at multiple TTIs, meaning that further research in this area remains valuable. This review did not scope a particular area of specialty in PTT due to a lack of articles, and further research into these specialties, for example, science education, could be valuable. Additionally, due to the small number of articles, differences in early childhood, primary or elementary, and secondary specialties could not be discerned. Focusing on specializations of subject or schooling phase may be of interest to future studies.

6. Conclusion
Our scoping review on the topic of Initial Teacher Training for twenty-first century skills in IR 4.0 revealed the following research gaps:

(1)
Understanding and developing frameworks and assessments which reflect and consider IR 4.0 for TTIs to effectively prepare preservice teachers for the realities of IR 4.0.

(2)
Understanding the ways in which TTIs can engage with IR 4.0 technologies (e.g., virtual reality, augmented reality, artificial intelligence) sustainably and innovatively to address opportunities and challenges available in developing preservice teachers.

Addressing these concerns is a priority given the already quick introduction of new skills, technologies, and spaces arising from IR 4.0. From the reviewed literature, it is concluded that this topic is far from mature, with many rich opportunities for future research. Given the progression even in such a short time, it is concerning that only limited research has been conducted within the IR 4.0 frame. Further clarification on why this is the case would also be valuable to this topic. Is it the result of technologies and approaches outpacing the speed with which research can be done? Are some of the technologies out of reach for the majority of TTI? These may be addressed in a future study, and these questions could be considered a limitation of this study. Preservice teachers require preparation for a changing educational landscape. Therefore, there is an urgent need for a larger volume of research to be done into this topic in order to provide support to the many challenges and opportunities ushered in by the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

