Developing digital competencies is a critical component of preservice teacher training. However, this is a complex process which includes a range of different strategies. Moreover, little is known about how they come together as an integrated approach to prepare future teachers for educational technology use. Therefore, the aim of this study is to examine relationships among strategies to develop digital competence in preservice teacher training. Association rules analysis was conducted on a questionnaire dataset of 931 preservice teachers' experiences in their training, representing the six strategies. Results showed four distinct clusters of associated strategies, revealing a new integrated approach for the development of digital competence in teacher training. Specifically, multi-directional and dynamic relationships in strategies are needed to improve preservice teachers’ experiences developing digital competencies. Future directions for research are discussed.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Digital competency

Preservice teaching

Association rules analysis

Integrated model

1. Introduction
Contemporary classrooms, both in compulsory schooling and in higher education, are a mix of digital and face-to-face interactions and tasks, which should broadly reflect work and learning in society (Oberländer, Beinicke, & Bipp, 2020). However, new digital technologies and ways of working technologically are continually emerging (Emejulu & McGregor, 2019). Therefore, it is essential that preservice teachers have the competencies to develop digitally integrated learning, but also be able to navigate this changing environment, today and in future integration of digital technologies (OECD, 2019). They need to possess the necessary digital competencies to do this when they complete their degree and enter the classroom (Elstad & Christophersen, 2017; Valtonen et al., 2015), but they are generally less prepared than other tertiary graduates to perform well at problem solving in technology-rich environments (OECD, 2019).

Strong digital competence in teachers is a key component of students developing the skills to make the most out of new technologies (OECD, 2019). A competency includes skills, such as how to perform a task or procedure, but also the capacity to problem solve and critically engage (Olofsson, Fransson, & Lindberg, 2019). Digital competence is a reflection of the digital skills and knowledge that are politically understood to be necessary to fully participate in our increasingly technological society (Ilomäki, Paavola, Lakkala, & Kantosalo, 2014). For preservice teachers, their use of and experience with digital technology integration will contribute to their digital competence (Instefjord & Munthe, 2017). The most effective way to develop teachers’ digital competence is to provide them with experiences integrating digital technologies in learning as part of their training (Farjon, Smits, & Voogt, 2019; Voithofer, Nelson, Han, & Caines, 2019). However, little is known about how teaching strategies to develop digital competence should be employed, in which combinations and for whom (e.g. Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018).

Developing preservice teachers' digital competence has proven difficult in teacher education due to the complexity of these practices (Mouza, Karchmer-Klein, Nandakumar, Ozden, & Hu, 2014). Specifically, due to multiple relationships among digital competence teaching strategies, it is unclear how to best design learning develop these skills. The current study draws on research considering preservice teachers' possible experiences with six effective teaching strategies, including role models, learning by design, and authentic experiences to support digital technology integration in future teaching (see Tondeur et al., 2012). We investigate how they may have experienced these practices in teacher training to provide some insight into design of future training to develop digital competence. To conduct this analysis, preservice teachers' questionnaire responses about their experiences with the teaching strategies were analyzed using the data mining technique association rules analysis. Data mining techniques were used because they are able to reveal new and novel relationships in datasets, which can contribute to existing understanding of phenomena (Baker, 2010). Results were visualized using directed graphs to identify patterns among the six strategies. This approach is novel in the field of teacher education. It provides a way to explore relationships among teaching strategies, to create a multi-strategy integrated approach in teaching which can contribute to developing digital competency. Findings can contribute to understanding how strategies can be organized in training to develop preservice teachers’ digital competence, which is a significant need in the field (e.g. Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018; Ilomäki, Paavola, Lakkala, & Kantosalo, 2014).

In the following sections, we first describe the conceptual framework underpinning this study, focusing on teaching strategies to develop digital competence. Existing evidence illustrating some of the complexities related to how relationships among the strategies will be discussed. Methods and results are then presented. This is followed by findings and implications for developing digital competency in teacher education. Finally, implications for teacher educators’ practice and future research will be discussed.

2. Developing preservice teachers’ digital competencies
While there have been significant gains in how teachers integrate digital technologies in teaching, internationally, it continues to be highly variable among different contexts (e.g. Ifinedo, Rikala, & Hämäläinen, 2020). It is relatively well known that providing teachers with access to digital technologies, time to experiment and training are not enough to result in digital technology integration (Lee & Lee, 2014). The skills and understanding to effectively integrate digital technologies in learning needs to be developed in teacher training programs. Moreover, it has been identified that improving how preservice teachers are trained to use digital technologies in an effective way to increase the confidence and capacity of teachers as a whole (Farjon et al., 2019) and their digital competency (Instefjord & Munthe, 2017).

There are a range of known teaching strategies that can be employed to prepare preservice teachers for technology integration in future teaching (Kay, 2007; Mouza et al., 2014). Still, the question remains how teacher trainers utilize various strategies to develop preservice teachers’ digital competence. In response to this question, Tondeur et al. (2012) reviewed 19 qualitative studies to identify which content and delivery methods best prepare preservice teachers to integrate technology into their future classrooms. The Synthesis of Qualitative Evidence (SQD) model has been developed based on these strategies (see Fig. 1).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (507KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Synthesis of Qualitative Evidence (SQD) model (Tondeur et al., 2012).

Three levels are included in the SQD-model to represent considerations for developing preservice teachers’ digital competency (Tondeur et al., 2012). The first, outer, level addresses aligning theory and practice within systemic change efforts. The next level in includes institutional and cultural aspects of change, including technology planning and leadership, professional learning, resources available and cooperation within the institution and beyond. The final level is the inner circle. This level includes six micro-level strategies that support change in teaching, such as employing change role models and authentic tasks. While it is necessary to address all three levels in systemic change in teaching, the current study begins with an examination of the six strategies on the inner circle. Integrating strategies to develop digital competence into preservice teacher training provides the types of experiences, examples and interactions needed to develop preservice teachers' ability to confidently and appropriately use digital technologies in future teaching.

The first strategy includes teacher educators as role models (Strategy 1: Role model). Role models provide examples and are a crucial motivator for the development of digital competencies (e.g. Kaufman, 2015), as preservice teachers are likely to adopt teaching styles and practices they observed (Ellis, Alonzo, & Nguyen, 2020). However, preservice teachers should also be able to reflect about the opportunities and challenges related to the use of technology in education (Strategy 2: Reflection). Providing preservice teachers for instance with the opportunity to critically assess materials and experiences integrating digital technologies in the classroom helps them to develop the ability to successfully select and integrate digital technologies in their learning designs (cf. Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018). The evidence in the Tondeur et al. (2012) review also shows that providing learning opportunities to learn about digital technology integration by designing curriculum materials (Strategy 3: Learning by design) can be a key strategy. Preservice teachers generally have very little experience designing learning materials (Agyei & Voogt, 2016). Therefore, it is important to provide opportunities to learn about technology integration through design (e.g. Alyyar & Fisser, 2019).

Given preservice teachers' unfamiliarity with technology integration, they often lack confidence in their designs. Working in groups can mitigate feelings of insecurity during this process (cf. Koh & Chai, 2016; Strategy 4: Collaboration). As a fifth strategy, preservice teachers should also apply their knowledge of digital technologies in an authentic setting (cf. Valtonen et al., 2015): experience the value to use digital technologies in education in authentic settings, doing rather than watching (Kimmons, Miller, Amador, Desjardins, & Hall, 2015: Strategy 5: Authentic experiences). Finally, feedback needs to be ongoing and process oriented (Strategy 6: Feedback). It could be provided through discussions, questionnaires, interviews, and observations in order to understand how preservice teachers’ digital competence develops, and what kind of problems preservice teachers face in using digital technologies (e.g. Ellis et al., 2020).

2.1. Towards an integrated approach of developing digital competencies
Addressing multiple strategies, such as the six SQD teaching strategies, can be understood as an integrated approach. An example of this is Chien, Chang, Yeh, and Chang (2012) MAGDAIRE 4-step approach: Modelled Analysis, Guided Development, Articulated Implementation, and Reflected Evaluation, which addresses moving preservice science teachers from passive digital technology users to active designers of learning. They come from the position that knowledge is fundamentally embedded in a relevant activity, which is then inextricably linked to the social, cultural and physical context of that activity. The approach draws on concepts of situated cognition and cognitive apprenticeship (cf. Bridges, Chan, & Hmelo-Silver, 2016, pp. 1–6; Hennessy, 1993), and it considers the activity and context framing as part of the integrated approach. For example, preservice teachers may observe how their teacher training deals with educational technology (Guided Development), while at the same time the teacher trainer is able to explain their thinking and decision making in the technology activity (Modelled Analysis). This example includes explanation of the activity, while observation and analysis of decision making can account for contextual factors, affecting how this task is able to be implemented in learning. Research has shown that this approach results in increased proficiency developing digital technology-integrated materials (see Becuwe et al., 2017).

However, to implement an integrated approach in practice, it is necessary to understand how the components come together and/or how the approach should be implemented to achieve the expected outcomes (Kay, 2007; Mouza et al., 2014). The difficulty is that when addressing multiple factors or strategies, multiple relationships will exist. In a pilot analysis of complexity in SQD strategies, Howard, Tondeur, Ma, and Yang (2019) identified multiple non-linear relationships among digital competency strategies. This complexity can be difficult to navigate and may cloud understanding of how each component behaves as part of the approach. It is necessary to understand how these can be integrated into teacher training and support preservice teachers to critically engage with technology-enhanced learning designs. Without gaining a better understanding of these relationships, how to best integrate these strategies into teacher training will remain elusive.

2.2. A complex problem
To develop an integrated approach to digital competence training, it is necessary to grasp some of the potential multiple and non-linear relationships among the six teaching strategies. It has been argued that training preservice teachers to integrate digital technologies in learning is a complex and dynamic problem (Jung & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2020). Importantly, digital competence not simply about learning how to integrate digital technologies in learning. It is also about understanding how digital technologies are used in work and learning, and that they are constantly changing and having the capacity to problem solve (e.g. Olofsson, Fransson, & Linberg, 2019). Teachers with a high level of digital competence will be able to navigate changes, problems and future technology integration. Therefore, to develop this competency preservice teachers need to acquire a range of different skills. They need to observe effective integrated learning and have it modelled to build a repertoire of digital technology integration strategies, they need to be explicitly support to engage in problem solving when designing learning, and they need the opportunity to reflect on those designs (Kafyulilo, Fisser, & Voogt, 2016). Identifying these types of strategy combinations could provide the building blocks of an integrated approach to develop digital competence.

The concept of complexity can be understood as of a dimension of large and multi-variable systems, but it can also be a key dimension of relatively well-known dimensions which are simply behaving in unpredictable ways (Nicolis & Nicolis, 2012). A complex system can be understood as "a set of components, coupled together to function in a way that might not be apparent from the functioning of the separate parts" (Hirsch, Levine, & Miller, 2007, p. 240). Research has argued that complexity theory is a useful way to explore the phenomenon of teacher education. In particular, complexity theory provides a way to understand non-linear relationships and how a whole can become more than the sum of its parts (Cochran-Smith, Ell, Ludlow, Grudnoff, & Aitken, 2014). We specifically draw on the concept of complexity to explore the organization of multiple and non-linear relationships among teaching strategies contributing to digital competence. In particular, complexity provides a way to understand and navigate relationships among the teaching strategies, which can then inform an integrated approach to developing digital competence.

We draw on two key concepts of complexity to explore relationships among preservice teachers’ experiences with the teaching strategies: emergence and self-organization. Emergence can be understood as, while "comprising of many units … the whole can in no way be reduced to the properties of the constituent parts" (Nicolis & Nicolis, 2012, p. 3; see also; Ye, Zhang, & Vasilakos, 2017). Limits to reducing a system to smaller parts results from underlying self-organization of a system. Self-organization includes hierarchical structures, which create order and coherence amongst the randomness of a complex system. These two concepts are appropriate for exploring how teaching strategies contribute to digital competence, because digital competence cannot be reduced to component parts. It is an ill-defined collection of skills and understanding, which must be developed through multiple strategies (cf. Ilomäki, Paavola, Lakkala, & Kantosalo, 2014).

In regard to the teaching strategies to develop digital competence, as discussed, these can be understood individually but to develop digital competence in preservice teacher training an integrated approach must be adopted (cf. Uerz, Volman, & Kral, 2018). In the following section, we highlight some key known relationships among digital competence teaching strategies to develop digital competence, which are likely to contribute to an integrated approach. Given the range of possible relationships among the strategies, it is not possible to fully anticipate all combinations. Therefore, we provide a few examples and empirical evidence of associations among SQD-strategies, to illustrate the level of complexity among strategies.

2.3. Contributing to digital competency
As an illustration, we initially consider relationships among three of the teaching strategies: Role Model (ROL), Instructional Design (DES) and Reflection (REF). Appropriate role models (ROL) are an important aspect of preservice teachers’ development of digital technology lessons (DES; Farjon et al., 2019). The function of role models includes practices such as providing worked examples, demonstrating good practice, providing problem solving strategies, etc., which contributes to preservice teachers' knowledge of design. This sets up a relationship between ROL and DES (ROL- > DES; see Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (191KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. DES, ROL & REF relationships.

However, simply providing examples and modelling good practice is not sufficient to develop digital competence. Preservice teachers also need to reflect (REF) on the role of digital technologies in education. REF involves discussing and reflecting upon digital technologies in learning, the opportunities and the risks of use (Kimmons et al., 2015). If digital technologies are modelled, preservice teachers are more likely to reflect on its use (ROL- > REF). This might help them see the utility, value and feasibility of using a particular technology and/or integration strategy (cf. Elstad & Christophersen, 2017; Mouza et al., 2014). This may also further their ability to differentiate between action and purpose and enable deeper and more critical thinking about technology integration in their designs (REF - > DES). Based on this knowledge, Fig. 2 presents hypothetical relationships among the three strategies.

Even in this simple example, some of the potential multiple relationships among the three teaching strategies can be observed. Role Model would theoretically affect both design and reflection, as these practices can be explicitly demonstrated and/or observed by preservice teachers. However, in this particular configuration instructional design does not affect role models or reflection. Again, we are only presenting a set of relationships to illustrate how relationships among all six teaching strategies may become more complex on a larger scale.

Authentic experiences (AUT) provide preservice teachers with the opportunity to apply their knowledge of educational technology in real settings, which helps them to develop practical knowledge about effective use of digital technology in classrooms (Alayyar & Fisser, 2019). In the Tondeur et al. (2012) review study, preservice teachers acknowledged the importance of applying their knowledge of educational technology in designing integrated learning experiences (AUT- > DES). According to Best, MacGregor, and Price (2017), their experience enables them to connect with real-world and meaningful problems that may be important to their students. They argue that embedding authentic learning experiences within the curriculum requires responding to the changing needs of teaching and learning. Some technology use can be modelled (ROL), but this does not substitute for 'doing', creating and using their own designs in a classroom (AUT).

While relationships presented above have been identified in research, they do not take into account the possible gestalt of multiple relationships. Therefore, it is necessary to consider how self-organization of the strategies may result in the emergence of other themes. Using these two concepts from complexity theory can provide insight into how combined strategies may contribute to digital competence. This can provide some insight into how teacher trainers can implement the teaching strategies as an integrated approach in their practice. This brings us to the main aim of the study.

3. Purpose of the study: exploring teaching strategies to develop digital competence
Using an existing dataset comprising of final year preservice teachers' responses to an SQD-questionnaire about their experiences with the six teaching strategies to develop preservice teachers’ digital competency. The current research will explore relationships among these teaching strategies. Research has identified multiple relationships among the teaching strategies (cf. Mouza et al., 2014). We argue that data mining is able to reveal complex relationships (cf. Bush, Thornton-Wells, & Ritchie, 2007), provide a novel view of these relationships (cf. Baker, 2010) and inform practice.

Data mining is an inductive process. The aim of data mining is ‘knowledge discovery’, through drawing meaningful insights from patterns observed in data (Bartschat, Reischl, & Mikut, 2019; Romero & Ventura, 2013). It can be applied to any dataset and is not embedded in any particular discipline. Importantly, data mining does not assume a model, such as the linear model assumed in inferential statistics. By not comparing observed patterns to an existing model, it allows data to be understood on its own. Results can then be visualized using graph theory, which is appropriate for exploring complex relationships in data (see Gignoux, Chérel, Davies, Flint, & Lateltin, 2017). Further analysis is then needed to understand how patterns are relevant and meaningful to contexts and behaviours.

The aim of the current analysis is to employ data mining approaches to explore preservice teachers' experiences with teaching strategies to develop digital competence in teacher training. The data mining approach can provide a novel view of relationships among known factors, which can then contribute to and build on existing understanding (Baker, 2010). It can reveal some of the complexity of relationships among the teaching strategies. Further, data mining methods, and specifically association rules, have been proven useful approaches to making patterns and relationships visible to teachers to improve instruction (e.g. Merceron & Yacef, 2010). However, one of the key issues identified in use of data and data visualizations to inform learning and instruction, is that analytics are not explicitly aligned with instructional strategies (Gašević, Dawson, & Siemens, 2015). In this research we address this issue, through our examination of preservice teachers’ reported experiences with teaching strategies. This has the potential to inform an integrated approach to implementing teaching strategies to develop digital competency and improve digital technology integration in initial teacher training.

4. Approach and methods
4.1. The dataset
The current study draws on an existing dataset, looking at 931 preservice teachers' experiences with teaching strategies to develop digital competency in their teacher training programs. Data were collected from 20 teacher training institutions in Belgium. The preservice teachers were in the final year of their degree. The sample was representative of preservice teachers, with 72% being female, with an average age of 24.7 years (SD = 7.02 years). In terms of previous educational experience, just over half had a Bachelor's degree (57.8%) and just under half had a teacher training degree (42.2%).

Data were collected using a validated SQD-scale (see Tondeur, van Braak, Siddiq, & Scherer, 2016). In the questionnaire, participants were asked to indicate agreement with a range of experiences related to the six digital competency teaching strategies (e.g. “During my preservice training I saw good examples of ICT practice that inspired me to use ICT” or “I received sufficient help in designing lessons that integrated ICT”). The six teaching strategies comprising the SQD-scale were further externally validated in Tondeur, Pareja Roblin, van Braak, Voogt, and Prestridge (2017) longitudinal study with beginning teachers. Findings from the longitudinal study indicate that the beginning teachers acknowledged the importance of the strategies, but not all of them where addressed during their training. In a more recent validation study (Tondeur, Scherer, Siddiq, & Baran, 2020), the strategies of the SQD model were used to explore the connections between TPACK (Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge) and the SQD strategies. Findings clearly demonstrated the importance of the SQD-strategies for enhancing pre-service teachers’ TPACK. At the same time, analysis of the in-depth interviews indicated a need for more integrated preservice teacher learning experiences which is the main focus of the current analysis.

4.2. Analysis
Association rules analysis was used in the current study to explore the research question: What are relationships among the six SQD strategies? Specifically, the Apriori algorithm is used to identify rules in the dataset. This approach is a data mining technique, widely used to explore associations (relationships) in a dataset and is appropriate for exploring complexity in data (see Bush et al., 2007). Associations are identified based on the frequency of items appearing together in the data. When two items appear together frequently, it is understood a ‘rule’. Items appearing in frequently as rules are considered ‘important’ in the dataset.

Associations between items are expressed in the form: A→ C. 'A' is the 'antecedent' while 'C' is the 'consequent'. This can be logically understood as ‘IF A, THEN C’. Antecedents and consequents may contain multiple items. Rules are assessed using three measurements: support, confidence and lift. Support is the degree to which the antecedent and consequent occur at the same time in the dataset. Confidence is how frequently the antecedent is followed by the consequent. Lift indicates the correlation between antecedent and consequent, which predicts performance of this rule (see Han, Kamber, & Pei, 2012).

Twenty-four SQD items were included in analysis (see Appendix 1 for a full list of the items). Each teaching strategy was addressed through four questionnaire items. Each item measures preservice teachers’ experiences with the teaching strategies, as they developed their digital competency. Items were Likert-type and had five possible options for responses, ‘Strongly agree’ to ‘Strongly disagree’. Each of these options is treated categorically in association rules analysis. In data science, each of these (i.e. ROL1, Agree) is understood as an attribute. This results in 120 possible attributes in the dataset, the number of resulting associations among 120 attributes is large. Therefore, rules fulfilling the cut-off criteria: Support (>0.10) and Confidence (>0.70) were included in the analysis.

The rules fulfilling the criteria were then visualized as a directed graph. In a directed graph rules are visualized as ‘ordered pairs.’ Ordered pairs connected by an arrow, with the antecedent at the beginning and consequent at the end. Groups of rules sharing antecedents and consequents may group together, which can then be understood as a cluster. Clusters can be understood as a group of related attributes based on density, which form a discrete group. For this initial analysis, clusters were heuristically identified based on their self-organization, rather than calculated. In Fig. 3, rule clusters have been circled (see Fig. 3) for the purpose of supporting an initial exploration of possible emergent themes.

5. Results
Analysis resulted in a total of 7821 rules, with an average combined antecedent and consequent length of 3.76 items. The results showed an average support of .106, meaning the antecedent and consequent occurred together 11% of the time. The confidence was 0.752, in that the consequent followed the antecedent 75% of the time. Thirty-three rules satisfied the cut-off points, which grouped into four clusters. Table 1 presents the support, confidence and lift statistics for the full 33 rules and each of the identified clusters.


Table 1. Support, confidence and lift for the dataset and clusters.

Support	Confidence	Lift
min	mean	max	min	mean	max	min	mean	max
All rules	.101	.106	.127	.702	.752	.847	2.661	3.235	3.790
Cluster 1	.102	.105	.114	.714	.723	.752	3.213	3.353	3.381
Cluster 2	.102	.107	.114	.702	.746	.770	3.054	3.245	3.349
Cluster 3	.101	.109	.127	.703	.785	.835	2.661	2.969	3.159
Cluster 4	.101	.104	.114	.719	.755	.847	3.170	3.372	3.790
Note. Cut-off points: Support > .10 and Confidence > 0.70.

It can be noted that the four clusters have similar support, confidence and lift scores. This suggests that they have similar importance and predictiveness. However, Cluster 4 does show a higher lift, which suggests associations in this cluster are the most significant of the four.

Fig. 4 presents a directed graph visualizing the 33 rules. Arrows linking antecedents and consequents (attributes, questionnaire items) represent a relationship, where the beginning of the arrow is the antecedent and the end is the consequent. The graph is 'directional', meaning the antecedents are likely to result in the consequent. This is the 'IF A, THEN C′ logic. Each rule has a 'lift' value. The average lift was 3.337, meaning the rules were on average 3.337 times more predictive than random choice.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Four-cluster solution.

All attributes appearing in the rules reflected students' positive experiences with the teaching strategies, e.g. Agree. For example, the rule ‘ROL4, AUT3- > REF1’ appears in the graph (Cluster 1). This rule has two antecedents (ROL4 and AUT3) and one consequent (REF1). It can be understood as:

1.
If a student Agreed “The potential of ICT for education was demonstrated in a concrete way" (ROL4): and,

2.
Agreed, “I was stimulated to gain experience with ICT in class practice” (AUT3); then,

3.
They were also likely to also Agree “I have been able to reflect sufficiently on the role of ICT in education” (REF1).

In the figure, grey areas indicate four heuristic clusters identified within the graph. Variables with associations with more than one cluster have been placed in the cluster where the association has a higher lift score. The weaker association was retained and expressed as a greyed-out line. Rule antecedents are on the edges of clusters, with consequents in the centre. We will not address each individual association in this analysis. We focus on patterns arising from self-organizing in each cluster and emergent themes.

Clusters 1 and Cluster 2 both show emergent role model themes. Cluster 1 has a non-linear distributed organization with two central nodes (consequents). The two central nodes in Cluster 1 are both Role Model strategies ROL3 (“I have seen good ICT practice examples that have inspired me to integrate ICT into the classroom”) and ROL1 (“I have seen many examples of educational ICT use”). The lift scores of associations in this cluster were similar, ranging from 3.2 to 3.5, suggesting that none of the associations are significantly more predictive than others. The frequency of ROL4 (“The potential of ICT for education was demonstrated in a concrete way”) in this cluster also suggests it is an important variable in this dataset. Cluster 2 comprises similar attributes to Cluster 1, with ROL4 at the centre. The combination of these two small clusters results in ROL1, ROL3 and ROL4 each appearing as a consequent. The three attributes (ROL1, 3 & 4) highlight the importance of good ICT examples in preservice teachers' developing digital competency, observing them in practice and in concrete ways. This suggests role models' use of quality examples were important to support positive experiences with digital competency development, in this dataset.

Cluster 3 shows a centralized organization with Authentic Experiences (AUT3, “I was stimulated to gain experience with ICT in class practice”) at the centre (rule consequent). This is an important aspect of developing digital competency, in that it is essential that preservice teachers' test integrated designs in real classrooms. It can be observed that all rule lift scores in the cluster ranged from 2.7 to 3.2, which suggests this cluster is slightly less predictive than the others. Self-organization of this cluster demonstrates all of the teaching strategies can contribute to preservice teachers' feeling stimulated to gain more experience using digital technologies in practice. However, in this sample example, not all of the other five strategies contributed equally. Variables from Reflection (REF), Role Models (ROL) and Instructional Design (DES) were more important in this cluster. Collaboration (COL) and Feedback (FEE) were less frequent and therefore, less likely to result in preservice teachers feeling stimulated to gain experience in class practice. Importantly, clusters reflect what preservice teachers experienced in their teacher training programs and what was important in their experience. This does not mean Collaboration and Feedback were not important, but that they did not significantly contribute to this population's desire to gain experience using digital technologies. This cluster is clearly about the importance of preservice teachers wanting to gain experience in class practice using digital technologies.

Cluster 4 has a similar centralized organization as Clusters 3, with the central node being Instructional Design (DES3, “We were supported to develop educational material using ICT”) and reflecting students' feeling that they are supported to develop integrated materials. The lift scores for this cluster range from 3.2 to 3.8. This cluster includes the most predictive associations in the dataset and all lift scores are relatively similar. Important in this cluster are associations among DES3 and each of the other five strategies, which suggests how all six strategies may come together to create a feeling of positive support for preservice teachers. This organization is similar to Cluster 3, in that the same variables are included. Moreover, self-organization of Cluster 4 suggests that the AUT3 (“I was stimulated to gain experience with ICT in class practice”) is an important aspect of feeling supported, appearing in seven of the eight associations. This suggests an emerging theme of feeling stimulated and supported to design, when developing ICT materials.

The four clusters demonstrate some of the complexity of relationships among the six strategies. In particular Clusters 1 and 2 reflect the same relationships among variables ROL1, 3 and 4. The self-organization of Cluster 4 reflects many of the same relationships appearing in Cluster 3. In Cluster 3, DES3 appears in the antecedent in six of the 10 associations with AUT3 as the consequent. In Cluster 4 DES3 is then the consequent and AUT3 appears in the antecedent, with the same relationships among variables. These repeating relationships suggest that they are important in preservice teachers' experiences, which makes visible some of the complexity among relationships and the multiple effects of strategies.

Results indicate how the strategies have come together in relation to preservice teachers’ experiences with developing digital competency. All six strategies are present in the graph, but Role Model, Instructional Design and Authentic Experiences are clearly the most important. If the directed graph is considered as a whole, it is possible to see how they suggest an integrated approach for developing digital competency. These will be explored and implications addressed in the following section.

6. Discussion
The aim of this study has been to explore relationships among six strategies to develop digital competence in preservice teacher training, to gain insight into some of the complexity of these relationships. This was explored through an association rules analysis of responses to 24 SQD items from a questionnaire addressing teaching strategies addressing digital technology integration. Results suggest implications for development of an integrated approach to developing digital competence can be explored, in relation to the two research questions. First, what are relationships among the six SQD strategies? Results suggest four clusters arising from relationships among preservice teachers’ experiences with the teaching strategies. From the four clusters, three themes emerged as important in preservice teachers' positive experiences with the strategies: i) role models' use of quality examples (Providing Quality Examples), ii) wanting to gain experience in class practice (Gaining Experience), and iii) feeling stimulated and supported in design (Stimulated and Supported to Design). The main finding from the study is how the three themes organize to form a possible integrated approach for the development of digital competency in teacher training. The ability to better understand some of the relationships among the strategies has important implications for teacher training and future research.

6.1. Emerging themes
The basic premise of this study was that complexity has been observed in relationships among preservice teachers’ experiences with the six digital competency strategies. This has contributed to difficulties effectively integrating the strategies into preservice teachers' training. We argued that a way to unpack some of this complexity is needed. Fig. 4 reveals some complexity in the relationships, such as repeating associations and multiple effects. Using the graph as a tool, it is possible to gain some insight into these relationships and potentially inform teacher training design. Returning to the illustrative example, presented earlier in the Background, Role Mode is presented as having an association with Instructional Design and Reflection, and Reflection having an association with Instructional Design. Forms of these relationships are visible in all four clusters. However, it is important to note that the relationships are not clearly unidirectional. Rather, the relationships are repeating, which suggests they are bi-directional. The complexity of these relationships highlights the need to not focus on individual associations, but to look to the emergent themes -- the gestalt -- of self-organization of the teaching strategies.

Three emergent themes have been identified in this dataset. Together these provide insight into a possible integrated approach to developing preservice teachers' digital competencies. The first theme comprises Clusters 1 and 2 and highlights the importance of ‘Providing Quality Examples', which largely includes attributes from the Role Model strategy. Specifically, results suggest the use of a range of quality examples (ROL1 & 3) presented in a concrete way (ROL4) were important in preservice teachers' experiences. This suggests the examples could be used as practical tools to support their developing designs (e.g. Ellis et al., 2020). The use of examples was related to Authentic Experiences (AUT3, “I was stimulated to gain experience with ICT in class practice”) and Reflection. Research has highlighted the importance of role models in supporting preservice teachers' reflection on Instructional Design (cf. Elstad & Christophersen, 2017). However, the association between Providing Quality Examples and authentic experiences is less understood. Feeling positively simulated to gain experience in class practice would predispose preservice teachers to feeling positively about quality examples to support that practice. This suggests a 'virtuous' loop and that the need for role models may appear at different times in the development of digital competencies.

This leads to the second emergent theme relates to ‘Gaining Experience’, which highlights which 'experiences' contribute to preservice teachers wanting to gain experience in class practice. Preservice teachers need to feel motivated to gain this experience and test their designs (Røkenes & Krumsvik, 2016). This theme includes all six strategies, with feeling positive about Authentic Experiences (AUT3) at the centre. However, results suggest that the other five strategies do not equally contribute to wanting to gain experience. Role Model, Reflection and Instructional Design occur more frequently and are likely to have a more significant effect on wanting to gain experience, while Collaboration and Feedback are likely to play less of a role. This result suggests that strategies that directly relate to 'doing' and design, such as working with examples, thinking about design and designing, would logically have a stronger relationship with wanting to gain experience in class practice (Kafyulilo et al., 2016). Collaboration and Feedback would be strategies that support this process, such as gaining input from peers and teacher trainers on design decisions (Pieters, Voogt, & Pareja Roblin, 2019, p. 424). In terms of understanding the integrated approach, this finding provides some insight into how the strategies may be purposively integrated into teacher training.

The final theme addresses preservice teachers feeling ‘Stimulated and Supported to Design’ and is drawn from the self-organization of Cluster 4. This theme also includes all six strategies, but showed an emphasis on the Instructional Design variable (see Koh & Chai, 2016), 'we were supported to develop educational material using ICT' (DES3) and 'feeling stimulated to gain experience in class practice (AUT3). Interestingly, self-organization of this theme showed very similar patterns to Gaining Experience, with a high frequency of associations between DES3 and AUT3. However, a de-emphasis on Role Model variables can also be observed. This suggests that when specifically emphasising design, teacher trainers may consider supporting preservice teachers through Reflection (which frequently occurred in Cluster 4) and ensuring they feel stimulated to gain experience in class practice (cf. Alayyar & Fisser, 2019), rather than providing examples of integration (ROL1) in a concrete way (ROL4). It is possible, at the point in their training, further examples may be less likely to be needed, and discussion of issues (REF2) and reflection on experiences are more important (REF3). This reflects some of the complexity of integrating teaching strategies to support digital competence into teacher training, as desired digital competencies are developed organization of the strategies may take on different forms.

6.2. Integrated approach
The combined three emergent themes present the beginning of a 'roadmap' of an integrated approach to developing digital competency in teacher training. The self-organization of the whole graph, and the three themes reflects the "complex, contextual, and multi-faceted" of digital technology integration (Kimmons et al., 2015), but also begins to inform how strategies may be integrated into teacher training. In the initial conception of the six strategies, Tondeur et al. (2012) argue a sequence of how the strategies may occur in training, which included "engagement of preservice teachers in investigating role models, designing lesson plans, practicing in authentic settings, and providing feedback" (p. 142). While this is a logical sequence, it is linear. In the findings from the current study, multiple-directions of relationships among the variables suggests a more non-linear organization of experiences with the teaching strategies. For example, in Gaining Experience, it can be observed that positive feelings about support (DES3), examples used (ROL1,3&4) and reflection (REF1-4) are all likely to be associated with feeling stimulated to gain experience (AUT3). These same variables then reorganize to form Stimulated and Supported to Design. Tondeur et al. (2012) original linear organization had linked designing and practicing designs in authentic settings in sequence and as a one-way process. Evidence of how strategies reorganize between designing and wanting to practice designs in authentic settings, suggest more of a complex relationship and one where the distinction between the two activities is not clearly separate in training. Therefore, there may not be a clear sequence of tasks, but a more iterative approach to training where designs are trialled in authentic settings, refined and then trialled a second time. The importance of the relationship between authentic experiences and design has been identified in other research (e.g. Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018). To better understand this interplay, the relationship between Authentic Experiences and Design needs to be explored in more depth to unpack the possible dynamic relationships and the role of this relationships in the integrated approach.

The integrated approach includes all six strategies and provides an important empirically-based view of the possible complexity in preservice teachers' experiences developing digital competency in their training. Importantly, the teaching strategies are not equally represented, which poses interesting questions about application in training. First, the proposed integrated approach heavily emphasises Role Model, Reflection and Instructional Design strategies. While Collaboration and Feedback strategies did not play a significant role in this dataset. However, these are known to be important in developing digital competency (see Alayyar & Fisser, 2019; Elstad & Christophersen, 2017). Second, not all of the variables for each strategy are represented. In previous discussions, we have touched on the fact that the analysis is drawn from data reflecting preservice teachers' experiences with strategies to develop digital technology integration for future teaching. This is an important consideration in the interpretation of findings and how these can be applied in practice. As the questionnaire data being analyzed is actually preservice teachers' reflections on their own experiences with the strategies, this does not necessarily provide an accurate view of teacher training. This means, teaching strategies that do not appear or appear infrequently in the analysis may not have been experienced by those preservice teachers or other strategies were experienced more frequently. This needs to be explored further to determine. It would also be necessary to explore contextual factors related to training, which may impact on experiences. However, while the integrated approach we have presented does not necessarily provide a complete view into how strategies are related, it does show which strategies preservice teachers felt they experienced more often and relationships among those strategies. This provides an important first step to inform how digital competence may be developed in teacher training and the organization of teaching strategies. Further research is needed to consider how teacher trainers integrate the strategies into teaching programs, to then compare preservice teachers' experiences with training design.

7. Limitations and future research
There are key limitations in the study methods that may also contribute to the organization of teaching strategies in the integrated approach. First, the association rules approach is based on frequency of associations appearing in the dataset. Therefore, if associations appear more frequently, they are assumed to be more important. However, this potentially eliminates important associations that may not appear as often but are highly predictive. This can produce an incomplete understanding of what is important in a dataset. To check this, it is necessary in further analysis to adjust confidence, support and lift thresholds to capture additional associations and check if additional relationships need to be included in the graph.

Second, conceptualization of the SQD strategies is based on research from before 2012. Digital competencies would have changed from that time, given new digital technologies and associated practices in teaching and learning. Preservice teacher experiences need to be considered as they dictate how the teaching strategies associate. For example, literature used in 2012 indicated that feedback was largely summative and provided through assessments. This is potentially reflected in how Feedback is observed in the graph, in that it is not related to possible formative feedback provided by Role Models. Alternatively, if Role Models are providing the feedback, preservice teachers may not relate it to this experience. Therefore, the experiences represented may not be reflective of what preservice teachers are experiencing in their own use of technology, in their work and in their placements. This should be explored in more depth, such as investigating how preservice teachers experience formative feedback and if this changes how they experience the Feedback strategies. A possible approach would be to conduct an updated systematic literature review of teaching strategies to develop digital competence, to capture any changes in this area.

Further work in this area should also explore connections between preservice teachers' experiences and the design of their training programs, to confirm how the teaching strategies are implemented and how they are experienced. To confirm relationships among strategies, it will be important to compare results across institutions to explore how the strategies self-organize and if different themes emerge in different teaching cultures. Clearly, simplifying such a complex innovation is a difficult process that can reduce the importance of the contextuality of the results. Therefore, future studies on preservice technology training should include the contextual nature of the development of competencies for integrating technology in teaching and learning processes.

8. Conclusions
In conclusion, the current study has been able to reveal some of the complexity in how preservice teachers experience teaching strategies to develop digital competency. In particular, the identification of multi-directional and dynamic relationships suggests a new integrated approach, which provides some insight into how to teach digital competence and design teacher training. The integrated approach 'roadmap' is a first attempt at better understanding of this process, and it introduces more questions than it may answer. However, this is an important step in studying the complex system of digital competence and developing a better understanding of how to prepare future teachers' digital technology integration.