The aim of this study is to contrast levels of student engagement in blended and non-blended learning scenarios. The theoretical framework addresses core elements for the implementation of blended learning scenarios and discusses their impacts on student engagement. A design based on the within-subject experimental model was utilized with a sample of 92 tenth grade students from four different groups at a state public secondary school in the Northeast of Brazil. Procedures comprised the application of a survey on familiarity with ICT tools followed by the implementation of two blocks of lessons separated by a two-month interval, each of them composed of computer-assisted blended and traditional lecture-based learning scenarios. Students' responses to the tasks in each lesson were captured through a screen recording application and levels of engagement determined from criteria based on observable quantifiable behaviors. Nonparametric tests show significantly higher levels of student engagement in blended learning scenarios not affected by significant differences in familiarity with ICT. Categories of engagement regarding the students’ use of resources available in the lessons are presented and discussion emphasizes behavioral engagement as a context-specific phenomenon, highlighting implications for teaching practices.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Blended learning

Student engagement

Teaching practice

Learning activities

1. Introduction
Several educational practices comprising the use of technology made popular over the past 15 years have been associated with the umbrella term blended learning (Boelens, Voet, & De Wever, 2017; Bower, Dalgarno, Kennedy, Lee, & Kenney, 2015; Cunningham, 2014; Garrison & Vaughan, 2008, Norberg, 2012; Prasad, Maaga, Redestowicza, & Hoeb, 2018; Thibaut, Curwood, Carvalho, & Simpson, 2015). Research has provided a great deal of evidence that these technologically enhanced pedagogical approaches contribute significantly to promote learning, especially for optimizing interactions and maximizing collaboration among individuals (Kumpulainen, Mikkola, & Jaatinen, 2014). Nevertheless, literature indicates there are still issues and assumptions concerning these practices which require discussion and experimental investigation (Boelens, Voet, & De Wever, 2017; Vanslambroucka et al., 2019).

There has been a gap in research when it comes to taking a closer look at students' behavior in the micro-context of learning activities in blended scenarios (Zhang et al., 2019). An important issue deriving from that is the extent to which these learning scenarios effectively enable learners to take up an active role in lessons (Osgerby, 2013). The potential of these now widespread educational practices to promote student engagement resulting in objectively verifiable active participation remains under-investigated (Wong, Hwang, Goh, & Arrif, 2018).

While it is known that engagement is an essential factor for academic success in both traditional and technology-enhanced lessons (Delialioglu, 2011; Heflin, Shewmaker, & Nguyen, 2017; Henrie, Halverson, & Graham, 2015), this study intends to contribute to fill a gap concerning its nature within the specific context of lesson tasks carried out in different learning scenarios. From this perspective, our objective is to contrast levels of student engagement in blended and non-blended learning scenarios. Along with this question, we address the way engagement is manifested in lessons, as well as whether there is a clear relationship between the learning activities proposed and the levels of student engagement observed in each scenario.

In the next section, which comprises the study's Theoretical Framework, we explore state-of-the-art discussions about blended learning scenarios and student engagement. Following on, the Methods section contains a description of the design conceived to investigate the research questions as well as the procedures and tools utilized. The Results and discussion section features the presentation of the main findings looked at in terms of their implications to teaching practices. Then, perspectives and suggestions for future research are highlighted.

2. Theoretical framework
Literature fails to provide a great deal of widely comprehensive evidence-based sets of guidelines for the implementation of blended learning scenarios (Bernard, Borokhovski, Schmid, Tamim, & Abrami, 2014; Chen, Breslow, & DeBoer, 2018). In this sense, consistent unequivocal remodelling of non-blended practices is a challenge for teachers and educational institutions. Nonetheless, research embodies basic premises for the design of blended learning systems which can inform discussions about their impacts on student engagement. These are addressed in this section.

2.1. Blended learning characteristics and core elements
Most definitions of blended learning have the integration of online and face-to-face modes of communication as its defining aspect (Dziuban, Graham, Moskal, Norberg, & Sicilia, 2018; Smith & Hill, 2018). There can be a wide range of models and procedures for implementing blended learning practices, which may vary according to learner needs, content to be delivered, and resources available. Models often comprise having part of the content accessed through an online platform; flexibility in terms of the sequence of tasks students perform; and the role of the teacher as a mediator rather than a lecturer (Horn & Staker, 2014; Dziuban et al., 2018).

The combination of different modes of communication in itself does not ensure better learning outcomes (Arrosagaray, González-Peiteado, Pino-Juste, & Rodríguez-Lopez, 2019; Driscoll, Jicha, Hunt, Tichavsky, & Thompson, 2012). Furthermore, ICT tools and media quality do not necessarily lead to better learning performance (Bower et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2018; López-Pérez, Pérez-López, & Rodríguez-Ariza, 2011). In fact, research suggests learning outcomes tend to be determined by the quality of the pedagogical practices rather than the tools and learning environment used in a course (Arrosagaray et al., 2019; Driscoll et al., 2012).

In this sense, one of blended learning core elements is the teaching practice, which encompasses an online component and ought to provide an environment allowing structured interaction along with the conditions for proper technology use oriented towards a learning goal (Rasheed, Kamsin, & Abdullah, 2020). Therefore, blended learning scenarios must be conceived, implemented and evaluated considering the complex integrations between technology and approaches to teaching.

2.2. Engagement in learning activities
Although there is no one widely accepted definition for student engagement, different perspectives have been discussed throughout the last decades, comprising emphasis on constructs such as motivation and self-regulation (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004; Reschly & Christenson, 2012; Reeve & Lee, 2014).

Besides carrying an affective component, engagement also has a behavioral dimension that plays a crucial role when it comes to active participation in learning activities (Fredricks et al., 2004; Skinner, Marchand, Furrer, & Kindrmann, 2008; Reeve, 2013). In this perspective, behavioral engagement can be defined as the degree to which students “participate through actions in their own learning process” (Sinatra, Heddy, & Lombardi, 2015, p. 2).

Concerning this behavioral domain, different studies stress the importance of the instructional practices employed by teachers, as such procedures impact students resulting in various types of behavior consecutive of underlying psychological states (Reyes, Brackett, Rivers, White, & Salovey, 2012; Roorda, Koomen, Spilt, & Oort, 2011; Skinner et al., 2008). From this point of view, three aspects of teaching practice are crucial for promoting student engagement in learning scenarios: autonomy support, involvement, and structure (Jang, Reeve, & Deci, 2010; Klem & Connell, 2004; Skinner & Belmont, 1993; Vollet, Kindermann, & Skinner, 2017). ‘Structure’ can be understood as the opposite of chaos. It refers to the organization of the information in the lesson as well as the means conceived for the pedagogical aims to be achieved. ‘Autonomy support’ consists in the degrees of freedom and empowerment in the lesson, which allow learners to make choices and decisions; and ‘involvement’ designates the interaction promoted and the quality of the relationship it sustains with peers and teachers.

Delialioglu (2011) affirms blended learning scenarios contribute significantly to student engagement and associates lecture-based instruction to lower levels of involvement and participation. Law, Geng, and Li's (2019) results, which are consistent with other research (Baragash & Al-Samarraie, 2018; Dringus & Seagull, 2013), point to similar levels of student engagement in blended and traditional learning scenarios as differences in constructs such as enrollment and motivation were not significant in the class configurations contrasted.

There is also a gap in literature concerning the extent to which students’ ICT skills may influence their engagement in computer-mediated learning scenarios. Although evidence that technical skill does not affect student engagement in learning activities mediated by digital technologies (Cakir, 2013) can be found in literature, research has also come across data that indicates a relationship “between School Engagement and ICT Engagement when school engagement is negative” (Howard, Ma, & Yang, 2016, p. 36).

The argument stated in the introductory section for investigating how different the levels of student engagement will be in blended and non-blended learning scenarios is reinforced by the contrasting findings outlined in this literature review. Potential impacts of variables such as the structure of the lesson and learners’ familiarity with ICT emphasize the importance of looking into how student engagement will manifest in these learning scenarios, and whether there will be a clear relationship between the levels of engagement and the learning activities implemented.

3. Method
These questions converge towards the aim of contrasting levels of student engagement in series of learning activities in blended and non-blended learning scenarios. Methodological aspects considered to accomplish this goal are discussed in the following subsections.

3.1. Context and participants
The study took place at a state public secondary school located in the outskirts of a 2.5 million-inhabited city in the Northeast of Brazil. The sample (n = 92) is composed of 4 groups (G1 = 24; G2 = 22; G3 = 26; G4 = 20) of 10th grade students aged 14–17 (μ = 15.3). These correspond to the groups students were enrolled in, having classes together on a daily basis. They shared a common syllabus and had the same teachers for every subject.

According to the Brazilian Educational System's Index of Socioeconomic Status,1 these students can be described as level 2 on a 1–6 low-to-high scale, which indicates they have minimum-wage family incomes, regular access to cellphones and limited home access to computers, although they used the ones in the school's lab frequently. The procedures presented in the following subsections took place in this computer lab during a series of learning activities carried out in math lessons aimed at revising and practising mathematical functions.

3.2. Research model
The methodological design chosen to assess and contrast levels of student engagement in the lessons derives from the within-subject experimental model (Cotton, 2014; Lanovaz, Turgeon, Cardinal, & Wheatley, 2019) and it consisted in exposing all four groups of participants, separately, to both learning scenarios. This model can also be referred to as ‘AB-BA′, having ‘A' indicating a traditional, lecture-based linear lesson and ‘B' a lesson remodeled according to blended learning practices, but analogous to lesson ‘A' in terms of content and level of difficulty.

Part 1 (AB-) of the experiment took place in the context of revisiting and reviewing the target content two months after it was first taught. Levels of student engagement were assessed in these lessons. Two months later, part 2 (-BA) was carried out, again in the context of revising the target content, but this time beginning with a B-type and then following it up with an A-type lesson. Levels of engagement were also assessed.

The two-month interval between each intervention as well as the decision to swap the order of the lessons from AB- to -BA in the second part of the experiment had the objective of counterbalancing a possible undesired bias resulting from carryover (Cotton, 2014) or memory (Albers, Boev, & Meijer, 2015) effects on the participants’ performance. The resources utilized to structure the lessons as well as the activities and measurement procedures are described in the following subsections.

3.3. Resources used to structure learning scenarios
Activities in both learning scenarios had as their key components the use of an Open Educational Resource (OER) focused on learning and practising mathematical functions as well as a tool for generating and managing online message boards. A short animated video was also used in B-type lessons.

3.3.1. Open Educational Resource (OER)
The primary tool used to focus on and practice mathematical functions in the learning scenarios is an applet written in Java code and embedded in HTML, accessible via any available web browser. It was chosen from a selection of applications presented to the students' math teacher, whose lessons provided the context for this study. This applet calculates images of numerical values according to a formula. Its interface displays a small animated manufacturing machine. The pre-images and images of the mathematical function are shown, respectively, as the input and output (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (417KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Open educational resource screenshot.

Both pre-images and formulas are easily defined by the users through mouse-clicking corresponding display areas and using the keyboard. The applet also allows visualization of the functions’ graph as the coordinates in the format (x, y) are shown in the cartesian plane when a new value is entered and processed.

3.3.2. Short animated video
A 3-min video was conceived for the B-type lessons, according to pedagogical understandings that have long situated visual and audiovisual media within the scope of effective blended learning practices (Allen, Seaman, & Garret, 2007; Laaser & Toloza, 2017). This video was made from a screen recording of the functioning of the OER described in the previous subsection. Signs and captions were added using a video editing tool with the purpose of highlighting where the input went as well as the relationship between the formula and the outputs. In this sense, it shows students how to use the applet and also how mathematical functions work.

3.3.3. Online message boards
Both lessons featured an online application for creating and managing web pages that function as notice boards or message walls, allowing content such as video, images, and text to be posted. Through a settings menu, users can easily set levels of permission for the pages they create, restricting interaction to the visualization of their posts or allowing page viewers to also post content.

The content is effortlessly added by mouse-clicking any spot on the wall and choosing from the options presented. Changes made on a wall page become immediately visible to anyone viewing it. There is no need for page viewers to create an account and log in to visualize and interact with the walls and their content. Fig. 2 shows the message board interface: on the left side, an example of a message wall can be seen displaying a mathematical equation on its top left corner. On the right side, there is a message wall displaying an equation above an illustration. The systems' functionalities on the configurations menu can also be seen on the right.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (654KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Online message boards.

3.4. Description of learning scenarios
The aim of the lessons carried out in this study was to perform several learning tasks which required an understanding of the concept of mathematical functions. All the tasks consisted of analyzing sets of written statements, associating the data provided in the instructions to the terms of the formula f(x) = ax + b, and then performing operations aimed at isolating the variable and determining its value.

All the lessons were conceived to be equivalent in terms of focus on content and level of difficulty. Different situational contexts and numerical values were involved in each lesson's set of tasks, but the number of elements presented in the problems as well as the operations necessary to find the answers were the same.

3.4.1. Traditional linear learning scenarios (A-type lesson)
The A-type lessons consisted of a fixed sequence of interactions involving the OER as well as the message walls described in the Resources subsection above. Classroom procedures began with a lecture-based presentation from the teacher revising the topic of mathematical functions, featuring the use of the OER to illustrate the concepts addressed in his explanations.

Students were instructed to turn computer screens on and work in pairs, solving the mathematical problems displayed on the message boards. Each computer terminal was logged on a different wall page, so there were no shared message boards. Interaction between individuals would only occur with the teacher and within each pair while working out the problems.

3.4.2. Blended learning scenarios (B-type lesson)
B-type lessons consisted of non-linear sequences of interactions involving the same OER and wall generator tool described above, as well as mathematical problems equivalent to those proposed in A-type lessons. In these blended-oriented scenarios, however, teacher-centered instruction was replaced with the short-animated film presented in the Resources subsection. The video covered the same content as the teacher's oral presentation given in the A-type lessons and it could be accessed in each terminal in the computer lab.

As in the A-type lessons, students worked in pairs and each computer terminal was logged on a message board displaying mathematical problems. However, B-type lessons also featured two shared message boards, allowing online communication between all individuals in the class. The first shared message board was referred to as ‘the learners' wall’, onto which students could post questions about the tasks and work collaboratively.

The other shared board was ‘the teachers' wall’, intended for students to interact with their teacher. Learners were instructed to resort to the students' wall first in order to foster collaboration among peers and avoid teacher overload. Only questions which hadn't been solved through the students' wall were allowed on the teacher's wall. In this sense, teacher-student verbal interaction related to the tasks was intended to occur via the message wall, even though the teacher was physically present and able to observe and monitor. On the other hand, interaction among students featured online communication as well as face-to-face pairwork. Fig. 3 indicates the differences between A-type and B-type lessons.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (287KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Resources and learning pathways in Lessons A (traditional) and B (blended).

3.5. Data collection and analysis
In order to assess levels of engagement in each learning scenario, a screen recording application was used to capture the activity in each computer. To aid the interpretation of results considering different group profiles, a survey on digital habits was applied before the first lesson.

3.5.1. Survey on familiarity with technological tools
The survey consisted in a list of statements about gadgets and technology-related activities to be acknowledged as frequent/familiar. These statements also addressed the amount of time students spent daily or weekly on such activities, like using social media or playing online games.

The instrument was applied one lesson prior to the implementation of the learning scenarios described in the previous subsection. The goal was to identify any significant differences between the four groups of students as digital habits and levels of engagement may vary within a single age group (Gurung & Rutledge, 2014; Rashid & Asghar, 2016).

Participants' responses to the survey composed a data matrix as series of 0's and 1's corresponding to crosses and ticks given to each statement representing a digital habit. Predominant 1's meant more familiarity with digital and web-based technological tools. Kruskall-Wallis' H nonparametric test was used to identify any significant differences between the four groups in terms of their habits and familiarity with ICT.

3.5.2. Screen recordings of responses to activities
The screen recording application in each terminal was activated before lessons began. Output files consisted of a video record of everything that went on computer screens, comprising what learners did, saw, and even their mouse cursor movements.

Since the use of resources in response to the tasks was computer-mediated, screen recordings contained critical data concerning the students’ behavior in each lesson. This strategy for data collection is consistent with the understanding of learner engagement in the behavioral domain, considering active participation in learning activities as previously discussed in the Theoretical Framework section.

The video output was analyzed aiming at mapping categories of quantifiable behavior (Cozby & Rawn, 2016) towards the tasks in the learning scenarios presented. Each pair of students' overall performance was objectively assessed concerning the presence or absence of actions in the form of manipulation of the resources available as well as attempts and responses driven towards performing the tasks.

Quality of participation was also taken into account as overall performance is often viewed by educators as essential for a teaching practice to be considered effective (Isotani et al., 2013). Besides displaying observable intent effort addressing the tasks, only pairs of students which provided answers at a minimum accuracy level of 75% were considered to be productively engaged. Analysis of occurrences of observable quantifiable behavior enabled the development of a data matrix composed of 0's and 1's referring respectively to lack of engagement and engagement in the activities proposed, so predominant 1's meant higher levels of engagement were observed in a group. Nonparametric tests were used to contrast data from the four groups (G1 – G4) in each lesson (A, B, B′ and A′). Fig. 4 shows the tests utilized as well as comparisons drawn based on them.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (496KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Nonparametric tests.

4. Results and discussion
Data resulting from the application of the survey and analysis of screen recordings is presented in this section. The discussion is focused on the levels of engagement in each scenario as well as their nature and relationships with the activities carried out in each lesson, as posed in the introductory section.

4.1. Students' familiarity with technological tools
Analysis of the data collected through the survey on digital habits showed Group 1 had 85% of responses acknowledging a digital habit, the highest result among all groups. While Groups 2 and 4 scored 75% and 44% respectively, Group 3 had 31% of responses acknowledging a digital habit, the lowest among all groups. These results are presented in Fig. 5 on a 0–10 scale.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (155KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Students familiarity with technological tools and differences between groups.

Fig. 5 also shows significant differences between the groups concerning their responses to the list of statements. In the four-group universe, Kruskal-Wallis' H indicates significant differences (p ≤ 0.02) between responses given to 87% of the statements in the survey. However, paired comparisons made with Mann-Whitney's U show some groups responded similarly to the items in the survey: Groups 1 and 2 had significantly different answers to only 4% of the statements and Groups 3 and 4 responded significantly differently to only 9% of the statements. On the other hand, Groups 1 and 3, in which highest and lowest scores for familiarity with technological tools were observed, responded significantly differently to 83% of the statements in the survey.

These results corroborate views that frequency and familiarity with different uses of digital technologies can vary significantly among students within a single age group (Gurung & Rutledge, 2014; Drabowicz, 2017). Given that all participants had frequent and equal opportunities of access to school computers, it can be presumed that significant differences in scores relate to disparities in their personal use of digital technologies at home. Gurung and Rutledge (2014) defend that home use plays an important role in the experiences students develop with digital technologies.

Nevertheless, significant variations in responses by Groups 1 and 3 challenge explanations of differences as a result of demographic factors such as family income or parents' educational level since the sample is rather homogeneous, with little variation in terms of socioeconomic status. Drabowicz (2017) highlights different studies in which the variance in students' internet habits is not explained by such demographic factors. Individual differences or factors undetected in educational census and demographic surveys could be conjectured as possible causes, but further investigation is clearly needed.

4.2. Levels of student engagement
Abrupt changes in behavior took place in both lesson blocks when switching from one type of scenario to the other: levels of engagement – understood as the overall percentage of participant students who scored ‘1′ rather than ‘0′ in the data matrix described in the previous section – increased considerably from 26.09% in lesson A to 84.78% in lesson B when the blended learning scenario was implemented.

The opposite happened later in the second block when the blended learning scenario was replaced with the traditional lecture-based linear lesson: global levels of student engagement dropped considerably from 82.61% in lesson B′ to 19.57% in lesson A'. Fig. 6 shows the levels observed in each group per lesson.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (173KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Levels of student engagement throughout lessons.

Friedman's test points to very significant differences (p < 0.001) in levels of student engagement throughout the sequence of lessons. However, Wilcoxon's test indicates such differences (p < 0.001) only exist between blended and non-blended scenarios (A x B; B′ x A'; A x B'; B′ x A). When drawing comparisons between the non-blended A x A' (p = 0.180) and the blended B x B' (p = 0.782) learning scenarios, there is no significant difference.

In a series of pairwise comparisons (G1 x G2; G1 x G3; G1 x G4; G2 x G3; G2 x G4; G3 x G4), Kruskall-Wallis’ test found no significant differences (p > 0,603), indicating that all four groups responded similarly to each learning scenario. Differences between blended and non-blended approaches in relation to the levels of engagement obtained in each lesson can be seen in Fig. 7.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (241KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Levels of student engagement in each lesson.

It can be argued that the blended learning practices utilized are consistent with the mobilizing dimensions of student engagement (Skinner & Belmont, 1993; Klem & Connell, 2004; Jang et al., 2010; Vollet et al., 2017): multiple learning pathways expressed as non-linear sequences allowing active decision making relate to autonomy support whereas architectured multilateral and multimodal communication foster integration. It can also be proposed that the structure component was effectively addressed in the blended learning design as its organization resulted in the effective accomplishment of the tasks. This corroborates reports that the combination of online and face-to-face interaction can be effectively and structurally managed in blended scenarios with regard to the conduction of learning activities (Gynne & Persson, 2018).

Drastic changes in student behavior taking place once classroom dynamics were altered also reinforce the argument that the teacher's actions impact students on the psychological dimension, resulting in a behavioral response, as stated by Skinner et al. (2008) and Roorda et al. (2011). This is consistent with Da Rocha Seixas, Gomes and Melo Filho's (2016) defense that the use of technological tools per se does not ensure engagement and pedagogical improvement and the teaching practice is the defining variable.

The scores observed in blended scenarios also reinforce Delialioglu's (2011) position that blended learning practices represent an essential factor for student engagement. On the other hand, these findings contrast with Law, Geng and Li's (2019) report that effort and engagement-related constructs such as enrollment and motivation differ little from blended to non-blended sessions, indicating no significant differences between the two types of scenarios from this standpoint.

Such divergences, when viewed in association with group trends, patterns and scores observed in this study, reinforce Pöysä, Vasalampi, Muotka, Lerkkanen, Poikkeus and Nurmi's (2018) conclusion that, rather than pointing to an overall characteristic, levels of student engagement are context-specific and can vary constantly and significantly throughout lessons and school days according to situational determinants. This is consistent with comparisons between blended and non-blended learning scenarios found in literature in terms of their effectiveness, also reported to be affected by context-specific elements such as characteristics of the design (Arrosagaray et al., 2019; Driscoll et al., 2012). In this perspective, our data suggests that teaching practice, comprising the conception and implementation of learning scenarios and activities, may have an even more important role than previously presumed on student engagement as a dependent variable looked at from the behavioral point of view.

Data also shows significant differences regarding familiarity with technological tools did not result in significant differences in levels of engagement. This is consistent with Cakir's (2013) findings concerning engagement in the context of one specific activity in which technical skills and the use of the tools involved can be described as low-demanding. However, these results differ from studies focused on student engagement in the perspective of broader school-related issues such as Rashid and Asghar (2016) and Howard et al. (2016), which report complex relationships between technology use and student engagement. This suggests that depending on situational determinants, context-specific student engagement within the scope of lesson activities is not affected by technical skill and levels of familiarity with technological tools.

In relation to this matter, one educational implication for the planning of lesson activities according to blended learning principles is the recognition of the appropriateness of a pedagogically balanced scenario aimed at the group's technological profile, taking into account accessibility and the cognitive demand associated with the tools utilized. Rasheed et al. (2020) defend schools ought to support students in the effective use of technology, which encompasses not only familiarity with functions and interfaces, but the ability to apply them to a learning goal. These considerations reinforce the need for previous diagnostic mapping of learners' levels of digital literacy (Aloi et al., 2017; Prasad et al., 2018) so informed planning decisions can be made by teachers.

4.3. Categories of engaged and unengaged behavior
Five base-type lesson behaviors were identified during the analysis of screen recordings. Types 1 and 2 indicate engagement in lesson activities: the former refers to the effective use of suggested tools to perform set tasks according to instructions, while the latter to the pursuit of unprescribed online resources, such as YouTube video lessons, to support the performance of set tasks. Behaviors 3–5 express lack of engagement in the lesson activities associated with the pursuit of online information and resources with no apparent relation to the subject content or the set tasks, and also the use of suggested tools for purposes other than performing the set tasks (Table 1).


Table 1. Types of observed behavior.



Rather than focusing on behavioral indicators such as effort, delivery and on-task time (Alexander, 2014; Taylor & Parsons, 2011; Vytasek, Patzak, & Winne, 2020) these mapping categories provide student profiles concerning their responses to the proposition of specific lesson activities, which can inform strategic teaching action towards target groups of students. This categorization sees effective task accomplishment according to the tools utilized by learners in relation to those presented by the teacher whereas Milligan, Littlejohn, and Margaryan's (2013) typology looks into whether participation underlying task accomplishment is openly manifested. It can be pondered nonetheless that lurking behavior, as discussed by them, should be naturally expected in the learning design presented in this research as students can benefit from questions posed and answered by classmates on the shared wall without having to create posts or reply to any of the messages themselves.

These results also reinforce previous conclusions that behavioral manifestations of participation are, to a great extent, a result of teaching practice (Reyes et al., 2012; Roorda et al., 2011; Skinner et al., 2008). A crucial implication for teaching in this sense lies in the awareness that criteria used to assess student engagement must be consistent with the learning design. Another important consideration related to this is that behavioral markers conceived for strictly online learning scenarios such as lurking or message posting must be looked at differently in blended scenarios as the face-to-face component is also a part of the equation.

The low-occurring presence of engaged behavior comprising the use of unprescribed online resources seems to respond to the need for educational practices that legitimize different forms of engagement outside the scope of teachers' presumed expectations (Godec, King, Archer, Dawson, & Seakins, 2018). This corroborates literature concerning blended learning's potential to cater for different individuals' preferences and needs (Wanner & Palmer, 2015; Boelens, Voet, & De Wever, 2018). Although the combination of online and face-to-face communication is not a prerequisite for pedagogically inclusive practices, it can be pondered that the elements in the blended scenario contributed to promote an environment in which students were able to express themselves in different ways with regard to performing the tasks effectively.

Unengaged learner behaviors associated with online resources used for leisure and entertainment purposes as well as their impacts on student performance have been the object of academic interest for some time (Junco, 2012). Gurung and Rutledge (2014) emphasize social networks can have a negative impact on individuals' educational digital engagement. What is interesting about the data presented here, however, is the extent to which these behaviors decreased in blended scenarios. In this perspective, one implication for teaching practice worth considering relates to the potential of consistently structured learning scenarios encompassing constant active and autonomous participation to address the issue of unengaged behaviors in computer-mediated lessons.

Both the ineffective or erratic use of tools and the rejection of the tasks in favour of non-academic use of social networks appear to have a common cause. These behaviors can be understood as learner responses according to their perception that the non-blended scenario presented lacked in structure, autonomy support and involvement (Jang et al., 2010; Klem & Connell, 2004; Skinner & Belmont, 1993; Vollet et al., 2017) in relation to its counterpart.

Interestingly, this perception also caused some learners to turn to activities within the scope of other school subjects. These data are consistent with findings on variations in student engagement associated with the subjects being taught (Pöysä et al., 2018). Students not resorting to non-academic activities like some of their peers can be interpreted as an indicator of higher levels of school engagement in a cognitive perspective. An implication for teaching practice in this sense relates to the consistency of learning activities and the way they are conducted during classes. These micro-contexts play an important role in learner engagement and performance regardless of general school experience and preferences for one subject or another. Such conclusion is consistent with the need for systematic study of learners’ on-task behaviors diagnosed in literature (Gill & Remedios, 2013).

5. Limitations and future research
An evident limitation in this research concerns its cross-sectional nature, comprising four lessons divided into two blocks separated by a two-month interval. It is not possible to draw conclusions as to whether the number of engaged learners would increase or decrease significantly throughout longer sequences of lessons. Besides addressing this issue, future research can focus on investigating student engagement in learning scenarios aimed at presenting new content rather than being limited to revision lessons. The methodological model can be applied or adapted in other studies so the micro-context of lessons’ learning activities can be investigated in different school subjects, geographical areas and age groups.

It is reasonable to assume the content of students’ face-to-face exchanges as well as their wall posts could provide insight into their engagement in the tasks. Besides an acoustics-related operational limitation concerning recording the pairwork interactions in the room, a learning design limitation has to be considered with regard to online communication. The rules for using the message boards, as well as their purpose, stimulated lurking behavior as observed in previous subsections. For this issue to be properly addressed in the future, it would be desirable that the learning scenarios presented featured tasks which actually required students to produce wall posts, having online written communication as a stronger component.

Findings indicate it would be pertinent to contrast measures of engagement as a broader globally-comprehensive and a strictly context-specific phenomenon. For that purpose, a scale-based instrument could be applied with the survey on familiarity with ICT. This would contribute to the understanding of possible relationships, differences and overlaps between school engagement scores and the levels of student behavioral engagement obtained in learning activities.

6. Conclusions
The contrast between levels of student engagement in the two types of lessons has shown blended learning scenarios obtained significantly higher scores than traditional lecture-based linear lessons. Score variations throughout these lessons reinforce the notion of engagement in learning activities as a context-specific phenomenon subject to situational determinants among which teaching practices comprising the planning and conduction of lesson activities play a fundamental role.

In this context-specific perspective, results also suggest levels of student engagement may not be affected by technical skill or familiarity with ICT tools provided that the learning design is appropriate for the group's technological profile considering accessibility and the cognitive demand inherent to the tools. Mapped categories of student engagement express engaged and unengaged task behaviors associated with the use of resources available in the lesson, and highlight the importance of consistency between criteria utilized to assess and describe engagement and the learning design adopted.

It can be pondered that the methodological design derived from the within-subject experimental model, along with the learning design in both types of lessons, contributed significantly for the teaching practice, manifested in the planning and conduction of lesson activities, to be objectively identified as a crucial variable for student engagement. This set of methods can be adapted in future research to fill previously mentioned gaps concerning the implementation of longer sequences of lessons; a more detailed analysis of students’ interactions in learning scenarios, and comparisons between different measures of engagement.

This research's contributions to the comprehension of student engagement in the micro-context of lesson tasks are expected to encourage and inform further investigation of blended and non-blended learning scenarios in terms of concrete effective lesson designs and their importance for learner involvement and participation.

A short abstract
a) In this paper, we contrast levels of student engagement in a blended and a non-blended learning scenario. In the following sections we explore the state of the art in learner engagement and blended learning scenarios, present our experimental design and then report and interpreted the main findings illustrated through quantitative evidence. We also discuss implications of our findings to state-of-the-art blended learning practices.

A short paragraph of information about each author
a)
Felipe de Brito Lima

i)
He is an assistant professor at Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco's Centre for Online Learning and Technologies, where he's also the coordinator of educational media contents development. He researches the design and implementation of educational media in learning contexts.

b)
Sintria Labres Lautert

i)
Associate Professor at the Federal University of Pernambuco, Department of Psychology and Postgraduate Program in Cognitive Psychology. Coordinates the WG Psychology of Mathematical Education of the National Association for Research and Graduate Studies in Psychology and WG Cognitive and Language Processes of the Brazilian Society of Mathematical Education.

c)
Alex Sandro Gomes

i)
Professor at the Computer Science Center of the Federal University of Pernambuco, Associate Researcher to the Brazilian Council for Scientific and Technological Development. Coordinator of the Special Committee on Educational Informatics (CEIE) of the Brazilian Computer Society. Member of the Innovation Board of the Brazilian Association of Distance Education.

