Online information problem solving (OIPS) is essential for 21st century information literacy which often requires information selection competencies. However, students usually have problems in discriminating information from complex web sources. This study, utilizing eye-tracking technology, aims to examine the relationships among learners' visual search patterns, information anxiety and OIPS task performance in web search contexts. In this study, 46 university students volunteered to participate in a web search task for solving a landslide problem. Student’ visual behaviors were recorded by eye-trackers during the task and information anxiety was self-reported immediately after the task. Reaction time and task performance were also recorded and scored. Pearson's correlation analyses, multiple regression analyses, cluster analyses and lag sequential analyses (LSA) were conducted. The results show that learners' eye-tracking measures, information anxiety, and task performances are significantly correlated in OIPS. Students' visual attention paid onto irrelevant web information can significantly and positively predicts their information anxiety, but negatively predicts their task performance. Additionally, based on eye-tracking measures and reaction time, three visual search patterns are identified: Confused, Slow-thinking and Fast-thinking. The LSA results further show that different information selection and attentional control strategies are utilized by different groups, especially when discriminating the relevancy of web information. This study bridges the associations among eye-tracking measures, information anxiety and task performances in OIPS contexts. Future studies are suggested to analyze eye-tracking data using cluster analyses plus LSAs to profile online learners' characteristics in terms of visual search or information processing patterns.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Data science applications in education

Human computer interaction

Information literacy

Eye-tracking

Teaching/learning strategies

1. Introduction
Searching online information to solve problems is one of the information literacy required for 21st century citizens. At many school levels and in many learning domains, students are usually asked to conduct web searching with specific goals in order to collect and analyze information to solve problems. Such activities can be described as goal-oriented online search tasks (Athukorala et al., 2016), online information searching (Tsai, 2009; Tsai & Tsai, 2003), information problem solving (Brand-Gruwel et al., 2005) or online inquiry learning (Quintana et al., 2005). With a focus on user models, information science researchers regard searching as learning, and have suggested studying searching as an information seeking and learning activity in a wide-range of domain-specific studies (Eickhoff et al., 2017). All of the above terms were referred as online information problem solving in this study.

1.1. Theoretical framework of online information problem solving (OIPS)
In the past decades, some conceptual models have been proposed for studying OIPS. For example, Marchionini (1995) proposed a multiple-stage model to decompose the process of web searching. Tsai (2009, August) proposed a similar framework focusing on the cycles of the three stages: the keywords inputting stage, the results list reading stage, and the webpage content reading stage. Brand-Gruwel et al. (2009) proposed an IPS-I model to describe the process of information problem solving (IPS) in which the Internet is used to search for information. In this model, five constituent cognitive skills were identified as: defining the information problem, searching for information, scanning information, processing information, and finally organizing and presenting information. On the other hand, Tsai & Tsai (2003) proposed a three-domain model to understand students' online information searching strategies for conducting such a goal-oriented problem solving task. In this model, seven strategies including control, disorientation, trial and error, and problem solving, purposeful thinking, selecting main ideas, and evaluation strategies were identified and further categorized into the following three domains: the behavioral, procedural and metacognitive domains. Based on this seven-aspect, three-domain model, a self-rating scale, the Online Information Searching Strategy Scale (OISSI)(Tsai, 2009), was further developed as an instrument to assess learners’ perceived strategies for OIPS.

The process of OIPS is a complex cognitive process. The process usually involves the uses of search engines, such as Google, and includes a basic procedure of typing keywords, viewing the search result lists, selecting webpages to visit, viewing the selected webpages, going back to the result list, and repeating the above procedure until the gathered information satisfies the query (Hsu et al., 2014; Gwizdka, 2010). Prior studies have examined the roles that activity features (Rieh et al., 2016; Vakkari, 2016), learner characteristics (Kammerer et al., 2013; Mason et al., 2010, 2018; Scheiter et al., 2009), strategy usage (Quintana et al., 2005), meta-cognition and epistemic cognition (Greene et al., 2014, 2018), learning contexts (Tsai et al., 2012c), and position about the controversial issues (Lin, 2019) play in such web information processing and associated learning performance. Tsai et al.'s (2012c) study suggested that students' behavioral and metacognitive domain strategies varied depending on the search topics, and unfamiliar or difficult problems usually made them think and search more slowly during the process. However, little research has been conducted to deeply explore the process of information slection in complex web learning environments in which students’ information selction competencies (Håkansson & Nelke, 2015; Kotchoubey, 1998) may be critical for learning via OIPS.

Problems are often occurred during the process of OIPS for students. They are sometimes suffered from disorientation problems or even anxiety when they could not find relevant information in an online problem solving task. Based on questionnaires and screen-captured video data analyses, Tsai et al. (2012b) found that students' purposeful thinking strategy is negatively correlated with the number of visited webpages and the time spent visiting them. This suggested that the more the students focus on the goals for searching, the more efficiently they can filter the information derived from a search engine. Additionally, students also have problems in sourcing information when reading online. For example, Paul et al. (2017) reported that multiple variables such as motivation and perceptual salience of source information, determined 9th graders online information sourcing behaviors. Mason et al. (2018) reported that although the 7th graders were able to distinguish the most and the least reliable websites, they were unable to accurately rank-order multiple web sources. Recently, Parsazadeh et al. (2018) developed mobile learning applications to enhance students' online information evaluation skills. Kammerer et al. (2019) investigated the effect of an intervention on conflict information identification, and found that students' reading comprehension ability had a moderated effect. In sum, prior studies have explored and revealed the individual differences in students’ task outcomes and information processing process of OIPS; however, affective variables such as information anxiety during online search and reading process have not been explored.

1.2. Information anxiety during OIPS
OIPS may be influenced by affective factors such as information anxiety. According to Wurman (1989), information anxiety occurs when people cannot be satisfied with what they want or need. This is mainly due to the gap between “what we really know” and “what we have to know.” Information anxiety appears often when people are faced with the following five circumstances: (1) they do not understand the information; (2) they do not know how to deal with the amount of information; (3) they do not know if the information exists; (4) they do not know how to get the information; and (5) even if they know how to get the information, they do not know how to obtain it with keywords. Also, learners’ information anxiety can be attributed to the following factors: (1) the amount of information; (2) lack of exploring experience; and (3) being unfamiliar with the computer technology.

All of the above circumstances and factors can easily occur in the task of information problem solving via web searching; therefore, information anxiety should be considered as a factor to influence the task process and task performance. For example, when a learner does not understand the information found by searching via Google, does not know how to get the information, or does not know how to deal with the huge amount of information gathered from Google, s/he may perceive some levels of information anxiety. Learners may also feel frustrated or helpless when the amount of information found via Google is too much to handle or too little to be able to draw conclusions from.

Anxiety can be generally divided into two categories, state anxiety or trait anxiety, in which state anxiety refers to the anxiety perceived in general situations and trait anxiety refers to the anxiety perceived in specific situations (Biggs & Moore, 1993). The information anxiety perceived during an OIPS task can be regarded as a kind of trait anxiety, specifically experienced when conducting such a task. Although many affective factors have been examined in prior studies regarding OIPS, such as attitude (Tsai et al., 2001), self-efficacy (Tsai & Tsai, 2003) and cognitive loads (Gwizdka, 2010), little studies have examined the role of information anxiety in OIPS tasks. Since the perceived anxiety could be increased due to the uncertainty or the unconfident feelings of searching results, the information anxiety perceived during the online search task could affect how learners process and select web information during the task.

1.3. Research methods for OIPS
Many approaches have been employed by researchers to explore or analyze the process of OIPS (Tsai, 2009; Tsai & Tsai, 2003, Tsai et al., 2012b, Ho et al., 2014; Bates, 1990; Bos, 2000; Marchionini, 1995; Spink & Jansen, 2004). Traditionally, system logs (Li & Tsai, 2017) and screen-captured videos are the most common approaches to collect explicit and objective data. However, screen-captured videos can only provide the log data of mouse and keyboard records during the information search process. It is still unknown how learners view, filter, select and process the information shown on different webpages unless their visual behaviors or eye movements are tracked and analyzed. Therefore, the data of system logs or screen-captured videos of mouse-and-keyboard behaviors may reveal the explicit behavioral strategies utilized for solving online information problems. Perhaps only the visual attention data can provide more direct information about the implicit cognitive strategies utilized for the task (Tsai et al., 2012b).

A retrospective verbal data analysis is another approach to examine the process of OIPS, especially for the cognitive strategies utilized by learners. The verbal data may include think aloud (Salmerón et al., 2017), questionnaires and interviews (Tsai et al., 2012c). These approaches are a subjective self-evaluation conducted by learners regarding their own learning process or learning strategies. However, questionnaires (e.g. Tsai, 2009) and interviews (e.g. Paul et al., 2017) are usually conducted after the task. Some information could be lost from learners’ working memory such that some clues could be lost from the post-task data collection. Therefore, questionnaires and interviews are usually not utilized alone in a study concerning learning processes. As for the think aloud protocol, it is a useful approach to collect real-time process data while learners are performing a task, for example, speaking out what they are thinking when they are conducting an online search for a problem solving task. The think-aloud approach could collect real-time (immediate) data during the process; however, not all learners can perform think-aloud well due to their less mature metacognitive abilities. In short, all the above methods have some disadvantages for assessing the process and strategies utilized in an OIPS task. These disadvantages may be the reasons for the decrease of amount of studies in this human-computer-interaction domain (Chen et al., 2020).

The eye-tracking method (Alemdag & Cagiltay, 2018; Just & Carpenter, 1980; Lai et al., 2013; Rayner, 1998; Rayner et al., 2006) has gained increasing attention from educational technology researchers because it can track students' visual behaviors throughout the entire learning process from a data-driven perspective (Chen et al., 2020). This method can deal with research questions such as how the visual attention is distributed and which information is focused on by learners while learning. For example, Tsai et al. (2012a) reported that successful problem solvers tended to transfer their visual attention from irrelevant to relevant information, and the less successful problem solvers tended to shift from relevant to irrelevant information. Tsai et al. (2019) indicated that dynamic seductive details like decorative animations could cause significant visual attention distractions while learning through multimedia-based instruction. Also, the eye-tracking method may reflect learners' emotional states while learning such as students’ flows in game-based learning (Tsai et al., 2016), culinary interests while reading a multimedia recipe (Wang et al., 2016) and the visual patterns of learners with different game playing self-efficacies (Hsu et al., 2019). Recent studies have discussed the effects of emotional designs used for multimedia learning from different views (Uzun & Yildirim, 2018) and attempted to use eye-tracking methods for investigations (Stark et al., 2018). However, a recent eye-tracking review (Alemdag & Cagiltay, 2018) indicated that there were still very few studies using eye-tracking methods to explore the roles of emotions play in learning processes. Therefore, it is worth attempting to use the eye-tracking method to explore how students select information with different levels of relevancy and how information anxiety affect students information processing in OIPS.

1.4. Eye-tracking studies in OIPS
Using eye-tracking technology to probe the visual behaviors of online information searching was relatively limited until the past decade (Alemdag & Cagiltay, 2018; Lai et al., 2013). Eye movements usually involve scanning (indexed by saccade measures) and gazing (indexed by fixation measures) visual behaviors. The eye-tracking data could uncover the patterns of information processing during a search task, and the derived eye-tracking measures could serve as indicators for further quantitative analyses. For example, according to Lai et al. (2013), the total reading time (TRT) refers to the total time spent on a reading task including both saccade and fixation behaviors, indicating the time spent on the overall cognitive process. Total fixation duration (TFD) refers to the fixation behaviors only indicating the duration of relatively concentrated or deep information processing. Due to the highly dynamic nature of OIPS activities, some specific variables could be further examined. For example, fixation rate (FR) refers to the number of fixation counts per second which can be used to represent the velocity of the information search. Scan path (i.e., a sequence of fixations linked by saccades) videos are another form of useful data for observing individuals’ visual patterns. Usually, a fixation sequence can be obtained from coding a scan path video or is provided by an eye-tracker. For deeper learning analytics, a lag sequential analysis (LSA) (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997) is useful for examining fixation-sequence data to explore the significant visual transfers between areas of interest and to provide data visualization output (e.g., Tsai et al., 2019). This approach allows researchers to observe the underlying process of information processing in OIPS from a microscopic-level perspective (Anderson et al., 2014a).

Recently, Salmerón et al. (2017) examined the quickly scanning and deeply processing visual behavior in online information searching when high school students performed an OIPS task. They reported that, when students' reading skills and the question types (retrieve vs. integrate) were taken into consideration, more scanning strategy uses led to worse performances in the good reading skill group. Furthermore, triangulated with the retrospective think-aloud data, it seemed that the students who spent more time on inspecting irrelevant information would achieve lower online information comprehension. This implies that students have problems in selecting information in OIPS tasks and scanning behaviors during the task may indicate searching for relevant information. On the other hand, the cluster analysis method has been utilized, using learning system log data, to analyze students' online learning behavioral patterns (Li & Tsai, 2017). Although cluster analyses on log behavioral data may not represent students' visual attention in online information problem solving contexts, cluster analyses on eye-tracking measures could help categorize learners' visual behavioral characteristics and analyze the patterns of students’ information processing in OIPS tasks.

Researchers from information science also conducted experiments to observe users' visual behaviors in web information searching. For example, Zhang and Gwizdka (2016) explored the factors of the online information search process and found that learners’ visual attention and the time spent on non-useful webpage information significantly predicted the cost of online information searching. That is, the more attention and time spent on non-useful webpage information, the worse the performance of online information searching. Furthermore, Gwizdka (2017) and Gwizdka et al. (2017) reported that cognitive processing patterns for texts of different relevance levels can be revealed by eye movement indicators. These studies show that the relevance of textual information could be revealed or reflected by eye-tracking indices while reading or searching for information. In sum, the visual patterns of information processing could be associated with the features of searched for or retrieved information. The eye-tracking technology could serve as a useful tool for further explorations.

2. Purpose
Based on the above literature, it is important to understand the roles of university students' information selection strategies utilized among the information of different relevancies and information anxiety due to complex web information in the information processing of OIPS tasks. Thus, this study aims to investigate students’ information selection and visual search characteristics through exploring and examining their visual patterns, information processing and anxiety as well as task performance in an OIPS context. The following two sets of research questions are proposed:

RQ1-1
In an OIPS task, are learners' visual attention distribution in relevant, partial relevant and irrelevant information correlated with their information anxiety and task performance?

RQ1-2
In an OIPS task, can eye-tracking measures on relevant, partial relevant or irrelevant information predict learners' information anxiety and task performance?

RQ2-1
What are the visual search characteristics based on the eye-tracking measures of relevant, irrelevant and partial-irrelevant information in an OIPS task?

RQ2-2
Do learners with different visual search characteristics in an OIPS task have different visual attention transfer patterns (i.e., information selection patterns) during the search task?

RQ2-3
Do learners with different visual search characteristics in an OIPS task have significantly different task performance and information anxiety?

3. Methodology
To answer the above research questions, a case study of an OIPS task regarding finding the factors causing landslides was adopted in this study. During the task, each participant's online search behaviors and eye movements were simultaneously tracked and recorded by an eye-tracking system. A one-group experimental design with a posttest survey followed by cluster analyses and lag sequential analyses (LSA) was conducted for deep analyses.

3.1. Participants
A total of 46 university students (30 males and 16 females, average age = 24.5) volunteered to participate in the OIPS task designed in this study. The problem of the online inquiry task was about the conditions to cause a landslide. The participants came from various majors including social science, natural science, liberal arts and engineering from four universities in northern Taiwan, representing most of the learning domains in universities. Since all participants had taken a fundamental earth science course in high schools, they were assumed to have some prior knowledge about landslides. None of them had eye surgery experience or serious eye vision problems. All of the 46 students passed the eye-tracking calibrations; therefore, they were all included for data analyses in this study.

3.2. Instruments
This study utilized the FaceLab 4.5 eye-tracker (sampling rate 60 Hz) to track and collect eye movement data for each participant during the task. The FaceLab eye-tracker was a desk-top remote eye-tracking system standing in front of a 19-inch computer screen. Sitting at a distance of 75 cm from the screen, the participants had free heads while doing the task. The definition of a fixation was set by default to at least 200 ms consecutively accumulated within a circle of a radius of 40 pixels. A nine point calibration was used and the criterion for passing the calibration was that the angular errors were less than 1.0 for both eyes. GazeTracker 9 was used to analyze the eye-tracking data and obtain the eye-tracking measures for areas of interest (AOIs). The web-based eye-tracking data analyzer, WEDA, revised from Tsai et al. (2018, July-August) using the Python programming language, was used to analyze the LSA in this study.

The Online Information Anxiety Rating Scale (OIARS) was a scale for self-reporting one's perceived anxiety toward searching information in general or for a specific task. In this study, it was used as a posttest to examine the anxiety the participants perceived during the online search task conducted in this study. The OIARS including six items was revised from the two subscales (uncertainty and unconfident) of the Online Information Anxiety Questionnaire (Tsai et al., 2008 March) which assesses individuals' anxiety of online information searching in daily life generally.

To examine the OIARS's validity, an exploratory factor analysis using a principal component analysis with a varimax method was conducted in this study. The Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) value was 0.78 and Barlett's test of Sphericity reached statistical significance (Barlett's = 123.85, p < .000), which suggested that the data were appropriate for the purpose of principal component analysis. With a total explained variance of 74.38%, the six items (see Appendix 1) were categorized into two subscales: the uncertainty subscale (Eigen value = 3.46; explained variance = 44.11%) and the unconfident subscale (Eigen value = 1.01; explained variance = 30.27%). The Cronbach's α reliability was 0.86 for the overall scale and was 0.87 and 0.77 for the two subscales, respectively. The above statistics suggest that the OIARS is a valid and a reliable instrument for assessing individuals' online information anxiety.

The uncertainty subscale assessed the level of anxiety due to making judgments on web information. A higher uncertainty score indicated that a higher level of anxiety was perceived for judging the reliability and the source of web information during a web search. The unconfident subscale assessed the level of anxiety due to doubts about the usefulness of the information gathered from the Web. A higher unconfident score indicated that a higher level of anxiety was experienced regarding the usefulness of the information obtained from the web search. Each item was measured on a 5-point Liker scale. A higher score on a subscale indicated a higher level of the corresponding anxiety perceived by the learner during the web search task.

3.3. Task and platform
An information problem solving task via web search regarding “landslides” was assigned for each participant in this study. An image-based problem which had been used in a prior study (Tsai et al., 2012a) was served as a leading question of the online searching task in this study. The leading question, “In which of the four contexts do you think a landslide would occur? And why?” was a multiple-choice question with four image-based selections. The images illustrated different combinations of the environmental conditions including the relevant and the irrelevant factors causing a landslide. The correct answer to the multiple-choice problem should be ‘B’ or ‘AB’ because the context B contained all required conditions causing a landslide, namely a rainfall density greater than 35 mm/h, a land slope between 15 and 35°, and mass debris on a slide. Answer ‘A’ was acceptable when learners justified their choice with the reason that shallow-rooted trees were assumed on the slide during heavy rain (see Tsai et al., 2012a). Although all participants had taken fundamental earth science courses in high school, based on the results of the prior study (Tsai et al., 2012a), students still have difficulties discriminating the relevant factors (rainfall, slopes and debris) from irrelevant factors (such as temperature). Thus, the online search task was designed to provide the participants a way to find the critical and relevant information about the factors and the thresholds for causing a landslide, so that they could respond with reasonable answers and solve the problem successfully. To show the leading question, provide a search engine and receive the question responses, a web-based platform (see Fig. 1) was designed for participants to perform such an information problem solving task.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (408KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The webpage (left) designed for the online information problem solving task including the three windows: Question, Answer and Google Search Page; and the AOIs including Q and A as well as the Relevant (R), Partially Relevant (PR) or Irrelevant (IR) labels for the Google Search page area according to the webpage content's relevance to the required conditions of causing a landslide.

The web-based task platform included three windows: Question, Search and Answer windows. The Question window showed the problem with the leading question including four contextual images in the upper-left corner of the website. The Search window, the main window on the right hand side of the Question window, provided the Google FrontPage for participants to navigate and search information via the WWW. The Answer window was below the Question window, i.e., in the lower-left corner of the website. In the Answer window, the participants could temporarily save the information drawn from the Search window and edit answers for responses. A button in the Answer window was provided for participants to submit and save their responses in the platform.

3.4. Procedure and data collection
After passing an eye-tracking calibration, which took about 5–10 min, each participant was guided to perform an online information search task individually to solve the problem regarding the factors causing a landslide via the task platform. During the search task, although the participants’ eye movements were tracked by the eye-tracking system, they sit naturally in front of a computer and were free to slightly move their heads. No time limit was set for the task and it was stopped when the participants hit the submit button for responding to the problem. The participants spent around 10–20 min to finish the search task. Once the experiment stopped, the responses and the reaction time were automatically saved as in the logs of the platform. At the same time, the eye-tracking system stopped recording and saved the raw tracking data in the eye-tracking system. Immediately after the task, a posttest survey was administered to each participant. The OIARS was taken by each participant for rating his/her perceived anxiety during the search or toward the online information they searched in this specific task. It took about 5–10 min to finish the survey. Therefore, it took about 20–40 min for one participant to finish the whole experimental procedure. Fig. 2 shows the experimental process, the data collections and the approaches for preliminary and advanced data analyses corresponding to RQ1 and RQ2 respectively.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (593KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Experimental procedure, data collection and data analyses approaches corresponding to research questions of this study. RQ1 examines the relationships among eye-tracking measures, task performance and online information anxiety using correlation and regression analyses. RQ2 identifies groups with different visual search characteristics by cluster analyses, and identifies the attention transfer pattern (implying information selection pattern) for each group using lag sequential analyses. Both preliminary (dashed arrow) and advanced (bold arrow) data analyses are aimed to bridge the process and the outcomes in an online inquiry task.

3.5. Data analyses
3.5.1. Eye-tracking data analyses
To analyze the eye-tracking data during a web search, several areas of interest (AOIs) were defined or labeled in this study (see Fig. 1). The Question (Q) and the Answer (A) were defined for the Question and the Answer windows in the task webpage. The Google Search window showed different webpages at different times during the online search; therefore, depending on the relevancy of the searched information shown on the screen, each Google Search Page was manually defined as an AOI with one of the following three labels: Relevant (R), Irrelevant (IR) or Partially Relevant (PR). The R label indicates that the content of the webpage covered all three requirements (rich debris, enough rainfall and adequate slope) of a landslide. The PR label indicates that the content of the webpage covered at least one of the three requirements of a landslide. The IR label indicates that the content of the webpage covered none of the three requirements of a landslide. All the dynamic AOIs were defined or labeled manually every 0.5 s using the video mode of GazeTracker 7.

In order to analyze the eye movements for visual searching, three eye-tracking indices were selected and calculated for each AOI. The proportion of fixation duration (PFD) was selected for revealing the amount of each participant's visual attention paid to each AOI. The PFD for an AOI usually reveals the proportion of the cognitive resources in working memory which has been put into processing the information located in the specific AOI. The total reading time (TRT) for an AOI was used to show the total processing time (including fixations and saccades) within each AOI. The fixation rate (FR) for each AOI was further calculated by dividing the total fixation counts in an AOI by the total reading time in the AOI (i.e., fixation rate = total fixation counts/total reading time). The FR index can reveal a participant's visual search velocity (or frequency) (Jacob & Karn, 2003) for the information within a specific AOI.

3.5.2. Task performance analyses
As for the task performance, the answers responded by all participants were graded by a panel of three educational researchers including one earth science educator. The task score was evaluated considering both the corrections of the answer selections as well as the corresponding reasons for the selections. The same criteria was used by the three graders: reasonable selections (B or AB, obtaining 40 credits) and consistent arguments with relevant supportive information (60 credits), such that a total task score ranged from 0 to 100. To ensure the reliability of the task scores, two rounds of evaluation were conducted in this study. The first round was evaluated by each grader individually according to the same grading criteria, and the second round was evaluated via a panel discussion of the three graders. All inconsistent scores were discussed in the panel meeting until all agreements were reached for all scores.

3.5.3. Questionnaire data analyses
The data collected from the OIARS questionnaire were pre-processed. An averaged item score was calculated for each of the two subscales: the uncertainty subscale and the unconfident subscale. Therefore, two scores, the uncertainty score and the unconfident score, were obtained for profiling the participants’ information anxiety during the web search for information problem solving.

3.5.4. Statistical analyses
To answer the RQ1, Pearson's correlation analyses were conducted to examine the relationships among participants' online information anxiety, eye-tracking measures on AOIs of different relevancy levels and task performance. Based on the results of correlation analyses, regression analyses were then used to examine prediction models and identify significant eye-tracking measures to predict information anxiety and task performance.

As for RQ2, a cluster analysis based on the three eye-tracking measures for visual search (FR: Fixation rate, TRT: Total reading time, PFD: Proportion of fixation duration) was conducted to identify the visual search characteristics and group the participants. Based on the result of the cluster analyses, due to the sample was not normally distributed in some groups, a Kruskal-Wallis H test was used to compare the task scores among the groups. Finally, to analyze the visual transition patterns for each group, a lag sequential analysis (LSA) (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997) was conducted for each group based on their fixation sequences with AOI labels (e.g., Tsai et al., 2019). In this study, the web-based eye-tracking data analyzer, WEDA (revised from Tsai et al., 2018 July-August), was used to perform and output the data and figures of the group-based LSA.

4. Results
4.1. Correlation analyses among eye-tracking measures, anxiety and performance
To explore the relationships between eye-tracking measures and information anxiety, the correlations between all AOIs' eye-tracking indices (PFD, TRT, FR) and the OIARS anxiety scores (uncertainty, unconfident) were examined using Pearson's correlation analyses. Several significant correlations (see Table 1) were found in this study. First, significant correlations were found between both anxiety sub-scores and the eye-tracking measures on the irrelevant webpages. The uncertainty sub-score was positively correlated with all three eye-tracking measures of the Irrelevant webpages: PFD (r = 0.39, p < .01), TRT (r = 0.44, p < .01) and FR (r = 0.45, p < .01). This means that the participants with higher PFD, TRT and FR indices on the Irrelevant webpages tended to perceive higher uncertainty anxiety during the web search, and vice versa. Regarding the unconfident sub-score, it was also significantly correlated with the PFD (r = 0.29, p < .05) and FR (r = 0.33, p < .05) on the Irrelevant webpages, positively. That is, the participants with higher PFD and FR indices on the irrelevant webpages tended to perceive greater unconfident anxiety during the web search, and vice versa.


Table 1. Correlation coefficients among eye-tracking measures on types of webpages, online information anxiety, and task performance.

Information Anxiety	Task Performance
Webpage Type (AOI)	Index	Uncertainty	Unconfident	Reaction Time	Task Score
Eye-tracking Measures	Relevant	PFD	−0.06	0.16	0.04	0.34*
TRT	−0.13	0.11	0.05	0.21
FR	−0.27	−0.04	−0.07	0.37*
Partially Relevant	PFD	0.21	−0.05	0.25	−0.01
TRT	0.15	−0.05	0.27	0.03
FR	0.27	0.27	0.31*	−0.17
Irrelevant	PFD	0.39**	0.29*	0.27	−0.53**
TRT	0.44**	0.25	0.47**	−0.53**
FR	0.45**	0.33*	0.31*	−0.33*
*p < .05, **p < .01.

Notes: PFD = proportion of fixation duration, TRT = total reading time, FR = fixation rate (i.e., total fixation count/total reading time).

Finally, there were some significant findings between the eye-tracking measures on different types of webpages and the task performance in terms of task scores and reaction time. First, the task scores had significantly positive correlations with the PFD (r = 0.34, p < .05) and FR (r = 0.37, p < .05) on the Relevant webpages, but had significantly negative correlations with the PFD (r = −0.53, p < .01), TRT (r = −0.53, p < .01) and FR (r = −0.33, p < .05) on the Irrelevant webpages. That is, the participants who had higher PFD and FR on the Relevant webpages and lower PFD, TRT and FR on the Irrelevant webpages tended to have higher task scores, and vice versa. Second, as for the reaction time, it had significantly positive correlations with the FR (r = 0.31, p < .05) on the Partially Relevant webpages, and with the TRT (r = 0.47, p < .01) and the FR (r = 0.31, p < .05) on the Irrelevant webpages. That is, the participants with higher FR on the Partially Relevant webpages and with longer TRT and higher FR on the Irrelevant webpages tended to have longer reaction time for the task, and vice versa.

4.2. Regression analyses of eye-tracking measures for anxiety and performance
Based on the above correlation analysis results, four stepwise regression models were conducted to further examine the possibility of predicting information anxiety and task performance by their associated eye-tracking measures. Thus, all the significantly correlated eye-tracking measures corresponding to each anxiety or performance variable were included as predictors in each corresponding regression model. Finally, four significant modules were obtained and are summarized in Table 2.


Table 2. Using eye-tracking measures to predict the information anxiety during the web search and the performance of the task.

Predicted Variable	Predicting eye-tracking measures	B	S.E.	Beta	t	Adjusted R2
Eye-Tracking Index	Webpage (AOI)
Anxiety of uncertainty	FR	Irrelevant	1.56	0.44	0.47	3.59**	0.21
Anxiety of unconfident	PFD	Irrelevant	6.02	2.37	0.35	2.54*	0.11
Reaction time	TRT	Irrelevant	17.63	4.97	0.47	3.57**	0.20
Task score	PFD	Irrelevant	−76.81	18.56	−0.53	−4.14***	0.26
*p < .05, **p < .01., ***p < .001

Notes: FR = fixation rate, PFD = proportion of fixation duration, TRT = total reading time.

First, as Table 2 shows, the FR index of IR webpages is the best predictor of uncertainty anxiety (t = 3.59, p < .01) with an adjusted R2 of 0.21. That is, the fixation rate (i.e., the search velocity) on irrelevant webpages can significantly and positively predict the perceived anxiety due to the uncertainty of the judgment of web information during the task.

For unconfident anxiety, the best predictor is the PFD on Irrelevant webpages (t = 2.54, p < .05) with an adjusted R2 of 0.11. That is, the proportion of fixation duration on irrelevant webpages can significantly and positively predict a participant's perceived anxiety due to they are unconfident about the usefulness of the information obtained from the web search. For the reaction time, the TRT on Irrelevant webpages (t = 3.57, p < .01) is the best predictor with an adjusted R2 of 0.20. That is, the total time spent on Irrelevant webpages can significantly and positively predict the total time to finish the task. Finally, the best predictor of the task score is the PFD on Irrelevant webpages (t = −4.14, p < .001) with an adjusted R2 of 0.26. This is a negative prediction (Beta = −0.53); therefore, the proportion of fixation duration on Irrelevant webpages can significantly and negatively predict the performance score of the task.

4.3. Cluster analyses based on eye-tracking measures
Based on the above results, a cluster analysis was conducted based on the three eye-tracking indices of the Irrelevant (IR) AOI, including the fixation rate (FR), the total reading time (TRT) and the proportion of fixation duration (PFD). For the IR AOI, a higher FR refers to searching more often on irrelevant webpages, a higher TRT refers to processing longer on irrelevant webpages, and a higher PFD refers to processing more deeply on irrelevant webpages. The results show that the participants can be clustered into three groups. Fig. 3 illustrates all the eye-tracking measures across the three groups. The group differences within each of the three eye-tracking indices were further examined in this study. The results have confirmed the significant differences among the groups for the FR (F = 20.59, p < .001), TRT (F = 199.94, p < .001) and PFD (F = 9.01, p < .01) indices. That is, the three clustered groups were significantly different in all of the three eye-tracking measures.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (150KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Three groups (G1: Confused group, G2: Slow-thinking group, G3: Fast-thinking group) were clustered by the three eye-tracking measures of irrelevant AOIs: FR = Fixation rate, TRT = Total reading time, PFD = Proportion of fixation duration).

From Fig. 3, among the three groups, group one (G1, N = 7) showed higher FR (1.74 counts/sec), the highest TRT (21.71 s) and the highest PFD (31%) on the irrelevant webpages. This means that G1 searched more often for the information on irrelevant webpages. They also processed the irrelevant information most deeply with the longest time among the three groups. This indicates that, among the three groups, G1 paid the greatest attention to the irrelevant information for the OIPS. Therefore, G1 is named the Confused group.

Group two (G2, N = 17) showed high FR (1.66 counts/sec), middle TRT (9.09 s) and middle PFD (13%) on the irrelevant webpages. This means that G2 searched more often on the irrelevant webpages. In addition, they processed the irrelevant information with less time and less deeply than G1, but processed the irrelevant information with more time and more deeply than G3. This suggests that, rather than using the deep-processing approach like G1, G2 processed the irrelevant information using a shallow-processing approach. They also frequently visited or checked for the irrelevant information during the task. That is, they did not quickly ignore the irrelevant information before leaving the irrelevant webpages, which suggests that G2 could be slow or careful in making the decision to leave an irrelevant webpage. Therefore, G2 was named the Slow-Thinking group.

Finally, group three (G3, N = 22) showed low FR (0.57 counts/sec), low TRT (1.04 s) and low PFD (6%) on the irrelevant webpages. This means that, among the three groups, G3 searched less often on the irrelevant webpages during the task. They processed the irrelevant information with the shortest time and least deeply on the irrelevant webpages. That is, G3 paid the least attention to the irrelevant information during the task. They were quick to make a decision to ignore the irrelevant information and leave the irrelevant webpages during the OIPS task. Therefore, G3 was named the Fast-Thinking group.

4.4. Comparisons of the performance and information anxiety of the clustered groups
To explore the learning characteristics of the three clustered groups, this study further compared the learning variables among the three groups clustered by eye-tracking measures. Kruskal-Wallis H tests followed by Dunn's post-hoc comparisons were conducted on the task scores, reaction time and information anxiety (both sub-scores and the total score) among the three groups (see Table 3). Since the group sample sizes were different for the three groups (n1 = 7, n2 = 17, n3 = 22), an effect size of Hodges' g was calculated for each significant pair found in the post-hoc comparisons.


Table 3. Results of Kruskal-Wallis tests on task performance among the three groups.

Group	Mean	SD	Mean Rank	X2	Dunn	Effect size (Hodges' g)
Task score	G1	59.29	31.28	11.14	8.84*	G2 > G1
G3 > G1	1.32
1.46
G2	90.29	19.80	27.56
G3	88.64	15.44	24.30
Reaction time	G1	574.29	418.31	33.14	14.51**	G1 > G3
G2 > G3	1.08
0.92
G2	494.06	257.80	30.71
G3	280.77	208.60	16.26
Anxiety of uncertainty	G1	9.71	3.82	29.57	10.47**	G2 > G3	1.20
G2	9.29	2.69	29.53
G3	6.91	1.19	16.91
Anxiety of unconfident	G1	9.86	3.24	27.43	1.77	- -	- -
G2	9.06	2.63	25.26
G3	8.27	2.10	20.89
Total Anxiety	G1	19.57	6.05	30.14	6.16*	G1 > G3
G2 > G3	1.15
0.82
G2	18.35	4.91	27.24
G3	15.18	2.86	18.50
*p < .05, **p < .01.

Notes: G1: Confused group; G2: Slow-thinking group; G3: Fast-thinking group.

As Table 3 shows, significant differences were found in the task scores of the three groups (X2(2, N = 46) = 8.84, p < .05). The post-hoc comparison results showed that the significances came from two comparisons. One was the difference between G1 (Mean Rank = 11.14) and G2 (Mean Rank = 27.56) with a large effect size (g = 1.32). The other came from the difference between G1 (Mean Rank = 11.14) and G3 (Mean Rank = 24.30) with a large effect size (g = 1.46). This means that both the Slow-thinking group (G2) and the Fast-thinking group (G3) gained significantly higher task scores than the Confused group (G1).

As for the reaction time, significant differences were also found among the three groups (X2(2, N = 46) = 14.51, p < .01). Two significant differences were found in the post-hoc comparisons: One was the difference between G1 (Mean Rank = 33.14) and G3 (Mean Rank = 16.26) with a large effect size (g = 1.08). The other significant difference was between G2 (Mean Rank = 30.71) and G3 (Mean Rank = 16.26) with a large effect size (g = 0.92). This indicated that both the Confused group (G1) and the Slow-thinking group (G2) had significantly longer reaction time than the Fast-thinking group (G3).

Regarding the total information anxiety, significant differences were also found among the three groups (X2(2, N = 46) = 6.16, p < .05). The post-hoc comparison results showed that one of the significant differences exists between G1 (Mean Rank = 30.14) and G3 (Mean Rank = 18.50) with a large effect size (g = 1.15); and the other significant difference exists between G2 (Mean Rank = 27.24) and G3 (Mean Rank = 18.50) with a large effect size (g = 0.82). This means that, for overall information anxiety, both the Confused group (G1) and the Slow-thinking group (G2) perceived significantly higher information anxiety than did the Fast-thinking group (G3). While looking further into the subscales, only the anxiety of uncertainty had significant differences among the three groups (X2(2, N = 46) = 10.47, p < .01). The post-hoc comparison indicated that such a difference existed between G2 (Mean Rank = 29.53) and G3 (Mean Rank = 16.91), with a high effect size (g = 1.20). That is, the Slow-thinking group (G2) perceived a significantly higher anxiety of uncertainty than the Fast-thinking group (G3). No significant differences were found among the groups regarding the anxiety of unconfident feelings.

In sum, when conducting an OIPS task, three groups were clustered with the following characteristics: First, the Confused group (G1) who completed the task slowly, gained low task scores and perceived high information anxieties; second, the Slow-thinking group (G2) who completed the task slowly, perceived high information anxiety, but gained high task scores; and third, the Fast-thinking group (G3) who completed the task quickly, perceived low information anxiety, and also gained high task scores.

4.5. Lag sequential analyses for visual transfer patterns of the three clustered groups
To further explore the visual transition patterns for the three clustered groups (G1: the Confused group, G2: the Slow-thinking group, G3: the Fast-thinking group), a lag sequential analysis (LSA) was conducted for each group based on the fixation sequences labeled by AOIs. Table 4 summarizes the z-scores for the three LSAs conducted in this study. In the matrix, each number located at raw X and colume Y is corresponding to the visual transfer from the AOI of raw X to the AOI of column Y. All the z scores greater than 1.96 are marked in bold and are regarded as significant visual transitions between AOIs, which were then drawn out and visualized in Fig. 4. An arrow from node X to node Y indicates a significant visual attention transition from AOI X to AOI Y.


Table 4. Residual tables (z scores) of the LSA of the three groups.

Group	Q	A	R	PR	IR
Q	G1	−7.22	11.48	−2.67	−2.45	−2.49
G2	−16.46	15.61	0.35	0.57	0.70
G3	−16.51	15.59	2.10	−1.04	−0.99
A	G1	10.80	−9.40	−0.78	−1.61	0.26
G2	14.70	−14.74	2.68	−0.59	−3.32
G3	15.69	−15.97	1.17	−0.06	−2.05
R	G1	−1.93	−1.54	−1.48	0.88	5.01
G2	1.51	1.95	−5.43	−1.39	2.51
G3	2.09	1.33	−5.43	0.76	1.45
PR	G1	−2.74	−1.48	2.66	−0.93	3.94
G2	1.13	−0.71	−1.47	−2.05	3.27
G3	−0.03	−0.79	0.40	−1.45	4.39
IR	G1	−1.75	0.06	3.57	4.82	−3.39
G2	0.74	−4.48	3.74	4.04	−2.15
G3	−2.27	−1.74	2.90	4.23	−0.48
Notes: G1: confused group; G2: slow-thinking group; G3: fast-thinking group; AOI abbreviations: Q = Question, A = Answer, R = Relevant webpage, PR=Partially Relevant webpage, IR=Irrelevant webpage; all z > 1.96 are marked bold.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (251KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The visual transition patterns for the Confused group (G1), the Slow-Thinking Group (G2) and the Fast-Thinking Group (G3). AOI: Q = Question window, A = Answering window, R = Relevant webpages, IR=Irrelevant webpages, PR=Partially Relevant webpages, the dash rectangle means the Google search window showing the R, IR and PR webpages.

As Fig. 4 shows, some significant visual transitions were commonly found in all three groups (G1, G2 and G3) as the following: A→Q (z = 10.80, 14.70 and 15.69, respectively), Q→A (z = 11.48, 15.61 and 15.59, respectively), IR→PR (z = 4.82, 4.04 and 4.23, respectively) and PR→IR (z = 3.94, 3.27 and 4.39, respectively). This means that all participants tended to transfer their visual attention back-and-forth between the Q and A areas as well as between the PR and IR webpages.

However, some unique visual transitions were found for the different groups. First, two significant visual transfers, R→IR (z = 5.01 and 2.51, respectively) and IR→R (z = 3.57 and 3.74, respectively) were found in G1 and G2, while only the significant visual transfer IR→R (z = 2.90) was found in G3. That is, both the Confused and Slow-thinking groups transferred their visual attention back-and-forth between the R and IR webpages; however, the Fast-thinking group only shifted their attention from the IR to R webpages. This indicates that, compared to the other two groups, the Fast-thinking group had better control of their attention, moving it away from the irrelevant information and focusing on the relevant information for problem solving during their online searching. Second, only G1 showed a loop among the R, IR and PR webpages in the Google search window. Without any significant link between the webpages and the Q/A AOIs in G1, this loop was independently located within the Google search window. That is, G1, the Confused group, could get trapped in the various kinds of online information during the web search process. Third, it is worth noting that G3 showed significant two-way visual transfers between Q and R (z = 2.10 for Q→R, z = 2.09 for R→Q) and that G2 showed only the significant one-way visual transfer of A→R (z = 2.68). This means that the Fast-thinking group significantly inter-scanned between the task problem and the relevant webpages, and the Slow-thinking group significantly shifted their attention to the relevant webpages while working on the answers.

5. Discussion
5.1. Irrelevant information processing increases online information anxiety and decreases OIPS performance
This study explored how eye-tracking measures are associated with learners' information anxiety and their task performance in an OIPS task. The results suggested that learners' eye-tracking measures, especially on the irrelevant webpages, were significantly correlated with their information anxiety and task performance. The eye-tracking measures on the irrelevant webpages were positively correlated with their information anxiety, but negatively correlated with their task performance. This result supported Salmerón et al.’s (2017) claim that eye-tracking measures could reflect an individual's anxiety state and could affect their performance outcomes of online problem solving. In addition, this result was in line with the intimate relationship found between learners' visual behaviors and emotional factors such as self-efficacy (Hsu et al., 2019), flows (Tsai et al., 2016) and interests (Wang et al., 2016) reported recently. The significantly negative relationship between the task scores and the eye-tracking indices of the irrelevant webpages could be explained by the seductive details effect (Harp & Mayer, 1998; Park et al., 2015), because the irrelevant webpages can be regarded as seductive details (i.e., the interesting but irrelevant information). The negative impacts of seductive details (Mayer et al., 2008; Sanchez & Wiley, 2006) could be due to the irrelevant information's distractions of visual attention from relevant information (Tsai et al., 2019).

The regression analysis results further suggested that the eye-tracking indices including total reading time, proportion of fixation, and fixation rate on the irrelevant webpages can predict learners' reaction time, task performance and information anxiety. Specifically, the total reading time on irrelevant webpages can predict the task reaction time positively. The proportion of fixation duration on the irrelevant webpages can predict the task scores negatively but predict the unconfident anxiety (associated with doubts about the usefulness of the selected web information) positively. The fixation rate on irrelevant webpages can predict the uncertainty anxiety (associated with the reliability of the web information) positively. These findings suggested that eye-tracking measures could reveal not only learners’ performances of OIPS but also their emotions during the problem solving process. That is, more total time spent on the irrelevant web information could reveal lower efficiency of the web search task. More visual attention paid to processing irrelevant web information could reveal worse performance outcomes for the task and higher information anxiety about judging the validity of the web information. Higher search velocity on irrelevant web information could reveal higher information anxiety about judging the reliability of the web information.

In sum, the cognitive resources spent on the irrelevant web information could be regarded as a cost of an OIPS task. This is in line with the findings reported in a prior study (Zhang & Gwizdka, 2016) that visual attention paid to not useful information during the validation process was a factor predicting the cost of an online information search task. Regarding the emotional associations, this study furthers our understanding that eye-tracking measures are not only associated with learners’ learning interest (Wang et al., 2016), flows (Tsai et al., 2016) and self-efficacy (Hsu et al., 2019), but also with their perceived information anxiety. These associated emotional variables should be considered for further examinations or applications for developing individualized or adapted learning systems (Scheiter et al., 2020) based on eye-tracking measures in future studies.

5.2. Three information processing patterns for OIPS: confused, slow-thinking and fast-thinking
Based on the cluster analysis of the eye-tracking measures of the irrelevant webpages along with their performance outcomes, all the learners were categorized into three groups: the Confused, the Slow-thinking and the Fast-thinking groups. The Fast-thinking group performed the task correctly and quickly, the Slow-thinking group performed the task correctly but slowly, and the Confused group performed the task incorrectly and slowly. Following the cluster analyses, this study further explored the visual attention transitional patterns using lag sequential analysis (LSA) for each clustered group and different information processing patterns were obtained.

First, in the Confused group, a closed cycle among R, IR and PR was shown in the LSA output, which means that they focused on linking the various types of web information (i.e., relevant, partially relevant and irrelevant information) during the web search, especially centered on the irrelevant information. Thus, learners in the Confused group seemed to be trapped by the various kinds of web information, especially by the irrelevant information. In addition, the web area was neither sufficiently linked with the question window nor the response window. This suggests that, for the Confused learners, information searching on an open-ended web might not be so helpful for them to perform such an information problem solving task. Future studies may further explore the influences of web types (closed vs. open) on the task performance and perceived anxiety of learners who are not able to handle complex information shown on the web.

Second, for the Slow-thinking group, learners tended to shift their attention to the relevant web information from the answering window. That is, they tended to check the relevant web information while working on the answers. This indicated that they were able to control their attention for solving the information problem. However, in the webpage area, they still centered their visual attention on the irrelevant information and checked it back-and-forth with both the relevant information and the partially relevant information. A possible explanation might be that the Slow-thinkers processed information slowly in order to carefully examine the irrelevant information shown on the websites; however, they were able to control their attention and shift back to the relevant information while answering the query. Therefore, although Slow-thinking learners process information slowly, they can still have good performance.

Finally, for the Fast-thinking group, a unique feature is that no significant visual transfer from relevant to irrelevant information was shown. This could imply that they had good control over their visual attention because they were not attracted by irrelevant but interesting web information during their searches. Meanwhile, this could also imply that they were good at discriminating the relevancy of encountered web information during the OIPS tasks. In addition, they tended to link the relevant information back-and-forth with the problem statement. That is, they tended to check the relevant web information while processing or thinking about the problem. This could imply that they were goal-oriented during the process information selection.

The cluster analysis followed by LSAs provided us with a deep look at the visual patterns for different groups of learners regarding the process of web information while conducting a goal-oriented web search task, i.e., an OIPS task. The results further our understandings of the individual differences in the implicit cognitive strategies utilized for OIPS (Tsai, 2009; Tsai et al., 2012b, Ho et al., 2014; Brand-Gruwel et al., 2005, 2009), the visual transfers between relevant and irrelevant information for multimedia learning (Tsai et al., 2012a, Tsai et al., 2019), and individual differences in the problem solving strategies observed in other complex learning circumstances (Tsai et al., 2016; Susac et al., 2014). This new approach (cluster analyses plus LSA) can be used for future learning analytics concerning learners’ online information processing patterns. For example, merging eye-tracking data with log data may help deeply understand the interactive processes between different groups of learners and online inquiry physics simulations (Chiou et al., 2019). System log data may reveal behavioral engagement (Li & Tsai, 2017), while eye-tracking data plus system log data may further uncover cognitive and emotional engagements during online learning process. Moreover, this approach may contribute to the designs of gaze-contingent adaptive learning systems (Scheiter et al., 2020) or intelligent learning system in the future.

The LSA results may provide explanations for the different perceived anxieties of the three groups. For example, for the Confused group, their information anxiety may be associated with the fact that they could be more likely to be trapped in the Web and always deal with irrelevant information during their web searches. This could be referred to Wurman (1989) that information anxiety may occur when people faced the circumstances that they do not understand the information or do not know how to deal with the amount of information. Therefore, for the Confused group, one situation may occur when they search a collection of irrelevant and partially irrelevant information, and they may have difficulties judging the information, selecting relevant information, finally resulting in the information anxiety of uncertainty. An alternative situation could be that when learners kept encountering the information that was irrelevant to the task, they might have been aware that they might not be able to accomplish the task or gather enough information to answer the questions correctly, which resulted in suffering from the unconfident information anxiety. Future studies may further examine the role that learners’ epistemic belief in justification plays in the learning process of the task (Kammerer et al., 2013; Mason et al., 2010). In educational practices, the confused learners may need to learn how to distinguish the relevance of content on the Web (Green et al., 2014, 2018; Parsazadeh et al., 2018). When they are more able to differentiate relevant and irrelevant information, they may have better achievements and perceive less anxiety in such online information problem-solving tasks.

6. Implication and conclusion
This study employed eye-tracking technology to probe learners' visual behaviors in an OIPS task. The results show that learners' eye-tracking measures in the web search process had significant correlations with their task performance and information anxiety; and the TRT, PFD and FR on irrelevant web information were the most significant predictors of task performance and information anxiety. Three clusters of learners (the confused, slow-thinking and fast-thinking groups) were identified based on students’ eye-tracking measures on the irrelevant webpages and their performance outcomes. Specifically, when conducting an OIPS task, three types of learners were clustered in this study: First, the confused learners who completed the task slowly, gained low task scores and perceived high information anxieties; second, the slow-thinking learners who completed the task slowly, perceived high information anxiety, but gained high task scores; and third, the fast-thinking learners who completed the task quickly, perceived low information anxiety, and also gained high task scores. Different visual scan patterns of the three groups obtained from the LSA results may suggest different attentional control and information discrimination (Mason et al., 2018) strategies. This could provide some clues for explaining the different performances among groups. Moreover, the role of visual attentional control played in OIPS task found in this study seems similarly to that reported in prior literature regarding seductive details effects (Tsai et al., 2019; Harp & Mayer, 1998).

Findings of this study can contribute some insights to the related research literature and provide some suggestions for teaching practices. First of all, this study revealed that learners' abilities to discriminate information (identify relevant and irrelevant information) and to control their visual attention allocation (from irrelevant information to relevant information) are important in an online information problem solving task. More studies are suggested to examine the roles of epistemic factors such as sourcing and justification (e.g., Kammerer et al., 2013) played in OIPS tasks. Also, future studies may manipulate the information complexity of web-based learning environments to investigate its impacts on students' cognitive load, information anxiety and performance in OIPS tasks. In addition, this study conducted cluster analyses followed by lag sequential analyses (LSA) using eye-tracking data and log data to explore and profile learners' visual search characteristics when they perform an OIPS task in an open-ended web environment. Three clusters of learners with different visual attention transitional patterns were successfully identified, and differences among groups in terms of task performance and information anxiety were further verified. This analysis approach for complex learning process provides researchers an opportunity to observe the different information selection strategies utilized by different clusters of leaners in OIPS tasks. Therefore, combining eye-tracking and system log data to perform cluster analyses followed by LSA are suggested for future learning analytics studies. On the other hand, in teaching practices for information literacy education, more studies are encouraged to develop the curriculum and instruction to enhance students' information discrimination strategies in online problem solving contexts at all school levels (e.g., the recent efforts made by Parsazadeh et al., 2018 & Kammerer et al., 2019), as well as to test its impact on OIPS task performance and information anxiety. Finally, similar to Scheiter et al.'s (2020) attempts, future studies in educational technology may develop an instructional system using the eye-tracking measures on irrelevant webpages to predict students' information anxiety and their task performance in OIPS tasks. Such a system may provide instant feedback based on learners' eye-tracking indices and log records during the learning process.

There are some limitations of the current study. The participants of this study were all university students, so the results may not be generalized to learners at other levels. However, web-based information sourcing and discrimination are critical for students at all levels, and young students have also been reported with similar problems in such OIPS tasks (Mason et al., 2018). Thus, the findings and the approaches of this study may be referenced by future studies concerning students at all levels. Finally, the sample of this study was only 46 which could limit the statistical analyses results reported in this study. Future studies can reexamine the findings of this study using a larger sample size.

