“Learning by design” is a widely used approach for developing teachers' technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK) in the context of designing technology-enhanced instruction. This approach offers teachers the opportunity to learn from colleagues with different areas of expertise. Despite the critical importance of teachers' collaborative discourse in mediating teacher learning in the design process, there has not yet been a TPACK review to analyze how researchers investigate this discourse. After a systematic literature search, we identified eleven TPACK studies from seven geographical regions that investigated teachers' collaborative discourse, and then examined how the researchers had structured and analyzed this discourse and integrated their findings. Our analysis identified four strategies used by the researchers to structure and promote teachers' collaborative discourse. We found that most studies relied on the “coding and counting” data analysis method to reveal the distribution of TPACK (sub)sets expressed in the collaborative discourse but not the dynamics of the knowledge construction process or the progression of the discourse. Although the studies generally provided initial evidence for the efficacy of the design process, this evidence was rarely based on changes in teachers' TPACK as enacted during classroom instruction or on the quality of the design outcomes. We thus propose a new conceptual framework that emphasizes the reciprocal knowledge exchange process between the TPACK of individual teachers and the knowledge shared by teachers through collaboration. This framework refocuses the attention of researchers on investigating and connecting teachers’ individual and collective TPACK and their development during the learning by design process.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Technological pedagogical content knowledge

Learning technology by design

Teacher collaborative discourse

1. Introduction
Educational technology can support and enhance student learning, but successfully integrating technology into the teaching of specific subjects is a complex endeavor (Herring, Koehler, Mishra, Rosenberg, & Teske, 2016). Mishra and Koehler (2006) extended the seminal work of Lee Shulman (1986, 1987) and argued that teachers should develop a complex, situated, and integrated body of knowledge, known as technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPCK), or more recently as technological, pedagogical, and content knowledge (TPACK) (Thompson & Mishra, 2007). Rather than simply combining the three constituent knowledge domains of technology, content, and pedagogy, TPACK reflects the dynamic integration of the three domains and is essential in mediating the enactment of context-specific, technology-enhanced (TE) instruction by teachers (Koehler & Mishra, 2008). The notion of TPACK challenges teacher educators to go beyond merely teaching how to use technology and to instead develop teachers' capacity to integrate technology into the teaching of specific subject matter (Niess, 2005; Voogt, Fisser, Pareja Roblin, Tondeur, & van Braak, 2013). Developing teachers’ TPACK has become a major feature of teacher education and in-service teacher professional development programs globally (Voogt et al., 2013; Wang, Schmidt-Crawford, & Jin, 2018). Teachers with high-quality TPACK are more effective in planning (Harris & Hofer, 2011; Koehler & Mishra, 2005) and enacting (Hughes, 2005; Niess, 2005) TE instruction.

“Learning by design” (LBD) (Koehler & Mishra, 2008; Koehler, Mishra, Hershey, & Peruski, 2004) is a widely used approach that engages teachers in collaborative design to develop teachers' competences for technology integration in general (Voogt et al., 2011, 2015) and TPACK in specific (e.g., Agyei & Voogt, 2012; Baran & Uygun, 2016; Koehler, Mishra, & Yahya, 2007; Papanikolaou, Makri, & Roussos, 2017). LBD is theoretically grounded in the situated view of teacher learning (e.g., Borko, 2004; Voogt, Westbroek, Handelzalts, Walraven, Pieters, & De Vries, 2011). Specifically, LBD involves engaging teachers in teams of two or more to design TE instruction through iterative cycles of design, redesign, and reflective practices (Voogt et al., 2015). The collaborative design process during LBD enables teachers to share knowledge through collaborative discourse so that they can learn and integrate knowledge from colleagues with different areas of expertise in a teacher community (Angeli & Valanides, 2005; So & Kim, 2009). Through the collaborative design process, teachers can also practicalize their knowledge in specific contexts around an authentic design problem related to technology integration (Koehler et al., 2007). The design process enhances the teachers’ agency and ownership of the knowledge, repositioning them from recipients of knowledge to creators in their own specific contexts (Papanikolaou et al., 2017; Voogt et al., 2015).

As teachers' social and cognitive engagement frequently materializes in discourse within a teacher community (Csanadi, Eagan, Kollar, Shaffer, & Fischer, 2018), teachers' collaborative discourse is critical to their joint sense-making and knowledge building processes (Lefstein, Louie, Segal, & Becher, 2020; Sherin, Linsenmeier, & van Es, 2009). A critical determinant of whether and how teachers develop TPACK from the LBD process is the quality of their collaborative discourse during the collaborative design process (or design talk) (Chai, Koh, & Tsai, 2016). To date, reviews of the role of teachers' collaborative design process in mediating teacher learning (Voogt et al., 2011; Voogt, Pieters, and Handelzalts, 2016; see Table 1) have not analyzed the teachers’ collaborative discourse during the design process or interpreted the results through a TPACK lens.


Table 1. Summary of prominent reviews of TPACK and teacher collaborative design.

Authors	Range of years	Number of publications reviewed	Focus of the review
Abbitt (2011)	2005–2010	20 publicationsa	
•
Instruments and methods used to measure TPACK and challenges, purposes, and potential uses of these tools for TPACK-based evaluation of pre-service teacher preparation experiences

Wu (2013)	2002–2011	24 journal articles	
•
General characteristics of the published TPACK studies, including the number of studies, sample groups, subject domains, and research methods

Chai et al. (2013)	Up to May 2011	74 journal articles	
•
General characteristics of the studies (i.e., study site, publication outlet, research methods) and how researchers designed their program according to the TPACK framework

Voogt et al. (2013)	2005 to September 2011	55 journal articles and 1 book chapter	
•
Theoretical basis (i.e., development of the concept, views on TK, development of TPACK as a concept in speciﬁc subject domains, and TPACK and teacher beliefs) and practical use of TPACK (i.e., measuring TPACK and strategies for developing (student-) teachers' TPACK)

Rosenberg and Koehler (2015)	2005–2013	74 journal articles	
•
The extent to which context is included in TPACK research and the meaning of context

Willermark (2018)	2011–2016	107 journal articles	
•
General characteristics of recently published TPACK studies (e.g., research design and methods, research samples, subject domains, etc.) and approaches to identifying teachers' TPACK

Wang et al. (2018)	2006 January to 2015 September	88 journal articles	
•
Types of research methodologies for measuring pre-service teachers' TPACK development, research findings on pre-service teachers' TPACK development

Njiku, Mutarutinya, and Maniraho (2020)	2009–2017*	28 journal articles	
•
The nature of survey instrument items for measuring TPACK

Voogt et al. (2011)	1988–2009	9 journal articles	
•
Processes in teacher design teams that contribute to teacher learning

Voogt, Pieters, et al. (2016)	2009–2015	14 doctoral theses	
•
The processes and effects of collaborative design in teacher teams on teacher learning and curriculum change

This review	Up to February 2020	11 journal articles	
•
How researchers structured and analyzed teachers' collaborative discourse during learning by design and the findings of these studies

Notes: * As the article did not specify the search period, the time period represents the years in which the studies were published.

a
These 20 publications were selected from 91 manuscripts, including 34 journal articles, 52 conference proceedings, 2 book chapters, 2 doctoral dissertations, and 1 report.

Our review addresses this gap by focusing on how the various TPACK researchers have structured and analyzed teachers' collaborative discourse, and then integrating the findings of these studies. As diverse methodological approaches and tools can be used to analyze teachers' collaborative discourse (Lefstein et al., 2020), an examination of the existing methods may reveal gaps in how teachers' collaborative discourse has been analyzed. With these foci, our review is thus distinct from and complementary to prior reviews of TPACK studies (Table 1), which have largely focused on the TPACK of individual teachers and provide little detail on how researchers investigate teachers' TPACK in a collective setting (e.g., Chai, Koh, & Tsai, 2013; Voogt et al., 2013; Willermark, 2018). Accordingly, our review makes at least three important contributions to the field. First, it identifies how researchers have structured teachers' collaborative discourse, an important mediator of teacher learning in the LBD process. Second, it reveals issues and gaps in the focus and methods of previous studies of teacher's collaborative discourse in the LBD context. Third, it proposes a new conceptual framework to investigate teachers' TPACK and its development during the LBD processes, which critically connects the investigation of teachers' TPACK at the individual level to TPACK at the collective level.

1.1. Theoretical perspectives
1.1.1. TPACK and TPACK development
TPACK refers to the professional knowledge teachers require for the effective design and implementation of technology-enhanced (TE) instruction. Shulman (1986, 1987) regarded pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) as integrated knowledge, and Mishra and Koehler (2006) similarly proposed TPCK (later called TPACK) as the overlap between three independent knowledge domains (i.e., technology, content, and pedagogy) and/or three mutually integrated subsets of knowledge (i.e., TPK, TCK, and PCK). Since its introduction, TPACK has been widely embraced as a way of articulating the knowledge required by teachers to enact successful TE instruction (AACTE Committee on Innovation and Technology, 2008; Herring, Koehler, & Mishra, 2016). Although many researchers have embraced the notion of TPACK, each has conceptualized and interpreted TPACK differently (See a helpful review by Voogt et al. (2013).). For example, some researchers have conceptualized TPACK as extended PCK (e.g., Cox & Graham, 2009; Niess, 2005) while others have taken a transformative stance, viewing it as a distinct category of knowledge (e.g., Angeli & Valanides, 2009). Some researchers have focused on specific technologies in their conceptualization (e.g., TPCK-W for the World Wide Web (Lee & Tsai, 2010) and G-TPACK for geospatial (geographic) technologies (Doering & Veletsianos, 2007)), whereas others have foregrounded the content-specific nature of TPACK (e.g., technological pedagogical science knowledge (TPASK; Jimoyiannis, 2010). Still others have highlighted the importance of TPACK in teacher practices, such as lesson planning (Harris & Hofer, 2011) or practical teaching experience (TPACK Practical or TPACK-P; Yeh, Hsu, Wu, Hwang, & Lin, 2014). Despite these variations, as Di Blas, Paolini, Sawaya, and Mishra (2014) have pointed out, TPACK “has consistently been conceptualized as being a form of knowledge that is resident in the heads of individual teachers” (p. 2457). Although researchers have acknowledged that a teacher's TPACK is embedded in the social context (Rosenberg & Koehler, 2015), only recently have TPACK researchers begun to suggest a more distributive and situative view of TPACK, conceptualizing it as a form of knowledge shared by members of a teacher community (Carpenter et al., 2020; Di Blas et al., 2014; Di Blas & Paolini, 2016; Jones, Heffernan, & Albion, 2015).

Koehler et al. (2007) stressed that TPACK development is “a multigenerational process, involving the development of deeper understandings of the complex web of relationships between content, pedagogy, and technology and the contexts in which they function” (Koehler et al., 2007, p. 740). Many approaches and professional development frameworks have been applied to enhance teachers' TPACK development in initial teacher education (De Rossi & Trevisan, 2018) and the professional development of in-service teachers (Harris, 2016). Although not explicitly identified as such, many of these approaches are often grounded in a situative view of teacher learning, which emphasizes learning as a social process occurring as individuals participate in the discourse and practices of a particular learning community situated in particular physical and social contexts (Greeno, 2003; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Putnam & Borko, 2000). Core aspects of this view of teacher learning are teachers' day-to-day classroom practices, the distributed nature of knowledge, and learning communities (Borko, 2004; Greeno, 2003; Putnam & Borko, 2004; Voogt et al., 2015). Engaging teachers in collaboration in a teacher community to share their knowledge is deemed particularly important for developing teachers’ TPACK. First, TPACK involves complex integration of the technology, content, and pedagogy. Engaging teachers in collaboration allows them to share, learn from, and integrate the available knowledge that is distributed across colleagues with different expertise. Second, the situated nature of TPACK means that teachers need to bring together a range of knowledge resources which are often shared by a team of teachers.

1.2. LBD as a professional development approach
In their review of TPACK studies, Voogt et al. (2013) identified engaging teachers in designing a TE lesson or course as a major strategy for developing their TPACK. This strategy has been used to enhance teachers' TPACK in pre-service teacher education (e.g., Agyei & Voogt, 2012; Papanikolaou et al., 2017), in-service teacher professional development (Baran & Uygun, 2016; Jimoyiannis, 2010), and faculty professional training (Koehler et al., 2007; Rienties, Brouwer, & Lygo-Baker, 2013). Despite the variation in terminology (e.g., “design-based learning” (Baran & Uygun, 2016), “collaborative design” (Voogt et al., 2015), “teacher design team” (Voogt, Fisser, Tondeur, & van Braak, 2016a)) and slight differences in focus, the core of all of these strategies is learning by design (LBD; Koehler & Mishra, 2008; Koehler et al., 2004). As Voogt, Fisser, Tondeur, and van Braak (2016) observed, “there seems [to be] agreement that TPACK can best be developed through ‘learning by design’” (Koehler & Mishra, 2008, p. 33).

LBD was first proposed by Koehler and colleagues to avoid using traditional technocratic approaches in the development of teachers' technology-based pedagogy for specific content areas (Koehler et al., 2004). It is grounded in the perspective that teaching can be regarded as a “design science”—a science teachers use to develop their teaching performance, guided by investigations based on theory and evidence (Laurillard, 2012). LBD is an iterative technology-mapping process in which teachers consider tool affordances, learner needs, and pedagogical concerns aligned with the important concepts of specific topics in meaningful and authentic contexts (Angeli & Valanides, 2009). Theoretically, LBD aligns with the situated views of teacher learning (Borko, 2004; Greeno, 2003; Voogt et al., 2015). First, LBD engages a group of teachers in mutual collaboration within a design community. Selecting and embedding the technological tools that best support teaching and learning needs involves a complex decision-making process. Working in teams enables teachers to exchange their knowledge, negotiate solutions for technology integration, and reflect deeply as practitioners (McDuffie & Mather, 2009). Moreover, design-based activities not only provide a rich and authentic context for learning, but also lend themselves to sustained inquiry and revision that help designers come away with the deep understanding needed to apply knowledge in the complex domains of real-world practice connected to the teachers' workplace (Mishra & Koehler, 2003; Vyas & Mishra, 2002). During the co-design process, teachers develop their TPACK through engagement in authentic design problems involving the integration of technology to support their teaching and student learning (Yeh et al., 2014). Iterative cycles of design, redesign, and reflective practices further enable teachers to individualize their own TPACK to be more coherently integrated and practically transformed (Hong, Lin, Chai, Hung, & Zhang, 2019; Lee & Kim, 2014). Overall, this approach engages teachers in designing tasks and repositions them from passive recipients of knowledge about technology-enhanced teaching to active designers of technology-rich environments and creators of contextual and student-specific knowledge (Voogt et al., 2015).

1.3. Teacher collaboration and collaborative discourse
Teacher collaboration is an important feature of effective teacher professional development. As Desimone (2009) put it, “such arrangements set up potential interaction and discourse, which can be a powerful form of teacher learning” (p. 184). Teacher collaboration is critical for the successful implementation of innovative student-centered pedagogies (Timperley, Wilson, Barrar, & Fung, 2007) and the improvement of student achievement (Ronfeldt, Farmer, McQueen, & Grissom, 2015). Teacher collaboration is also advocated in professional development centered on technology integration (Kopcha, 2012; Macdonald, 2008; Schrum & Levin, 2013). Engaging teachers in collaboration benefits not only newcomers but also old-timers, who can learn from the technological experience of the newcomers. Such collaboration can lead to a greater gain for the community that is larger than the sum of its parts (Macdonald, 2008). However, engaging teachers in a design team does not necessarily result in meaningful collaboration (Pieters & Voogt, 2016). Teacher collaboration can vary in depth and quality, ranging from superﬁcial interaction to deeply meaningful collaboration (Vangrieken, Dochy, Raes, & Kyndt, 2015). As the distribution of knowledge within the design teams ultimately takes place through social interaction among the participants, the collaborative design process, including the interactions and dynamics among the design team members during the LBD process, are critical to the success of the LBD approach (Koehler & Mishra, 2008; Voogt et al., 2015). As Lefstein et al. (2020) pointed out, “discourse is a critical component of collaboration and community. It is the medium through which members of a community of practice work together, make meaning, and negotiate roles and identity (p. 1). It follows that the primary medium of interaction for the social distribution of knowledge is teachers' collaborative discourse that occurs during the collaborative design process. From a TPACK perspective, Chai et al. (2016) reminded us of the importance of teachers’ collaborative discourse during the design process, suggesting that as “the quality of the collaborative design processes is pivotal to the constructed TPACK … researchers should explore ways of measuring design talk processes” (p. 102).

Taken together, it is the interactions and dynamics between the design team members that constitute the resources for teacher learning during the LBD process. As the social and cognitive engagement of the design team members frequently materialize in teachers’ collaborative discourse, it is critical to examine how researchers have structured and analyzed this discourse and to evaluate their findings. Three research questions formed the basis of our review.

(1)
How has the collaborative discourse of teachers been structured in TPACK studies?

(2)
How was this discourse analyzed?

(3)
What have these studies contributed to our knowledge of teachers' collaborative discourse and TPACK and its development?

2. Methods
We used a systematic review process (Petticrew & Roberts, 2006) and began by querying two major databases, Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus. We limited our search to peer-reviewed articles in the social sciences (search date: February 13, 2020). We followed the TPACK review by Voogt et al. (2013) in using broad search terms to adequately survey the whole TPACK field. The keywords used were “technological pedagogical content knowledge,” “technological pedagogical and content knowledge,” “TPACK,” and “TPCK.” The initial search returned 1,203 and 1,430 hits from WoS and Scopus, respectively. After removing duplicates obtained from the keyword search from each database, the numbers of articles were 707 and 819, respectively. After removing the duplicates found in both databases, we obtained 978 articles. The authors then worked together to apply the following selection criteria:

1.
Empirical studies (we excluded literature reviews, editorials, position papers, and commentaries);

2.
A focus on teachers' TPACK or its development;

3.
Includes descriptions of the collaborative design process between teachers (either as an intervention or as part of the professional development experience in initial teacher education or professional development activities);

4.
Includes teachers' collaborative discourse as part of the study; and

5.
Sufficiently describes how the TPACK of teachers in the collaborative discourse process was analyzed.

Studies involving pre-service, in-service and university teachers and those undertaken in primary, secondary and tertiary settings were included. The titles and abstracts were initially screened by the authors to identify articles for potential inclusion, with full-text screening in cases of doubt. The three authors independently screened 20 articles, and there was no disagreement on the articles selected for review. Each author then screened the abstracts of around 350 articles and around 40 full texts for further clarification (i.e., 122 in total). After consulting with the research team in cases of doubt, we finally identified 11 articles for review. Fig. 1 summarizes the details of the literature search process.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (748KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Literature search process.

The research team worked collaboratively to develop an analytical framework. The first author read all the articles and developed an initial coding scheme. The second and third authors then each read one half of the selected articles to refine the coding scheme. After a series of research meetings, the authors developed the initial draft of the Article Analysis Form to focus the data analysis. The second and third authors then each analyzed one half of the articles and completed the form independently. The Article Analysis Form was iteratively refined (see the final version in Appendix 1). Summary tables based on the completed Article Analysis Form were then compiled by the authors and discussed in research meetings. The completed forms were used to identify themes (see below for details).

We used investigator triangulation (Denzin, 2017) throughout the process to ensure reliability. The coding of the articles was verified by at least two team members, and any difficulties were discussed, and the final coding negotiated until complete consensus was reached. The completed tables were then verified and checked by the first author. The tables provide sufficient detail for readers to see how our codes and themes were generated.

3. Findings
The basic information about the reviewed articles is summarized in Table 1. Two themes relevant to RQ1 were identified: the organization of the collaborative discourse and the strategies used to promote it. The themes identified for RQ2 were the TPACK models that guided the investigations into the collaborative discourse and the nature of the data and its analysis. Finally, we integrated the findings related to the content of the teachers’ collaborative discourse and TPACK and its development.

(1)
Study contexts

Table 2 provides the bibliographic information and research context of the studies reviewed. Of the 11 studies, all except #5 and #9 analyzed teachers’ collaborative discourse related to specific subject-matter teaching. Most were related to either first or second/foreign-language teaching. In seven studies (#1, #2, #6, #7, #8, #10, #11), the data were collected from in-school teacher professional development workshops initiated in response to school-based initiatives or to facilitate the (re-)design of the curriculum/material. The remainder were implemented in teacher education (#3, #4, #9) or faculty development (#5) courses. In terms of grade level, most involved kindergarten or primary school teachers, with #5, #10, and #11 focusing on secondary school teachers or college instructors.


Table 2. Summary of the reviewed studies.

Study	Author(s)	Journal	Country	Discipline	Context
1	Boschman, McKenney, Pieters and Voogt (2016)	Journal of Computer Assisted Learning	Netherlands	Early literacy	Kindergarten in-service teacher PD workshops
2	Boschman, McKenney, and Voogt (2015)	Computers & Education	Netherlands	Early literacy	Kindergarten in-service teacher PD workshops
3	Bueno-Alastuey and García Esteban (2016)	Estudios Sobre Educación	Spain	Content and Language Integrated
Learning (CLIL)	Teacher education course for pre-school/primary school
4	Bueno-Alastuey, Villarreal, and García Esteban (2018)	Technology, Pedagogy and Education	Spain	CLIL	Teacher education course for pre-school/primary school
5	Koehler et al. (2007)	Computers & Education	USA	Educational Technology	Faculty development course: Learning technology by design
6	Koh (2019)	International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education	Singapore	Mathematics	School initiatives in primary school
7	Koh and Chai (2016)	Computers & Education	Singapore	English, Mathematics, Science	School initiatives in primary school
8	Koh, Chai, and Tay (2014)	Computers & Education	Singapore	(Not mentioned)	Ministry-funded school-development project in a primary school
9	Nguyen and Bower (2018)	British Journal of Educational Technology	Australia	ICT	ICT in education course for pre-service primary-school teachers
10	Tseng, Cheng, and Yeh (2019)	Computers & Education	Taiwan	English	Distance learning project for senior secondary school students initiated by an in-service teacher with pre-service teachers
11	Yan, Chai, and So (2018)	Australasian Journal of Educational Technology	China	Mathematics	A development and evaluation study for inquiry-based learning in secondary school contexts
Note: Teachers of Grades 1 to 6 were categorized as primary teachers and those of Grades 7 to 12 as secondary teachers.

Overall, the studies were conducted at diverse locations and educational levels, suggesting that LBD is widely recognized by researchers around the world as a useful means of developing the TPACK of pre-, in-service, and university teachers. However, the limited number of studies investigating the teachers' collaborative discourse published in peer-reviewed journals signals a lack of attention to the role of teachers’ collaborative discourse in empirical TPACK studies.

(2)
Organization of teachers' collaborative discourse

The reviewed studies differed in their design community composition, means of collaborative discourse, and design outcomes/artifacts (Table 3). The number of design team members ranged from 3 to 7, except in #8 and #10. The members included pre-service teachers, in-service teachers, teacher education instructors, and external experts, depending on the research purpose, context, and professional development needs. In some studies, content experts (e.g., #1) or experienced teachers (e.g., #11) were involved in the design process. For studies that were conducted alongside other school improvement plans, it was important that teachers teamed up based on their needs, such as designing curricula or teaching collaboratively (#6, #7, #8).

Table 3. Structure of the teachers’ collaborative discourse.

Study	Composition of the design community	Major means of collaborative discourse	Design outcomes/artifacts
Number & type of participants	Number of teams	Number of participants in each team	Team composition	Face-to-face	Online
1	6 kindergarten teachers and 2 content (language) experts	2	5, 3	1 content expert in each team	X		PictoPal learning materiala
2	6 kindergarten teachers and 1 teacher coordinator	1	7	All participants	X		PictoPal learning materiala
3	26 + 19 pre-service teachers from 2 universities	10	N/A	N/A		X (BigBlueButton)	Analyzing an ICT-integrated CLIL unit design
4	28 + 17 pre-service teachers from 2 universities	9	5–6	3–4 from 1 university and 2 from the other		X (Skype)	Sharing views in a questionnaire and analyzing an ICT-integrated CLIL unit design
5	6 faculty members and 18 education technology Master's students	2 focal teams out of 6	4	1 faculty member and 3 Master's students	X	X (e-mail)	A prototype of an online courseb
6	3 primary mathematics teachers and	1	3	3 in-service teachers	X		Technology-integrated lessons (Topic: Averages; Tool: Microsoft Excel)
7	27 primary teachers	5	5–6	English (2 teams), Math (2 teams), Science (1 team)	X		Student-centered ICT lessons for school curriculum
8	24 primary teachers	3	6, 7, 11	1 team each for Grades 1, 4, and 5, respectively (1 lead teacher in each group)	X		ICT lessons
9	9 pre-service teachers	3	3	3 pre-service teachers	X		Moodle-based course
10	6 pre-service English teachers, 1 in-service English teacher, and 3 university professors	1	8	All participantse		Xc (Adobe Connect)	Online teaching materials and activities (Adobe Connect, PowerPoint)
11	24 pre-service math teachers, 5 practicing secondary math teachers, 2 university-based educational technology instructors	6	6	1 in-service teacher, 4 pre-service teachers, and 1 instructor		X (QQ)d	Technological pedagogical mathematics tools (TPMTs) with Flash script technology for inquiry-based learning
Notes.

a
PictoPal comprises computer activities that take place in a software-based learning environment and teacher-designed off-computer activities (McKenney & Voogt, 2009).

b
The protocol comprises the syllabus, course structure, readings, student assignments, and assessment rubrics.

c
The article did not mention whether the discussion was conducted online or face-to-face. As the article described it as a post-teaching discussion, we coded it as online.

d
The discussion was in the form of chat messages on the Tencent QQ platform (called QQ). It was unclear whether the participants met during designated timeslots.

e
Three professors were involved in the larger project, but only one provided feedback near the end of the meeting.

N/A indicates the information was not available in the article.

Regarding the major means of collaboration, most studies engaged teachers mainly in face-to-face collaboration. Computer-mediated communication (CMC) was also used to extend team members’ collaboration after their face-to-face interactions. These included Facebook chats (#9) or email (#5). Some studies used web-conferencing systems (#3, #4, #10) or chat messaging platforms (#11) to engage participants from different geographical locations in collaboration.

Teachers were engaged in designing TE materials and/or enacting TE instruction, but the design outcomes varied. The outcomes mainly included creating technology-supported lessons (#5, #6, #7, #8, #9) and teaching or learning materials (#1, #2, #10, #11). Some studies pre-specified the technological tools or platforms to be considered and implemented in the design outcomes (#1, #2, #6, #9, #10, #11). The designated technologies were chosen mainly for their affordances for disciplinary learning needs, except in Studies 9 and 10, which used platforms catering to generic learning needs. For example, PictoPal, a platform supported by Clicker@ software, facilitates student literacy learning through mapping written texts to pictures or text-to-speech functions (#1, #2). Study 11 required pre-service teachers to create two-dimensional animations for selected math concepts using Adobe Flash, as they were familiar with the C++ programming language. In the studies that did not predetermine the technology to be used (e.g., #3, #4, #5, #8), the teachers had greater freedom to select the technology.

To summarize, the reviewed studies differed in design team composition, means of collaborative discourse, and design outcomes. The distributive view of TPACK highlights the importance of carefully considering the design team composition. The design teams in some studies involved only pre-service teachers or only in-service teachers as team members. As TPACK refers to integrating knowledge relevant to designing and enacting TE instruction (Koehler & Mishra, 2008), in line with the distributive nature of TPACK, the teams should ideally include content experts, technology experts (or teachers adept at using technology), and pedagogues (or experts with expertise in more than one area). Thus, the various contributions of individual knowledge distributed across individuals can be shared during the collaborative discourse, encouraging the development of TPACK within the design communities. Understandably, design team composition in actual practice is highly dependent on the tasks and resources available. However, during initial teacher education, design teams should preferably include teacher educators or experienced teachers who can provide the novices with ongoing and process-oriented feedback during the design conversation. Such feedback is critical in helping novice teachers to learn how to integrate technology into their lessons (Tondeur et al., 2012). Although some design teams did include external experts or course instructors, they may or may not have facilitated the teachers' collaborative discourse. Facilitators as discussion leaders should have a repertoire of strategies, such as eliciting metacognitive and higher-order thinking from participants (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2006, 2008) or prompting them to share experiences and reflections (González, Deal, & Skultety, 2016; van Es, Tunney, Goldsmith, & Seago, 2014). Facilitators play a critical role, as it is the process of teacher collaborative discourse that mediates the exchange of knowledge rather than the mere presence of individuals with different forms of expertise. For example, facilitators should prioritize learning to integrate technology to fulfill students’ standards-based or curriculum-structured learning needs by unpacking their pedagogical reasoning and decisions, rather than overemphasizing the technological affordances of tools (Harris & Hofer, 2011). However, the reviewed studies did not always make clear the role of the facilitator, if present, in mediating the interactions and collaborative discourses of the design teams.

(3)
Strategies for promoting productive teacher collaborative discourse

Four strategies for promoting productive teacher collaborative discourse were identified (Table 4). The first was to provide the teachers with the necessary knowledge before they engaged in collaborative discourse. These inputs were often the knowledge (sub)sets that constitute TPACK. Workshops or training included topics on technology introduction and exposure (#1, #2, #5, #9, #10), pedagogical foundations or student backgrounds (#7, #10), technological support for student learning (#5, #6), and using technology to support students’ inquiry into subject content (#11). Content knowledge did not seem to be the focus of these workshops.


Table 4. Strategies for promoting productive teacher collaborative discourse.

Strategies for developing collective TPACK
Study	Providing inputs before discussion	Establishing a common goal in discussion	Engaging teachers in discussion and analysis of artifacts	Facilitating reflection
1.	T: PictoPal	Aligning on/off-computer learning activities	Within-group
Pre-implementation design-revision	(Implicitly embedded in revision tasks)
2.	T: PictoPal	Developing a series of PictoPal learning activities	Within-group
Pre-implementation design-revision	(None)
3.	(None)	Creating a TE CLIL unit in a group
Analyzing work from other groups	Across-group
Analyzing the CILI unit developed by another group	Self-ratings of “how CLIL are you?” in questionnaire (before discussion)
4.	(None)	Creating a TE CLIL unit in a group
Analyzing work from other groups	Across-group
Analyzing and critiquing the CILI unit developed based on a) lower/higher-order thinking skills; and b) cognitive skills progression	Offline written reflection on telecollaboration (after discussion)
5.	T: technologies exposure
TP: effective web design	Designing a prototype for an online course	Within-group
Reaching consensus on design decisions	Self-progress survey (periodic)
6.	TP: design of technology-integrated, student-centered learning
P: meaningful learning (Howland, Jonassen, & Marra, 2013)	Designing math lessons on “averages” through TE inquiry into authentic problems	Within-group
Pre-implementation design-revision	Reflections at the end of the design project
7.	P: 21st-century competency frameworks
P: meaningful learning (Howland et al., 2013)	Sharing ideas in designing and implementing student-centered ICT lessons in English, Math, and Science
Providing feedback for team members on the difficulties encountered in ICT lesson design and implementation	Within-group
Design-revision-implementation	Presentations of a) findings from students' learning performances (based on pre-/post-tests); and b) their own reflections (at the end of the school year)
8.	(None)	Discussing ICT lesson ideas, curricular matters, and logistical issues of the upcoming lessons	Within-group
Pre-implementation design-revision	(None)
9.	T: hands-on Moodle tutorial
T: web-conferencing platform	Designing a primary-level curriculum and related materials	Within-group
Reaching consensus on design decisions	600-word design justification
10.	T: web-conferencing platform
P: visiting schools to learn students' backgrounds; designing the curriculum	Creating PPT-based materials for distance learning
Solving T and P problems in the design process	Within-group
Design-implementation-redesign by pre-service teachers	Reflection on practice and redesign
11.	TPACK: 3 theory-based design principles of technological pedagogical mathematics tools (TPMTs)	Sharing topic-related materials by practicing teachers
Designing flash-supported lesson plans by pre-service teachers	Within-group
Reaching consensus on design decisions for TPMTs between pre-service and in-service teachers	(Implicitly embedded in revision tasks)
Note: P = pedagogy, T = technology, TPACK = technological pedagogical content knowledge.

The second strategy was to establish a common goal in the collaborative discourse. The teachers were tasked with the collaborative design of the TE curriculum. The design tasks were often guided by strategies fundamental to the TE curriculum, such as following design cycles (#7, #11) or activity alignment (#1, #2). Some tasks even demanded that the TE curriculum be embedded with design features such as supporting students’ mathematical inquiry (#6, #11) or distance learning (#5, #10), which challenged teachers to become more deliberate and intentional in designing student-centered instruction. When given a common goal in designing TE tasks, the teachers had opportunities to explicate their design reasoning within the collaborative discourse.

The third strategy involved engaging teachers in discussing and analyzing group design artifacts. All of the collaborative discourses took place within the design teams, except for Studies 3 and 4, in which pre-service teachers in groups located in two universities shared and analyzed the previously developed CLIL units. The researchers sometimes asked the teachers to offer constructive feedback on the works created within their groups during the design process (#1, #2, #9, #11) or the final artifacts of other groups (#3, #4). The feedback focus was sometimes peer support for difficulties in TE instruction (#7) or general comments on the TE curriculum (#1, #2, #3, #5, #10). Interestingly, only in two studies were the teachers allowed to implement instruction using the materials designed during the study (#7, #10). Subsequent collaborative discourse could help the teachers to optimize design outcomes and deal with the difficulties they encountered during the enactment of TE instruction.

The fourth strategy was to engage teachers in sharing their reflections during their collaborative discourse, not only to develop the professional knowledge of individual teachers, but also to promote the quality of collaborative discourse. All of the studies except #1, #2, and #8 explicitly indicated that the teachers were prompted to reflect on the design process through the use of questionnaires or written reflections. Nevertheless, this was mostly done after the design process was completed (#4, #6, #7, #9). Engaging teachers in sharing their reflections during the design process can stimulate their collaborative discourse (#3). Ideally, the redesign should be based on teachers' reflections on practices (#10) so that they can share the issues and challenges they encountered during the enactment of the TE materials or the design outcomes of the subsequent collaborative discourse, which could be oriented to support the teachers’ in integrating technology into their instruction.

In summary, we identified four strategies TPACK researchers used to promote productive teacher collaborative discourse. It is worth noting that these strategies were used either alone or in combination to promote teacher collaborative discourse, but it was unclear whether specific strategies were required under certain conditions or whether more general approaches could improve the quality of discourse and enhance teachers' TPACK. Two issues merit further discussion from the situative view of teacher learning. First, none of the studies explicitly highlighted the importance of group norms, although these have been found to “promote supportive yet challenging conversations about teaching” and can help to support teacher discussions or work sharing (Borko, 2004, p. 7). Second, few studies (only #7 and #10) required teachers to enact teaching and then redesign the TE materials. Without implementing TE instruction, the teachers could only envisage issues that might arise during actual enactment. More importantly, the teachers did not have the chance to collect learning evidence from their students for feedback into their revision of the TE instruction/materials. Such a feedback loop between students and teachers is critical in improving teachers’ TPACK, as it helps teachers learn from the design and redesign cycles (Fishman, Marx, Best, & Tal, 2003).

(4)
TPACK model(s) guiding the analysis of teacher collaborative discourse

Various theoretical TPCK/TPACK models were used to guide the study designs and data collection methods (Table 5). Mishra and Koehler's (2006) model was the most frequently used. Self-defined TPACK models proposed in the authors' previous works were used in four studies (#1, #2, #8, #11). Two studies combined multiple models to define TPACK (#6, #9). The researchers applied some/all of the seven knowledge (sub)sets from the integrative conceptualization of TPACK (or TPCK) as the basis for characterizing the composition of the collaborative discourse.


Table 5. Research focus and TPACK model.

Study	TPACK model	What was investigated
TPACK/TPCK1	Factors
1	Self-defined model	7 (sub)sets1 of TPCK	Design reasoningb
2	Self-defined model	7 (sub)sets1 of TPCK	Design reasoningb, depth of inquiry in TPACK-related design talk
3	Techno-pedagogical-content skills (Koehler & Mishra, 2009)	T, P, C, TP	(None)
4	Mishra and Koehler (2006)	TK, TPK, PCK, TPACK	(None)
5	Koehler et al. (2004); Mishra and Koehler (2006)	7 (sub)setsa of TPACK	Group dynamics, social, and miscellaneous
6	Technological pedagogical mathematical knowledge (TPMK)	7 (sub)sets1 of TPMK	Design knowledge, context
7	Cox and Graham (2009); Mishra and Koehler (2006)	7 (sub)sets1 of TPACK	Design frames: idea development, design management, perception, enactment, institutional, design scaffold, and interpersonal factors
8	Chai, Koh, and Tsai (2011)	7 (sub)sets1 of TPACK	Contextual factors: physical/technological, cultural/institutional, intrapersonal, interpersonal
9	Not committed to a single model	Content, pedagogy, technology	Learner characteristics, context, and teacher beliefs
10	Mishra and Koehler (2006)	7 (sub)sets1 of TPACK	Problems encountered in contexts and created solutions (implicitly analyzed through the five contextual dimensions of Porras-Hernández & Salinas-Amescua, 2013)
11	Self-defined model	7 (sub)sets1 of TPCK	The design stage in terms of design decisions, levels of technological tool integration
Notes.

a
Denotes the seven knowledge (sub)sets that underpin TPACK (TPCK): TK, PK, CK, TPK, TCK, PCK, and TPACK (TPCK).

b
Denotes practical concerns, existing orientations, and external priorities.

The quality of the collaborative discourse was also influenced by the teachers’ knowledge of instructional design. Their discourse was coded by design-related factors such as design reasoning and contextual constraints. The teachers designed the teaching and learning materials through frames, by stages, or in terms of problems encountered (#6, #7, #10, #11). The artifacts designed were likely to be shaped by the contexts of the design teams and those that they were designed for (#1, #2, #5, #6, #8, #9).

Overall, the most common of analyzing the teachers’ collaborative discourse was to count and code the TPACK knowledge (sub)sets. Some studies did not even focus on TPCK/TPACK. These studies implicitly operated from an integrative view of TPACK, assuming that growth in any of the related constructs (i.e., content, technology, pedagogy) or TPACK subsets would automatically contribute to growth in TPCK. However, this assumption has been severely questioned in the TPACK literature (Angeli & Valanides, 2009). Questions then remain as to how the researchers could adequately analyze the development of the TPACK of the collective teacher groups based on their collaborative discourse data. In the next theme, we zoom in on the details of the data analysis.

(5)
Data collection and analysis of TPACK in teacher collaborative discourse

As Table 6 shows, investigations into teacher collaborative discourse ranged from using a single data source (e.g., video or audio transcripts) to multiple sources such as questionnaires or design artifacts. Audio recordings were widely used, as they can help avoid the potential distortion of interactions in teacher collaboration to which video-recording can lead. Multiple data sources revealed rich information, and data triangulation was necessary for research quality (e.g., teachers’ pedagogical decisions/reasoning in # 9). Not all of the studies clearly specified the data volume or collection timeframe (#3, #4). The collaborative discourse data were collected from three to five design team meetings and spanned two-to three-month semesters (#1, #2, #7, #8, #10). The researchers did not generally analyze the whole dataset but selected key stages related to the collaborative design (#5, #7, #10). They often offered justifications of why and how data were collected and analyzed.


Table 6. Foci of data collection and data analysis for teacher collaborative discourse.

Study	Data sources	Number of meetings and duration of data collection	Length of discussion analyzed	Unit of analysis	No of units	Analysis technique	Reliability
1	Transcripts (v)	3 workshop meetings over 3 months	N/A	Utterance	1,766	Content analysis	Inter-rater (K = 0.74)
2	Transcripts (v/a)	3 workshop meetings over 3 months	About 150 min	Episode	65	Content analysis	Inter-rater (K = 0.76)
3	Transcripts (a), written reflection, questionnaire	N/A	N/A	Episode	230	Content analysis	N/A
4	Transcripts (v/a), written reflection	N/A	N/A	Episode	326	Content analysis	Inter-rating to reach consensus
5	Field notes, emails, artifacts and related notes, survey	15 weeks, 3 of which were analyzed (beginning, middle, and end of semester)	N/A	Episode	Group 1 (26, 48, 48)
Group 2 (43, 30, 39)	Content analysis	Inter-raters (90%)
6	Transcripts (a)	5 design sessions over 2 months	N/A	Episode (Boschman et al., 2015)	252	Content analysis	Inter-rater (K = 0.85)
7	Transcripts (a)	7 x 5 teams = 35 sessions (7 design sessions for each team) across 2 semesters	35 h	Textual unit based on sentences	12,598	Content analysis, chi-square analysis	Inter-rater for TPACK, DK and design frame (K > 0.80)
8	Transcripts (a)	3 months	13 audio recordings (9 h and 50 min)	Paragraph	3,592	Content analysis, chi-square analysis	Inter-rating to reach consensus
9	Transcripts (a), online resources during design, artifact screenshots, researchers' notes, individual interviews	5 weeks	30 min face-to-face discussion (5 weeks)	Turns in the topic of conversation	N/A	Hybrid thematic analysis	Investigator triangulation
10	Transcripts (a) (post-teaching discussion, interview)	Any 3 discussion sessions that were comparatively richer and lengthier were chosen from the early and later stages over 14 weeks	30 min x 9 = 270 min	Episode	59	Content analysis	Re-coding one-month after re-coding
11	Chat messages on the Tencent QQ platform	10 weeks (3 weeks between pre-service and 7 weeks between pre-service and practicing teachers)	N/A	Utterance (Stahl, 2011)	N/A	Content analysis	Inter-rater (86%)
Notes:(a) = audio; (v) = video N/A = Information not available in the article.

Most studies were small-scale qualitative studies, and all except #9 and #11 took the “coding and counting” approach to data analysis (Chai et al., 2013). This involved 1) coding discourse units using the TPACK/TPCK knowledge (sub)sets and 2) frequency counting. Boschman and colleagues reported that they coded the data deductively and then inductively (#1, #2), and a similar approach, “hybrid thematic analysis,” was used in #9. Frequency counting enabled simple statistical comparisons of these categorical coding results (e.g., frequency reports, percentages), indicating which TPACK knowledge (sub)sets dominated the discourse or demonstrating possible knowledge transformation. Excerpts from the discourse were included to exemplify teachers’ knowledge exchanges. Some studies (#5, #7, #8) used mixed methods. Chi-square analysis was also used to compare the extent of the knowledge (sub)sets represented in the discourse.

Units of analysis were used inconsistently across the reviewed studies. Boschman and colleagues used “utterances” and “episodes” as the unit of analysis in #1 and 2, respectively. Different authors defined the same units rather differently. For example, “utterance” was defined as a unit of speech in #1 and as an online chat message in #11. “Episode” was defined as a larger textual unit segmented by topical turns in some studies (#2, #5, #6, #9, #10) but was not clearly defined in other studies (#3, #4). Koh and colleagues also analyzed transcripts using sentences or paragraphs as units (#7, #8). The inconsistency in units may be due to the data volume in a large range mentioned above. The differences in terminology and units across the studies make it difficult to compare and contrast their findings.

Cohen's K was the most commonly used method for calculating inter-rater reliability (#1, #2, #5, #6, #7), although in some studies the reliability calculation was not explained (#5, #11), or the researchers only reported that the raters reached consensus (#4, #8). In #9, data from different sources were coded and triangulated, and individual interviews were conducted to assess teachers' design rationales. Otherwise, no validity tests, such as checking the interpretations with the participants, were apparent.

Two issues worth further elaboration. First, while it is legitimate for researchers to use different methods to analyze discourse data, the unclear definition of unit of analysis and the idiosyncratic meaning of the same term (e.g., utterance) hamper meaningful comparison of findings across the studies. Second, the methodologies have been mostly limited to a coding and counting strategy. Although this approach enabled the researchers to understand the composition of the TPACK embedded in the discourse, this method neglects the temporal nature of verbal data (Csanadi et al., 2018) and the dynamics of knowledge construction. The forward and backward links between the design ideas were rarely analyzed in the studies reviewed. This is particularly problematic when the development of TPACK of a group of teachers is the focus of investigation. Further analysis would have been useful (e.g., analyzing the collective consensus of the group, the quality of the design outcomes (artifacts), the individual TPACK levels expressed, and the quality of the discourse using theoretically derived rubrics). Visualizations of the interactions between team members can be a useful strategy and provide further understanding of the progression of the discourse focus or knowledge construction process (#5).

(6)
Discourse content, collaboration process, and implications for teachers' professional/TPACK development

Table 7 synthesizes the findings of the reviewed studies related to the three themes related to RQ3: discourse content, collaboration processes, and implications for teachers' development of TPACK. First, in terms of the content of the teachers' collaborative discourse, PCK was the predominant knowledge subset (#2, #4, #6, #7, #10), whereas TPK was rarely considered (#4, #7, #10). However, the knowledge (sub)set represented in the discourse seems to be dependent on the topic discussed. For example, Bueno-Alastuey and García Esteban (2016) found that when pre-service teachers discussed technology tools, T was mentioned more frequently, whereas PK and CK were more commonly mentioned in discussions of the CLIL curriculum unit. Several studies reported that the teachers' TPACK represented in the group discourse became more complex as the knowledge subsets became integrated during the progress of collaborative design (#2, #4, #5). Practical concerns (#1, #2, #7, #8) were often expressed during the discourse. Cultural/institutional factors can dominate group discussions and hinder the teachers' opportunities to share their TPACK (#8). Apart from external factors, multiple studies (e.g., #2, #8) also pointed to the importance of intrapersonal factors, such as beliefs, in influencing teachers’ discourse content.


Table 7. Discourse content, collaboration process, and implications for teachers’ professional/TPACK development.

Study	Discourse content	Collaboration process	Implications for teachers' professional/TPACK development
1	
•
Practical concerns (i.e., design-related and implementation-related) were predominant, mostly related to TCK and TPCK.

•
Integrated TPCK emerged most often when teachers envisioned actual implementation.

•
The content expert contributed to the discussion by providing content-based explanations and strategy suggestions.

•
Explicit attention should be given to envisioning actual classroom implementation, including practical concerns related to both design and implementation.

2	
•
Most discussion time was spent on PCK and TPCK; discussion of separate subsets of knowledge (TK, PK, CK) was rare.

•
P was always explicated with other knowledge subsets (e.g., TPK, PCK, TPCK).

•
Attention to TPCK gradually increased across discussions.

•
Practical concerns were dominant.

•
External priorities hardly played a role; teachers' existing orientation (e.g., beliefs) featured more prominently in discussion of deeper inquiry.

•
The researcher–facilitator provided procedural support (e.g., dividing the design work into three workshops with open-ended tasks).

•
Teachers require both procedural and substantive (i.e., content) support to achieve a deep level of inquiry in the discussion. Content experts should provide content input before and during the design.

3	
•
T was articulated more when discussing telecollaboration.

•
PK and CK were mentioned more when discussing the CLIL unit.

•
Teachers' collaboration was easily hindered by technical constraints (e.g., problems with sound).

•
Pre-service teachers' discussion was not deep, and did not result in changes in the CLIL units. Tasks that extend collaboration and reflection should be included.

4	
•
PCK was the focus.

•
TPK and TPACK were less discussed, and the integration of TK into TPK and TPACK needed time to evolve.

•
Discourse developed first from the individual knowledge subsets of TPACK and later their intersections.

•
Telecollaboration promoted collaboration, as it made participation more equal and showed potential for developing pre-service teachers' TPACK.

•
A final task that engages pre-service teachers in discussing more critical aspects (e.g., underlying learning theories, the best type of ICT integration) should be included.

5	
•
Discourse moved from considering T, P, and C as independent constructs toward a more interdependent construction.

•
The participants' roles in the discussion and the nature of their meaning-making in the groups evolved over time.

•
LBD is an approach that honors the rich connections between C, T, and P.

6	
•
PCK, TPMK, and DK accounted for most of the discourse episodes.

•
PCK was adapted and deepened, but TPMK was not.

•
N/A

•
The five pathways to create teachers' TPM provided implications on how to promote its development.

7	
•
PCK was discussed more.

•
TPK and TCK were less discussed.

•
Seven design frames were identified, of which only design management was largely used by teachers.

•
N/A

•
Multiple design frames should be used as scaffolds to support teachers' design reasoning in student-centered ICT lessons.

8	
•
Cultural/institutional factors dominated group discussions.

•
The more talk focused on cultural/institutional factors, the less TPACK was discussed.

•
Intrapersonal factors (e.g., teacher beliefs) played a part in triggering discussions related to TPACK.

•
An experienced facilitator ensured that TPACK was addressed during the discussion.

•
Teachers need to develop competencies to facilitate discourse about design so that contextual concerns can be turned into opportunities to support pedagogical improvement.

9	
•
Pedagogy was rarely mentioned.

•
Tutor support, technological capabilities, and group collaboration influenced the technology-enhanced learning design process.

•
Pre-service teachers should be encouraged to articulate and reflect on their beliefs about learning and teaching and their design decisions throughout the design process.

10	
•
PCK predominated, while TPK was absent.

•
N/A

•
Contextual factors (e.g., technology quality, students' learning characteristics) should be tackled through teachers' collaborative designs.

11	
•
Pre-service teachers articulated limited PCK, and the deeper PCK of practicing teachers provided material to further develop pre-service teachers' TK and TCK.

•
Pre-service and in-service teachers in different geographical areas were able to work collaboratively using mobile devices and social network services.

•
Practicing teachers' PCK played a crucial role in refining the initial TPACK of pre-service teachers.

•
Teachers should be encouraged to use the well-tested design guidelines and collaborative design processes to create technological pedagogical mathematics tools and students' inquiry-based learning.

Notes: P = pedagogy, C = content, T = technology, TP = technological pedagogy, TC = technological content, PC = pedagogical content, TPACK = technological pedagogical content knowledge.

For the collaboration process, some studies found evidence that technological tools such as web conferencing (#3, #4) or mobile devices (#11) provide affordances that promote teacher collaboration. These include promoting equal participation among the participants (#4), connecting participants in different geographical locations (#3, #4, #11), and enabling sharing between teachers with different levels of expertise (e.g., pre- and in-service teachers) (#11). However, technological constraints were also shown to hinder collaboration (#3). Another important subtheme pertained to the importance of the presence of “more knowledgeable others” in the collaborative process (#1, #9, #11). For example, #1 specifically mapped out the role of content experts in providing content-based explanations and suggested strategies to promote collaborative discourse, and #11 stressed that practicing teachers sharing their PCK was critical to the initial TPACK development of pre-service teachers.

The studies have a variety of implications for teachers' professional development and TPACK development. Several of these studies have implications for the content to be addressed during teachers’ collaborative discourse (#1, #9, #10). For example, teachers should be directed to envision actual implementation (#1) and articulate their pedagogical reasoning and beliefs (#9) to promote their TPACK development. The studies also suggested that to deepen the collaborative discourse, teachers may require subject-matter support (#2), design guidelines (#11), and scaffolding (#7). Some studies (#2, #8) explicitly highlighted the role of facilitators in orchestrating the discourse, to ensure that the discussion is focused on specific aspects conducive to collective TPACK construction.

Although these studies generally provided initial evidence of the efficacy of the LBD approach for promoting teachers' TPACK development (i.e., TPACK (sub)sets are evident in the teachers' collaborative discourse), some also found that the discussion may lack depth (#3, #4) or address TPK and TCK less often than expected (#7). Similarly, #10 reported that TPK was absent in the discussion. As TPK and TPCK can be considered as the more critical knowledge subsets within the TPACK framework (Graham, 2011), these findings raise questions about the actual effectiveness of the LBD approach in developing teachers' TPACK. Studies #3 and #4 also reported that the pre-service teachers’ CLIL units underwent no change as a result of the discussion, and suggested the inclusion in the CLIL units of a final task that encourages pre-service teachers to reflect collaboratively. We found that only one study assessed the quality of the design outcomes. Study 11 used a study-derived rubric comprising detailed criteria (i.e., the Technology Tools Integration Assessment Rubric; Harris, Grandgenett, & Hofer, 2010) to evaluate the design artifacts (i.e., technological pedagogical mathematics tools) produced by the design teams. The evaluation was conducted by 30 practicing teachers. Surprisingly, none of the studies evaluated the quality of the TE instruction enacted by the members of the design team.

In summary, the reviewed studies revealed the content of the teachers' TPACK expressed in the teachers' collaborative discourse and the nature of the collaborative processes in that discourse. As TPACK was embedded in the teachers' collaborative discourse, these studies provide some evidence that teachers' individual TPACK could benefit from meaningfully structured design processes or collaboration. However, most of the studies reviewed did not provide evidence of how TPACK expressed in the collaborative discourse influenced the TPACK enacted by individual teachers or the quality of the design outcomes. Moreover, most of the reviewed studies provided no evidence of how teachers' collective TPACK may influence the enactment of TPACK by individual teachers, or how the teachers’ enacted TPACK in subsequent rounds of instruction may inform the TPACK constructed by collaborative discourse.

4. Discussion and conclusion
In line with the situative view of learning, which emphasizes the social and situated nature of learning (Borko, 2004; Greeno, 2003; Putnam & Borko, 2000), LBD is widely recognized as a valuable approach to developing pre-/in-service/university teachers' TPACK (e.g., Agyei & Voogt, 2012; Koehler et al., 2007; Papanikolaou et al., 2017). Yet, despite the critical importance of teachers' collaborative discourse in mediating TPACK development (Chai et al., 2016), a surprisingly small number of LBD studies have included analysis of teachers’ collaborative discourse, signaling that this critical aspect has been largely overlooked in empirical TPACK studies published in peer-reviewed journals.

Several salient findings of our analysis are worth recapitulating. First, although researchers generally provided information about how the teachers' collaborative discourse was organized in terms of design team composition, means of collaborative discourse, and design outcomes, they seldom described the critical role of facilitators in orchestrating the collaborative discourse or setting up and maintaining group norms. Our review identified four strategies for promoting teachers' collaborative discourse: (1) equipping teachers with the necessary knowledge before engaging them in collaborative discourse; (2) establishing a common goal for the teachers' collaborative discourse; (3) engaging teachers in discussing and analyzing group design artifacts, and (4) providing chances for teachers to share their reflections during their collaborative discourse. Second, our analysis revealed that the methods used to analyze the collaborative discourse were somewhat homogeneous, with most using the “coding and counting” approach to reveal the distribution of TPACK (sub)sets expressed in the collaborative discourse. The studies seldom focused on the dynamics of the knowledge construction process or the progression of the discourse. Finally, although the findings generally provided evidence for the efficacy of the LBD approach, the evidence was rarely based on changes in teachers’ TPACK enacted in classroom instruction or the quality of the design artifacts produced from the collaborative design processes. Based on these points, we considered how best to pursue further investigation of TPACK and TPACK development in the context of collaborative discourse during the LBD process.

A group of science education researchers recently proposed the refined consensus model (RCM) for PCK (Carlson et al., 2019). This model articulates three distinct realms of PCK: personal (at the individual level), collective (within a group of individuals), and enacted (i.e., teachers' personal PCK may be enacted during planning, teaching, and reflection). We believe that this notion can also be applied to the field of TPACK, in which knowledge exchange may occur between teachers’ personal and collective TPACK during the LBD process. The TPACK developed from the individual enactment of TE instruction may loop back to personal and collective TPACK, and vice versa. To exemplify these knowledge exchange processes, consider Study #10, in which the design team comprised six pre-service English teachers, one practicing teacher, and one university professor. The process started with the pre-service teachers designing online teaching materials and activities and discussing the initial designs with the team. The pre-service teachers then implemented the designed materials, discussed the problems they encountered during the enactment and reflected on their practices to redesign the teaching materials and adjust their instruction. Extensive collaborative discourse associated with the design-teach-reflect-redesign cycle enabled the pre-service and in-service teachers and university professors to exchange their individual TPACK and build new collective TPACK. This process also promoted extensive knowledge exchange between different realms of TPACK, in which collective TPACK was potentially offloaded to design artifacts or enacted by the pre-service teachers. The three TPACK realms interacted as the design team shared their expertise and attempted to introduce technology into their implementation in authentic contexts. However, this study only focused on the collective TPACK; it did not analyze either the changes in the individual TPACK of the pre-service teachers during the LBD process or the quality of the design outcomes/enacted lessons resulting from the collaborative discourse.

Based on the RCM for PCK created by two dozen international scholars in the PCK field (Carlson et al., 2019) and our review, we propose a conceptual framework, Collaboration-enriched TPACK framework (Fig. 2), which highlights the TPACK knowledge exchange process during LBD with the goal of refocusing the attention of researchers on teachers’ collective and individual TPACK.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (588KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Collaboration-enriched TPACK framework.

First, this framework highlights the need to examine teachers' collaborative discourse. The nature and quality of the discourse, and hence the quality of the collective TPACK (purple box), can potentially influence teachers' personal TPACK (green box) and the quality of the design artifacts (orange box) produced from the collaboration during the iterative design and redesign cycles of LBD (grey arrows). Second, it highlights the need to trace the two-way knowledge exchange processes (pink arrows) between teachers' collective TPACK (purple box), personal TPACK (green box) and enacted TPACK (blue box). These two-way knowledge exchanges between the three realms of TPACK are mediated through pedagogical reasoning (Carlson et al., 2019; Shulman, 1987), during which teachers reason about their own teaching/design decisions and actions. Third, the framework highlights the purposeful structuring and facilitation of teachers' collaborative discourse so that it can expand organically and meaningfully to facilitate the development of teachers’ TPACK. This requires strategic planning of the design team composition and design tasks, and organization of the discourse (e.g., the presence of a skilled facilitator).

Self-reporting surveys have been the most frequent approach to determining individual teachers' TPACK levels (Koehler, Shin, & Mishra, 2012; Willermark, 2018). However, recent TPACK studies have revealed that the TPACK represented in self-reported surveys does not always influence teachers' instructional quality (Petko, 2020), as evidenced by teachers' lesson plans (Backfisch, Lachner, Hische, Loose, & Scheiter, 2020) and actual classroom practice (Ocak & Baran, 2019; Yeh, Hsu, Wu, & Chien, 2017). Empirical research has also shown that teachers' self-reported TPACK is only weakly related to their objective-TPACK (e.g., measured in terms of teachers' ability to discriminate between true and false statements about TPACK) (Drummond & Sweeney, 2017). Although existing studies of collective TPACK with a component of teacher collaborative discourse have moved beyond self-report and provided initial evidence for the efficacy of the LBD approach in enhancing teachers' collective TPACK, it is also critical to gather evidence of individual teachers' personal/enacted TPACK development as a result of collaborative discourse during the LBD process. We argue that TPACK researchers should focus on the three realms of TPACK in a holistic manner with the aim of connecting both the processes (in the form of personal and collective TPACK) and the outcomes (in the form of enacted TPACK and/or design artifacts) to provide stronger evidence for the efficacy of the LBD approach. This is important because a shift in teachers' knowledge at the group level or changes in teachers' individual knowledge may not necessarily translate into decision-making and actions in their own classrooms (Chan & Hume, 2019). Future studies should empirically verify these outcomes and also identify effective strategies to augment the effectiveness of this approach in developing teachers’ TPACK.

One possible method to analyze teachers' collaborative discourse beyond the coding-and-counting approach is epistemic network analysis (ENA) (Shaffer, 2017; Shaffer et al., 2009). ENA is theoretically grounded in epistemic frame theory, which posits that learning cannot be reduced to isolated components but to the transformation of an individual's epistemic network, which comprises a set of relationships connecting the skills, knowledge, and values a learner uses to make sense of and take action in the world. This network is expressed through discourse and changes over time during the learning process (Shaffer, 2012). ENA allows researchers to identify and quantify connections among elements in coded data and to represent them in dynamic networks that model learning in discourse data (Shaffer et al., 2009). Specifically, the use of ENA allows TPACK researchers to model temporal co-occurrences between teachers' TPACK (sub)sets and actions during discourse, visualize their co-occurrences, and statistically compare teacher discourse during different meetings and between different teacher groups with respect to these models. This provides greater insight into how individual (sub)sets of TPACK/actions occur in relation to one another throughout the whole discourse. It reveals the temporal development of teachers' TPACK and the interdependence between different TPACK (sub)sets/actions, and visualizes the dynamics of learning. Recent TPACK studies have applied this technique to unpack teachers' TPACK reflected in online collaborative discourse (Zhang, Liu, Cai, 2019) and lesson plans (Phillips, Kovanović, Mitchell, & Gašević, 2019). We believe this analytical technique can be similarly applied to understand teachers' collective TPACK embedded in their collaborative discourse and its development.

In closing, we acknowledge the limitations of our review. First, it was restricted to English-language articles published in high-quality peer-reviewed journals available from two major databases. Second, only a few articles met our requirement for TPACK studies that analyzed teachers' collaborative discourse, and hence our findings were drawn from a limited number of empirical studies. Third, of the eleven articles we reviewed, eight were written by a select group of four authors and their collaborators, and five were published in Computers & Education. This suggests that the reviewed studies may have been influenced by the ideas of only a few researchers and their particular orientation toward collective TPCK/TPACK. While this may be considered a limitation, we hope to shed light on the lack of attention to teachers' collaborative discourse and collective TPACK in the context of LBD in the major peer-reviewed journals, which we see as a potentially promising direction in the TPACK field. From this perspective, our review provides a starting point for the many TPACK researchers who are interested in using the LBD approach in developing teachers' TPACK. The conceptual framework we propose offers an analytical tool for future studies aimed at investigating teachers' personal and collective TPACK through LBD, while refocusing researchers' attention on investigating and connecting teachers’ individual and collective TPACK and their development during the LBD process. Thus, our review represents a valuable contribution to the TPACK field.

