Social media has become a useful tool for learning and teaching due to its functions for knowledge sharing, such as documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation. Higher education institutions (HEIs) that recognise the value of social media and the importance of individual motivation have sought to encourage its use to bolster learning performance. Using social cognitive theory and connectivism theory, we developed a model that theorises the influence of social media and individual motivation (reputation and altruism) on knowledge sharing and learning performance among students in higher education. To test the model, we employed covariance-based structural equation modelling (CB SEM) on survey data that was collected using questionnaires from 407 students enrolled in the top 10 private universities in West Malaysia. Congruently, we established the utility of the Heterotrait-Monotrait (HTMT) ratio (which was traditionally confined to variance-based or partial least squares SEM) as a discriminant validity measure for CB SEM. As a result, our study empirically evidences that social media functions (documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation) and individual motivation (reputation) are core factors that HEIs can leverage to encourage knowledge sharing and improve learning performance among tertiary students. The paper concludes with a discussion of its implications, limitations, and future research directions.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Social media

Individual motivation

Knowledge sharing

Learning performance

Malaysia

1. Introduction
Web-based technologies bring—and continue to bring—interactive and unique facilities for the net generation (Blaj-Ward & Winter 2019), which consists of individuals (digital natives) who grew up with such technologies that they often use for virtual communication and self-development without prior expertise or knowledge (Hortigüela-Alcalá, Sánchez-Santamaría, Perez-Pueyo, & Abella-García, 2019). Among the web-based technologies that are prevalent today, social media is most popular and widely studied, especially in developed countries such as Australia, Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States (Bigman, Smith, Williamson, Planey, & Smith, 2019; Connolly, Willis, & Lloyd, 2019; Mauroner, 2016; Yu, Foroudi, & Gupta, 2019). Though social media research in developing countries exist, its insights are often limited to a single or a specific set of social media (Kirschner & Karpinski, 2010; Lau, 2017; Ma & Chan, 2014; Moorthy et al., 2019), thereby enhancing our understanding of context (e.g., social media sites such as Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter) rather than concept (e.g., social media functions such as documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation).

Of particular interest in this study is social media use among higher education students in Malaysia, which is a developing country where social media use is omnipresent, though its study in higher education, especially among private higher education institutions (HEIs), remains in an infancy stage (Moorthy et al., 2019). Recent studies reveal that social media such as Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter are highly popular among students in Malaysia, who perceive social media as a source of e-learning (Al-Rahmi et al., 2015, 2018; Bukhari et al., 2020; Manickam, Selvam, & Ahrumugam, 2020). According to the 2019 Digital Malaysia report,1 25 million people in Malaysia are actively using social media, representing 78% of the total population, who spend an average of  eigth hours per day on the internet and three hours per day on social media. Malaysia is also among the top developing countries in Southeast Asia and occupies the fourth position globally for countries with high levels of social media users (New Straits Times, 2019). Given that social media enables users, including students, to share ideas and interact with others (Al-Rahmi & Zeki, 2017; Mahdi, 2019), the site essentially facilitates knowledge sharing, which can enhance interpersonal skills, reinforce learning, improve self-confidence, bolster academic performance, increase tolerance of constructive criticism, improve leadership quality, and yield enormous satisfaction among students, as evidenced in existing studies, including those conducted and reported in Malaysia (Balakrishnan & Gan, 2016; Mahdi, 2019).

Social media has advanced and evolved over the years. Through its functions, social media has gradually metamorphosed from a social communication digital hub into a commercial, educational, and social regulatory entity (Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016). Indeed, social media functions provide unique options for interactivity such as liking, commenting, polling, and sharing content that students can benefit from. Eid and Al-Jabri's (2016) study, which investigated Saudi students' knowledge and learning performance through different categories of social media, revealed that social media is able to foster students' learning performance, and that such insights can be enriched by incorporating individual motivational factors. Although prior studies on individual motivational factors exist, they do not focus on social media influences. Chang and Chuang's (2011) investigation of individual motivation influence in virtual communities revealed a significant relationship between motivation factors and knowledge sharing. Likewise, Hsu and Lin (2008) showed that individuals are altruistic and more interested in sharing knowledge to gain and enhance reputation. These studies remain congruent in recent times, as evidenced by Hoseini, Saghafi, and Aghayi (2019), who reported that altruism and reputation remain key drivers of knowledge sharing on social media. The authors reiterate that knowledge sharing will not occur if an individual's intrinsic motivation (altruism) is absent. Though many other factors such as self-status, social image, respect, positive feedback, and popularity exist, they are often considered as driving factors of reputation. Indeed, many students want to enhance their reputation, which encourages them to share knowledge in a virtual community (Hoseini et al., 2019; Ma & Chan, 2014; Zhang, Liu, Deng, & Chen, 2017). The recent work of Choi, Ramirez, Gregg, Scott, and Lee (2020) corroborates existing findings in this area, wherein altruism and reputation are individual motivation factors that significantly impact students' knowledge sharing. The authors explained that social media is a voluntary service site, and that students engage in it to share knowledge in tandem with self-willingness and reputation advancement. Similarly, Shahzad et al. (2020) revealed that intrinsic motivation has a positive moderating role between technological, environmental, and cloud computing adoption. Yet, despite the myriad benefits that students can obtain from using social media, the question of how social media functions and individual motivation factors, influence knowledge sharing and learning performance when they are taken collectively—rather than individually, as seen in the existing literature—remains underexplored (Anderson & Dron, 2017; Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016).

Most HEIs have adopted learning management systems to bolster students' learning performance (Anderson & Dron, 2017; Balakrishnan & Gan, 2016). At the same time, students are becoming more eager to leverage social media for solving problems, facilitating discussions, and completing assignments (Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016), which are consequences of social media functions, reflecting easy accessibility, affordability, and speedy interaction (Al-Rahmi et al., 2018; Lim, Lim, & Phang, 2019). Thus, social media has become a tool that can supplement learning management systems for fostering virtual classroom experiences, wherein students across the globe can join in simultaneously to learn and share their ideas (Tess, 2013). Balakrishnan and Gan (2016) added that the original intention of most students’ use of social media is for learning purposes, which corroborates the earlier work of Patel, Darji, and Mujapara (2013), which suggests that the intention of most students who use social media is to acquire information and increase their learning. Interestingly, Hennessy, Kirkpatrick, Smith, and Border (2016) found that Twitter, as a social media tool, can also help students initiate smooth communication by reducing the anxiety that influenced participation. Indeed, prior research indicated that students are often delighted or highly satisfied with social interactions associated with learning through social media (Tur, Marín, & Carpenter, 2017; Yang & Tang, 2003). Importantly, social media represents an opportunity to curate a highly engaging learning experience for students that can lead to improved learning performance (Thoms & Eryilmaz, 2014).

Many researchers have indicated that social media such as Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter, are new sites for education that can reinforce student learning albeit without systematic and logical judgment (Blasco-Arcas, Buil, Hernández-Ortega, & Sese, 2013; Tur et al., 2017). In the context of higher education, students are more inclined to use social media to increase their knowledge sharing behaviours and improve their learning performance, as compared to other conventional learning approaches because of the site's easy and convenient functions (Al-Rahmi & Zeki, 2017). In addition, Blasco-Arcas et al. (2013) highlighted that with the advent of social media, a high level of interactivity between peers and teachers can avail and strengthen the student knowledge sharing and learning performance. Nevertheless, the findings from existing research are still inconclusive, as Aalbers, McNally, Heeren, de Wit, and Fried (2019) and Kirschner and Karpinski (2010) argued that students who use Facebook have lower grade point average (GPA) compared to non-Facebook users, wherein the authors attributed this outcome to students spending more time weekly on social media rather than studying.

Similarly, many researchers have investigated social media in the educational context and measured the use of its distinct factors by using diverse instruments and models and have integrated theories for capturing new research frameworks (Lee, Krilavi, Zhang, Wan, & Man, 2012; Lin & Lu, 2011). However, many studies have produced inconclusive results due to the lack of coherence of findings encompassing the social media phenomenon (Kirschner & Karpinski, 2010; Lau, 2017; Yang & Tang, 2003). Moreover, conflicting debates provided to undergird social media mainly via its sites and their probable influences on knowledge sharing and learning performance among students have contributed to the plausible inherent fracture arising from distinct philosophical views (Kirschner & Karpinski, 2010; Lau, 2017). Consequently, in this paper, we endeavour to offer a congruence by examining social media through the lens of its functions rather than its sites to contribute more meaningfully to the literature. Moreover, we endeavour to advance prior literature on diverse juxtapositions of social media, knowledge sharing, and learning performance by investigating reputation and altruism as individual motivations that influence knowledge sharing and learning performance among students, which supplements the understanding of social media functions, and thus provide a holistic encapsulation of both social media and its users in a single study. Finally, we endeavour to shed additional light on social media for education in a context that would reasonably resonate with that in developed and developing countries, wherein Malaysia is selected as a suitable case due to its evolution into one of the most prominent educational hubs in Asia. Equally, Malaysia has similarities with established and aspiring educational hubs in developed and developing countries, respectively.

2. Literature review and hypothesis development
2.1. Theoretical underpinning
Social cognitive theory (SCT) was developed by Bandura (1986) by incorporating a modified version of social learning theory. The SCT consists of individual factors, environmental factors, and corresponding actual behaviours. Individual factors determine the ability of a person to perform a definite behaviour in a social networking system. Individual factors examine the self-efficacy level that can help boost a person's altruism to share knowledge in a virtual community. Environmental factors refer to how the environment acts to influence individual self-efficacy and to ensure a successful behaviour. This is also considered when the fundamental concern is to provide more suitable technological support (Bandura & Bandura, 2016). SCT has been extensively examined in the information systems literature for authenticating individual behaviour that primarily focuses on media influences, learning performance, communication, and social interaction (Lau, 2017). Zhou et al. (2020) applied SCT to investigate the virtual community's knowledge sharing behaviour through YouTube and revealed that individuals' attributes such as self-efficacy and outcome expectations accelerate knowledge sharing intention. Self-efficacy denotes a person's capability to perform a certain job, whereas outcome expectation defines the leading consequences of that execution (Bandura & Bandura, 2016).

Consistent with the debate of extant literature underpinned by the SCT, an individuals’ decision to participate in knowledge sharing may be aroused by diverse yet distinct expectations to achieve a specific outcome (Alexander, Cao, & Alfonso, 2021; Bolkan, Pedersen, Stormes, & Manke, 2021). Studies opine that a common outcome expectation of individuals is often associated with achieving or boosting their personal reputation (Alam, Khusro, Ullah, & Karim, 2017; Moghavvemi, Sharabati, Paramanathan, & Rahin, 2017). Gaining a personal reputation through altruism is one of the stimuli to use social media to learn, as it can bring reciprocal benefits from the perspective of SCT (Choi et al., 2020). Consequently, reputation may be perceived as a factor that motivates students to engage in knowledge sharing (Zhou et al., 2020). Moreover, while engaging in knowledge sharing via social media sites, prior research espouses that individuals may also exhibit altruistic behaviours that mirror selfless considerations or benevolence towards the well-being of others (Hoseini et al., 2019). Congruent with the assumptions of the SCT, altruistic behaviours typified via knowledge sharing can aid to provoke reinforcement of knowledge shared or obtained, thus leading to increased learning within the defined social media site (Dahdal, 2020). Therefore, guided by the SCT assumptions, reputation and altruism can be seen as probable factors that are not just associated with outcome expectation and reinforcement, but also the learning performance of an individual engaging in knowledge sharing (Al-Rahmi et al., 2018; Alexander, Cao, & Alfonso, 2021).

Apart from SCT, connectivism theory has been widely employed in research associated with digitalisation concepts (Corbett & Spinello, 2020; Duan, Xie, Hawk, Yu, & Wang, 2019), including the world wide web (WWW), online discussion groups, social media sites, and wikis, which can improve learner capability to cultivate knowledge and increase knowledge sharing (Downes, 2020). Eid and Al-Jabri (2016). Majchrzak, Faraj, Kane, and Azad (2013) applied the connectivism theory to identify social media functions, whereas Hsu and Lin (2008) did the same to investigate what motivated people to participate in blog activities. Consistent with the work of Hsu and Lin (2008) on technology acceptance, knowledge sharing, and social influence, we developed our research model to mirror the assumptions of the SCT and the connectivism theory in relating to knowledge sharing and learning performance emerging from social media and individual motivations. Specifically, knowledge sharing is the acquisition and exchange of valuable information that helps to enhance understanding of a particular subject matter. Knowledge sharing often occurs when information is exchanged directly or indirectly (such as the use of technologies) between people (Naeem & Khan, 2019). Goldie (2016) argued that the teaching and learning of students can be enhanced by the technologies reinforced by connectivism. According to Yeh, Huang, and Yeh (2011), the learning community can contribute towards knowledge sharing while individuals participate in online group discussions. Moreover, in the organisational context, Lou, Fang, Lim, and Peng (2013) espoused that employees mostly share knowledge to achieve self-satisfaction or establish a good position that can increase the respect they get from others. Thus, reputation can help increase the drive to share knowledge in a virtual community (Chang & Chuang, 2011).

Consistent with extant debates, the connectivism theory relay assumptions that deepen understanding of learning and how it may be further engendered in today's digitalised world (Cleary, 2021; Peled, Pundak, & Weiser-Biton, 2020). The connectivism theory espouses how the internet is being leveraged by individuals to learn and exchange information across the globe, and prior research have established that a common online site is social media (Chu, 2020). With the help of internet technologies, social media has become an important learning tool. Studies contend that this is largely attributed to individuals' need to exchange documents and engage in virtual communication and knowledge formation (Glassner & Back, 2020). The works of Naeem and Khan (2019) and Eid and Al-Jabri (2016) further relate that documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation mirror social media's unique methods of fostering learning across the globe. Congruent with the assumptions of connectivism theory, the exchange of documents, virtual communication, and knowledge formation have been accentuated by extant research to be positively associated with increased learning and knowledge sharing (Mpungose & Khoza, 2020; Nobre, 2020).

Similarly, based on the above theoretical discussion, the perception of knowledge sharing and learning performance rely on a learning community, active participation, social interaction, understanding, negotiation, and observation (Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016). However, in the context of social media, these functions are defined as documents exchange, knowledge formation, and communication that can influence students' knowledge sharing and learning performance. Thus, social media can assist users in enhancing effective communication (Abbas, Aman, Nurunnabi, & Bano, 2019). This is plausible via recently developed social media sites (e.g., Instagram, Facebook, Instagram, ResearchGate, Telegram, Twitter, WhatsApp, YouTube) that create opportunities for increased knowledge sharing. Moreover, most social media sites provide several services that reflect communication, documents exchange, and knowledge formation (Majchrzak et al., 2013). Hence, we endeavour to investigate whether these services can accelerate students’ knowledge sharing and learning performance. Although much have been done over the years to deepen insights into the social cognitive and connectivism theories, more research must be done to advance and better align the collective assumptions to recent growing social media actors and self-motivators influencing student knowledge sharing and learning performance. Therefore, we endeavour to advance prior understanding and contribute to theory by investigating how reputation and altruism (individual motivations factors), documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation (social media functions) influence student knowledge sharing and learning performance.

2.2. Influence of documents exchange on knowledge sharing and learning performance
Consistent with recent technological advancements, several tertiary level students commonly use social media sites, such as Facebook, Dropbox, ResearchGate, Telegram, and WhatsApp, to exchange important documents, including project tasks, assignments, class notes, voice recordings, and suggestions to peers (Ahmed, Ahmad, Ahmad, & Zakaria, 2019; Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016). It is argued that documents exchange is linked to the central idea encapsulating the distinct academic learning-related activities initiated between students via social media sites (Majchrzak et al., 2013). Consistent with online activities and learning performance, Ozlati (2012) noted a positive correlation between documents exchange and organisational management system improvement. The author argued that the speed of documents exchange is increased during the execution of online media activities, which could promote individual efficiency. However, Elaimi and Persaud (2014) found a negative relationship between technological implementation and knowledge sharing behaviour towards documents exchange in Saudi firms. The authors explained that most users waste a lot of their valuable time while using technology. Similarly, previous research relating to peer-to-peer documents exchange has been carried out from ethical and legal perspectives (Moore & McMullan, 2004). Several extant works on the effect of documents exchange have also been executed within organisational contexts, thus contributing to the growing sparseness of research into educational contexts (Ozlati, 2012). Notably, Eid and Al-Jabri (2016) found that documents exchange positively influences students’ knowledge sharing but demonstrates an insignificant influence on learning performance. However, Al-Rahmi et al. (2018) argued that a significant relationship exists between social media and learning performance. The inconclusive evidence in extant research indicates that empirical re-examination of conflicting findings is necessary. Leading towards the mainstream findings of prior research, we postulate that documents exchange has a positive influence on knowledge sharing and learning performance.

H1

Documents exchange as a social media function is positively associated with knowledge sharing.

H2

Documents exchange as a social media function is positively associated with learning performance.

2.3. Influence of virtual communication on knowledge sharing and learning performance
Virtual communication could be defined as an online process of leveraging sounds, symbols, or words to engender a conversation and transfer ideologies between two or more individuals (Balaji & Chakrabarti, 2010). According to Majchrzak et al. (2013), virtual communication occurs when any study-related idea or personal opinion towards issues is uttered, responded to, or debated using social media sites. A study conducted by Hershey, Hammond, & Wiriyapinit (2005) posits that virtual communication fostered a positive learning experience in an MBA online distance learning course. On the other hand, Balaji & Chakrabarti (2020) concluded that online discussion sites positively influence students’ interactions and catalyse the learning process. Ma and Yuen (2011) also argued that a positive relationship exists between virtual communication and knowledge sharing. The work of Dahdal (2020) highlights a need to consistently investigate the association between virtual communication and knowledge sharing, considering the differing impact of constant changes influencing human behaviours. Congruent with the debates of extant research, we believe that virtual communication positively influences knowledge sharing and learning performance.

H3

Virtual communication has a positive relationship with knowledge sharing.

H4

Virtual communication has a positive relationship with learning performance.

2.4. Influence of knowledge formation on knowledge sharing and learning performance
While knowledge formation can be done through content creation, various contents are constantly being created and shared through social media sites (Jadin, Gnambs, & Batinic, 2013; Lu, Hao, & Jing, 2016). Knowledge formation can also be evidenced as students’ attempt at answering questions on ResearchGate, Quora, or post summaries of learning outcomes to Twitter, Facebook, or WhatsApp groups. Nonaka & Takeuchi (1995) opined that knowledge formation mirrors the creation of content that may be in the form of writing down or recording personal experiences, assignment issues, presentation slides, formation and development of an idea into a video, and uploading such content into any social media site for the benefit of others. Bebensee, Helms, and Spruit (2011) investigated the impact of knowledge formation through technology-based social media, including blogs and wikis. The result revealed that individuals in the utility industry could create more knowledge formation through blogs instead of wikis. Additionally, Barker (2015) argued that virtual communities often use social media to help individuals form knowledge more efficiently. Extant research posits that individuals of a group who engage in forming knowledge through social media are more likely to enhance knowledge sharing and overall performance of their groups or online learning networks (Barker, 2015; Bebensee et al., 2011). Carter & Nugent (2011) found that personal learning networks could be based on various social media sites geared toward knowledge formation. However, Jadin et al. (2013) argued that personal attributes of trend-setting could be determined by the level of knowledge sharing in the context of using Wikipedia but not much effect on pro-social value. Congruent with the disparate juxtapositions of previous research, we theorise that knowledge formation is positively associated with knowledge sharing and student performance.

H5

Knowledge formation has a positive relationship with knowledge sharing.

H6

Knowledge formation has a positive relationship with learning performance.

2.5. Influence of reputation on knowledge sharing and learning performance
Knowledge is an intellectual property that is often obtained from information exchange or experience, and thus, the sharing of knowledge via virtual sites could be more challenging when no reward is given (Hoseini et al., 2019). In the work of Moghavvemi et al. (2017) on the factors that support students' knowledge sharing and learning performance through social media, Facebook was notably the most popular means of sharing students' ideas, and often students expected rewards for sharing. Sharing knowledge in a virtual community cannot be forced but rather inspired. Knowledge sharing can occur spontaneously when participants realize that their sharing might be compensated with rewards such as increased reputation (Yan, Wang, Chen, & Zhang, 2016). Reputation, either positive or negative, can be defined as an initial opinion and judgment of any person that comes as feedback to a particular task that individuals try or continue to achieve (Yan et al., 2016). Sometimes participants' knowledge sharing intention and reputation reduce when shared content is unreliable, relays no significant impact, or when participants receive no reward from shared content. However, an individual's reputation may be increased due to a demonstration of expertise in ways that accord exceptional acknowledgment to such individual or increase learning performance (Safa & Von Solms, 2016). This notion is supported by Yan et al.’s (2016) study, which accentuated that online health care professionals' reputation would increase alongside individuals' knowledge sharing behaviour and learning performance. Consequently, we hypothesise that reputation is positively associated with knowledge sharing and learning performance.

H7

Reputation has a positive relationship with knowledge sharing.

H8

Reputation has a positive relationship with learning performance.

2.6. Influence of altruism on knowledge sharing and learning performance
Altruism can be denoted as a voluntary job to assist others without expecting any rewards, and in virtual communities, altruism plays a vital role in advancing knowledge sharing with participants (Yan et al., 2016). Chang and Chuang (2011) mentioned that altruism is an individual attribute that inspires individuals to willingly help others achieve a predetermined goal and increase their learning performance. Ma and Chan (2014) investigated a survey of 299 high school students' intention to share knowledge through social media sites. The result indicated that self-enjoyment mostly influences students to share their class-related materials through Facebook and Twitter. Similarly, Hung, Durcikova, Lai, and Lin (2011) found that intrinsic motivation enhances the mentality of participants to share knowledge that can engender the achievement of predetermined goals. More recently, Akosile and Olatokun's (2019) study of 151 Nigerian tertiary students' knowledge sharing and learning performance influencing factors, shows that individual factors significantly influence knowledge sharing. Therefore, we postulate that altruism, an individual motivating factor, is positively associated with knowledge sharing and learning performance.

H9

Altruism has a positive relationship with knowledge sharing.

H10

Altruism has a positive relationship with learning performance.

The research framework, which collectively mirrors our study's current hypotheses, is shown in Fig. 1, whereas the definitions and measurement sources of our constructs derived from the existing literature are presented in Table 1.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (341KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Research framework.


Table 1. Construct definitions and measurement sources.

Construct	Definition	Items	Source(s)
Documents exchange	Documents exchange is a process that allows for the sharing of aggregated information that is saved as a file and shared via social media sites in order to curate value for others.	9	Eid and Al-Jabri (2016)
Virtual communication	Virtual communication is an online process and act of leveraging sounds, symbols, or words to engender a conversation and transfer of ideologies between two or more individuals.	9	Ma and Chan (2014) and Moore and McMullan (2004)
Knowledge formation	Knowledge formation is the creation of content that may be in the form of writing down or recording personal experiences, assignment issues, presentation slides, and formation and development of any idea into a video and uploading such content into any social media site for the benefit of others.	9	Eid and Al-Jabri (2016)
Reputation	Reputation, in this study, is a driving perception of an individual to improve self-status or image by sharing important knowledge, information, and experience in a virtual community.	4	Chang and Chuang (2011)
Altruism	Altruism is a special self-satisfaction attribute of an individual that shows unconditional kindness towards others.	4	Chang and Chuang (2011) and Yu and Chu (2007)
Knowledge sharing	Knowledge sharing is a process of acquiring and exchanging individual ideas, information, skill, or experiences in a positive way to increase value of other individuals.	6	Hsu et al. (2007) and Chai et al. (2011)
Learning performance	Learning performance is the degree of knowledge and skills at which the individual can become effectively enhanced to achieve education-related goals through the use of social media sites.	5	Al-Rahmi et al. (2018) and Blasco-Arcas et al. (2013)
3. Methodology
3.1. Instrumentation
A survey was conducted using a questionnaire that consisted of (1) three social media functions (i.e., document exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation) that were measured on a five-point scale where “1” indicates “never”, “2” indicates “once a month”, “3” indicates “once a week”, “4” indicates “daily”, and “5” indicates “hourly”, (2) two individual motivational factors (i.e., reputation and altruism), knowledge sharing, and learning performance that were measured on a five-point Likert scale where “1” indicates “strongly disagree” and “5” indicates “strongly agree”, and (3) socio-demographic questions such as gender, age, ethnicity, program, cumulative grade point average (CGPA), and duration of internet usage on social media (see Appendix).2 Specifically, the nine items each for document exchange and knowledge formation were adapted from Eid and Al-Jabri (2016), the nine items for virtual communication were adapted from Ma and Chan (2014) and Moore and McMullan (2004), the four items each for reputation and altruism were adapted from Chang and Chuang (2011) and Yu and Chu (2007), the six items for knowledge sharing were adapted from Chai, Das, and Rao (2011) and Hsu, Ju, Yen, and Chang (2007), and the five items for learning performance were adapted from Al-Rahmi et al. (2018) and Blasco-Arcas, Buil, Hernández-Ortega, and Javier-Sese (2013). The Cronbach's alpha of these constructs were between 0.88 and 0.96 and thus met the recommended minimum threshold of 0.70 (Hair, Sarstedt, Hopkins, & G Kuppelwieser, 2014), thereby indicating the presence of construct reliability in this study.

3.2. Data collection method and procedure
The top 10 private universities in West Malaysia based on student enrolment were selected for data collection. The chosen universities consist of Multimedia University (MMU), Sunway University (SU), Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR), Taylor's University (TU), USCI University, Universiti Kuala Lumpur (UniKL), HELP University, Open University Malaysia, Monash University Malaysia, and INTI University. The choice for focusing on West Malaysia is because the region has the highest concentration of the top private universities in Malaysia (Hosen et al., 2020, 2021). The respondents selected are those who have active studentship in foundation, undergraduate, and postgraduate programs. A non-probability sampling method approach was applied to collect the data because all private universities do not disclose their student database, and genuine attempts to obtain such information were futile. A snowball sampling method was applied as it was difficult to contact willing participants at large. Students of the respective universities were approached and asked to fill up a copy of the questionnaire. The respondents who filled the questionnaires were requested to recommend eligible respondents. The questionnaires were distributed face-to-face. In order to refine the questionnaire, a pre-test and a pilot study of 50 respondents were carried out before a total of 510 (refined) questionnaires were distributed for the main study. Out of 510 questionnaires in the main study, 461 responses were received, indicating a response rate of more than 90 percent. The data from the questionnaires were analysed, and 35 questionnaires were excluded due to erroneous entries by the respondents. The data from the remaining questionnaires were checked for possible missing data and outliers, wherein 19 questionnaires were omitted due to the aforementioned reasons. The final dataset came from 407 questionnaires and were useable for subsequent data analysis (Hair, Sarstedt, Ringle, & Mena, 2012).

3.3. Common method bias or variance
To address concerns about common method bias or variance (CMB/CMV), we employed the procedural and statistical approaches recommended by Cham, Cheng, Low, and Lim (2020). According to Podsakoff, MacKenzie, and Podsakoff (2012), CMB/CMV occurs when self-reported questionnaires are used to collect data for any specific study, and most data are collected from a single source. CMB/CMV is a concern because using data tainted with this issue can lead to false correlations and internal consistencies among the studied constructs. As a procedural remedy, (1) measurement items were adopted from different sources, (2) a pre-test and a pilot study were conducted with samples from targeted respondents, (3) a question randomisation option was used, and (4) two types of scales were incorporated in the questionnaire to encourage objective thinking by respondents before responding to the questionnaire, and thus, helped to engender psychological separation when respondents attempt to respond to the items in the questionnaire. As a statistical remedy, the Harman's single-factor test was executed. The Harman's single-factor test result reveals that the variance expressed by the first factor is 32.08%, which is far less than the maximum threshold of 50% (Hair et al., 2014). Additionally, congruent with the recommendations of Malhotra, Kim, and Patil (2006), CMB/CMV is not a serious concern for our study because the initial hypothesized model with the entire item indicators of the constructs modelled as a single factor was not statistically fit (RMSEA = 0.118, RMR = 0.089, AGFI = 0.527, CFI = 0.662, NFI = 0.439, GFI = 0.732). Moreover, the common latent factor (CLF) test was executed, wherein all the items from models with or without CLF were compared to the standardised regression weights, whose differences were less than the 0.20 threshold (Archimi, Reynaud, Yasin, & Bhatti, 2018). As a whole, the statistical approach reaffirms the procedural approach to establish that CMB/CMV is not a serious concern in this study.

3.4. Data analysis method and procedure
Covariance-based structural equation modelling (CB SEM) was conducted to statistically test the hypothesized model in Fig. 1. CB SEM is a suitable data analysis technique for this study because of its ability to generate simultaneous inter-relationships among latent constructs compared to first-generation techniques such as ordinary least squares (Alavifar, Karimimalayer, & Anuar, 2012; Awang, 2015). Analysis of moment structures (AMOS) is also applied to illustrate the hypothesized model in AMOS (v. 24) graphics for data analysis. To establish and estimate the hypothesized model, a two-stage process is followed, wherein the measurement model involving reliability and validity testing is ascertained before the structural model involving the nature of relationships between different constructs is assessed (Hair et al., 2012).

4. Findings
4.1. Profile of respondents
The current study carried out a survey to investigate the influence of three different functions commonly used in social media sites and two major motivational factors on knowledge sharing and learning performance among students in higher education using Malaysia as a case. According to the 2019 Malaysian Qualifications Register report,3 Malaysia has a total of 50 public universities and 82 private universities that are legally registered. To foster the generalisation of our findings, we collected data from the top 10 private universities based on student enrolment in West Malaysia, wherein foundation, undergraduate, and postgraduate students have been included into our sample (see Table 2). Specially, the number of female respondents (50.6%) was slightly higher than the number of male respondents (49.4%). In the context of social media sites, 46.19% of respondents whose ages were between 21 and 23 were the highest users as compared to non-users. The majority of the Malaysian population, which is the Malays, were also strongly represented in our study, wherein 45.95% of respondents were Malays, while the Chinese and the Indian respondents were 33.17% and 12.78%, respectively. In terms of programs studied, 46.44% of respondents were studying in undergraduate programs, whereas 31.45% of students were in foundation or diploma programs, with the rest of the 22.11% of students being enrolled in postgraduate programs. Most respondents’ CGPA ranged from 3.1 to 3.5, and only 15.72% of students held CGPA below 2.5. Finally, 34.64% of respondents spent between one to three hours on social media daily, while 30.96% of respondents spent more than six hours on social media daily.


Table 2. Socio-demographic profile of respondents.

Sociodemographic	Characteristics	N	%
Gender	Male	201	49.4
Female	206	50.6
Age	18–20 years	129	31.70
21–23 years	188	46.19
24–26 years	78	19.16
>26 years	12	2.95
Ethnicity	Malay	187	45.95
Chinese	135	33.17
Indian	52	12.78
Others	33	8.10
Program	Foundation/Diploma	128	31.45
Undergraduate	189	46.44
Postgraduate	90	22.11
CGPA	1.5–2.5	64	15.72
2.6–3.0	122	29.98
3.1–3.5	144	35.38
>3.5	77	18.92
Duration of internet usage on social media	>6 hours	126	30.96
4–6 hours	108	26.54
1–3 hour(s)	141	34.64
<1 hour	32	7.86
Note(s): CGPA = cumulative grade point average.

4.2. Measurement model evaluation
Congruent with the recommendations of Hsu and Lin (2008) and Lim (2015), the measurement model was examined in terms of construct reliability, convergent validity, and discriminant validity. According to Fornell and Larcker (1981), composite reliability is used to measure construct reliability. The rule of thumb indicates that the value of composite reliability should be greater than 0.70 (Liu & Wang, 2016). The composite reliability of all constructs is between 0.83 and 0.94, which is above the 0.70 minimum threshold, and the Cronbach's Alpha is also above the same benchmark (Hair et al., 2014), and thus, indicating that composite reliability is present in this study (see Table 3). Additionally, Fornell and Larcker (1981) recommend that the value of average variance extracted (AVE) should be above 0.50, and Hair, Ringle, and Sarstedt (2011) suggest that the factor loading of each item should be more than 0.60 in order to establish convergent validity. The AVEs of all constructs are between 0.55 and 0.68 and the factor loadings for all items measuring constructs are between 0.65 and 0.92, and thus, indicating that convergent validity is present in this study (see Table 3).


Table 3. Confirmatory factor analysis results.

Construct	Items	FL	AVE	CA	CR
Documents exchange	DE1	.78	.61	.94	.93
DE2	.77
DE3	.73
DE4	.76
DE5	.82
DE6	.87
DE7	.75
DE8	.88
DE9	.66
Virtual communication	VC1	.80	.57	.96	92
VC2	.75
VC3	.84
VC4	.72
VC5	.70
VC6	.77
VC7	.82
VC8	.70
VC9	.65
Knowledge formation	KF1	.77	.63	.95	.94
KF2	.72
KF3	.82
KF4	.78
KF5	.74
KF6	.77
KF7	.87
KF8	.85
KF9	.83
Reputation	RE1	.75	.58	.89	.85
RE2	.78
RE3	.80
RE4	.72
Altruism	AL1	.70	.55	.88	.83
AL2	.72
AL3	.80
AL4	.75
Knowledge sharing	KS1	.82	.65	.95	.92
KS2	.91
KS3	.75
KS4	.78
KS5	.72
KS6	.85
Learning performance	LP1	.92	.68	.93	.91
LP2	.90
LP3	.79
LP4	.70
LP5	.80
Note(s): DE = documents exchange. VC = virtual communication. KF = knowledge formation. RE = reputation. AL = altruism. KS = knowledge sharing. LP = learning performance. FL = factor loading. AVE = average variance extracted. CA = Cronbach's alpha. CR = composite reliability.

According to Benitez, Henseler, Castillo, and Schuberth (2019), Fornell and Larcker's (1981) recommendation for assessing discriminant validity has not been free from criticisms. Henseler, Ringle, and Sarstedt (2015) proposed a higher boundary criterion known as the Heterotrait-Monotrait (HTMT) ratio of correlation to assess the discriminant validity of variance-based estimators, which we attempt to use in this study. Though we acknowledge that HTMT was originally established for variance-based or partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS SEM), we opine that HTMT is applicable in this study despite its usage of CB SEM on the basis that the items measuring the factors need to be assessed in terms of its variance (or variability), as in the case of running a factor analysis, which avails and runs in the same way regardless of whether CB or PLS SEM is applied to assess the structural model. Moreover, HTMT has been proven to be capable of attaining greater specificity and sensitivity rates (97%–99%) as compared to cross loadings (0.00%) and Fornell and Larcker's criterion (20.82%) (Ab Hamid, Sami, & Sidek, 2017). Specifically, discriminant validity can be assessed by comparing the HTMT values between two constructs, wherein the HTMT value between two factors should ideally be below 0.85, but can go up to 0.90 if the constructs are conceptually similar (Benitez et al., 2019; Henseler et al., 2015; Ogbeibu, Senadjki, & Gaskin, 2018). The HTMT ratio test results range from 0.012 to 0.253, which indicate that all constructs are independent of each other, and thus, discriminant validity is present in this study (see Table 4).4


Table 4. Heterotrait-Monotrait (HTMT) between study constructs.

Construct	DE	VC	KF	RE	AL	KS	LP
DE							
VC	0.026						
KF	0.126	0.110					
RE	0.121	0.099	0.136				
AL	0.036	0.032	0.122	0.216			
KS	0.142	0.130	0.012	0.253	0.122		
LP	0.144	0.055	0.023	0.012	0.045	0.078	
Note(s): DE = documents exchange. VC = virtual communication. KF = knowledge formation. RE = reputation. AL = altruism. KS = knowledge sharing. LP = learning performance.

4.3. Structural model evaluation
To ascertain that the hypothesized relationships are not spurious, we assessed the goodness of fit of the structural model. According to Hair et al. (2012), the goodness of fit of a model can be assessed in terms of its Chi-Square (χ2), Root Mean Square of Error Approximation (RMSEA), Root Mean Square Residual (RMR), Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI), Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Normed Fit Index (NFI), and Relative Chi-Square (χ2/df). The goodness of fit indices in Table 5 indicates that all values of the indices are within the acceptable range, and thus, the structural model is deemed to possess a good fit.


Table 5. Goodness of fit indices.

Measure	Threshold	Value
Chi-Square (χ2)	p > 0.01	1504.537
Root Mean Square of Error Approximation (RMSEA)	<0.08	0.030
Root Mean Square Residual (RMR)	<0.08	0.060
Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI)	>0.90	0.950
Comparative Fit Index (CFI)	>0.90	0.956
Normed Fit Index (NFI)	>0.90	0.921
Relative Chi-Square (χ2/df)	<3.00	2.58
The path analysis and hypothesis testing results are reported in Fig. 2 and in Table 6. The results indicate that documents exchange, virtual communication, and reputation have a positive influence on knowledge sharing, which indicate their utility in encouraging knowledge sharing among students, and thus, H1, H3, and H7 are supported. Interestingly, reputation, which is an individual extrinsic motivator, exerts the strongest positive influence on knowledge sharing among students, followed by virtual communication and documents exchange, which suggest that students prefer to engage in knowledge sharing to enhance their reputation over the self-satisfaction that can be obtain from communicating virtually and successfully exchanging documents with peers via social media sites. While these findings are congruent with extant research in the mainstream literature (Al-Rahmi & Zeki, 2017; Al-Rahmi et al., 2018; Hall, 2018; Hung et al., 2011), they also challenge prior juxtapositions that contend otherwise (Junco, 2012, 2015; Kirschner & Karpinski, 2010; Rostaminezhad, Porshafei, & Ahamdi, 2019).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (403KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Path analysis results.


Table 6. Hypotheses testing results.

Hypothesis	Estimate	SE	CR	p	Outcome
H1	DE → KS	0.326	0.072	4.527	0.000	Supported
H2	DE → LP	0.301	0.053	5.668	0.000	Supported
H3	VC → KS	0.147	0.066	2.239	0.025	Supported
H4	VC → LP	0.106	0.074	1.325	0.185	Not Supported
H5	KF → KS	0.092	0.080	1.150	0.250	Not Supported
H6	KF → LP	0.152	0.074	2.054	0.040	Supported
H7	RE → KS	0.325	0.042	7.721	0.000	Supported
H8	RE → LP	0.461	0.055	8.256	0.000	Supported
H9	AL → KS	0.097	0.082	1.182	0.237	Not Supported
H10	AL → LP	0.102	0.079	1.291	0.197	Not Supported
Note(s): DE = documents exchange. VC = virtual communication. KF = knowledge formation. RE = reputation. AL = altruism. KS = knowledge sharing. LP = learning performance. SE = standard error. CR = critical ratio. p = p-value.

The results also indicate that documents exchange, knowledge formation, and reputation have a positive influence on student learning performance, and thus, H2, H6, and H8 are supported. Interestingly, documents exchange exhibits the strongest positive influence on student learning performance, followed by knowledge formation and reputation, which suggest that students realize the importance of engaging in documents exchange and knowledge formation, especially in ways that can enhance reputation, to improve their learning performance. In that sense, our findings complement the debates of scholarly works that have espoused the positive influence of documents exchange, knowledge formation, and reputation on student learning performance when social media is utilised (Al-Rahmi et al., 2018; Al-Rahmi & Zeki, 2017; Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016; Qi, 2019).

However, our initial conjectures of H4, H5, H9, and H10 are not significant, and thus, they are not supported by this study. Following the recommendation of Aczel et al. (2018) and Lim, Teh, and Ahmed (2020) to avoid overlooking the plausible contributions of non-significant results, our study challenges the juxtapositions of prior debates that have otherwise championed the understanding that such factors exert a significant influence on knowledge sharing and student learning performance. Specifically, the results indicate that virtual communication cannot lead to improvements in learning performance, and that knowledge formation does not necessarily lead to knowledge sharing, which suggests that communication without knowledge substance (as in the case of document exchange and knowledge formation) in social media sites may be more hedonic rather than utilitarian when it comes to learning performance, whereas knowledge sharing needs to be ignited after knowledge is formed through social media. The results also indicate that altruism does not significantly influence knowledge sharing, which stands in dissonance to the findings of extant research (Chang & Chuang, 2011; Ma & Chan, 2014). Our finding mirrors a plausible outcome given that many tertiary students have less or no voluntary urge to share their knowledge without expecting any return (Chong, Teh, & Tan, 2014).

Additionally, living in a highly collectivist and high power distance society, the Malaysian populace, among whom our participants were recruited, continues to demonstrate a culture that typifies a clan-oriented value system (Hofstede & McCrae, 2004; Ogbeibu, Senadjki, Emelifeonwu, & Vohra, 2020). Such a value system can be observed in the exchanges, attributes, and figurehead (e.g., leader, parent) influences that are commonly found in families (Ogbeibu et al., 2018). Thus, student decisions to demonstrate altruism or not can be influenced by a group member who may be held in high regard by other group members. This is a common practice as students are culturally inclined to have high regard for, and be submissive to, higher standings in their peer groups, families, or society (Hofstede & McCrae, 2004). Keeping this in mind, students can become more unwilling or disinterested in knowledge sharing through social media sites due to a culturally-driven peer group influence. When expected behaviours of a group of students reflect little or no need for knowledge sharing via social media sites despite plausible rewards, such expected behaviours often tend to become norms (Al-Rahmi et al., 2018). Consequently, students become influenced to mainly exert group expected behaviours (Balakrishnan & Gan, 2016; Hsu et al., 2007). Therefore, the willingness or urge of students to exhibit altruism may be stifled, and the subsequent practice of knowledge sharing hampered. This notion is congruent with the debates of extant research (Hung, Durcikova, Lai, & Lin, 2011), including in recent times (Park & Gabbard, 2018), where altruism knowledge sharing behaviour are not significantly correlated. The implications of our findings are discussed in the next section.

5. Implications
Given the rising uptick in global digitalisation and use of social media sites, this study mirrors a timely and relevant investigation with substantive implications that could be useful for HEIs. The findings of this research provide several pertinent implications, wherein our study advances conventional understanding associated with HEI students. Specifically, our investigation of social media functions and individual motivational factors influencing student knowledge sharing and learning performance extends theoretical insights that undergird core antecedents that HEIs should not overlook when initiating relevant policies for leveraging social media sites in university learning environments. We demonstrate the distinct roles of core factors such as social media functions and individual motivators, which have been scarcely employed simultaneously in prior literature. We challenge the individual motivation theoretical lens by exemplifying that reputation alone (excluding altruism) plays a significant role in engendering students’ knowledge-sharing behaviour and learning performance. We contribute to the connectivism theory by examining nine distinct types of social media sites and conceptualised them to respectively reflect three disparate functions that are not commonly found in extant research, thereby deepening the depth of substantive insights that extend beyond the conclusion of prior debates that were established on mainly one or two types of social media sites. Thus, our conceptualisation of social media sites opens new avenues that should provoke significant future research. Moreover, our findings show that altruism has no meaningful association with knowledge sharing and learning performance among students in higher education. By providing such evidence, we contribute to the debate of prior literature and establish that in our context, policymakers may be able to save resources, time, and efforts that could otherwise be allocated to foster initiatives that undergird the impacts of altruism on student knowledge sharing and learning performance. Given the student and university-centred context, initiatives that may have been established to foster increased altruism could be local or international conferences, workshops, role-playing-related activities, and others focused on bolstering altruism. Such initiatives could also be pertinent toward the further engendering of knowledge sharing and student learning performance. Consequently, we argue that in the Malaysian context, resources, time, and efforts may be otherwise allocated towards driving relative initiatives that actually do positively engender knowledge sharing and learning performance, based on the positive and significant relationships found in the context of our study.

By integrating the social cognitive and individual motivation theoretical underpinnings, we provide a novel conceptual framework that contributes to the knowledge-sharing literature that supports the use of social media sites in HEIs. Our findings are also relevant to help online communities better understand what social media functions and individual motivational factors could significantly increase students' use of social media to advance their knowledge sharing and learning performance. Congruently, knowing that students find virtual communication relatively cheap and comparatively fast, policymakers can better understand how to improve upon virtual communication systems that more adequately support social media sites. Virtual communication can also allow students to get interconnected with several experts within their fields more quickly and thus increase their chances of obtaining new knowledge. Thus, virtual communication can help boost students’ learning performance accordingly. We also offer contributions to the literature by demonstrating that documents exchange and knowledge formation are positive drivers of knowledge sharing. Given the rise of constant changes in recent times, students are becoming more inclined to exchange their documents through social media sites. Therefore, it is important to understand how social media functions and how individual motivational factors might influence their knowledge-sharing behaviour and learning performance.

Indeed, social media use is on the rise amid today's global digitalisation and technological advancements. As students often engage and use social media for personal entertainment or information exchange purposes, policymakers and practitioners may consider developing strategies around increased documents exchange that can foster social practices of sharing study-related materials through various social media sites in order to engender students' learning performance. This is due to the finding that documents exchange positively influences students' learning performance. Therefore, policymakers should give considerable attention to virtual communication and documents exchange, given their respective positive influence on students' learning performance. Academic policies could be instituted and resources allocated to guide and enable students to become more willing to exchange documents and engage in knowledge formation initiatives and virtual communication tasks via social media. In addition, more constructive feedback could be given to students by peers or relevant experts who engage, discuss, and exchange their ideas and opinions through social media groups. This could help inspire more knowledge formation in and among students and enhance their knowledge sharing and learning performance. Given the above implications, established and aspiring educational hubs in developed and developing economies that resonate with the Malaysian HEI landscape can consider strengthening their virtual communication, reputation, and documents exchange systems, as they can positively contribute toward increasing students' learning performance. Likewise, attention should be given to ensuring policies are instituted to foster documents exchange, reputation, and knowledge formation, considering their respective positive influences on students' knowledge sharing. Furthermore, given our unique context, other cultures and societies should exercise caution when implementing policies associated with the individual motivational factor of altruistic nature, as it may not necessarily influence students' knowledge sharing and learning performance significantly.

It is worth noting that our investigation also encapsulates nine different social media sites to help us garner original and more meaningful information on students' knowledge sharing and learning performance. Considering the rising debates on the need to achieve constructs’ discriminant validity, our study also demonstrates the use of a higher boundary criterion known as the Heterotrait-Monotrait (HTMT) ratio of correlation proposed by Henseler et al. (2015) to determine the discriminant validity with respect to the variance-based estimators. We note that the HTMT criterion has mostly been used when employing PLS SEM, and thus, its use is scarcely found in extant research that has employed CB SEM to analyse their empirical data. We, therefore, exemplify the use of a more consistent and higher boundary criterion compared to the more traditionally-used Fornell and Larcker approach that has been criticised in prior research for its underpowered estimates. We, therefore, recommend the use of the HTMT discriminant validity measure when initiating discriminant validity assessment using the covariant-based SEM technique.

6. Conclusion
Our study sheds more light and deepens insights into contemporary debates engendering the contention about social media sites usage by students. We provide evidence that helps address, support, and challenge prior discourse by leveraging two individual motivational factors and three core antecedents that qualify as functions of nine different social media sites to investigate their respective influences on student knowledge sharing and learning performance. The findings indicate that HEI students use social media to gain an increased reputation, share knowledge formed, and exchange documents to enhance their learning performance. Our findings are also supported by the debates of prior research that have employed similar distinct categories to investigate the concept of social media (Eid & Al-Jabri, 2016). Past researchers, however, overlooked the plausible roles of individual motivational factors such as reputation and altruism in their investigation. On the other hand, our findings show contradictory evidence with the result of Lau (2017), who found that social media usage has a negative impact on students' learning performance among 384 Hong Kong university students. The author espoused that multitasking, less attentiveness, less commitment, and high distraction are core reasons for the reduction of students' CGPA in light of social media use. Though students initially intend to share and gather knowledge while using social media, they are frequently distracted via entertainment, advertisement, and other offerings provided by social media sites. Likewise, Abbas et al. (2019) explored the negative consequences of social media usage of 831 students from Pakistan. The authors argued that frequent disruptions and waste of valuable time are the maiden culprits of the adverse influence of social media on students' academic performance. Moreover, we exemplify that documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation are essential for students to share knowledge in today's digitalised world. Likewise, our results also suggest that individual motivational factors such as reputation have a stronger positive influence on knowledge sharing than altruism, which shows no significant influence in our study. Our result is consistent with extant research (Chang & Chuang, 2011) that has examined reputation as a form of extrinsic reward and that relate that students share knowledge through social media to benefit from that sharing (Hung, Lai, & Chang, 2011), and thus, stands in dissonance with the debate of Zhang et al. (2017) who opposed this view.

6.1. Limitations and future research directions
Regardless of our study's substantive contributions, it is not without limitations. Our study includes only private universities in West Malaysia, and thus, the findings received from this study do not necessarily reflect the behaviour of other public universities in Malaysia or private universities in East Malaysia. That is to say, though our findings offer meaningful implications that public universities may also consider, we cannot directly infer that our findings are fundamental to both private and public universities in Malaysia. Therefore, while our findings may be useful to both private and public universities, they relay much-targeted importance in their implications to private universities, particular in metropolitan cities in West Malaysia. Hence, future research should consider exploring the aims and objectives of this study with data obtained from both private and public universities. Future research can also consider investigating student knowledge-sharing behaviour and learning performance in public universities to encourage a comparative analysis. The would be helpful as our study has not investigated the link between student knowledge sharing and learning performance. Given a higher student population of public universities in Malaysia, we would expect probable differences in student knowledge sharing and learning performance, as available financial resources (via constant government funding) in public universities that support the procurement of advanced internet technologies utilised to drive social media functions are usually larger compared to that of private universities. Hence, it is likely that in public universities, social media functions and individual motivations may have different significant influences on the way students engage in knowledge sharing and also on their learning performance. By investigating public universities, deeper insights can be obtained to foster future comparative assessments of how social media functions (documents exchange, virtual communication, and knowledge formation) act to drive students' knowledge sharing and learning performance. This may foster congruence in extant debates that have examined a relatively similar study and advance contemporary insights into whether reputation and altruism have a positive but insignificant influence on students' knowledge sharing and learning performance in public universities. Evidently, in our study, we find that in private universities in West Malaysia, altruism is not significantly associated with students' knowledge sharing and learning performance. A distinct outcome may very likely ensue should similar research be initiated within the public universities, or even private universities in East Malaysia, where the landscape is developing at a catch-up phase as compared to West Malaysia (Lim, Badiozaman, & Voon, 2020). However, these arguments should be subjected to further empirical examination by future research in order to more clearly ascertain how students' knowledge sharing and learning performance may be impacted accordingly. Another important drawback would be sample composition and data collection method. This study's data has been collected from students who were within the younger age group. Nevertheless, several young individuals in this study are students who comprise the net generation. Thus, they would generally use more internet compared to the aging populace. On this note, it would be informative for future research to investigate the net generation and the aging populace's use of social media sites from a student diversity perspective (Lim, 2020). This would provoke a more comparative examination, resulting in new insights that can be useful to policymakers and practitioners. In addition, our study used a cross-sectional data collection technique and focused on a single country-based data source. Therefore, we suggest that future research can be done to mirror cross-cultural empirical evidence and that attempts at conditional and longitudinal investigations be made (Lim, 2021). This would allow for a more progressive view of behavioural changes over time and in response to digitalisation across universities in different countries. Finally, social media use in education is likely to proliferate exponentially because of the accelerated progress in technology adoption and the immediate shift to online learning worldwide in response to the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic. In that sense, we foresee a rise in studies in this area, and thus, we urge prospective scholars to be prepared to undertake a stocktake of the field in the near future in order to chart its trajectory in the long run. Systematic literature reviews are an established form of research suitable for this endeavour, and thus, future research can consider established review protocols and types to develop rich retrospectives and future agendas (Paul, Lim, O’Cass, Hao, & Bresciani, 2021) on social media use in education.

