Some previous research has illustrated teachers' conceptions and responsibilities in student-centered classes for assisting potent implementation of novel pedagogies. On the other hand, mobile learning has been widely adopted in education in the past decades, and a great deal of previous research has revealed the effects of mobile learning on students' learning. However, few studies have probed teachers' conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction. In this study, a total of 25 elementary school teachers in Taiwan were interviewed, and the phenomenographic method was adopted to explore the teachers' conceptions of mobile learning. As a result of the data analysis, seven qualitatively and hierarchically different categories (7-T) of mobile learning were revealed, namely a “Tool,” “Travel,” “Timeliness/Tutor,” a “Toy,” “Tracking,” “Teamwork,” and a “Tutee.” These hierarchical categories represent a spectrum ranging from “teacher-centered” to “student/teacher interaction,” and “student-centered” instructional strategies. Among the 7 categories, 4 (i.e., Toy, Tracking, Teamwork, and Tutee) are considered as student-centered instructional strategies, and the tracking category had the maximum frequency of teachers’ main conceptions of mobile learning. Thus, mobile technology offers opportunities to facilitate student-centered learning. The results provide educators and teachers with deep comprehension of advanced technology-enhanced learning for designing student-centered learning activities.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Teacher professional development

Mobile learning

Pedagogical issues

1. Introduction
1.1. Teachers’ conceptions of teaching
Teachers' conceptions of teaching have been explored in some educational studies (Virtanen & Lindblom-Ylänne, 2010). Teachers' conceptions of teaching, which are associated with their perspectives on experiencing teaching, could be spurred by their personal epistemologies (Tsai, 2007). Previous studies have declared the vigorous relationship between conceptions of teaching and approaches to teaching, and the significant influences of conceptions of teaching on students' learning achievements (Taylor & Booth, 2015). Thus, it is crucial to intently investigate teachers’ conceptions of teaching.

Some previous studies have probed teachers' conceptions of teaching via the “phenomenographic” method. This method is considered as a type of qualitative research method, consisting of interviews, conversation, and protocol, so as to resolve interviewees' different, logically-related views on specific issues or conceptions (Gustavsson, Jonsson, Ljung-Djärf, & Thulin, 2016; Richardson, 1999). The studies listed in Table 1 have classified teachers' conceptions of teaching in the hierarchical-related framework using the phenomenographic method. In common, they illustrate the conceptions from surface to deep, or from teacher-centered to student-centered. For example, Prosser, Trigwell, and Taylor (1994) conducted a phenomenographic study involving first-year science teachers' conceptions of teaching, and depicted six classes of conceptions of teaching, consisting of “transmitting concepts of the syllabus,” “transmitting the teachers' knowledge,” “helping students acquire concepts of the syllabus,” “helping students acquire teachers' knowledge,” “helping students develop conceptions,” and “helping students change conceptions.” In Boulton-Lewis, Smith, McCrindle, Burnett, and Campbell's (2001) study, four categories of conceptions of teaching were recognized, comprising “transmission of content/skills,” “development of skills/understanding,” “facilitation of understanding,” and “transformation.” Particularly, the category of transformation indicates that teachers offer students a stimulus to engage them in learning activities and in extending themselves cognitively, behaviorally, and affectively. Moreover, Wang, Tsai and Wei (2015) distinguished teachers' conceptions of teaching into two models, that is, traditional and constructivist. Traditional teachers consider students as passive recipients of knowledge, whereas constructivist teachers help students to be critical thinkers.


Table 1. A list of teachers’ conceptions of teaching.

Author	Teacher-centered	Student-centered
Samuelowicz and Bain (1992)	Imparting information	Transmission of knowledge and attitudes towards knowledge within an academic discipline	Facilitating understanding	Changing students' conceptions or understanding of the world	Supporting student learning	
Prosser et al. (1994)	Transmitting concepts of the syllabus	Transmitting the teachers' knowledge	Helping students acquire concepts of the syllabus	Helping students acquire teachers' knowledge	Helping students develop conceptions	Helping students change conceptions
Kember (1997)	Imparting information	Transmitting structured knowledge	Student-Teacher interaction	Facilitating understanding	Conceptual change/Intellectual development	
Boulton-Lewis, Smith, McCrindle, Burnett, and Campbell (2001)	Transmission of content/skills	Development of skills/understanding	Facilitation of understanding	Transformation		
Degago and Kaino (2015)	Satisfying syllabus demands	Presenting structured information to students	Helping students learn what they learn	Helping students expand their knowledge		
Several previous studies have defined dimensions of variation for distinguishing the categories of teachers' conceptions of teaching. As shown in Table 2, Kember (1997) asserted five dimensions (teacher, teaching, student, content, and knowledge), recognizing five kinds of teachers' views on teaching. Furthermore, Lameras, Levy, Paraskakis, and Webber (2012) proposed five dimensions to identify teachers’ conceptions of teaching using virtual learning environments, comprising “role of the teacher,” “role of the student,” “relation between modes,” “epistemic status of the subject matter,” and “study level.”


Table 2. Dimensions used to demarcate conceptions of teaching (from Kember, 1997).

Dimension	Imparting information	Transmitting structured knowledge	Teacher-student interaction	Facilitating understanding	Conceptual change
Teacher	Presenter	Presenter	Presenter and tutor	Facilitator	Change agent/developer
Teaching	Transfer of information	Transfer of well- structured information	Interactive process	Process of helping students to learn	Development of person and conceptions
Student	Passive recipient	Recipient	Participant	Lecturer responsible for students' learning	Lecturer responsible for student development
Content	Defined by curriculum	Lecturer needs to order and structure material	Defined by teacher	Constructed by students within teacher's framework	Constructed by students but conceptions can be changed
Knowledge	Possessed by lecturer	Possessed by lecturer	Discovered by students but within lecturer's framework	Constructed by students	Socially constructed
Advances in information and communication technology (ICT) have challenged the use of traditional instruction approach, and contributed emerging teaching approach (Tezci, 2011). It has been argued that teacher-centered teaching is insufficient to meet the knowledge requirements of a rapidly advancing technological society. Remarkable advances in technology have affected the progression of student-centered teaching environments. Accordingly, it is significant to probe teachers’ conceptions of teaching with advanced technology, such as mobile technology.

1.2. Student-centered teaching
In recent decades, teaching reforms have attracted attention as a result of the conventional direct-teaching approach, which considers teaching as knowledge transmission and regards teachers as the center of learning and teaching (Nachlieli & Tabach, 2019). It has been argued that conventional direct-teaching approaches seldom stress critical thinking or practical problem solving (Hannafin & Land, 1997). On the other hand, student-centered teaching has refined the conventional teacher-centered education format. Student-centered teaching considers students as designers, and changes the teacher's role from delivering information to facilitating students' learning (Partanen, 2020), implying the significance of students' participation in learning processes. Student-centered learning can enhance a deeper approach for concept comprehension rather than rote knowledge (Wang & Zhang, 2019), and can promote students' higher order thinking (Keiler, 2018).

With the shift in beliefs regarding the role of the individual's learning, student-centered learning environments have evolved over the past decades, including assimilation of knowledge and perceptions of meaning (Hannafin & Land, 1997). A student-centered, learning-oriented conception emphasizes students' active participation in learning processes, and their responsibility for learning (Kember, 1997). A great deal of research has conducted student-centered learning activities based on the constructivist learning theory (Keiler, 2018; Wang & Zhang, 2019), which considers learning as “an active process in which learners are active sense makers who seek to build coherent and organized knowledge” (Mayer, 2004, p. 14). In a student-centered teaching activity, constructivist ideas emphasize student responsibility and a coaching role of the teacher; moreover, students should learn by resolving problem situations using knowledge as a tool (Nachlieli & Tabach, 2019).

1.3. Teachers’ conceptions of technology-enhanced learning
Technology-enhanced learning refers to the utilization of information and communication technologies (ICT) to support teaching and learning. An effective learning approach can be conducted via comprehensively integrating technology into pedagogy (Suárez-Rodríguez, Almerich, Orellana, & Díaz-García, 2018 ). Effectively using technology helps teachers to probe their students' learning progress (Luckin, Clark, Avramides, Hunter, & Oliver, 2017), and integrating teachers’ conceptions of instruction with two forms (i.e., constructivist and traditional conceptions) could probe sophisticated comprehension of their technology acceptance (Teo & Zhou, 2017). Furthermore, the advances in mobile and wireless communication technologies have offered new opportunities for developing new learning approaches via integrating digital resources into real-world learning environments (Bourekkache & Kazar, 2020).

With the remarkable advances in information and communication technologies, learning and teaching with technology in blended environments has become the mainstream teaching approach in education (Bliuc, Casey, Bachfischer, Goodyear, & Ellis, 2012). Teachers need the capability of pedagogical knowledge to utilize ICT for effective teaching; moreover, comprehending teachers' teaching approaches can offer clues for changing teachers' practices and promoting students' learning (Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018). Some studies have probed teachers' perceptions of technology-integrated instruction by means of the phenomenographic method, as depicted in Table 3. Similar to teachers' conceptions of teaching, those studies illustrated the conceptions of teachers' technology-integrated instruction from surface to deep, or from teacher-centered to student-centered. For example, Khan and Markauskaite (2017) inspected 23 vocational teachers' experience of approaches to technology-enhanced teaching using the phenomenographic method. They affirmed two strategies (i.e., the teacher-focused approach and the student-focused approach) with five main orientations. The teacher-focused approach includes information-oriented, feedback-oriented, and practice-oriented orientations; on the other hand, the student-focused approach is composed of activity-oriented and industry-oriented orientations. These studies listed in Table 3 probed teachers' conceptions of technology-integrated instruction and portrayed a relatively wide spectrum of conceptions, implying that teachers are inclined to hold qualitatively different conceptions of the utilization of ICT in teaching. Furthermore, Khan (2015) illustrated teachers’ conceptions of ICT-enhanced teaching and affirmed four dimensions of variation, consisting of “role of the teacher,” “role of the student,” “impact of technology on student and teacher knowledge,” and “who benefits from ICT in teaching.”


Table 3. A list of teachers’ conceptions of technology-enhanced learning.

Author	Teacher-centered	Student-centered
Ellis, Hughes, Weyers, and Riding (2009)	Tools for access	Tools for information delivery	Ways of providing active learning opportunities	Ways of building knowledge	
González (2012)	Information-focused strategy with the intention of providing easy access to course materials-administrative information	Information-focused strategy with the intention of providing up-to-date/quality materials	Communication-focused strategy with the intention of providing a space for asking questions, making announcements, keeping in touch	Communication-focused strategy with the intention of engaging students in deep thinking through online discussions	Collaborative-focused strategy with the intention of providing an online space for building knowledge
Bliuc et al. (2012)	Use of technological teaching tools only	Aggregation of face-to-face and (mainly) online but also other types of technologically driven delivery	Combination of different ways of delivery to improve students' access to learning and meet their practical needs	For students' needs and learning goals	Empowering students for lifelong learning
Lameras et al. (2012)	Information transfer	Application and clarification of concepts	Exchange and development of ideas, and resource exploration and sharing	Collaborative knowledge-creation, and development of process awareness and skills	
Khan (2015)	Meeting external expectations	Gaining access to information and resources	A delivery tool	A medium for active learning	Preparing students for their future professions
Khan and Markauskaite (2017)	Information-oriented strategy with the intention of effectively delivering subject content	Feedback-oriented strategy with the intention of achieving intended course outcomes	Practice-oriented strategy with the intention of linking theoretical and practical knowledge	Facilitation-oriented strategy with the intention of creating active learning opportunities for developing students' understanding	Industry-oriented strategy with the intention of developing students' knowledge and skills to meet industry's needs
Englund, Olofsson, and Price (2017)	Transmit information about the discipline	Help students acquire the concepts of the syllabus.	Dialog with students in the learning process using communication technologies	Collaboration and communication with students and between students.	Helping students prepare themselves for their future roles and careers/Students design and create their own scenarios
1.4. Role of technology
Viewpoints on the role of technology in student-centered learning have conceptually broadened, and the transmutation has been reflected in the nature of experiences (Hannafin & Land, 1997). Furthermore, ICT has been considered as a tool, which has enormous potential for improving teaching and learning (Skinner & Preece, 2003), implying the significance of inspecting the role technology plays in schools. Taylor (1980) classified the roles of computers according to a 3-T framework, consisting of three main categories, namely Tutor, Tool, and Tutee. The “Tutor” category asserts that a computer can be considered as a teacher for assisting teaching; moreover, computers make it possible to accommodate students’ individual differences. The “Tool” category values the enormous capability programmed into computers, such as word processing, or statistical analysis. The “Tutee” category allows students to tutor computers, and to teach them how to be a tool; therefore, they are capable of attaining new insights into their own minds via learning to program.

With the advancement of ICT, the role that technology plays may vary. In Tsai's (2004) study, a 4-T framework (i.e., Technology, Tool, Toy, and Tour/Travel) was proposed by investigating adolescents' views on the Internet. The “Technology” category reveals that the adolescents perceived the Internet as a form of technology for enhancing their lives. Next, the adolescents in the “Tool” category deemed the Internet to be a tool for obtaining information, trading, and communicating, while the adolescents in the “Toy” category considered the Internet as the origin of pleasure and entertainment, especially for online games. Finally, the adolescents in the “Tour/Travel” category perceived the Internet as a provider of information for touring or navigation. Following that, Chou, Yu, Chen, and Wu (2009) probed fifth-graders’ perceptions of the Internet, and affirmed a 5-T framework, including Tool, Toy, Telephone, Territory, and Treasure of Information. Some students performed some tasks by using the Internet as a Tool, while others might play games online and consequently considered the Internet as a Toy. The Internet was also regarded as a Telephone for facilitating communication with others. Furthermore, some students presented themselves online in the “Territory” category, and others underlined the characteristic of collecting online information in the “Treasure of Information” category. These views can be good references for exploring teachers' conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction.

1.5. Mobile learning
A variety of definitions of mobile learning have been provided, such as “learning anytime and anywhere,” and “learning through mobile devices” (Sha, Looi, Chen, Seow, & Wong, 2012). A widely accepted definition of mobile learning is “using mobile technologies to facilitate learning” (Hwang & Tsai, 2011, p. E65). A great deal of previous research has demonstrated the benefits of mobile learning activities in terms of improving students’ learning effectiveness (Chee, Yahaya, Ibrahim, & Noor Hassan, 2017). For example, Tabuenca, Kalz, Drachsler, and Specht (2015) investigated the influences of tracking and monitoring time on self-regulated learning, and illustrated the advantages of utilizing a mobile tool to improve time management skills. Shadiev, Hwang, Huang, and Liu (2018) designed a mobile learning system to investigate students' learning experiences, and asserted that students' familiarity with authentic environments benefits their learning, and the learning system can facilitate collaboration.

Mobile learning is capable of helping learners to access information anytime and anywhere, so as to enhance their learning achievements and motivations (Diacopoulos & Crompton, 2020). The characteristics of mobile learning offer opportunities for individualized, situated, and informal learning in in-field learning contexts, and for facilitating student-centered learning activities (Lai, Chen, & Lee, 2019; Sha et al., 2012). Moreover, mobile learning can assist students in sharing their knowledge or experiences, and collaboratively accomplishing learning tasks with team members via mobile devices with wireless communication technologies. For example, Reeves, Gunter, and Lacey (2017) utilized mobile devices as the learning tools to enhance students’ collaborative efforts and engagement, and to improve their mathematics achievements.

Some review papers on mobile learning have revealed that the majority of the studies focused on students' learning effectiveness or mobile learning system design (Chee et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2012). This indicated that relatively fewer studies have probed the potential impacts of mobile technology from pedagogical perspectives, such as a socio-cultural perspective (Kearney, Schuck, Burden, & Aubusson, 2012), pre-service teachers' mobile phone self-efficacy (Gloria & Oluwadara, 2016) or pedagogical frameworks of mobile devices (Crompton & Burke, 2020). Only limited information about pedagogical approaches which in-service teachers experienced with mobile technology has been revealed. One example is Hsieh and Tsai's (2017) study, which used a phenomenographic method to analyze senior high school teachers' conceptions of mobile learning, and concluded six qualitatively different conceptions of mobile learning. This hierarchy depicted a trajectory from teacher-/content-oriented to learner-/learning-oriented conceptions. As far as we are aware, no previous study has probed in-service teachers' conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction from the viewpoints on the role of technology in student-centered learning with the advance in technology. Thus, investigating teachers’ conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction is a crucial issue for those researchers or instructors who are endeavoring to persistently teach in mobile learning situations.

1.6. Purpose of the study
Advances in ICT have facilitated student-centered learning, and student-centered learning environments have great potential for optimizing the competence of both students and technology (Hannafin & Land, 1997), implying the necessity of probing the expansion of technology-enhanced learning. Furthermore, some previous research has illustrated that deeply grasping teachers' roles and responsibilities can assist in potent implementation of novel pedagogies (Keiler, 2018). This describes the significance of exploring teachers’ conceptions of advanced technology-enhanced learning, such as mobile technology.

As mentioned above, it is worth investigating in-service teachers' conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction from the perspective on the role of technology due to the rapid advance in technology. Therefore, the phenomenographic method was adopted in this study to explore teachers’ conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction. A total of 25 elementary school teachers in Taiwan were interviewed to analyze their qualitatively different conceptions of mobile learning, and their intentions to support the development of mobile learning. The research questions of this study are as follows:

(1)
What are the elementary school teachers' conceptions of mobile learning?

(2)
What are the distributions of the elementary school teachers' conceptions of mobile learning?

2. Method
2.1. Participants
In this study, a total of 25 teachers (21 females and 4 males) were recruited for individual interviews from three elementary schools in Taiwan. These schools are working to integrate ICT into courses. In these three schools, mobile devices, wireless communication technology, and interactive learning platforms have been provided to support teaching and learning. Furthermore, each student taught by these interviewed teachers was furnished with a mobile device during school time. The interviewed teachers had a range of college majors, and taught via mobile technology in diverse courses such as Mandarin, Mathematics, Nature Science, Social Studies, English, Arts and Humanities, Integrative Activities, and Special Education. The participants’ ages ranged from 25 to 55, with an average of 42.28; moreover, the experience of their teaching, and mobile technology-integration teaching ranged from 2 to 28 years (M = 15.88), and 1–18 years (M = 4.24), respectively. All of them had conducted mobile technology-integrated instruction for more than 1 year.

2.2. Data collection
To survey the teachers' conceptions of mobile learning, the data were collected by interviewing the participants. Each participant was interviewed individually for approximately 30–40 min by the first author. The items of the guiding interview were designed by referring to Trigwell, Prosser, and Taylor's (1994), and Tsai (2009) studies, as described below:

(1)
From your perspective, what is mobile learning?

(2)
What makes the most successful teaching by mobile technology-integrated instruction?

(3)
How do you go about your teaching via mobile learning?

(4)
Is there anything that you perceive as particularly important during mobile technology-integrated instruction?

Every individual interview was conducted in Chinese and audio-recorded. Following that, all data were transcribed and the verbatim transcripts were analyzed to explore the teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning.

2.3. Data analysis
All the verbatim transcripts of the teacher interviews were dissected using the phenomenographic method, which is for interviewees' experiential depiction (Gustavsson et al., 2016). The phenomenographic method is a qualitative research approach, comprising discourse and protocol, for identifying interviewees' different, logically-related conceptions or comprehension of the phenomenon experienced (Tsai, 2004; Souleles, Savva, Watters, Annesley, & Bull, 2015). During the process for analyzing the responses, some significant keywords and sentences regarding teachers' perceptions were carefully chosen. Afterwards, the discrepancies and similarities between the sentences and keywords in the teachers' main conceptions related to their conceptions of mobile learning were extracted. Subsequently, the qualitative differences and the order of the conceptual categories were framed. As previously mentioned in the “Role of technology”, several previous studies have proposed frameworks for illustrating the roles of computers or the Internet in education, such as Taylor's (1980) 3-T framework (i.e., Tutor, Tool, and Tutee), Tsai's (2004) 4-T framework (i.e., Technology, Tool, Toy, and Tour/Travel), and Chou et al.’s (2009) 5-T framework (i.e., Tool, Toy, Telephone, Territory, and Treasure of Information). It is worth noting that more diverse or specific roles technology may play due to the advances in ICT. For example, different roles may partition from the Tutee category of Taylor's study, which contains the evaluation of the students' response, the presentation of sequential subject material depended on students' response, and the accommodation of individual differences. These frameworks provided good references for analyzing the teachers' conceptions of mobile learning in this study.

The analyses of the verbatim transcripts of the teachers' responses were independently conducted by two researchers. The percentage of agreement on the teachers’ conceptual categories of mobile learning was utilized for revealing the intercoder reliability, and showed 92% agreement.

3. Results
3.1. The categories of teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning
In this study, some major categories of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning were generated by means of comparing the discrepancies and similarities between their discourses. A 7-T framework of teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning was formed, consisting of mobile learning as a “Tool,” “Travel,” “Timeliness/Tutor,” a “Toy,” “Tracking,” “Teamwork,” and a “Tutee.” Compared with the frameworks stated above, the 7-T framework provided some additional information about the role of technology in education. In the 7-T framework, the four categories (i.e., Tool, Travel, Toy, and Tutee) were similar to those in the existing frameworks, whereas the other three were newly framed or revised, namely Timeliness/Tutor, Tracking, and Teamwork. The latter three outlined the crucial characteristics of mobile technology and depicted potential opportunities for instruction, such as effective interactions, adaptive learning, and collaborative learning. The characterizations of the 7-T framework are explained below:

(1)
Mobile learning as a Tool (L). In this category, the teachers consider mobile learning as a tool for assisting teaching and learning, such as the transmission of the learning conceptions, the recording of learning materials, the presentation of work or school assignments, and the analysis of information. For these teachers, mobile learning is regarded as an effective tool for promoting students' learning. For example, the teachers described that:

T01: Mobile learning is considered as utilizing a mobile device to record the learning content so as to achieve the learning objectives.

T06: A mobile device is a tool and is used to do the school assignments and to promote students’ learning effectiveness. Furthermore, a mobile device can assist students in applying what they have learned in the future.

T19: Mobile learning refers to learning via a mobile device, such as the applications of an iPad, and an Apple TV. Taking advantage of the mobile device can help improve students’ learning efficiency and effectiveness.

(2)
Mobile learning as Travel (V). Mobile and wireless technology helps students to travel around the world on the Internet. Students can search for all kinds of information about their learning tasks through surfing the Internet. Furthermore, teachers are able to design learning activities outside the classroom, so as to provide students with an authentic learning environment. That is to say, students are capable of learning anytime and anywhere in a mobile technology-enhanced learning environment. For example, the teachers stated that:

T01: Mobile learning refers to the capability of learning anytime and anywhere. Students may gain what they want at any time and in any place. Using an iPad or a mobile phone, a student can take pictures outside, integrate them into a project, and then upload them to the cloud.

T10: The functions of the mobile devices mean learning is no longer confined by time and space. Mobile learning breaks through the classroom space-time restriction. Learning may take place over the Internet.

T20: Mobile learning assists students in overcoming the constraints of the classroom. They can observe or take pictures of the plants in the learning park, and get the related data online via the mobile devices.

(3)
Mobile learning as Timeliness/Tutor (M). In the interactions of teacher and students, students served their apprenticeship with the teacher, while the teacher took the role of a tutor (Degago & Kaino, 2015). In this category, not only teachers but also students can immediately dispatch learning materials or display their products via the mobile and wireless technologies. In such a mobile technology-enhanced learning environment, students promptly transmit information to others, indicating effective interactions between peers. Furthermore, students' learning outcomes are instantly collected by the teachers in an efficient way. For example, the teachers described that:

T08: To save teaching time is the most obvious advantage of mobile learning, which refers to a kind of timely teaching. Some suitable examples found online allow students to comprehend the text. On the other hand, a teacher is capable of perceiving students’ learning effects from their timely responses.

T10: Mobile devices have the capability of interaction between a teacher and students. Via the support of a mobile device or an app, such as IRS, feedback or requests are received quickly.

T22: It is convenient for a teacher to promptly collect the students’ conceptions, so as to obtain their alternative concepts.

(4)
Mobile learning as a Toy (Y). The characteristic of mobile learning refers to a toy in this category, implying that the students are attracted to mobile technology. Moreover, some gaming mechanisms are easily programmed via mobile and wireless technology, indicating one reason why students are fascinated with mobile learning. By reason of students' concentration on mobile learning, their learning motivation and attitudes are enhanced. For example, the teachers explained that:

T05: In a mobile learning environment, students can sense something interesting and fun. For example, watching a video, or playing a game is a kind of positive reinforcement of students’ learning.

T09: Mobile technology is a kind of potential trigger for students' curiosity and hunger for knowledge. Mobile learning arouses students' learning interest, and mobile technology itself is capable of promoting students’ learning motivations. For example, students consider an interactive response system (IRS) to be of great interest.

T12: Mobile learning holds students’ attention. Students are willing to learn while learning with an iPad.

(5)
Mobile learning as Tracking (K). The learning processes of the students in the classroom have no need to be identical. No longer are teachers restricted by the students' learning progress; rather, they are capable of paying individual attention to more students in the classroom. Students with diverse learning capacity are able to study at their own pace through mobile technology; students with lower learning capabilities can slowly but surely study the learning content, while those with higher learning capabilities can explore advanced learning materials. That is, different students can take different learning tracks. Mobile learning is considered as adaptive to personal needs. Also, this category emphasizes that the mobile learning environment is good at keeping track of each individual student, facilitating individual learning. For example, the teachers depicted that:

T07: Mobile learning facilitates differentiated instruction and adaptive learning. In a mobile technology-enhanced learning environment, I can assign distinct projects to my students. On the other hand, individual students can carry out identical learning tasks at their own pace.

T10: The learning process is recorded and inspected via the mobile device. Using mobile technology, students are capable of creating their own learning portfolio. The diversity of students’ learning may be reflected in their learning portfolio. Moreover, mobile learning supports students to learn in their own way.

T25: In a mobile learning environment, diverse levels of learning materials, resources, and tasks are provided for students with different abilities.

(6)
Mobile learning as Teamwork (W). In this category, the teachers appreciate that mobile and wireless technology can assist students in their collaborative learning. Immediate information displayed on the mobile devices supports students' discussion with their team members. Ubiquitous data collection for mobile learning helps students to collaboratively perform learning tasks. With the assistance of mobile technology for data sharing, students have different ways of working collaboratively, such as face-to-face communication or online discussion. The teachers explained that:

T01: Team members are able to separately investigate and discuss outside through the mobile technologies, and share the outcomes in the classroom afterwards.

T19: A student shares the information with the other team members. Everyone can receive the information via the mobile device and online learning platform. Thus, the discussion tends to focus on the learning issue, so as to assist the team in probing the solutions.

T23: A mobile device supports efficient collaborative learning. The learning outcomes can be recorded and uploaded to the learning platform via the mobile device. A lively discussion or debate, which focuses on the learning objectives, can be conducted via the mobile technologies.

(7)
Mobile learning as a Tutee (U). In this category, students tutor the mobile technology as a tool; that is, they instruct the mobile technology to complete specific assignments. Students can benefit greatly by designing and thinking about the features of the program while tutoring the mobile technologies. By way of such a procedure, they are capable of improving their creativity and imagination. For example, the teachers stated that:

T05: Using apps and mobile technology, students design puzzles by themselves and interact with each other.

T07: Some apps can promote students’ design thinking. For example, a student can tutor puppets to act as entertainers.

Collectively, seven categories of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning are illustrated via the phenomenographic method. Moreover, as mentioned in the literature review, dimensions have been utilized in the past to identify the similarities and differences between the categories of teachers' conceptions of teaching. Similar to Kember's (1997) and Khan's (2015) studies, Table 4 provides an overview of five dimensions, namely “instructional strategies,” “teaching intention,” “role of the teacher,” “role of the student,” and “learning materials,” of teachers' conceptions of teaching using mobile learning to recognize the seven categories proposed in this study. All dimensions are composed of the expanding foci from the categories of “Tool” to “Tutee,” and reveal a wide spectrum of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning from the surface to the deep instructional approaches. For example, the dimension of “instructional strategy” with regard to the teaching approaches, starts from “teacher-centered” then “student-teacher interaction” and then “student-centered” instructional approaches. The dimension of “teaching intention” is chiefly concerned with the teaching objectives, ranging from “transfer of information,” “transfer of information with context,” “interactive process,” “process of helping student learning,” “development of person and conception,” and “empowering students for lifelong learning.” Therefore, the relationship among the categories of teachers' conceptions was confirmed, and individual categories are located in the teacher-centered and student-centered framework of teachers' conceptions. For instance, the “Timeliness/Tutor” category refers to an instructional strategy of student-teacher interaction, and emphasizes the learning intention in the process of interactive learning.


Table 4. Dimension of teachers’ conceptions of teaching using mobile learning.

Key aspects	Teacher-centered	Student-centered
Tool	Travel	Timeliness/Tutor	Toy	Tracking	Teamwork	Tutee
Instructional strategy	Teacher-centered approach	Teacher-centered approach	Student-teacher interaction	Student-centered approach	Student-centered approach	Student-centered approach	Student-centered approach
Teaching intention	Transfer of information	Transfer of information with context	Interactive process	Process of helping student learning	Development of person and conception	Development of person and conception	Empowering students for lifelong learning
Role of teacher	Presenter	Moderator	Moderator and tutor	Facilitator	Facilitator	Facilitator	Change agent/developer
Role of student	Recipient	Participant	Participant	Participant	Responsible for their own learning	Responsible for collaborative learning	Develop lifelong learning skills
Learning materials	Defined by the curriculum	Discovered by students but within teachers' framework	Constructed by students within teacher's framework	Constructed by students within teacher's framework	Constructed by students within teacher's framework	Co-constructed by students	Constructed by students
3.2. The distribution of teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning
Several previous studies have revealed that students and teachers expressed mixed conceptions of learning and teaching across diverse categories (Roberts, 2003). To illustrate each teacher's conceptions of mobile learning more directly and clearly, this study adopted the approach devised by Lin and Tsai (2008) for conveying the diversity of teachers' conceptions. Once a teacher expressed any conceptions belonging to a certain category, he/she was considered as belonging to that category of mobile learning conceptions. Moreover, every individual teacher can be categorized into more than one category. For example, the teacher with ID 22 voiced conceptions in the categories of “Tool,” “Travel,” “Timeliness/Tutor,” and “Toy”; he was therefore classified as belonging to these four categories.

According to the analysis of the 25 teachers' interviews, Table 5 depicts the distribution of the seven categories of the teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning. The “Tool” category, mentioned by all 25 participants, was the most agreed upon concept. Next, the “Timeliness/Tutor” category was expressed by 23 teachers. Both the “Toy” and the “Travel” categories were raised by 22 teachers. In addition, the “Tracking” and the “Teamwork” categories were respectively noted by 21 and 17 teachers. Finally, the “Tutee” category was mentioned by only three teachers.


Table 5. The distribution of teachers’ conceptions of teaching using mobile learning.

Teacher ID	Tool	Travel	Timeliness/Tutor	Toy	Tracking	Teamwork	Tutee
1	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
2	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
3	✓	✓	✓	✓		✓	
4	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
5	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		✓
6	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓
7	✓		✓	✓	✓	✓	✓
8	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		
9	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		
10	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		
11	✓	✓		✓	✓	✓	
12	✓	✓		✓	✓		
13	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓	
14	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
15	✓		✓	✓		✓	
16	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		
17	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
18	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
19	✓		✓	✓	✓	✓	
20	✓	✓	✓	✓		✓	
21	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		
22	✓	✓	✓	✓			
23	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
24	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓	
25	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓	
Total	25	22	23	22	21	17	3
%	100	88	92	88	84	68	12
In this study, the main idea of a teacher's conceptions refers to the highest frequency of mentioning the conceptions of mobile learning in one category. For example, “Timeliness/Tutor” is Teacher 8's most frequently mentioned category. Thus, Teacher 8's main conceptions of mobile learning are labeled as the “Timeliness/Tutor” category. As shown in Table 6, the “Tracking” category, which was most persistently mentioned by 11 teachers, was the top main idea of mobile learning for all 25 teachers. Furthermore, the “Timeliness/Tutor” category was described as the main idea by six teachers. Five teachers' main conceptions were labeled as “Tool,” whereas two teachers' main conceptions were considered as “Travel.” Finally, only one teacher's main idea was recognized as “Teamwork,” and none of the teachers' main conceptions pointed to “Toy” or “Tutee.”


Table 6. The main conceptions of teachers’ conceptions of teaching using mobile learning.

Category	Tool	Travel	Timeliness/Tutor	Toy	Tracking	Teamwork	Tutee
N	5	2	6	0	11	1	0
%	20	8	24	0	44	4	0
3.3. The tree of teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning
In this study, the “tree of conceptions of learning” method, designed by Lin and Tsai (2008), was utilized for deeply representing the relations between the teachers' conceptions of mobile learning. After gathering statistics of the teachers' conceptions, the frequencies of their similar conceptions were arranged. As depicted in Fig. 1, the maximum frequency (n = 25) of their conceptions, the category of “Tool,” was plotted as the root of the tree. Next, the teachers' mixed views across two categories were considered as the first-tier branch, including the categories of “Travel” and “Timeliness/Tutor,” which overlap the “Tool” category. Following that, the teachers' mixed conceptions across three categories were referred to as the second-tier branch. For example, 22 teachers had the “Tool” and “Travel” categories as mixed conceptions; 20 teachers among those 22 had the idea of the “Timeliness/Tutor” category, whereas the other two held the views of the “Toy” category. Then, the teachers’ mixed conceptions across four, five, and six categories were considered as the third-, fourth-, and fifth-tier branches, respectively. It is worth noting that a good number of teachers (n = 14, 56%) simultaneously had the same mixed categories of conceptions of mobile learning, namely Tool－Travel－Timeliness/Tutor－Toy－Tracking. Finally, only one teacher held mixed conceptions across all seven categories.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (182KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Tree of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning.

4. Discussion and conclusions
In this study, a total of 25 elementary school teachers were recruited to probe their qualitatively different conceptions of mobile learning. A 7-T framework of hierarchical categories was found for presenting the similarities and differences in the teachers’ conceptions, namely tool, travel, timeliness/tutor, toy, tracking, teamwork, and tutee; furthermore, the distributions of their conceptions were counted and portrayed.

The teachers held considerably consistent conceptions of mobile learning, such as seeing it as a tool (100%), travel (88%), timeliness/tutor (92%), toy (88%), tracking (84%), and teamwork (68%). This complies with the views expressed by several studies which described that the characteristics of mobile learning benefited students' learning effectiveness, for example, accessing information anytime and anywhere, offering opportunities for individualized or situated learning, and enhancing students' collaborative efforts and engagement (Reeves et al., 2017; Shadiev et al., 2018). However, few teachers' conceptions of mobile learning were concerned with the tutee category (n = 3, 12%), assuming that their students were too young to utilize mobile devices in the role of tutee. Taylor (1980) declared that the tutee category helps students to tutor computers, so as to get new ideas by programming. Therefore, it is sensible that few teachers mentioned mobile learning as the role of tutee, as they are teaching in elementary schools. Furthermore, the most dominant ideas of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning were the tracking (44%) and timeliness/tutor (24%) categories, which respectively express “adaptive to personal needs,” and “immediate interactions of teacher and students, and between peers,” implying the crucial features of mobile technology that teachers pay attention to. A great deal of research has taken advantage of these two features to promote students’ learning, such as self-reflective skills (Hung, Yang, Fang, Hwang, & Chen, 2014; Tabuenca et al., 2015), and learning achievements (Lai, Chen, & Lee, 2019). It is noteworthy that these two categories did not exist in the previous studies, which illustrated the 3-T (i.e., Tutor, Tool, and Tutee; Taylor, 1980), 4-T (i.e., Technology, Tool, Toy, and Tour/Travel; Tsai, 2004), and 5-T (i.e., Tool, Toy, Telephone, Territory, and Treasure of Information; Chou et al., 2009) frameworks.

According to the tree of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning, the teachers' multiple conceptions of mobile learning were clearly displayed. It was portrayed that numerous teachers (n = 22; 88%) considered mobile learning as a “tool” and for “travel,” while few teachers (n = 3; 12%) regarded it as a “tool” and as “timeliness/tutor.” This implies that, via mobile technology, students can obtain learning resources at all times and in all places. This result is in accordance with the definitions of mobile learning asserted by Sha et al. (2012), who described that mobile learning is considered as “learning anytime and anywhere,” and “learning through mobile devices.” Moreover, a total of 14 teachers (56%) stressed the features of mobile learning as a “tool,” “travel,” “timeliness/tutor,” “toy,” and “tracking,” indicating that more than half of the teachers in this study had the same mixed conceptions. Among 14 teachers, five had mixed conceptions of “tool,” “travel,” “timeliness/tutor,” “toy,” and “tracking”; seven held mixed views across “tool,” “travel,” “timeliness/tutor,” “toy,” “tracking,” and “teamwork”; one had mixed conceptions among “tool,” “travel,” “timeliness/tutor,” “toy,” “tracking,” and “tutee”; and one teacher held mixed perspectives across all the categories. It would be worth probing the diversified teachers' conceptions of mobile learning at this branch. As illustrated above, the potent relationships between conceptions of teaching and approaches to teaching have been confirmed in several previous studies, and teachers' views on teaching significantly impact students' learning achievements (Taylor & Booth, 2015). By using the tree of teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning, this study clearly delineated the relations among these conceptions for facilitating higher-level hierarchical conceptions.

As mentioned above, several previous studies have proposed qualitatively different ways of conceptualizing teaching. This study further analyzed the categories of teachers' conceptions of mobile learning via juxtaposing them with the framework of approaches to learning, as reported by Trigwell, Prosser, and Taylor's (1994) study. As portrayed in Table 7, three strategies and four intentions were integrated for associating qualitatively different categories of instructional approaches. The strategies are composed of the “teacher-focused,” “student/teacher interaction,” and “student-focused” approaches; on the other hand, the intentions consist of “information transmission,” “concept acquisition,” “conceptual development,” and “conceptual change.” It was found that the tool category refers to a teacher-focused approach with the aim of transmitting information to learners, indicating the most surface conception categories of mobile technology-integrated instruction. Next, the travel category is a teacher-focused approach, with the objective of assisting students in acquiring learning concepts. The timeliness/tutor category facilitates students' interaction with other students and with the teacher. It is considered as an instructional strategy of student/teacher interaction, with the goal of students' conceptual development. The toy, tracking, and teamwork categories are regarded as student-focused approaches with the aim of students' conceptual development, describing deeper conception categories of mobile learning. Finally, the tutee category refers to a student-focused approach with the objective of students' conceptual change, implying the deepest conception category of mobile technology-integrated instruction.


Table 7. The relation between teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning and approaches to teaching.

Intention	Strategy
Teacher-focused	Student/Teacher interaction	Student-focused
Information transmission	Tool		
Concept acquisition	Travel		
Conceptual development		Timeliness/Tutor	Toy, Tracking, Teamwork
Conceptual change			Tutee
Among the seven categories in this 7-T framework, four are considered as student-focused instructional strategies. It is apparent that most of the teachers' conceptions of mobile learning tend to be deeper instructional strategies. Moreover, the tracking category is the maximum frequency of teachers' main conceptions of mobile learning. That is to say, mobile technology offers opportunities to facilitate student-focused learning. Such a result is in line with several previous studies which described that teachers can facilitate and implement student-centered learning activities by means of the assistance of mobile learning (Sha et al., 2012). Thus, this provides educators and teachers with deep comprehension of mobile learning, and for designing and conducting mobile learning activities. The findings of this study have several crucial implications for future practice. Individual teachers' conceptions of teaching could be promoted toward student-centered learning via mobile technology, implying that more resources are needed to advance training and professional learning of mobile technology-integrated instruction for educators and teachers. Properly integrating mobile learning activities may be a potential means to foster teachers’ conceptions of technology-assisted instruction. Furthermore, some exemplar activities or lesson plans of mobile learning can be shared with teachers for facilitating their conceptions of mobile technology-enhanced learning.

This study, by collecting a group of teachers' interview responses, adopted the phenomenographic method to explore the teachers' conceptions of mobile technology-integrated instruction, and the 7-T framework was revealed. Further research could provide an opportunity to extend possible teacher conceptions via more open-ended or investigative questions as the technology grows. In addition, future research can conduct some class observations for those implementing mobile or other technology-assisted learning activities, coupled with following-up interviews, to explore more potential other conceptions of mobile or technology-assisted learning held by teachers. It would also be interesting to probe the relationship between teachers' conceptions of mobile learning and their teaching approaches. Moreover, a small sample size was recruited to probe teachers’ conceptions of mobile learning in this study. It is suggested that further studies could be undertaken using quantitative research designs.