Self-regulated learning (SRL) has a predictable and instrumental effect on learning complicated knowledge. This study investigates the role of SRL in acquiring technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK), an important aspect of teachers' effective technology use. The present study identified several regulatory procedural patterns used by teachers in the context of their TPACK achievements. A computer-based context, nBrowser, was used to facilitate teachers lesson planning around technology usage. Teachers log file data were analyzed using process mining approaches. Findings indicate that high TPACK performers are more likely to perform self-regulative activities (e.g., monitoring) in developing TPACK compared to the low performers. Higher TPACK performers are more goal-oriented, demonstrate more monitoring and are more iterative in using all SRL processes in contrast to low performers who only partially regulate their problem solving. Such findings support previous research. This study adopts a novel approach for understanding the relations between SRL and TPACK. It offers opportunities to examine how teachers enact SRL as they move from the beginning to later stages of designing lessons and provides insights to researchers who study SRL in TPACK domains. Furthermore, the findings can assist educational designers in developing interventions for promoting TPACK development by concentrating on teachers’ SRL abilities.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Self-regulated learning

TPACK

Process mining

Log files

1. Introduction
Self-regulated learning (SRL) is an essential concept in the field of educational psychology. The notion is derived from research on metacognition and discusses how learners deploy metacognitive knowledge and skills to monitor and regulate their cognitive, motivational, and behavioral processes in learning (Pintrich, 2000; Winne & Hadwin, 1998). SRL has a pervasive, predictable, and instrumental effect on learning. Successful SRL enables students to engage in a recursive cycle of analyzing task conditions, constructing goals, monitoring learning strategies, and evaluating the effectiveness of the strategies (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004; Mega et al., 2014). However, dysregulation hampers learning, including failures to update one's standards and adapt to the demands of the task, deploy effective strategies, as well as make accurate judgments of one's progress (Azevedo & Feyzi-Behnagh, 2011). Such findings have been documented in research conducted across disciplines such as science (Deekens, Greene, & Lobczowski, 2018), mathematics (Kramarski & Friedman, 2014), medicine (Lajoie, Poitras, Doleck, & Jarrell, 2014), and psychology (Sonnenberg & Bannert, 2015).

In the context of teacher technology education, technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK, Mishra & Koehler, 2006) plays a crucial role in teachers' effective uses of educational technology for teaching. It serves as a heuristic conceptual framework instructing teachers on how to combine their extensive technological knowledge with their content and pedagogical knowledge in an effort to make abstract subject topics more concrete and to assist students in constructing new knowledge (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). However, developing TPACK is complex in that teachers need to consider students’ specific needs as well as the constraints of learning contexts when performing technology-integrated practices (Angeli & Valanides, 2009).

Investigations into the relations between SRL and learning in TPACK commences with Kramarski et al.’s (2009, 2010) study wherein three metacognitive prompts were provided to student teachers during different phases of learning TPACK in a web-based context. Their findings demonstrate that participants obtained higher TPACK comprehension and performance of lesson design with SRL scaffolds in the planning and evaluation phases. In a study of TPACK in secondary in-service teachers Chen and Jiang (2019) found that teachers' SRL capacities play a different role in building TPACK, with planning capacity as the factor that exerts an exceptional influence. Poitras (Poitras, Doleck, Huang, Li, & Lajoie, 2017; Poitras & Fazeli, 2016)) contributes to this field of research by including a computer-based learning environment (CBLE) that is designed to facilitate teachers' SRL and TPACK. Poitras, Fazeli, and Mayne (2018) built a structural model to test several information seeking and acquisition behaviours (e.g., site visits using a CBLE), as predictors for TPACK, assuming that teachers who regulated their information seeking and acquisition behaviours could result in better TPACK performance. Another study using this CBLE analyzed preservice teachers' lesson plans and corroborates the arguments that teachers with high SRL abilities outperform those with lower SRL in terms of TPACK achievements (Huang, Li, Poitras, & Lajoie, 2020). Despite significant findings, further examinations of the relations between SRL and TPACK are needed.

There is necessity to probe further into teachers' self-regulatory processes to establish a sound understanding of the relations between SRL and TPACK. The underlying assumption is that SRL is temporal and dynamic in the way it changes over time and in different contexts (Taub, Azevedo, & Mudrick, 2018). Deeper insight into how SRL is performed can provide opportunities to explain why teachers succeed or fail in learning about TPACK. Studies looking into teachers' SRL processes in TPACK is still somewhat limited in the existing literature. Accordingly, the present study aims to fill this gap through modeling teachers' self-regulatory processes as they conduct a technology-infused task and will present inferences about the relations between SRL and TPACK temporally. The findings will provide insights as to how teachers enact SRL as they move from the beginning to later stages of designing lessons and provides insights to researchers who study SRL in TPACK domains. Furthermore, the findings can assist educational designers in developing interventions for promoting TPACK development by concentrating on teachers’ SRL abilities.

2. Theoretical background and literature review
2.1. Self-regulated learning
Several scholars have modeled students' SRL with different theoretical perspectives, such as the social-cognitive model of SRL (Zimmerman, 2002), the general framework of SRL (Pintrich, 2000), and the information-processing model of SRL (Winne & Hadwin, 1998). Despite differences, there are some commonly shared assumptions (Panadero, 2017; Puustinen & Pulkkinen, 2001). First, SRL is a constructive cyclical process consisting of phases. The first phase is forethought wherein students analyze the task or the problem to be addressed to understand available resources and the constraints for problem-solving. In the second stage of planning, students construct several specific learning goals, retrieve possible strategies, and select the most appropriate ones used for problem-solving. The next phase involves task execution, in which students monitor the enactment of the planned strategies and evaluate their consequences on learning. When learning is accomplished, learners in the last phase of self-regulation reflect on their performance and make modifications in general, which exerts influence in future learning. The second characteristic shared by all models is that SRL is assumed to be goal-oriented (Pintrich, 2000; Winne & Hadwin, 1998). Goals articulately indicate the expected consequences that guide how to regulate learning (Winne, 2001). When students develop clear goals, they are able to retrieve relevant prior knowledge appropriate for the tasks to be addressed and implement effective strategies to approach the objectives. More importantly, goals define the standards for metacognitive monitoring activities that contrast the products of a given SRL phase against the standards to determine whether or not the content should be restudied (Winne, 2001, 2010). In addition, researchers also emphasize the critical role of metacognitive activities in SRL and their effects on individual regulatory phases. Metacognitive activities consist of monitoring and control (Azevedo et al., 2012; Pintrich, 2000; Winne, 2001). Monitoring enables students to self-observe the entire study process, compare the achieved outcomes against their goals that have been set before learning, and identify whether or not differences exist (Winne & Hadwin, 1998). The internal feedback, accompanied by monitoring, leads to control activities that allow for refining task perceptions, adjusting objectives, or revising learning tactics and strategies (Schunk, 2008). As Zimmerman (1986) stated, “self-regulated learners are persons who plan, organize, self-instruct, self-monitor, and self-evaluate at various stages during the learning process” (p. 308). Winne claims that metacognitive activities can take place during any phase of a regulatory process, allowing learners to control their study as needed (Puustinen & Pulkkinen, 2001; Winne & Hadwin, 1998). Hence, SRL is described as a goal-oriented process with distinguishable phases, but there is no assumption that these phases are arranged in a strict time ordered sequence (Azevedo, 2009; Bannert et al., 2014). In the exploratory research, Schoor et al. (Schoor & Bannert, 2012) demonstrated students’ regulated learning over time by means of a process graph. They found that students processed a typical regulatory process of coordination, working on the task, and monitoring, which is different from what they expected from SRL models, i.e., working on the task – monitoring – coordination – working on the task.

2.2. Capturing SRL processes with logs and process mining techniques
Since an SRL process is recursive and temporal in terms of real-time occurrence of regulatory events (Bernacki, 2018), it is essential to capture SRL with a novel event-based approach rather than self-reports that only examines SRL as an aptitude (Veenman, 2011, Winne & Perry, 2000). Recent research suggests event-based SRL measures treat SRL as a sequence of temporal events (Azevedo et al., 2012; Greene, Moos, & Azevedo, 2011, Winne & Perry, 2000). Event measures require a learning environment that integrates advanced technologies to track and log students' actual, real-time events (Greene & Azevedo, 2010; Greene et al., 2019; Schraw, 2007). As such, computer logs can be extracted and analyzed to make inferences regarding SRL (Cho & Yoo, 2017; Winne, 2010; Zhou & Winne, 2012). According to Winne (2010), logs are defined as a collection of observable behaviors indicative of students' mental models that students apply to process information. The underlying assumption is that students do not perform SRL randomly, so the logged behavioral data can account for systematic regulatory patterns (Winne, 2010). Log data are objective, do not rely on participants' perceptions or recalls, and cannot be calibrated by participants (Siadaty et al., 2016). Furthermore, a log encompasses multiple forms of information, such as when and where an event is enacted, how long an event is, or what sequence an event is in. Such information, hence, allows researchers to identify students' learning trajectories and make inferences about students’ SRL processes in an accurate way (Bernacki, 2018; Biswas et al., 2014; Cho & Yoo, 2017; Winne, 2017; Zhou & Winne, 2012).

With log events, researchers are able to discover cyclical and temporal self-regulatory processes. Recent literature has shown that process mining (PM) can reveal specific features and sequences of SRL processes (Bannert et al., 2014; Reimann et al., 2014). PM works on time-stamped event logs, identifying, confirming, or extending process models to extract process-related patterns (van der Aalst, 2012). Since theories have assumed event-like SRL, the goal of PM is to present the expression of a sequence of log events generated by a particular SRL process. For instance, Bannert et al. (2014) differentiated the SRL process of academically successful and less successful students with events extracted from students’ think-aloud protocols. Cerezo, Bogarín, Esteban, and Romero (2019) applied PM for SRL assessment in e-learning and found students who passed followed the logic of a successful self-regulated learning process. Sonnenberg and Bannert (2015, 2019) applied PM algorithms to test the long-term effects of metacognitive prompts on learning. Their findings reveal that the designed prompts had significant long-term effects on increasing the frequency of using metacognitive strategies. Additionally, PM outputs graphs comprising nodes and edges between nodes. By manipulating parameter threshold values of nodes or edges, researchers are able to deal with noise in the data, control the level of detail, and focus on the main relations among log events (van der Aalst, 2012). Thus, process mining has implications for understanding the temporal nature of SRL more fully.

2.3. Research on SRL TPACK development
2.3.1. Technological pedagogical content knowledge
TPACK refers to teachers' effective use of technology for teaching and learning purposes. TPACK is often discussed as an extension of Schulman's (1986) construct of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) by incorporating technological knowledge. TPACK accounts for seven sub-domains of knowledge (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). Content knowledge indicates how teachers understand the facts, structures, and difficulty levels of content. Pedagogical knowledge indicates what knowledge of general instructional principles and strategies teachers master. Technological knowledge represents teachers' technological skills (e.g., operations of tools and troubleshooting). PCK concerns teaching specific subject topics with domain-specific instructional methods. Technological content knowledge (TCK) refers to how teachers take the difficulty level of topics or concepts into account when deciding technology. Technological pedagogical knowledge (TPK) refers to how teachers adapt general technological and pedagogical skills to the characteristics of concrete subject topics as well as knowledge of learners and contexts. TPACK is a unique body of knowledge, meaning that it goes beyond mere integration of the individual knowledge domains towards transforming knowledge of sub-domains to a particular understanding of the values of technology for particular topics that are difficult to be understood by learners or difficult to be represented by teachers (Angeli & Valanides, 2009). This transformation requires cognitive and metacognitive activities needed to construct sophisticated TPACK by integrating knowledge across each knowledge domain (Krauskopf, Zahn, & Hesse, 2015). These high-order thinking activities are of significance since they signify a teacher's deep understanding of identification, selection, or infusion of technology teaching purposes (Graham, Borup, & Smith, 2012).

2.3.2. SRL in TPACK development
SRL models pave the way for revisiting TPACK development by providing a framework that sheds comprehensive insight into the cognitive and metacognitive processes involved in the TPACK context. Empirical research conducted by Kramarski et al. (2009, 2010) has aligned learning about TPACK with three SRL phases of planning, actions, and performance, evaluation. Similarly, Poitras et al. (2017) conceptualized teachers' information seeking behaviors in performing TPACK tasks as planning, monitoring, and strategy use phases. Such research indicates that at different stages of TPACK learning there are specific activities relevant to SRL within each phase. Accordingly, we support a TPACK framework with three phrases. Teachers in Phase 1 analyze the task to be performed in the initial phase, to understand the task requirements in detail, and retrieve relevant prior knowledge from long-term memory. Phase 2 is the planning stage, in which teachers formulate concrete goals they would like to attain. Goals are critical for TPACK development because, according to SRL theories, goals can be transferred into standards guiding teachers’ enactment of TPACK and evaluations of their TPACK efforts. What is worth emphasizing is that teachers in this phase attempt to transform independent sub-domain knowledge into the knowledge of the intersecting sub-domains, such as technological content knowledge. Phase 3 is TPACK enactment—teachers perfect their technology strategies by considering more factors. Monitoring plays a significant role in this phase, assessing the discrepancies between existing technology solutions and planned ones, or between the plausibility of proposed strategies and the possibilities of implementing these strategies in authentic teaching environments. Teachers draw on the feedback of monitoring to determine whether they need to refine TPACK enactment. Throughout the entire developmental process, TPACK is also used as metaknowledge for evaluations and reflections; for example, whether additional knowledge of a particular technological tool is needed for decisions.

2.4. Descriptions of study and research questions
This study aimed to answer the research question regarding what SRL process patterns can be identified while teachers are developing TPACK. To gain a better understanding of the role of SRL in TPACK, we mined two types of process patterns. First, we classified teachers into three profiles indicating different levels of TPACK achievements. Under such a circumstance, we mined three SRL processes, known as global process patterns. Second, we selected the higher- and lower-performers from each TPACK profile and subsequently mined within-group process patterns, i.e., three SRL processes of the higher TPACK performers versus three SRL processes of the lower TPACK performers. Hence, we address two specific research questions: (1) what global SRL process patterns can be identified in terms of different levels of TPACK achievements? (2) what within-group SRL process patterns can be identified in terms of the high and the low TPACK performers with individual TPACK groups?

3. Methods
3.1. Participants
The participants in this study were 70 English as second language teachers in a city in the southern region of China. Of them, 49 student teachers (third-year university students), were recruited in a local normal university after we received the approval from the faculty administration and received the Ethics approval from the authors' affiliated university. Participants' personal information was treated in strict confidence. The in-service teachers were working at local public primary schools or higher institutions. The eligibility for participation was that potential participants had taken courses or training relevant to instructional pedagogy and technology. The mean age of the sample was 23 years old (SD = 6.96). The average teaching experience was reported as four years (SD = 5.94). Participants of the study were compensated 50 Chinese Yuan (equal to 10 Canadian dollars) for their time. Due to technical issues, three participants whose recordings were incomplete were excluded from the dataset, resulting in 67 participants’ data used in the analyses.

3.2. Learning environment and tasks
The nBrowser (Poitras et al., 2017) is a CBLE for TPACK development, and it provides teachers with opportunities to acquire and transfer TPACK into practice through designing a technology-integrated lesson. The system (Fig. 1) involves two interfaces, namely, a Workspace and a Dashboard. The Workspace has three sections. The Solution View consists of a display of the learning material and online search tools. The Tutor section is placed underneath the Solution View, providing hints and a “TESOL Technology Standards Framework.” There are four hints in response to problems teachers might ask while solving the task. For instance, teachers might refer to the first hint if they did not have a clear understanding of what technology integration is. Also, teachers could use the second hint to get access to a website that offers numerous resources regarding educational technologies and exemplary scenarios. The Standards could assist teachers in reflecting on their performance of designing a technology-infused English lesson. On the left side is the Solution Explorer allowing teachers to analyze the task (the Details panel), seek online information and save online resources (the Assets panel), as well as edit and revise a lesson plan (the Builder panel). The dashboard presents teachers' learning activities and their outcomes. For example, the check teaching focus or the lesson plan exhibited in the dashboard. Teachers are able to switch between each interface freely to monitor their task solving process and make any modifications wherever they are necessary. Teachers click the “Save” button on the dashboard to save their work and indicate the completion of the task. All of the teachers’ actions within nBrowser, such as clicks and movements, websites search, and lesson plans, were recorded in the log files. In this study, the participants were to design a technology-infused lesson with the provided material that introduces the Canadian Tulip Festival. Their lesson plans serve as one indicator of TPACK achievements.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (295KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Interfaces of nBrowser: The Workspace (Left) and the Dashboard (Right).

3.3. Procedure
The study was laboratory-based and participants were run individually. The day before the implementation, the experimenter emailed participants, enclosing an instruction video of nBrowser, the demographic survey, and the TPACK questionnaires. On the day of implementation, the experimenter asked participants to sign the consent form and fill in the survey and questionnaires, after which they were briefed on the objectives and the procedures of the study. Participants worked on nBrowser, analyzing the assigned tasks, performing online information searching, and completed a lesson plan within 45 min. The experimenter stayed in the lab throughout the entire process and did not communicate with participants except for technical issues. The experimenter alerted participants when there was 5 min remaining to complete the task.

3.4. Data sources
3.4.1. Perceived TPACK comprehension
The TPACK-practical survey (Yeh, Hsu, Wu, Hwang, & Lin, 2014) was administered to examine teachers' self-perceptions of their TPACK competence. The survey includes 22 items rated on a 7-point Likert scale with 1 indicating “not at all true of me” to 7 indicating “very true of you.” TPACK-Practical assesses how teachers apply technologies to teaching from the following five pedagogical dimensions, i.e., knowing learners (3 items), Subject content (2 items), Curriculum design (8 items), Practical teaching (6 items), and Assessment (3 items). Yeh and her team developed the survey through the Delphi approach, inviting 60 researchers and specialists to evaluate the original scale in two rounds. According to their report, 95.83% of the items were considered critical components for the TPACK measurement (Yeh et al., 2014). Moreover, experts conducted two-rounds of evaluations, and the correlations of items in each round were between 0.5 and 0.73, which leads to robust validity to this survey (Yeh et al., 2014). In this study, the reliability (the Cronbach's alphas) of the overall scale was 0.95, and the reliability of individual dimensions ranged from 0.78 to 0.91, which indicates a reliable measurement (George & Mallery, 2001).

3.4.2. Evaluations of lesson plans
Lesson plans were used to reveal teachers' ability to apply TPACK in their lesson designs. Lesson plans were retrieved from nBrowser logs. We assessed lesson plans based on six TPACK basic elements, namely, content, pedagogy, technology, PCK, TCK, and TPK. The evaluation rubric (Table 1) was created by synthesizing three well-developed evaluation criteria, including Technology Integration Assessment Rubric (Harris, Grandgenett, & Hofer, 2010), the TPACK performance assessment instrument (Akyuz, 2018), and the TPACK lesson plan coding scheme (Janssen & Lazonder, 2016). The scale was 0–3 on each dimension. Participants gained a score of 3 points indicating an adaptive level when they considered students' characteristics and learning contexts into the TPACK framework. The score of 2 points denoted a specific level, meaning that participants presented details of information relevant to TPACK but indicated less consideration of students’ needs. Participants received 1 point when they generally discuss individual TPACK elements in their designs. When there was no mention or unclear information of the TPACK elements 0 points were allocated. As a consequence, the maximum score for a single plan was 18. The higher score denoted more expert design skills relating to TPACK. Three evaluators collaboratively completed the work through a two-step evaluation. The first step was to establish the inter-rater agreement. Three researchers independently graded 25 lesson plans and compared their scores. The interclass correlation analysis coefficient was 0.86, yielding an acceptable agreement (Cicchetti, 1994). The second step included evaluated the remaining lesson plans. Three evaluators discussed and resolved all their differences. The first author made the final decision when agreements could not be resolved on a given evaluation element.


Table 1. Evaluation criteria of participants’ lesson plans.

TPACK Elements	Not Applicable (0 point)	Low (1 point)	Medium (2 points)	Advanced (3 points)
Content	not stating the content or the presence of content is irrelevant to the teaching materials/curriculum	content is stated clearly but generally or board.
Example
"teaching objectives: vocabulary";
"to have students understand the cultures";	specify the topic-specific content or identify the difficult aspects of the subject content.
Example
"teaching objectives: vocabulary: tulips; scarify, govern";
"difficulties: the past particle form of verbs in the passive voice";	specify the concrete the topic-specific content or difficult aspects, and elucidate that they are derived from the demand of students or curriculum
Example the lesson focuses on past particle form of a verb because students need to learn them for the use of passive voice.
Pedagogy	not using or using only one method in the teaching	multiple pedagogical methods are used but stated in simple ways.
Example
"skim and scan the passage";"let students work in groups";	multiple pedagogical methods are stated clearly and the specifications of these methods are articulated
Example scan the material because it allows students to understand the main idea quickly. And perusing helps to find the details.	multiple pedagogical methods are specified, and and/or teachers know how they contribute to student-centered learning
Example
Task-based teaching is student-centered by which students can learn by perform tasks independently or collaboratively.
Technology	not using any technology in teaching	one or more technologies are used but stated in simple ways.
Example
"use computers, videos, and Internet";	multiple pedagogical methods are mentioned clearly and the affordances and/or constraints of these tools are discussed.
Example
"playing videos can stimulate students' interest"	the specifications of technology are discussed in detail and/or teachers know how it contributes to student-centered learning.
Example
"video can be used in the beginning to attract students' attention so that they might be more engaged in the lessons."
PCK	no alignment between pedagogy and content, or the use of pedagogy is not aligned with content representation.	content information is stated generally and taught by simple methods, or content information is specified but represented by a single method;
Example
"have students scan and the reading material to find out the main ideas and discuss with peers"	subject/topic-specific contents are presented and multiple methods are used to support content representations
Example
"I explain the structure of a passive-voiced sentence and ask students to find out all the passive-voiced sentences in the reading materials"	subject/topic-specific contents are presented and multiple methods are used to support content representations. And teachers use student-centered methods to encourage learning
Example
"Students first find out all the passive-voiced sentences in the reading materials and try to identify the general structure of such sentences through peer discussions. I will ask some students to share their opinions and make additional information";
TCK	no alignment between technology and content, or the use of technology is not aligned with content representation	content information is stated generally and represented by a single technology; or content information is specified but represented by single technology;
Example
"play a video about Canadian cultures"
"show digital images of different types of tulips"	subject/topic-specific contents are presented and multiple technologies are used to support content representations.
Example
"I will search additional information about Canadian tulip festival online and share it in the class discussion board. I also create a gap-fill game to help students understand the significance of such festival"	subject/topic-specific contents are presented and multiple technologies are used to support content representations. And teachers encourage students' use of technology to present contents.
Example
"students log in the class forum created by me and guess the flowers I uploaded before. Then they complete a word puzzle game to know the names of the flowers."
TPK	no alignment between pedagogy and pedagogy, or the use of technology is not aligned with pedagogical implementation	use a single technology to support teaching, or use a few technologies but teaching is designed simply.
Example
"ask students to search online"
"use a video and digital images in the warm-up session"	teachers articulate how to use technologies to support their teaching in different stages of the class, but no consideration of after class or students' use.
Example
"Scanning and skimming are important reading skills. I use a cellphone timer to count how much time students need to finish reading the material. I will also use a vocabulary game to engage students' word acquisition.”	teachers articulate how to use technologies to support their teaching in class, which includes using technologies in different stages and for different purpose, and/or the student use is encouraged.
Example
"for collaborative work, I will create a class discussion board before the class in which I can assign students in groups with 3-4 people after their sign in."
Note: PCK = Pedagogical content knowledge; TCK = Technological content knowledge; TPK = Technological pedagogical knowledge.

3.4.3. Identification of SRL events
A process analysis of the computer logs collected from nBrowser was conducted. In order to generate fine-grained SRL events, we followed trace-based, microanalytic measure protocols (Siadaty et al., 2016) that define the targeted SRL event list based on the theory and mapped the raw logs onto the SRL list. For example, goal setting is defined as constructing specific goals relevant to the task. The nBrowser provides a checklist that helps teachers clarify what their instructional goals are as they plan their lesson design. For instance, when the logs table shows “Lesson_Details_Topic_Checked,” we mapped it onto the Goal setting category. Another example is Goal setting, which is related to three raw events of “Lesson_Details_Focus_Checked,” “Lesson_Details_Standard,” and “Lesson_Details_LanguageSkills_Checked.” The details are presented in Table 2.


Table 2. Reference table for defining SRL events.

SRL Event	Behavioural Indicators	Raw Logs
Task analysis	Check on Grade menu	Lesson_Details_Grade
Check Technological Competencies box	Lesson_Details_TechCompetence_Checked
Goal setting	Check items in Focus	Lesson_Details_Focus_Checked
Check items in Topic	Lesson_Details_Topic_Checked
Check items in Skill	Lesson_Details_LanguageSkills_Checked
Clicking on Standards menu	Lesson_Details_Standard
Search	Search/Navigation	Assets_URL
Navigation_Bookmark
Navigation_Event
Navigation_Forward
Navigation_Back
Transfer	Assign tags and Save as a Bookmark	Assets_Label
Reflection	Read Evaluation Criteria	Lesson_Plan_Evaluation_Criteria
Monitor	Requesting Hints to understand what technology integration means	Technology_Hint
4. Analysis and results
4.1. Creation of TPACK groups
TPACK groups were created prior to answering the research questions. These groups were associated with the levels of TPACK achievements that were predicted by the scores of the self-report of TPACK and the results of evaluations of lesson plans. The descriptive statistics demonstrated that the average score of perceived TPACK was 4.51 out of 7 (SD = 0.89) and around half of the sample obtained the scores above the mean. In light of the results of the evaluations of lesson plans, the mean score was 7.60 out of 18 (SD = 3.18). The minimum score was 2, while the maximum was 18. For classification, hierarchical clustering (HC) analysis was performed using the R package. HC analysis is a frequently used method in data mining for establishing a hierarchy of clusters (Muntaner et al., 2012). The agglomerative HC algorithm was used to compute dissimilarity of two pairs of observations by distance measure (e.g., Euclidean distance) and cluster data points internally coherent into a hierarchical tree-like dendrogram (Gil-Garcia, Badia-Contelles, & Pons-Porrata, 2006). We also employed the average silhouette method to determine the optimal number of cluster k (Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990). As a consequence, the dendrogram visualization (Fig. 2 Left) suggests that three clusters are optimal and the silhouette graph (Fig. 2 Right) confirms the output, which further presents the three distinct clusters with the involved members. Then we computed the mean scores of the TPACK survey and the evaluations of lesson plans in response to the three clusters. Based on our previous argument, proficiency in TPACK requires an understanding of TPACK, but more importantly how to apply TPACK for task accomplishments. Consequently, we labeled the clusters from least to best TPACK understanding as the knowledge-merit group (KMG), the competent group (CG) and the design merit group (DMG). As Table 3 exhibits, the largest group has the lowest level of TPACK, revealing 36 participants in the KMG category who had the highest scores in the TPACK survey but could not apply their understanding. The DMG (n = 16) included teachers who received a higher score in lesson plan evaluations but lower scores in self-reported TPACK. The DMG represented a medium level of TPACK. The third group, CG (n = 15), is characterized by the higher scores in both self-reports and the design task.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (362KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Dendrogram of the clustering result on TPACK profile.


Table 3. Number of members, means, and standard deviations of SR dimensions in classes.

Groups	N (%)	TPACK comprehension*	Design performance*
KMG	36 (53.7%)	4.92 (.58)/7	5.81 (2.05)/18
DMG	16 (23.9%)	3.33 (.68)/7	8.00 (2.63)/18
CG	15 (22.4%)	4.81 (.52)/7	11.47 (2.26)/18
Note: The scale of TPACK comprehension is on 7-point. The full point of performance evaluation is 18.

4.2. Descriptions of SRL events
Table 4 presents the statistical analysis of the identified SRL events, namely Analysis, Goal setting, Monitoring, Reflection, Search, and Transfer. In total, all SRL events were performed 3141 times. Search (n = 2125) was the event most frequently enacted in the KMG (n = 1292), the DMG (n = 392), and the CG (n = 441) while the events of Transfer, Monitoring, and Reflection were less performed. The events of Goal setting and Analysis were fairly enacted within each group. We also ran the one-way ANOVA test to see whether there is any difference between groups in terms of the counts of SRL events, and the results indicate no statistically significant differences can be detected on individual SRL events, with all p values greater than 0.05.


Table 4. Counts, means and the ANOVA test of all SRL events for three groups.

Events	KMG	DMG	CG	ANOVA
Counts	M	SD	Counts	M	SD	Counts	M	SD
GS	278	7.72	2.3	111	7.25	3.44	116	7.4	2.75	ps > .05
ANA	143	3.97	2.35	66	3	2.03	48	4.4	2.85
SEA	1292	35.89	34.69	392	27.56	26.17	441	26.13	15.38
TRA	83	2.31	3.09	28	1.56	1.83	25	1.87	1.81
MON	38	1.06	1.51	20	1.63	1.82	26	1.33	1.92
REF	15	.42	.73	10	.67	1.05	9	.56	.96
Note: GS = Goal setting; ANA = Analysis; SEA = Search; TRA = Transfer; MON = Monitoring; REF = Reflection.

4.3. Process analysis of teachers’ SRL
The analysis was conducted with RapidMiner Studio 9.7 and the ProM extension developed by the University of Eindhoven. Fuzzy Miner algorithm was applied to capture teachers' self-regulatory processes in the context of TPACK development. Fuzzy miner holds the potential to deal with unstructured events data and place such data into interpretable models (Günther & van der Aalst, 2007). Fuzzy miner visualizes event clusters by means of nodes and measures the level of importance of observed events via significance. There are three types of representations of nodes, namely, the highly significant nodes, clustered nodes that refer to the less significant but highly correlated ones and removed nodes that indicated the less significant and lowly correlated events. The edges in the fuzzy miner indicate the relations of two event clusters, which is reflected by the significance and correlation of edges. For fuzzy mining analysis, this study followed the default metrics setting, with the edge cut-off value of 0.2, and the significance cut-off of the node of 0 to examine how each event was positioned in a process. In addition, we removed the Edit from the event list due to its higher frequency caused by the fact that nBrowser recorded every single keystroke as an Edit event when participants were writing lesson plans. Excessive counts did not provide meaningful information which resulted in using only six event types to analyze teachers' SRL processes. Using the PM methods, we will discover the global SRL processes and the within-group SRL processes. The global SRL processes capture teachers’ regulatory patterns in relation to the general classifications of TPACK levels (low, medium, high). In contrast, the within-group SRL processes show sequential patterns for the best and worst performing members in a particular TPACK cluster, which provides opportunities to further detect how high achievers differ from low achievers as they orient, monitor, and evaluate the task as they develop TPACK. We will interpret the identified patterns based on the importance of nodes and relatedness of two nodes.

4.3.1. Analysis of global SRL process patterns
Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5 represent the process models for the three distinct TPACK groups. For the low TPACK achievements of KMG (Fig. 3), the model shows two separate SRL routes. The more common route consisted of Monitoring, Search, Reflection, and Transfer. Based on the significance level of the nodes, Search showed the highest frequency, while Transfer had the lowest frequency. Monitoring had a similar significance level to Reflection. This means that Search, Monitoring, and Reflection events were frequently observed while participants were conducting design tasks. Furthermore, the edges of the nodes of this pattern demonstrated that Search and Transfer were significantly connected. Although the connections were identified between Search and Monitoring and Reflection, respectively, such connections were considered less significant and weak. Goal setting and Analysis were two significant events frequently performed by KMG participants. They were strongly connected with each other and produced another sequential path that was independent of the common one. Moreover, Search, Goal setting, and Analysis were self-looped, suggesting that participants enacted these events consecutively and multiple times in a row.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (181KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The SRL process model of the KMG.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (180KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The SRL process model of the DMG.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (266KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The SRL process model of the CG.

Interestingly, the DMG (i.e., the medium TPACK achievements) (Fig. 4) shows a similar procedural graph to the KMG (lowest TPACK achievement). Two separate paths can be identified in this group. One consists of Monitoring, Search, Transfer, and Reflection, and the other includes Goal setting and Analysis. With respect to the connections Goal setting and Analysis are significantly and closely connected with each other similarly to the KMG. The loop between Search and Transfer was strong whereas the loop between Search and Reflection was weak. The degree of connection between Monitoring and Search was stronger for the DMG group then the KMG, although the Monitoring event was less frequently observed as evidenced by its decreased significance level.

The model (Fig. 5) of the CG representing the high TPACK achievements exhibited a different sequential pattern. All SRL events in this model were connected in a direct or an indirect way. All events except Reflection and Transfer showed high frequency. Participants started with Analysis and Goal setting, which led to a loop among Monitoring, Search, and Transfer. This sequence suggests that participants constantly monitored their searches of online information and evaluated their usefulness before saving them as available resources for lesson edits. Search also led to Reflection, but the connection was weak, which might be due to the low occurrence of Reflection (low significance level). Similar to the other two groups, Analysis, Goal setting, and Search were enacted multiple times in a row, evidenced by the self-loops.

4.3.2. Analysis of SRL processes within groups
In addition to the global analysis, we further conducted a within-group analysis of SRL processes. Within each identified TPACK cluster, we further created a higher-performing sub-cluster (high cluster) that reflects the participants’ TPACK achievements (top 5 participants) and a lower-performing sub-cluster (ranked last 5 of the entire group). The resulted six process graphs were presented in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8. Within the KMG, the process map of the high cluster (Fig. 6a) showed an iteratively sequential model. Participants frequently performed SRL actions of Analysis, Goal setting, Search given the high significance of events. With respect to transitions, the model began with a loop of Analysis, Goal setting, Search, and Monitoring and then led to Reflection or Transfer. Although all events in this pattern were connected, there were only two transitions at a relatively high significance, namely, the mutual connections between Analysis and Goal setting as well as the transition from Search to Goal setting. In contrast, the low cluster (Fig. 6b) showed a different process that was similar to the process map of the global SRL process of the KMG. Goal setting and Analysis were in a strong mutual connection, but neither of them connected with other SRL events. Search in this model played a central position, connecting with Reflection, Monitoring, and Transfer. The most significant nodes were Search and Reflection, meaning that the participants spend more time searching online information and self-reflecting lesson plans according to the TPACK standards. Moreover, it has been noticed that, despite differences, Analysis and Search were the two events that obtained a higher significance level in both process patterns.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (360KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. The SRL process model of the high cluster (6a, left) and the low cluster (6b, right) in the KMG.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (325KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The SRL process model of the high cluster (7a, left) and the low cluster (7b, right) in the DMG.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (363KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The SRL process model of the high cluster (8a, left) and the low cluster (8b, right) in the CG.

The two process maps of the DMG are displayed in Fig. 7a (the high cluster) and 7b (the low cluster). The regulatory process model of the high cluster exhibits more of an iterative pattern than that of the low cluster. The high performing participants circled within Goal setting – Reflection – Search, which suggests that the Search was goal-oriented and reflected. Analysis - Goal setting - Search – Monitoring composed a meaningful transition. In a sense, these loops could consolidate that participants performed self-regulation oriented by goals and in a nonlinear way. By contrast, low performing participants regulated their task solving through transition of Analysis - Goal setting – Reflection - Search – Monitoring/Transfer. Compared with the model of the high cluster, this process was goal -oriented but in a more linear way. The significant connection between Search and Monitoring reveals that the event of Search was monitored. The significant connection between Search and Transfer reveals that the participants might save numerous online resources for lesson designing. Different from patterns of the KMG, the most significant SRL events existing in both models are Search, Analysis, and Goal setting and Monitoring.

Within the CG, participants in the high cluster (Fig. 8a) started their lesson design from constructing instructional goals and proceeded to analyze conditions like students and self-evaluation of technological competencies. After that, they monitored their search actions, which includes looking for external online resources provided by nBrowser or reading sample lesson plans. The action of Search was then connected to Goal setting, which might suggest that participants modified their instructional goals, and a new circle began. This is a major route in this SRL process, revealing a successful self-regulative pattern. Either Transfer or Reflection was followed by Search, forming two independent minor loops. However, the two minor loops were displayed by dash lines because their significant values of correlations were small, indicating weak connections. The process model for the low cluster (Fig. 8b) was goal-oriented in a sense because it started with the loop of Analysis and Goal setting, followed by Monitoring, Search, Reflection, or Transfer. However, there were only two significant connections, Analysis - Goal setting and Search – Transfer. Compared with the process of the higher cluster, this procedural pattern of the low cluster is more linear. Participants might complete their lesson design tasks with fewer considerations of updating or modifying other regulatory actions. In both graphs, Search, Analysis, and Goal setting and Monitoring reached a higher significance level, indicating frequent exposures to these actions.

5. Discussions
The purpose of this study was to explore the patterns of teachers' SRL processes in the context of TPACK development. Previous empirical research consistently emphasizes that SRL mediates learning outcomes, with higher SRL associating with better achievements (e.g., Huang et al., 2020; Kramarski & Michalsky, 2010). Thus, the present study measured teachers' TPACK achievements by assessing their TPACK understandings and lesson plan and lesson designing performance, which leads to three levels of TPACK achievements, namely, the competent group (CG), the design-merit group (DMG), and the knowledge-merit group (KMG). Since TPACK is conceptualized as knowledge for accomplishing authentic tasks rather than the integration of sub-domain knowledge (e.g., CK, TCK), we defined CG as representing the highest level of achievements since it involved both knowledge and transfer of knowledge to an actual lesson design. The DMG and the KMG indicated the medium and the low level of TPACK achievements respectively. In this context, we endeavoured to discover the patterns pertaining to teachers' SRL processes via PM methods. The identified global SRL process patterns and the within-group SRL process patterns generally reveal that teachers' SRL processes vary based on different levels of TPACK performance. To elaborate on the variations and differences, we will discuss the findings in detail in the following sections concentrating on 3 aspects of SRL, namely whether teachers’ SRL processes are goal-oriented, whether the SRL processes are iterative, and how the SRL processes are monitored.

5.1. Were teachers’ SRL processes goal-oriented?
Contemporary SRL models acknowledge that the self-regulative learning process is goal-oriented (e.g., Pintrich, 2000) and that goal setting activities usually occur in the initial or before learning phase. Goals help establish various specific standards that allow learners to activate self-evaluations for learning performance (Schunk, 1990). Without clearly-defined goals, learners will have difficulties in planning strategies, monitoring learning, and defining success and failure. Our findings support the fact that teachers who are learning to integrate technology into their lesson plans are goal oriented. The most frequently noted SRL processes in these teachers were goal-oriented events, evidenced by the significant occurrence of the Goal setting event at the beginning of an SRL process. Teachers constructed specific instructional goals and oriented their lesson design activities accordingly. Specifically, teachers used goals to orient analysis of students’ characteristics, manifested in the high connections between Goal setting and Analysis found in all models. Furthermore, the Search event was followed by Goal setting in most observed SRL models, which suggests goal-oriented searches of online resources of possible technologies was a frequent event. In addition, connections between Goal events and Monitoring in regulatory patterns were identified in the high TPACK achievement groups identified in the competent and the medium knowledge group. These sequences illustrate that high performing teachers could be adjusting goals according to the consequences of monitoring their search results. However, we do acknowledge that the CBLE (i.e. nBrowser) helps support goal setting through its interface since it provides a feature for teachers to define specific instructional goals. That is to say, every participant establishes a goal before proceeding to conducting online information seeking and transfer. However, participants can revisit and revise goals as many times as they like.

5.2. Were teachers’ SRL processes iterative?
SRL theory hypothesizes that successful learners frequently enact metacognitive monitoring activities that evaluate the consequences of different phases and update the conditions for operating the next phase (Sedrakyan et al., 2016; Winne, 2001). Hence, the SRL process is characterized by a tendency to work in an iterative rather than a linear way. The resulting models of this study support this hypothesis. Teachers with higher TPACK achievements exhibited iterative SRL processes whereas lower achievers did not. For example, the global patterns of the CG and the DMG suggested that teachers were able to adaptively perform metacognitive monitoring activities to analyze their searches and evaluated them before deciding to save them as useful resources for technology-infused instructions. By comparison, the regulatory process of the KMG is observed as a non-iterative approach manifested in limited monitoring activities enactment throughout the lesson design process. In light of the within-group patterns, the high clusters of each group demonstrated iterative SRL sequential patterns. The monitoring event played a pivotal role in leading teachers to constantly assess the performance of other SRL events such as Goal setting, Analysis, or the Search of technological solutions. The low performing clusters of the competent and design group showed a slight tendency to regulate their lesson designing in an iterative manner because iterative approaches were manifested by some significant mutual connections like Goal setting and Analysis. However, the low performers of the knowledge group failed to present an iterative SRL pattern.

5.3. How were teachers’ SRL processes monitored?
SRL models place a high emphasis on metacognitive monitoring activities since they are pivotal in enabling learners to constantly evaluate consequences produced in different SRL phases and are needed to determine necessary modifications (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2012). As we see in this study, the process models illustrate that in general teachers who exhibited better TPACK achievements executed more monitoring activities and made more efforts to monitor other SRL events. For instance, monitoring events in the CG showed a higher significance level and were observed to have significant connections with the events of Search, Transfer, and Reflection. Similarly, the high TPACK performers in the DMG and CG actively utilized Monitor to assess events such as Goal setting, Search, or Analysis. Teachers with lower TPACK achievements also enact monitoring activities. However, their efforts to monitor were limited, and the entire self-regulative process was partially monitored, in contrast to higher achievers. Kramarski and Michalsky (2010) used metacognitive self-questioning (one type of monitoring techniques) to facilitate preservice teachers' TPACK development. The results of their study illustrate that metacognitive monitoring could enhance preservice teachers’ ability to regulate their learning processes, which, in turn, benefits their TPACK. Although we adopted a different approach to investigating the role of metacognitive monitoring activities, our results are considered in line with what empirical studies have found and consolidate the assumption that metacognitive monitoring is central in the self-regulation of learning leads to higher performance.

6. Limitations and future directions
Log trace data are subject to being challenged in terms of interpretability and accuracy, although trace-based measure protocols (Siadaty et al., 2016) offer optimal solutions about how to translate raw traces into fine-grained SRL events. The multichannel data and multimodal learning analytics still have to be adopted in future research (Azevedo & Gašević, 2019; Worsley & Blikstein, 2015). Moreover, Fuzzy Miner only builds descriptive models that benefit model development but do not directly relate to statistical testing. The conformance checker algorithm (Rozinat & van der Aalst, 2008) of PM can be applied to test the goodness of fit of the model. In addition, the obtained patterns might be specific for the teaching scenario and the participants (i.e., English teachers), and consequently, generalizations of the resulting patterns should be used with caution. Future research should consider various contexts and samples. In addition, the use of nBrowser might intervene with teachers’ SRL process as the nBrowser is designed based on SRL models, highlighting phases of goal setting, strategy enacting, and reflection. We did not examine whether or not teachers show changes in SRL over time. Future research can determine this issue by using experimental designs using control and intervention groups or pre and post-tests to minimize the impacts of learning environments.

7. Conclusions
In conclusion, this study identified SRL sequential patterns, a novel approach to inspecting the relations between teachers’ self-regulation and their TPACK development. Although this study is exploratory rather than predictive, we did establish specific regulatory procedural patterns that are generally in line with what previous studies (Chen & Jang, 2019; Kramarski & Michalsky, 2010; Poitras et al., 2018) have indicated which is that high performers are more likely to adaptively perform self-regulative activities in knowledge acquisition to ensure better learning consequences.

Despite limitations, we do believe that the present study has scientific and practical implications. While educators are seeking effective ways to measure TPACK, the lens of SRL offers insights into teachers' enactment of regulatory activities in addressing authentic instructional tasks. In doing so, educators can understand how teachers rationalize their selection and implementation of technologies and transform their technological knowledge into complicated knowledge domains such as technological pedagogical knowledge. In the context of becoming more expert-like in TPACK performance the findings of this study suggest that expert teachers should be self-regulated, adaptive in deploying technological strategies for teaching and learning problems and evaluating the effectiveness of strategies to guarantee outstanding performances. Most of the previous research on TPACK largely focuses on evaluating the effectiveness of training programs. Examining teachers' SRL abilities, in particular the metacognitive elements in the context of TPACK, has received insufficient empirical investigation. This study lends supports to the demands that SRL should be incorporated into teachers' professional training, whereby cognitive and metacognitive regulation should become part of teachers' repertoire when they are accomplishing instructional tasks (Kramarski and Kohen, 2017, Michalsky & Kramarksi, 2015)) ). We see the advancement of developing teachers' TPACK in CBLEs as a promising approach to provide guidance and intervention to promote teachers’ SRL in specific contexts. Using advanced technologies can serve as both a research and training platform to advance TPACK scholarship (Poitras, Doleck, Huang, Li, & Lajoie, 2017).