The role that moderation plays in the effective functioning of online communities is relatively well studied in relation to both general free-time social media groups and discussion groups that are part of formal educational and professional learning initiatives. However, at the intersection of these domains, there are a growing number of large-scale informally-developed professional-learning groups. While this kind of group has been studied more generally, little attention has been paid to the particular moderation concerns at play in these hybrid online spaces. In this study, we examine moderation over a three-year period in a teacher-professional Facebook group with over 13,000 members. Maintaining an interpretivist stance while drawing on an exploratory statistical analysis of trace data to identify critical instances in the activity of the group, we adopt a Goffmanian approach to examine how moderation is performed. Based on this analysis, we find that moderation in the case group involved a particular balance of three different moderation concerns. In addition to the facilitation role that moderators are often described as having in groups associated with formal educational and professional learning initiatives, our findings show that moderation can also involve the monitoring of group norms more commonly associated with general free-time social media groups and the third moderation concern of acting as an expert member.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Professional development

Social media

Online communities

Moderation

Teachers

1. Introduction
For many different professions, large online discussion groups on social media platforms can be found that have been informally developed for professional learning. Many of these groups are inherently hybrid in the sense that they operate on primarily public, general interest platforms with members drawn together by a shared topic of interest (Grabher & Ibert, 2014), while at the same time existing as part of professional practices connected to members’ working identities. This hybrid nature shapes interactions between members and the ways that such groups are moderated in a fashion distinct from those of general interest groups.

Recent studies show how commercial large-scale social media platforms are dependent on the voluntary work of moderators and other participants to report and manage misuse and questionable activity (Almerekhi, 2020; Myers West, 2018). This is as true for professionally oriented groups as it is for general interest groups, but we will argue, with significant differences in the character of how this voluntary work is accomplished. To date, studies on informally developed online communities for professional learning have explored the characteristics of the interaction and motivations for participating (e.g., Goodyear et al., 2019; Prestridge, 2019; Trust et al., 2016; Xing & Gao, 2018; Zhang & Liu, 2019). Relatively few studies have specifically addressed moderation in such communities, but a number have touched upon issues of moderation while focusing on other aspects. For example, Kilner and Hoadley's (2005) study of the character of professional participation in relation to several types of participant anonymity touches upon the issue of moderation of unwanted behaviour and Goodyear et al. (2019) reported on engagement and shared practices in teacher's Twitter discussions that involved moderators who seeded and facilitated specific discussion topics. Other studies have considered moderation, amongst other factors, as it relates to initiating or limiting knowledge-sharing (Booth, 2012; Rehm & Notten, 2016) or what Xing and Gao (2018) describe as the promotion of “more cognitive and interactive discussion” (p. 397). Moderators have also been broadly discussed as important for organizational support and the sustainability and continuity of groups by inspiring member engagement (Britt & Paulus, 2016; Davis, 2015). However, such studies have tended to refer to moderation while focusing on describing the benefits expressed by professionals in relation to their use of social media and other digital platforms for learning without unpacking the details of how moderation is accomplished. This gap in the literature has not gone unnoticed and several authors have called for more focused examinations into the key role that moderators play in informally developed online professional learning communities (Britt and Paulus, 2016, Coutinho and Lisbôa, 2013, Ivaturi and Chua, 2019, Lantz-Andersson, Peterson, Hillman, Lundin, & Bergviken Rensfeldt, 2017).

The study reported here examines the gap in the literature around the moderation of professional learning groups on social media. This is achieved by focusing in-between and bridging existing results on the moderation of general interest social media groups and those on the moderation of formally organised educational and professional learning activities online. In the research literature, definitions of formal and informal learning are widely discussed and the complexity of the relationship between what can be seen as formal and informal is often in focus (Greenhow & Lewin, 2016: Sefton-Green, 2004; Selwyn, 2007). The discussions have resulted in several models attempting to theorize the appropriation of social media, notably Greenhow and Lewin, who suggest “a model that theorizes social media as a space for learning with varying attributes of formality and informality” (2016, p. 7). Following Bergviken Rensfeldt, Hillman and Selwyn (2018) we characterize the group in focus in this study by the way it was initiated as an informally developed online teacher community, where practitioners participate, discuss, and share information as a voluntary leisure time activity. However, the group is focused on a profession-related topic centered on a particular approach to the use of information technology for teaching. This means that like other similar informal hybrid spaces for professionals, it sits at the intersection of online professional learning discussions and more general interest social media and internet forums. The study is exploratory rather than confirmatory with the aim of revealing ways that key moderation concerns are performed in this particular type of social media group. Our aim is twofold. First, we aim to add to the theoretical understanding of moderation concerns in hybrid social media settings typical for professional learning communities interacting on public platforms. Secondly, we also aim to contribute to the ways moderators choose and balance between moderation concerns for sustainable interaction and how they can be supported by discussion group platform features.

1.1. Background
Literature on discussion in formally organised online professional communities indicates that active moderation to maintain standards and social norms may not be as key a concern as it is for more general online discussion groups (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2010; Goodyear et al., 2019; Smithson et al., 2012). Moderation can be seen to be a practice focused on creating discussions, helping participants to feel comfortable (Smithson et al., 2012), and encouraging them “to move beyond solitary statements” (Goodyear et al., 2019, p. 428). By contrast, in more general online discussion groups, moderators are often reported to need to take on a more disciplinarian role to maintain politeness and protect interactions from inappropriate comments (e.g., Matzat & Rooks, 2014). Found in-between, informally developed professional discussion groups on social media are distinct from the more traditional, often much smaller groups that are part of the formally organised activities most often in focus in studies of professional discussions online (e.g., Costa, 2010; Davis, 2015; Lieberman & Mace; 2010; Liljekvist et al., 2020). Many informally developed professional groups share characteristics associated with general interest internet forums and social media groups such as many members and frequent activity while adding a professional and often thematic framing. Such groups can be open to any user of a social networking service and may equally be formed at a grassroots level rather than as part of any professional-development strategy. In this sense, informally developed professional social media groups often reflect many of the features of what Gee and Hayes (2012) identify as an affinity space with the caveat that such groups congregate around issues of a professional character with a bearing on participants' working lives. This particularity is also captured in Grabher and Ibert's conceptualization that in contrast with the presumption that professional development must be guided by specific learning goals, rooted in ‘offline’ contexts, and based on personal relationships, professionals increasingly engage in “hybrid virtual communities–in which knowledge practices, despite the unavailability of physical co-location and personalized trust, evolve in elaborate ways” (2014, p. 117). Extending our understanding of this hybridity while focusing on the implications for moderation, in this paper we argue that informally developed professional discussion groups on social media exist themselves in a hybrid online space in the sense that they exist between more traditionally organised professional groups and general interest groups.

A common feature of research that specifically addresses online discussion as part of informally developed professional learning activities is that it tends to raise the issue that moderation plays a significant role in facilitating active communities (c.f. Goodyear et al., 2019; Ivaturi & Chua, 2019; Muls et al., 2019; Yildirim, 2019). However, analysis of specific aspects of moderator activity or how it may play a significant role is uncommon. By contrast, in the literature examining online communities more broadly and online groups in formal education, the role of effective moderation in creating and facilitating active communities has been widely examined. For example, in an experimental study where college students were shown different versions of online forums and asked to rate their interest in participating, Wise et al. (2006) found that forums with highly visible moderator activity attracted more interest in participation than those with little visible moderator activity. Similarly, in an ethnographic study of professional learning discussions, Gray (2005) found that, “[e]ffective moderating strategies help to sustain the community through the ebbs and flows of interactivity and to facilitate the learning that is a critical dimension of the experience” (p. 33). Such studies have shown that moderation is an important aspect of creating and maintaining a thriving online community, but equally studies have shown that effectively moderating an online discussion is challenging. Examining the role of volunteer moderators on professional sporting-team fan forums, Alonso and O'Shea (2012) raise the issue of balancing supportive interactions while ensuring standards of behaviour, a balance that Almerekhi et al. (2020) show has effects on the levels of harassment on the r/AskReddit forum. In the case of Reddit, Del Valle et al. (2020) show that although members in subreddit communities (in their case AskStatistics and AskSocialScience) can flag or downvote inappropriate content, the enforcement of Reddit rules and norms is usually centralized to a limited number of moderators. As Reddit is comprised of over 100,000 subreddits, each with its own moderator(s), rules and norms vary across the platform and sometimes conflict with broader contexts. As an example, Gilbert (2018) showed that the norms of minimal moderation on Reddit were problematic for members of a subreddit with strict rules and enforcement, largely because users who did not value the rules of the subreddit engaged in disruptive and rule-breaking behaviour. However, this can be compared with the results of Edwards (2002), who found that moderators of government initiated political discussion forums are most effective when acting in a role they describe as “democratic intermediary” between citizens and government. This role involves acting to establish the boundaries of the discussion while furthering its progress toward goals established by the initiating government institution. Such differences in forms of moderation indicate that, depending on the particularities of the community in question, it can take different forms beyond disciplinary filtering, from setting the conditions for discussions to managing them as a collaborative activity.

With the background that moderation involves a challenging balance between facilitating and controlling discussions in online forums and social media groups, several studies have examined different moderation strategies (e.g., Gairín-Sallán et al., 2010; Hsieh & Tsai, 2012; Matzat & Rooks, 2014). For example, based on an application of Matzat's earlier Theory of Relational Signaling (2009), in a study of moderation styles in public online health and support communities, Matzat and Rooks (2014) suggest that active strategies for ensuring standards of behaviour are crucial to a well-functioning forum. Through an experimental design that tested assorted styles of moderation, they found that indirect forms of social control such as moderators repeatedly posting statements about the nature of the community as a supportive environment were more effective than direct forms such as a moderator publicly disapproving of a member's behaviour. These results also supported their hypothesis that rewarding forms of social control were more effective than punishing ones. By contrast, in a study that in part compares moderation strategies in discussions on the websites of four major newspapers, Ruiz et al. (2011) found that distinctly different strategies had comparable results. They found that across strategies, moderators were most effective in removing insulting or abusive comments and least effective at ensuring a high quality of debate. However, the strategy of one newspaper, The Guardian, which had the lowest levels of direct forms of social control, had results in line with Matzat and Rooks' (2014) findings. Ruiz et al. (2011) characterize the Guardian strategy as helping to produce a community where members police themselves.

While much of the literature related to moderation of public internet forums and social media groups has focused on the difficult balance between facilitating and controlling, studies conducted on smaller scale forums within educational contexts show another focus for moderation. Studies show how issues of social control may be handled indirectly through the instantiation of specific structures such as codes of conduct (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2010; Hsieh & Tsai, 2012; Smithson et al., 2012). However, these structures are often solely considered in relation to educational goals leaving little direct focus on the issues of ensuring standards of behaviour. In a study of online discussion as part of workplace learning, Smithson et al. (2012) developed an intervention as part of an online learning community involving both mental health professionals and patients. They found that while moderators were able to hold discussions within the type of academic/medical discourse intended for the project, they were unable to meet the goal of staying neutral in discussions. Contrary to the goals of the project, the authors found that moderators were treated as content experts by participants leading sometimes to difficulties in sustaining an open climate for discussion. However, the authors did not identify any challenges in terms of maintaining standards of behaviour. Examining moderation of a forum in an educational context, Hsieh and Tsai (2012) identified four moderation strategies that facilitate in relation to the goals of a higher education course: “Helping students focus on the main topic”, “Facilitating students’ argumentations”, “Giving students positive feedback”, and “Helping students to sustain threaded discussion” (p. 1710). Again, and as is often the case with studies that touch on the role of moderators in small online discussions that are part of educational contexts, the strategies Hsieh and Tsai identify are not related to ensuring standards of behaviour.

A related strand in studies of discussion in workplace learning that is of relevance to this study, is research on the use of social media for continuing professional development. Here, studies tend to focus on cataloguing the different services and activities professionals engage in (Lawson and Cowling, 2015, Terrill, 2014) and their perceived benefits (Carpenter et al., 2020; Donelan, 2016). Few studies address the role that moderation may play in discussions even in such instances as pre-arranged discussions on Twitter (Goodyear et al., 2019; Moorley & Chinn, 2015). Reviews of research on social media as a professional-development tool in healthcare (Lawson & Cowling, 2015) and higher education (Luan et al., 2020; Luo; Freeman & Stefaniak, 2020), find that much of the existing literature focuses on describing potential and reported benefits of using platforms such as Twitter and WeChat. Neither review discusses moderation as a feature of these kinds of activities, the area of focus in this study, and both call for research into more specific aspects of how professional development groups function.

While under-examined in the literature to date, the characteristics of informally developed professional social media groups render moderation concerns and their accomplishment distinct from both those of small formally organised online professional learning groups and those of large general interest internet forums. Active moderation is a core aspect of supporting discussion that is often discussed in literature on formally organised online professional development and educational groups (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2010; Hsieh & Tsai, 2012; Smithson et al., 2012). However, moderation also plays a significant role in maintaining community standards, like the concerns described in much research on moderation in more general online communities (Gairín-Sallán et al., 2010; Matzat & Rooks, 2014). Such duality in moderator concerns is by no means unique to informally developed professional learning groups on social media, but the nature of these groups suggests a particular balance of concerns as moderators work to support participation. Addressing the need for better understanding of the concerns implicated in the moderation of informally developed professionally oriented discussion groups on social media, the study reported here asks the question:

•
How is a balance of moderation concerns accomplished in an informally developed professional learning group on social media?

1.2. Conceptual framework
In this study, we adopt an interpretivist stance while making use of the enormous volumes of trace data produced through human interactions on digital platforms much of which is numerical or categorical in nature. This invites the use of some quantitative methods while maintaining an ethnographic orientation, an approach that Geiger and Ribes (2010) term “trace ethnography”. The approach means that while the methods chosen in this study are mixed in the sense that they draw from both qualitative and quantitative traditions of social research, the interpretive stance taken to understanding the data collected and results produced remains consistent (see Lindgren, 2020 for a detailed discussion of this orientation to mixing data types).

1.3. Understanding moderator activity
To understand how a balance of moderation concerns is accomplished, we draw on a conceptualization of moderation as social control proposed in relation to general free-time online discussion groups by Matzat (2009) together with a conceptualization of moderation as facilitation suggested in relation to online discussion groups in formal educational settings by Hsieh and Tsai (2012) (see Table 1).


Table 1. Models of group moderator activity.

Moderation as social control (Matzat, 2009)	Moderation as facilitation (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012)
Frame stabilizing tools	Maintaining focus on the discussion topic
Direct monitoring tools	Facilitating argumentation
Indirect monitoring tools	Giving positive feedback
Helping to sustain threaded discussion
Matzat's three types of social control available to moderators have their origins in his conceptualization of relational signaling (2009) with moderation as one of the forms of relational signal found in online discussion groups. First among the three moderator activities identified as ways of performing social control are frame stabilizing tools such as “a moderator's normative plea that refers to common rules and goals” (Matzat & Rooks, 2014, p. 67). Second are direct monitoring tools involving the explicit use of rewards or punishments such as a moderator enforcing a “rule stating that rule-breaking members will be excluded from the community” (Matzat & Rooks, 2014, p. 67). Third are indirect monitoring tools that signal to participants to conform to the norms and framings of the group such as the example of a moderator who addressed norm violating members when publicly declaring “their behaviour as unacceptable and invited other members to show their disapproval in public, thereby punishing the deviating members indirectly” (Matzat & Rooks, 2014, p. 67).

Hsieh and Tsai's (2012) four moderator activities that facilitate discussion were identified as part of an investigation of online discussion as part of a secondary school computer science course. First among the four types of facilitation types is maintaining focus on the discussion topic by reminding participants “that they were straying from the main subject and reaffirmed the discussion topic” (p. 1713). Second is facilitating argumentation through such formulations as, ‘‘Okay, but I would like to know whether removing the virus is the only way to do it?’’ (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012, p. 1713). Third is giving positive feedback and fourth is helping to sustain threaded discussion with comments such as, ‘‘Let's discuss the influence of computer viruses next’’ (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012, p. 1713). The distinctions between the different activities of moderation as social control and moderation as facilitation manifest a particular tension associated with moderating an online group of the kind studied here. The group operates on primarily public platforms and is a voluntary free-time activity, but is focused on profession-related issues and consists of expressions of members' professional identities.

1.4. Participation framework and footing
To analytically understand how a balance of moderation concerns is accomplished through interaction in discussion threads, we draw on Goffman's (1981) participation framework. This implies that we understand the character and meaning of interactions, in this case those related to moderation activities, to be negotiated in relation to the frameworks that are instantiated by participants through their framing of situations (Goffman, 1974). From this perspective, what is said or communicated during a discussion as part of professional learning activities online is understood in relation to how the situation is framed by a participant's implicit answer to the question “What is going on here?” (Goffman, 1974, p. 8). An appropriate framing allows continuation of the interaction by meaningful contributions. Participants' framing of a situation is thus a crucial analytical resource to understand what counts as a proper conduct of interactional activities in each situation. However, situations often involve various participant framings that continuously shift in interaction (Hoyle, 1993; Kendall, 2004; Linell & Thunqvist, 2003; Tannen & Wallat, 1987). As a result, interaction is only possible if the participants share to at least some extent the definition of the situation. This is shown by participants' alignment to the situation which Goffman (1981) calls footings. Thus, different framings “have their behavioral counterparts in parties' different footings” (Linell & Thunqvist, 2003, p. 412). In this respect, a shift in footing is the conversational accomplishment of framing and re-framing:

A change in footing implies a change in the alignment we take up to ourselves and the others present as expressed in the way we manage the production or reception of an utterance. A change in footing is another way of talking about a change in our frame for events. […] participants over the course of their speaking constantly change their footing, these changes being a persistent feature of natural talk. (Goffman, 1981, p. 128, p. 128)

Participants' footings are embedded within one another, meaning that a footing can be maintained across several turns of talk (Hoyle, 1993). In this study, we draw on the concept of footing to understand the dialogic interplay of various co-existing claims and the shifting alignments of group members and in particular, moderators. As an example, if the moderator of an online group momentarily stops aligning with an established framing as moderator to make a personal comment to a member in a group, this can be a shift in footing. Such shifts in moderator footing may have implications for how interaction among group members can be understood, both by researchers as part of their analytic process, but also by group members themselves. In this sense, we understand participants’ footings to be tied to claims, tasks, entitlements, and obligations that they are held accountable for in interaction. Participants within an activity can also try to change a definition of the situation they do not agree with, by shifting their footings. Accordingly, a footing, or a change in footing, is first relevant when it becomes consequential for the interaction that follows. This also means that asymmetries between participants can develop dynamically “in terms of such matters as differential distribution of knowledge, rights to knowledge, access to conversational resources and to participation in the interaction” (Drew & Heritage, 1992, p. 49). This implies that different footings come with certain knowledge claims that participants display in interaction. For this study, we use the analytical concept of footing (Goffman, 1981) to draw out the details through which online discussions are constituted and to reveal the ways alignments to different moderation concerns are performed.

2. Method
For this exploratory examination, we chose the case of a large Swedish-language Facebook group where teachers engage in informal professional learning around the theme of a particular instructional approach. This instructional approach can be described as a teacher-led initiative harnessing technology to offer new possibilities for learner-centered teaching by changing classroom practice. The group was initiated, created, administered and moderated by a sole member who also has standing within the teaching community as an expert on the instructional approach. Beyond initiating and administering the Facebook group, expression of this expert status also included running a blog and giving talks on the approach at teacher professional development events. For the purposes of this study focused on moderation practices, we describe this member as a moderator, but it should be noted that in terms of the roles formally available on Facebook, they should be considered to be the group administrator. Administrators of Facebook groups have a variety of privileges beyond those of regular members and moderators such as the ability to assign other members to administrator or moderator roles and manage group settings such as those involving visibility and privacy. They also have the same privileges as moderators such as the ability to choose to approve membership requests, remove posts and comments, exclude and block members, as well as pin or unpin posts to the top of the group page.

Participants in the case group at the time of data collection were mainly middle and secondary school teachers. These teachers can be understood as having an interest in the instructional approach with Swedish teachers having a high degree of individual freedom to choose the instructional approaches and educational resources they use. At the time of data collection, the group had 13,000 members who had collectively contributed just under 3000 posts and just over 15,000 comments. At this time, the members accounted for 10% of the total teacher population in Sweden. In this sense, while a single Facebook group is not representative of all professional learning groups of this type, the group chosen was of large enough size and active enough participation to offer a rich case to work with. To examine the group, we collected all activity for the first three years it was active by accessing the Facebook Graph Application Programming Interface (API) through the Facepy library (Gorset, 2011) for the Python programming language. It should be noted, however, that there have been significant changes to the Facebook API since the data was collected for this study. The data collected included all posts, comments, and likes with the accompanying information about who conducted these activities and when. Once collected, the dataset was then processed to create continuous transcripts of each thread and a large table with all the data organised by type.

The name of the group along with the specific instructional approach discussed, the names of the members and the specific times and dates of activities are withheld for ethical reasons (see Bergviken Rensfeldt, Hillman, Lantz-Andersson, Lundin, & Peterson, 2019 for a discussion of the research ethics approach taken). The group in question conducts discussion in the Swedish language and we have translated all excerpts from discussions used in this study into English without providing the original Swedish text. This combination of obscuring identifying features of the group and its members along with translation of member discourse is intended to protect the integrity of participant identities. The group administrator agreed to our use of the group for research purposes and a post that informed members about the study was pinned at the top of the group page. The pinned post explained that group activity would be followed by researchers, described the aim of the research, noted that group members could ask to be excluded from the dataset at any time, and included a link for further information where the project was described and the ethical framing of the study was elaborated. This post remained pinned throughout the three-year duration of the study, though once seen for the first time by a member, only the title was shown upon subsequent viewings, requiring them to click on the post to re-read it.

2.1. Identifying critical instances
Our interest in this study is the performance of different moderation concerns. To focus our inquiry and select interactions for analysis amongst the thousands available, we chose to seek critical instances where the way moderator activity was performed is of particularly importance for participation in the group. This choice may beg the question of whether it is relevant to deliberately study ‘unusual’ moments in the lifespan of a group. However, in line with a Goffmanian perspective that focuses on shifts in footing, it extends a well-established tradition in interpretive social research of looking at critical instances to reveal the particulars of human activity (Flanagan, 1954; Tripp, 1994). In this way, the choice of critical instances is intended to reveal the norms of moderator activity by identifying moments where those activities can be clearly discerned from one another. To identify critical instances, we first identified aspects of the relationship between moderation and group participation that could be investigated through exploratory data analysis techniques (Morgenthaler, 2009; Tukey, 1977) at the macro level. Identification of potentially relevant relationships in the data was guided by a prolonged ethnographic engagement with the group in which all five authors were observer-members, following the activity in detail for four years without actively posting or commenting themselves. Through this process, we decided to focus on the number of commenters in a thread as a measure of participation. At the time of data production, there were two major ways of contributing to a Facebook group. The first was to write posts or comments, and the second was to ‘like’ posts or comments. Examining the activity of the moderator in relation to the number of commenters per thread, we compared shifts in the levels of participation to shifts in the proportion of comments made by the moderator over time.

Looking at participation in the group, we see that over the three-year period of the corpus, participation varied greatly but increased during the earliest part, decreased during the middle, before increasing again and finally decreasing towards the end of the period (see Fig. 1). To select critical instances for detailed analysis, we examined the number of participants in threads over time using cumulative sum (CUSUM) change point analysis (Hinkley, 1971; Taylor, 2006). This computational process identifies time points and intervals surrounding them during which a shift can be understood to have occurred in the overall trend in a continuous dataset given a particular level of confidence. In the case of this study, intervals were identified that indicate a change in the group participation trend with a 95% degree of confidence.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (443KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. 30-day moving average of moderator activity and group participation with change point intervals indicated.

Performing CUSUM on the number of commenters per thread over time, we identified the three candidate points indicated in Fig. 1. Other less distinct changes occurred, but these three points are those that can be identified with a degree of confidence higher than 95%. Each change point is also situated within a confidence interval indicating that there is a 95% chance that the change took place between the beginning and end. These intervals range in length from two weeks to just under a year. Intervals A and B indicate shifts to greater upward trends in participation with the average number of unique commenters per thread moving from 1.44 to 2.05 and from 2.05 to 3.61, respectively. In contrast, Interval C indicates a shift to a downward trend in participation moving from 3.61 to 2.86 unique commenters per thread during the period. There are a many explanations for these shifts, but these identified change points mark critical instances in the lifespan of the group that provide an opportunity for examining moderator activity in more detail.

2.2. Selecting threads and analysing moderator activity
For each of the identified change point intervals where a significant shift in group participation trend was detected and given our focus on the performance of moderation concerns, we chose to focus on threads where the moderator was particularly active. This was achieved by analysing the proportion of moderator comments for each day of each thread active during a change point interval. Based on this analysis, we selected those threads for which the proportion of moderator activity was above the 95th percentile for the corpus (25%) for at least one day during a change point interval. This resulted in 12 threads selected during interval A, eight threads selected during interval B, and five threads selected during interval C.

With 25 threads selected from the corpus of almost 3000, we analysed how different moderation concerns were performed. This analysis was performed collaboratively by the five authors in a fashion consistent with what Elliot et al. (1999) describe as triangulation between investigators. It involved each of the authors contributing to the analysis of the threads through several rounds of iteration that first focused on the deductive process of identifying different moderator activities using the models proposed by Matzat (2009) and Hsieh and Tsai (2012) as guides. For the purposes of unpacking moderator activities in the context of the interaction that takes place in the threads, they were then viewed as footings (Goffman, 1981) and thus taken to be something participants accomplish in interaction with consequences for the actions, or in this case the comments that follow (Linell, 1998). In more concrete terms, this means that individual posts, comments, and likes were not the primary focus of our analysis. Instead, to reveal the relevance and consequences of posts and comments, we also examined the ways they were responded to.

2.3. Findings
To understand the details of moderator activity in the three intervals where participation trends in the group shifted, we examined the threads in detail from the perspective of different footings. For the purposes of this paper, the analysis of one critical instance from each interval is presented. The features of the interactions discussed, particularly the performance of moderator concerns, should be understood as indicative of the analysis of selected critical instances more generally.

2.4. Interval A: monitoring
From late March to early July 2012 during the first months of the group's existence, there was a shift in group participation to a distinctly more positive trend than before. This shift followed a short, but distinct downward trend of several weeks that followed the initial upward trend that started with the group's inception. This shift to an upward trend also corresponds with the beginning of a peak in moderator activity that then begins to tail off a few weeks later and in this way may indicate a closure of the initial phase of the groups lifespan. Our analysis of moderator activity during interval A revealed one thread where the moderator contributed especially often and acted in ways that can be categorized as making use of direct/indirect monitoring tools (Matzat & Rooks, 2014). The thread begins with a post soliciting experiences of using an online mathematics teaching resource developed as part of Khan Academy, known for distributing educational videos. It continues with the moderator making regular contributions, including a comment where they inform that, together with others, they have started translating videos on Khan to Swedish (as the language is a problem raised by others in the discussion). The moderator also appeals to other teachers to help in this translation work and in this way displays an appropriate framing (Goffman, 1974) of the activity. The stance the moderator takes signals moderation as facilitation (which will be explored in more depth in Interval B below) by helping to sustain the threaded discussion with ‘action’ (e.g., translation) and ‘comments’ (e.g., pleas for help) that signal the group norms of being part of the teaching community, sharing a professional identity, as well as sharing tips and ideas for the instructional approach in focus.

After 19 comments, a member who appears to be involved in selling an alternative online learning system to Khan Academy enters the discussion. This member posts repeated promotions for their product along with questions about classroom needs for such a product. At first, the moderator responds by engaging the promoter:

[Promoter] wondering … It says 49 kronor per month. Will it cost for teachers? I'm wondering about how responsibility for payment can be put on students when school should be free … Alternatively what will be the cost of a class if the school stands for the money?

The moderator's first response to the promoter is to ask critical questions about the business model of the product being discussed from the perspective of an interested teacher. Even though making a profit on the ideas shared within the Facebook group is against the rules for the group posted by the moderator, they do not immediately exclude the promoter from the group or otherwise engage with the issue of promotion. The discussion continues for several posts over two days, until another member questions the motives of the member promoting the alternative product:

[Promoter] who are you? And who is behind [product name]? Why don't you write out who “[company name]” is on the webpage? Who is [name], the CEO? There is no financial reporting for [year] listed??

The parent company [company name] doesn't have infinite assets like you claim, 1.8 million last year.

It's not as if you are on these forums to milk good ideas that you will make money on??

This can be understood as a shift in footing in the discussion as a member shifts the focus from the online mathematics teaching resource to questioning the identity and affiliation, and thus the motives, of the person presenting it. The shift is particularly evident in the first sentence of the comment where the member adopts a direct tone asking, “[Promoter] who are you?” The member confronts the promoter, providing the moderator with the opportunity to pursue a line started through collective policing of group norms. To this comment the moderator replies:

I have started to wonder too. Don't like to be suspicious, but this doesn't really feel ok.

Rather than completely taking up the shift in footing and following on from the member's confrontation by publicly addressing the promoter, the moderator takes a moderation as social control approach by using a combination of direct and indirect monitoring. This involves the direct monitoring action of banning the promoter from the group and removing all their posts and comments, but then in line with an indirect form of moderation as social control, choosing not to announce the action publicly. However, later in the same thread the moderator is forced to declare their actions when another member returns to the motives of the promoter asking them to clarify their intentions. In response, the moderator reveals having banned the promoter from the group, writing:

Well, unfortunately [the promoter] cannot answer because they are expelled from the group. Right now, I'm wrestling with the question of whether or not I need to make it a closed group.

30 min later, the moderator starts a new thread with a shift in footing expressed in a post announcing that they have changed the group from an open group where any Facebook member can join, to a closed group where membership must be approved by the moderator. These communicative actions by the moderator make it clear to group members that the promotor should not be seen as a ratified participant (Goffman, 1981) in the discussion thread, or the Facebook group. This can be understood as a rare use of a direct monitoring tool and a critical incident where group norms were established and performed by the moderator through the banning of a member and the introduction of the requirement for memberships to be approved.

2.5. Interval B: facilitation
Like interval A, interval B also marked a distinct shift to a trend of increased group participation. In this case however, while still relatively early in the three-year period studied, the interval may represent a more established phase for the group. The threads with moderator posts on high moderator activity days during interval B can be characterised as being short and as having many examples of moderation activity as social control. Particularly typical of those threads that include social control during this interval are frame stabilizing tools. For this interval, we have chosen to unpack a thread illustrating both the use of frame stabilizing tools and moderator activity that can be better categorized as facilitation. The thread begins with a post from a member writing that they are going to present the instructional approach focused on in the group in a local teacher conference. The member describes having written a handout where the group is mentioned as the best place to get answers on the topic:

Next week, I will talk for a while at [a local teacher conference] in [city] about [instructional approach] in [language teaching]. Today I had to submit a small handout. On the last slide I wrote:

“Facebook group: [group name] That's where you will most easily find answers to all the questions from lots of teachers.”

The comment above displays the member's alignment with the framing of the Facebook group as a professional learning community with competence in the instructional approach in focus. As a response, the moderator comments with a statement expressing joy at hearing about the member's view of the group:

That makes me happy. Just as I want it to be. No prestige and everyone help's everyone. Hope you have fun at [local teacher conference]. It usually gets noticed here when someone has been talking [instructional approach].: D.

In their comment, the moderator takes the opportunity for frame stabilizing or, as Hsieh and Tsai (2012) describe such actions giving positive feedback, by rewarding the poster with the assessment that their actions are “Just like I want it to be” and explicitly stating their preferred norm of “No prestige and everyone helps everyone”. The moderator ends the comment by further encouraging group members to promote the instructional approach outside the group by writing “It usually shows here when somebody has been talking [instructional approach].” The moderator's comment above, written in the first person singular, signals the footing taken in the communicative actions at hand to be moderation as social control. They make explicit that they want interaction in the group to be framed as happy, prestige free and helpful with members acting as ambassadors for the instructional approach in focus. The moderator footing taken in this thread can thus be understood as moderation as social control through frame stabilizing tools but as with many such examples, the footing taken in this instance could also be understood in terms of moderation as facilitation. In this sense, the two footings overlap when frame stabilizing tools are employed but are more distinct in the case of direct/indirect monitoring. During interval B much of the moderator activity can be understood as shifts in footing that display alignment with either moderation as social control through frame stabilizing tools or moderation as facilitation. However, as with interval A, alignment to the communicative activity as moderation as social control through direct/indirect monitoring tools could also be found.

2.6. Interval C: Expert membership
Interval C is distinct. It marks a shift to a downward rather than an upward trend in participation in the group where only five threads met the criteria for detailed examination, all of which were short with at most six comments. These threads include one where the pros and cons of different digital tablet brands are discussed, another asking for tips about research on the instructional approach, one sharing an example of the approach in use, and finally one discussing the topic of homework in relation to the approach. The moderator is active in each of these threads, but more often taking what we will describe as an expert membership footing, not covered in either Matzat's (2009) nor Hsieh and Tsai's (2012) models.

As an example of this character of moderator activity during interval C, in one thread, the moderator posts a link to a blog post they have written, adopting the footing of expert member by communicating content knowledge to the group. A member criticises the moderator's interpretation of a National Agency for Education document in the blog post and, in response, the moderator affirms their initial footing by answering the critique without performing actions characteristic of moderation as social control or as facilitation. The thread begins with the moderator posting a short statement with a link to the blog post:

A little on homework and [the instruction approach] (amongst other things). [Link to blog post].

While this post receives likes immediately, it doesn't receive any comments until two days later when a member questions the content of the blog post:

Hi [moderator]. From a brand new [practitioner of the instructional approach]: Thanks for the inspiration! Maybe it’s silly of me to point out a mistake when everything else you write is so smart, but you have misunderstood the National Agency for Education. They mean that there is a risk that a [instructional approach] teacher will not receive feedback from his/her audience during the actual teaching and therefore cannot be sure if he or she is reaching out effectively. So, it is the teacher they are talking about and not students: [Direct quotes comparing the moderator's blog post and the National Agency for Education document].

Here, the member suggests that in the blog post, the moderator has misunderstood a key aspect of a National Agency for Education document relating to the instructional approach. Aligning with the norms of the group and the moderator's status (see Lantz-Andersson, Peterson, Hillman, Lundin, & Bergviken Rensfeldt, 2017, Peterson, Lantz-Andersson, Hillman, Lundin, & Bergviken Rensfeldt, 2019), the criticism is preceded by an account of the commenter's status as a new practitioner of the instructional approach. This is followed by a recognition of the moderator's status in the form of an anticipatory remedial interchange (Goffman, 1974) where the commenter explicitly refers to the moderator's positioning as an expert in the group by writing, “Maybe it’s silly of me to point out a mistake when everything else you write is so smart, but you have misunderstood the National Agency for Education”. The critique is not lightly proposed, with the commenter delineating the proposed error by including direct extracts from the blog post and the agency document. A few minutes later, the commenter then adds to their account by proposing a solution to what is positioned as a criticism of the instructional approach by the National Agency for Education:

But one could answer the National Agency for Education's concerns like this: With a properly asked control question, the [instructional approach] teacher gets to know from all their students how well they have managed to reach them. In the classroom, you can get a sense of how well you have managed to reach the group by noting this or that signal, but it is difficult to perceive signals from all students.

But that is really the same conclusion that they want to come to as well.

The knowledgeable footing taken in this account stands in contrast to the initial footing the commenter took as a beginner. Following this account, rather than engaging in an activity associated with moderation as social control or as facilitation, the moderator writes:

Well, I understand that. What I'm trying to problematize is how important what you win is from a comparative perspective. But maybe I don't write that out particularly clearly.:)

In a first response, the moderator explains that they have understood what the original poster is suggesting and reformulates their main argument. They follow this reformulation with an apology for not being clear in her blog post writing, “But maybe I don't write that out particularly clearly.” However, a few minutes later, the moderator responds once more by shifting footing and affirming themselves as an expert on the subject:

Otherwise, it is always good to see risks too and that is also why I like that they have included the risks. If nothing else, it was me that talked to the National Agency for Education about this at a meeting about two years ago and pointed out the risks.:)

The moderator first acknowledges the argument made by the commenter noting that they agree with the importance of raising the potential issues associated with using the instructional approach. However, the moderator's projected status is at stake and the comment is followed by a shift of footing shown by displaying access to influential actors that positions them as an expert. This is performed by offering an account of how the issue was raised by them with the National Agency for Education in the first place, thus firmly affirming their authority in the area. As with their earlier response, this comment is finished with a smiley face emoji, a widespread practice within the group when critical or otherwise difficult statements are made, as also seen in the excerpt above. Here, as with the other instances of moderator activity during this interval, no moderator posts could be found to be performing moderation in the sense of social control described by Matzat (2009). Instead, moderator activity during the interval involved activities that can be understood in terms of expert membership or facilitation. As the above example illustrates, few attempts were made to stabilize the framings in the group or maintain norms of participation beyond those associated with maintaining focus on the discussion topic in the sense described by Hsieh and Tsai (2012).

3. Discussion
The focus of this study has been on examining how different moderation concerns are performed in the hybrid online space of a large informally developed professional learning Facebook group. The intent has been to answer the question, how is a balance of moderation concerns accomplished in an informally developed professional learning group on social media? The study has taken a novel approach by selecting moderator activity for analysis in relation to group participation trends. This has focused our analysis on what we argue to be critical instances in the lifespan of the case group that help render the accomplishment of different moderation concerns discernible. By examining moderator activity during the identified instances, we have been able to develop an understanding of the kinds of moderation concerns performed by unpacking them in the context of the discussion threads within which they appear (see Table 2).


Table 2. Large-scale informally developed professional learning group moderator activity.

Monitoring (see Interval A)	Facilitation (see Interval B)	Expert membership (see Interval C)
Direct monitoring tools (Matzat, 2009)	Frame stabilizing tools (Matzat, 2009)	Displaying access to influential discourses, practices, actors, groups, or communities
Indirect monitoring tools (Matzat, 2009)	Facilitating argumentation (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012)	Communicating content knowledge
Maintaining focus on the discussion topic (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012)	Giving positive feedback (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012)	Maintaining factual accuracy
Helping to sustain threaded discussion (Hsieh & Tsai, 2012)	
Our findings suggest that contrary to the situation described in earlier literature (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2010; Goodyear et al., 2019; Smithson et al., 2012), there is support for the notion that beyond the facilitative role associated with moderation in educational or professional development contexts, moderation in professional learning contexts must police group norms. Our analysis of critical instances associated with shifts in group participation in the lifespan of the group shows that both monitoring activities often associated with general interest groups and facilitation activities often associated with educational or professional development groups, were performed. The findings of this study show that these concerns are sometimes complementary and at other times less so, suggesting that moderators must balance them differently depending on the context. Given the platform hosting the examined Facebook group and its scale (13,000 members), it is unsurprising that both types of moderator activity occurred despite the overt professional learning orientation. As Matzat and Rooks (2014) found, moderation to ensure standards of behaviour are crucial to well-functioning online communities. At first, the group examined in this study was open to any Facebook member and even once closed, its scale meant that thoroughly vetting each member and attending to every thread would have been far beyond the scope of most educational or professional development initiatives. For professionals with an interest in a particular topic who take the initiative to start a group, the need for monitoring activities may not be immediately obvious or desirable. As was the case for the group studied here, it may not be until a group reaches a certain size that the balance of moderation concerns begins to shift. This points to the importance of considering the lifespan and expansion of such groups when considering the shifts in moderator roles that may occur.

In the analysis of the threads within the identified critical instances, we found that moderator activity that could be understood as monitoring through indirect monitoring tools (Matzat & Rooks, 2014) such as posting statements about the nature of the group as a supportive environment was not always clearly delineated from activity that could be understood in terms of facilitation. Given the finding of Ivaturi and Chua (2019), that the consistency of framing in moderator contributions is crucial for effectively maintaining community norms, the shifts in footing and moderation activities found in our study suggest an issue. Further complicating the situation and distinct from more traditional educational or professional development groups, the informally developed social media group studied here was moderated by a volunteer with an interest in discussing the instructional approach. We found that particularly in the third critical instance, when examined in detail, much moderator activity could be best understood as expert membership with the moderator sometimes acting to monitor or facilitate the discussions and, in response to other similar cases, acting to display their own expertise in the domain. However, Ivaturi and Chua (2019) found moderator ‘frame consistency’ to be more significant than ‘empirical credibility’ for maintaining community norms and suggest that inconsistencies in moderator footings and activities can be negative. As Smithson et al. (2012) found in the context of more traditionally organised professional development discussion groups, when moderators are treated as content experts by participants, it can sometimes lead to challenges for sustaining an open climate for discussion. Moderator activity in the form of expert membership in informally developed professional learning groups could thus on the one hand be understood as crucial for maintaining the focus and quality of interaction. On the other hand, supporting the argument made by Rehm and Notten (2016) that there is a risk that moderators dominate discussions, our findings show that moderator activity in the form of expert membership can constrain collegiality and hamper sustainable participation over time. This reveals an inherent tension in the hybrid online space of informally developed professional learning groups organised by interested professionals. That of being a group member who has an interest in being identified as an expert in a domain while also being a moderator without a formally assigned responsibility to moderate. Awareness of this tension and how it may appear to group members in relation to the lifespan of such groups may help moderators to make sense of the different responses they receive to their actions.

For professionals participating or moderating hybrid online spaces or moving between informally developed and formally organised professional learning spaces, our study complements Ivaturi and Chua's (2019) results by supporting the suggestion that balanced moderation best supports sustainable participation. However, our results also detail the balance in the examined large-scale informally developed professional learning group on Facebook by showing how moderation is performed through the performance of monitoring, facilitation, and expert membership. A balance of moderation concerns must be accomplished in relation to participation trends during the lifespan of online groups that are difficult to identify from the situated position of a moderator engaging with a group on a day-to-day basis, particularly for a single moderator of a large group with a strong personal interest in the topic. This suggests that, whether using large commercial platforms like Facebook or platforms developed specifically for educational or professional learning purposes, moderators would be supported by features like dashboards displaying participation trends. Such features could help moderators to understand their situated performance of different concerns in relation to broader trends in the participation of the groups they manage. This might also be complemented by situated guidance for moderators of professional learning groups when performing moderation activities starting with those most readily available to the platform such as removing posts or members. This would extend the features of platforms like Facebook that already provide some general guidance, by tailoring the guidance to the specific balance of concerns of informally developed professional-learning groups.

The findings of this study show how a moderator of an informally developed professional learning group engages in activity that aligns with different framings, including that of expert, at different points in the lifespan and expansion of the group. Given the nature of such groups that are likely to be started by individuals with a particular interest in a topic and sense of ownership of a group rather than a desire to administer what may expand into a very large number of members, the activity analysed in this study suggests tensions may arise. An area for future research is to further investigate the value and challenges of moderators aligning with different framings at different points during the lifespan of social media groups of this kind. Such work may also provide a direction for the development of automated moderator support systems that consider not only the type of group being moderated, but the phase of expansion in which a group finds itself, differentiating, for example, the guidance given in terms of the types of moderator activity suggested during the early inception phase of a group with that given later in the lifespan of the same group. Such lifespan and expansion situated guidance could also further support moderators by suggesting the need for more moderators or moderators who adopt particular roles based on the activity in a group, or even limitations in the number of group members.

4. Limitations
This exploratory study has focused on the case of a single informally developed professional learning group on social media. The findings can be understood to suggest a particular balance of moderation concerns. However, as this study along with earlier studies of moderation in different online contexts (e.g., Almerekhi et al., 2020; Edwards, 2002) indicate, the specific characteristics of a group such as theme, participant type and hosting platform are associated with different balances. In addition, the study performs detailed analysis of activity during critical incidents making up only a small proportion of the overall activity found in the case group. As such, the findings of this study are not an exhaustive accounting of the moderation activity in the group. They are intended to serve as an orientation for future confirmatory research that seeks to unpack the details of moderation and may be transferable to studies of other informally developed professional learning groups on social media. However, the findings are not generalizable without re-interpretation for the specific cases of other groups.

5. Conclusion
The findings of this study reveal how moderation concerns are balanced in an informally developed professional learning group on social media. They highlight the balance of moderation concerns that are performed when professional learning discussions take place on primarily public platforms where members (including moderators) are drawn together by a common interest. Volunteer moderators of such groups who may have initially been driven by a desire to discuss professional concerns rather than a particular desire to moderate the discussions of others are faced with the difficult balance of maintaining community norms, facilitating professional learning, and engaging as interested, sometimes expert, members themselves. Neither moderation as social control nor moderation as facilitation alone describe the particulars of this balance. Instead, the results of this study suggest that moderator activity in informally developed professional learning groups can be better understood as the work of maintaining group participation while constantly shifting footing through activities associated with monitoring, facilitation, and expert membership.