There is an increasing trend of learning analytics dashboards (LADs) being used to provide feedback to learners. However, there is little empirical evidence about the influence of their design features on learners' cognitive and affective outcomes, especially in high-anxiety courses such as statistics. To address this gap, this study employed a two-group experimental design applied to an authentic setting to assess the influence of task-value scaffolding in a LAD on learners' anxiety, motivation, and learning performance in an online statistics course. This semester-long experiment was implemented in two instances of the course offering (Fall/2019 and Spring/2020) and involved a total of 146 students. The results showed that task-value scaffolding had a negative impact on learners’ computation anxiety and attitudes towards statistics in comparison to the control group. On the other hand, the treatment had no significant influence on other aspects of statistics anxiety, motivation, and learning outcomes. Taken jointly, these results suggest that the use of task-value scaffolding embedded in LADs can have detrimental effects on learners. More experimental studies are necessary to understand the positive and negative effects of LADs with motivational scaffolding.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Data science applications in education

Distance education and online learning

Human-computer interface

Pedagogical issues

Post-secondary education

1. Introduction
Statistics has a notorious reputation for creating anxiety among learners, negatively impacting motivation and learning outcomes (Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Zeidner, 1991). As with any subject that is perceived as difficult, statistics courses require learners to have significant levels of self-regulation and motivation (Zimmerman, 2008), particularly in online learning environments where the asynchronous nature of the course, limited access to instructors, and proficiency in technology such as statistical software impose additional challenges to learners (Hsu et al., 2009). The compulsory nature of statistics courses in many degree programs compounds these issues and together these problems underscore the need for revisions on how the learning of statistics is facilitated (DeVaney, 2016).

Considering the importance of technology-enhanced pedagogical tools to facilitate the learning of statistics in 21st century online and blended learning environments, this study investigated whether the design and implementation of a personalized learning analytics dashboard (LAD) combined with domain-specific feedback on task value components of statistical concepts could support students’ motivation (Winne & Baker, 2013), learning performance, and reduce anxiety in a graduate online statistics course.

Informed by the situated expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Wigfield, Ecces, & Möller, 2020), this study examined the influence of task-value scaffolding embedded in a predictive LAD on learner's motivation, anxiety, and learning performance. This investigation was based on the premise that motivation to engage in a task is contingent on learners' perceptions of the value associated with the task (Schunk et al., 2014). The concepts of interest to this study – statistics anxiety, task value, scaffolding, and LADs – are discussed below.

1.1. Statistics anxiety
The increasing use of statistical methodology in a variety of fields has led many degree programs to require college students to enroll in statistics courses regardless of their background, learning preferences, and familiarity with statistical concepts (Onwuegbuzie & Wilson, 2003). Despite the importance of statistical applications, many learners regard statistics courses as anxiety-inducive and as a negative learning experience (Onwuegbuzie, 1997; Zeidner, 1991).

Statistics anxiety is described as the anxiety a person experiences when dealing with statistics and it is characterized by a mental disorganization, worry, and tension felt by learners when dealing with statistics content or problems (Zeidner, 1990). From a psychometric standpoint, statistics anxiety can be considered a multidimensional construct that differentiates between test- and content-related anxiety (Cruise et al., 1985; Onwuegbuzie, 1997). Specific components have been identified as part of statistics anxiety, including anxiety related to the content of statistics, statistics class, interpersonal relationships with peers and instructors, perceived value of statistics, and computational self-concept (Cruise et al., 1985; Onwuegbuzie et al., 1997). Some of the most recognized components of statistics anxiety were described by Cruise et al. (1985), who identified six constructs:

•
Test and class anxiety: anxiety experienced when taking a statistics test or attending a statistics class;

•
Interpretation anxiety: anxiety when interpreting statistical results;

•
Fear of asking for help: anxiety experienced when help seeking is considered;

•
Computational self-concept (computation anxiety): anxiety related to mathematical calculations;

•
Worth of statistics (worth anxiety): perceived usefulness of statistics (negative attitude towards statistics);

•
Fear of statistics instructors (teacher anxiety): negative attitudes toward statistics teachers.

Statistics anxiety has been characterized as a debilitating phenomenon that impacts learners’ performance in statistics courses (Onwuegbuzie & Wilson, 2003; Paechter et al., 2017). It is worth noting, however, that intrapersonal motivational factors such as goal orientation and task value directly and indirectly influence statistics anxiety (Lavasani et al., 2014). Importantly, this relationship underscores the practical and theoretical relevance of the intervention proposed in this study.

1.2. Situated expectancy-value theory
The situated expectancy-value theory is based on the social cognitive perspective where culture, social interactions, attitudes, and prior experiences influence learners’ expectation of success, achievement-related choices, and subjective task value (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020). The term “situated” reflects the most recent revision and renaming of the theory by its developers (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Wigfield, Ecces, & Möller, 2020). In their revision, the authors provide an in-depth explanation of the “situative nature” of the situated expectancy-value theory.

Expectancies and values are constructs present in many theories of motivation, including Bandura's self-efficacy theory (Bandura, 1991). Situated expectancy-value theory is based on distinct theoretical perspectives that emphasize the relationship between individual's beliefs and the value that they assign to a task with the choices, persistence, and performance related to the activity (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). In other words, individuals may choose not to pursue a task for one of the following reasons: they may believe that they can do the activity well, but may have no interest in it; or they may have high interest in the task, but may have low expectation for performing it well (Schunk et al., 2014). The expectancy components of the theory emphasize ability and expectancy beliefs and can be framed around the question “Can I do this task?” On the other hand, the value components center around the role of intrinsic, attainment, and utility values for a learner and address the question “Why do I want to do this task?” (Dietrich et al., 2017; Schunk et al., 2014). We provide further details about each component of the task value construct below:

•
From the perspective of the situated expectancy-value theory, intrinsic value is related to the enjoyment and pleasure learners feel in doing the task and assumes that situational interests can be further developed and internalized. The focus on the task itself and on situational interests differentiates the conceptualization of intrinsic value from that of intrinsic motivation as described by the self-determination theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Ryan & Deci, 2020).

•
Attainment value represents learners' perceptions of the importance of the task and has been described as a key component of subjective task value. It bears close relationship with individual's social and personal identities, as individuals tend to value tasks that are consistent with their identities, including social identities such as those related to gender-role (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020).

•
Utility value reflects the benefits or usefulness of doing the task to achieve present or future goals such as taking a required course in order to graduate (Schunk et al., 2014). When the task has strong connections to personal goals and affects the individual's sense of self, it becomes harder to pinpoint the distinction between utility and attainment values (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020).

•
It is worth noting that there is also a negative component of task value: cost. Cost can be defined as the “price” learners pay for being involved in the task (Schunk et al., 2014). For example, to improve their academic performance, learners may engage in optional learning opportunities (e.g., clubs, extra practice exercises); however, these learning opportunities require allocation of time that otherwise could be used for other activities such as spending time with family and friends (opportunity cost). As a result, there can exist a perception of cost associated with the involvement in these optional learning activities (Flake et al., 2015). In general, costs can be related to: a) the perception of effort required to complete the task given its perceived value (effort cost); b) the tradeoffs in terms of time and skills needed to do the task instead of another valued task (opportunity cost); and c) the emotional or psychological costs related to negative feelings such as anxiety and social costs of failure (emotional cost) (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020).

Results from empirical studies guided by the situated expectancy-value theory offer important insights into how the learning situation and inter-individual differences (differences between learners) influence expectancies and perceived task value and how they intersect with performance (Dietrich et al., 2017; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000; Wigfield, Ecces, & Möller, 2020). However, there is limited understanding of how learning theories, especially theories of motivation such as situated expectancy-value theory, could be integrated into the design of LADs (Valle et al., 2021a; Matcha et al., 2019).

The lack of robust theoretical grounding to guide the design and development of LADs has been highlighted as a concerning trend and an important issue to be addressed as the field of LADs matures (Matcha et al., 2019). Importantly, the lack of interventions using LADs to enhance learners' motivation in STEM subjects such as statistics illustrates a missing opportunity as motivation can boost learners’ interest and performance in STEM (Rosenzweig et al., 2020). This study addressed this gap by using a LAD as the means to scaffold for motivation, that is, to present value components related to the importance, relevance, and utility of learning statistics concepts and applying statistics skills. Thus, the scaffolding for motivation can provide relevant context for learners (Ritzhaupt, Valle, & Sommer, 2020).

1.3. Scaffolding
Learning experiences can be supported – or scaffolded – at motivational, affective, cognitive, and metacognitive levels (Reiser & Tabak, 2014) through the implementation of prompts, hints, and questions. These scaffolds can be described as fixed or adaptive (Azevedo et al., 2004, 2005; Puntambekar & Hubscher, 2005). In the context of technology-supported learning environments, fixed scaffolds are static elements of the interface, while adaptive scaffolds are adaptable to meet the needs of the learners (Azevedo et al., 2005). For this study, we used a fixed-scaffold approach to describe the value and utility of the concepts and skills covered in each module of an introductory statistics course.

In addition to their mode of implementation (e.g., fixed, adaptive), scaffolds have been divided into four categories according to their function (Hannafin et al., 1999; Hill & Hannafin, 2001): a) conceptual, b) metacognitive, c) procedural, and d) strategic. These categories mostly support cognitive functions in one level or another despite the different nuances of instructional support that they represent. There is, however, a growing body of literature emphasizing the role of motivational scaffolds to support learners’ efforts (Azevedo et al., 2004; Belland et al., 2013; Boyer et al., 2008; Brophy, 1999; Devolder et al., 2012; Duffy & Azevedo, 2015; Lepper, 1988; Tuckman, 2007). For instance, Belland et al. (2013) offered a reevaluation of the six processes described by Wood et al. (1976) as the intersection between scaffolding and instructional theory, dividing these processes into motivational (recruitment, direction maintenance, and frustration control) and cognitive (reduction in degrees of freedom, marking critical features, and demonstration) strategies.

Although motivation is a key element of scaffolding, there is a lack of empirical studies exploring the influence of motivational scaffolding on learners' cognitive, emotional, and behavioral engagement (Belland et al., 2013). The gap is even greater in the context of LADs, with only a few LAD studies addressing motivation or affect in general (Muldner et al., 2015; Sedrakyan et al., 2017) and even fewer addressing specific motivation constructs such as learners' goal orientation (Valle et al., 2021b) or task value. This study addressed this gap by empirically evaluating how task-value scaffolding embedded in a LAD influenced learners’ motivation, anxiety, and learning performance.

1.3.1. Motivational scaffolding using task-value interventions
Task-value interventions focus on learners' “perceptions about the value of academic tasks without changing the content students are being asked to learn” (Acee et al., 2018, p. 69). Similar to the present study, other research works have employed task-value interventions to scaffold for motivation and interest in specific topics and disciplines. These interventions, especially utility value, are usually implemented through “self-generated” or “directly communicated” approaches (Soicher & Becker-Blease, 2020). In self-generated task-value interventions, learners are asked to write about the importance of the topic and its relevance for their (or their friends, peers, relatives') short and long-term goals; in directly communicated task-value interventions, learners are given information (via text, video, etc.) about the usefulness of the topic and how it relates to their (or their friends, peers, relatives’) lives and career plans.

Self-generated task-value interventions have been used in variety of contexts, including introductory biology courses (Canning et al., 2018; Harackiewicz et al., 2016); introductory psychology courses and in the domain of mathematics (Hulleman et al., 2010, 2017); and in the context of teacher education (Kale & Akcaoglu, 2018). These studies examined the influence of self-generated task-value interventions on learners’ utility value, academic performance, behavior, situational interest, maintained interest, and behavioral intention. In self-generated approaches, guidelines on the number of paragraphs and focus of the writing are often provided. For example, in their lab study addressing a mental mathematics technique for solving specific multiplication problems, Hulleman et al. (2010, p. 884) used the following directions for the intervention group “type a short essay (1–3 paragraphs in length) briefly describing the potential relevance of this technique to your own life, or to the lives of college students in general. […]”.

Directly communicated task-value interventions have also been used in different contexts and domain areas, including mathematics (Durik et al., 2015; Shechter et al., 2011), physical education (Simons et al., 2003), and introductory computer-science course (Geerling et al., 2020). These studies investigated the influence of directly communicated task-value interventions on learners' situational interest, academic performance, state task orientation, motivated behavior, sport performance, and interest and confusion. In this approach, the task-value interventions are often embedded in the learning materials. For example, in their study, Durik et al. (2015) embedded the utility value information in the instructions by including an initial passage on how the new math technique improved college performance and could be useful for different occupations. To that end, the authors used quotes such as ‘‘A psychologist may use mental math to evaluate a test report’‘. Their task-value intervention also included pictures and a final statement to remind participants of the usefulness of the topic to their short and long-term goals.

While self-generated and directly communicated task-value interventions can be used separately as shown above, interventions combining both approaches are also common (Canning et al., 2019; Canning & Harackiewicz, 2015a; Curry et al., 2020; Kosovich et al., 2019; Rosenzweig et al., 2020). These interventions are usually based on the presentation of quotes from the instructor or peers' perspectives and learners are asked to reflect on, rank, and/or write about the quotes and/or to write their own quotes (Rosenzweig et al., 2020). Despite their potential for impacting learners’ motivation and performance outcomes, task-value interventions have not, to our knowledge, been embedded in LADs. In this study, we address this gap by embedding directly communicated task-value prompts in a LAD in the context of an introductory statistics course. We opted for a directly communicated approach because they are assumed to be more scaffolded than self-generated task-value interventions (Albrecht & Karabenick, 2018).

1.4. Learning analytics dashboards (LADs)
As an incipient field and emerging area of research (Valle et al., 2021a; Jivet et al., 2017), LADs have gained increased attention due to their potential to support educational practice and self-regulated learning (Bodily et al., 2018). Used as instructional scaffolds in a variety of technology-enhanced learning environments, LADs are helpful data visualization tools that have been increasingly adopted in higher education contexts (Lim et al., 2019; Schwendimann et al., 2017) to provide key information needed to help users in achieving their goals (Teasley, 2017). As other learning analytics applications, LADs involve the measurement, collection, analysis, and reporting of learners’ data and their environments to support understanding and optimization of learning (Siemens & Gasevic, 2012).

Usually arranged on a single screen (Teasley, 2017), LADs are useful analytics applications because they help to convey quantitative information in a more digestible and actionable manner for the user. There are, however, some recognized issues hampering the successful implementation of LADs as effective pedagogical tools to support learners, including the lack of attention to LADs aimed at learners as end users (learner-facing LADs) and the limited use of learning theories to guide the design and implementation of these applications (Jivet et al., 2017, 2018; Matcha et al., 2019; Schwendimann et al., 2017). Indeed, despite their potential to promote learners’ autonomy, motivation, metacognitive skills, awareness, reflection, monitoring of progress, engagement, help-seeking behavior, and motivation (Bodily & Verbert, 2017; Jivet et al., 2017), many LADs ( 68%) have been developed without theories to guide their design and implementation (Matcha et al., 2019). While researchers recognize the need for rigorous studies grounded in learning theories (Jivet et al., 2017; Liu & Nesbit, 2020; Teasley, 2017), recent systematic literature reviews have shown that this is rarely the case (Schwendimann et al., 2017).

One of the most common theoretical frameworks that are used to guide the design of LADs, when learning theories are adopted, is self-regulated learning (Valle et al., 2021a). Still, even when a theoretical framework such as self-regulated learning is used, the approach is often limited to two goals: increase awareness and trigger self-reflection (Jivet et al., 2017). As a result, there is a need for a more integrated approach that accounts for the subject of instruction, learning environment, and learner's motivation (Valle et al., 2021a).

This gap is particularly critical in the area of motivation (Hooshyar et al., 2020). For example, despite the growing body of literature on task-value interventions and the taxonomy that has emerged from studies in different domain areas such as statistics, mathematics, and physics (Acee et al., 2018); in the field of LADs, task value has only been briefly conceptualized as a self-regulated learning construct to represent task-related knowledge (Matcha et al., 2019). This lack of attention to theories of motivation is concerning because motivation plays an essential role in learning outcomes and learners’ engagement with tasks (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Lazowski & Hulleman, 2016).

In this experimental study, the adoption of the situated expectancy-value theory to guide the design and application of a LAD aimed at learners represents an important step towards the generation of practical and theoretical insights into the use of LADs to support learners' cognitive and affective outcomes (Winne, 2017). More specifically, the significance of this study is two-fold: a) it offers a framework focusing on situated expectancy-value theory of motivation, acknowledging that the value learners attribute to a task or learning activity is domain specific (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002) and b) it contributes to a limited number of experimental studies that systematically investigate the influence of LADs' design elements on learners’ cognitive and affective outcomes (Bodily & Verbert, 2017; Matcha et al., 2019).

1.4.1. “My Learning Progress” LAD
“My Learning Progress” (Fig. 2) is a predictive LAD designed to give learners an opportunity to evaluate their performance based on individual goals and the content to be learned in the context of an online statistics course. The design of the LAD supports learners’ ongoing self-assessment (Andrade & Du, 2007). R software (version R 3.5.2 – © 2004–2016) and Shiny, a web development application, were used to develop this tool. Using a Naïve Bayes (NB) model, a commonly used method in machine learning, the LAD predicted the probability that learners would receive a letter grade of A, B, C, or D/E by the end of the course. The NB model predicts these final letter grade probabilities using Bayes Theorem and assuming that the predictors are conditionally independent. We chose this model because it has been repeatedly shown to have good predictive skill for a wide range of applications and because it accommodates missing data (Domingos & Pazzani, 1997; Hand & Yu, 2001; Zhang, 2004). Indeed, several systematic literature reviews on learning analytics have highlighted the excellent performance of the NB model (Cui et al., 2019; Khan & Ghosh, 2021; Liz-Domınguez et al., 2019). For example, the NB model has been successfully used to identify students likely to perform poorly or at risk of dropping out in several studies (e.g., Akçapınar et al., 2019; Ornelas & Ordonez, 2017; Z.; Wang et al., 2018). Critically, missing data is one of the most ubiquitous problems in learning analytics (Cui et al., 2019). In our course, some students will invariably miss some of the weekly quizzes due to field work, health issues, or other personal problems and, as a result, the ability of the NB model to readily accommodate missing data is very useful. These predicted probabilities were continuously updated throughout the course as learners engaged with course content and took weekly quizzes. The model was tested prior to the implementation of this study and showed to have an adequate predictive performance (Valle et al., 2021b).

2. Conceptual framework and research questions
Using a randomized control-group pretest posttest design, this experimental study manipulated task-value scaffolding as the independent variable and used measures of motivation and statistics anxiety at the start of the semester as baseline measures. This study examines possible relationships between the task-value scaffolding intervention and learners’ cognitive and affective outcomes. More specifically, we ask how the use of task-value scaffolding embedded in a predictive LAD influence: RQ-1) motivation, RQ-2) statistics anxiety, and RQ-3) learning performance.

3. Method
3.1. Context
This study was implemented in a semester-long online introductory statistics course in two instances of the course (Fall/2019 and Spring/2020) at a large public university in the southeastern US. The course was delivered using Canvas™, a popular learning management system, and included video tutorials, practice exercises, discussion boards, built-in learning analytics for instructors and learners, weekly quizzes, and a final exam. Weekly modules 2 to 13 covered statistical concepts, while the first and the final modules introduced the course (e.g., syllabus, netiquette) and provided additional resources (e.g., list of other statistics courses), respectively. The course covered a variety of topics, including: overview of statistics, reproducible science and programming, data and summary statistics, data visualization, random variables and probability distributions, hypothesis testing, linear models, T-tests, analysis of variance, simple regression, multiple regression, categorical data, and Monte Carlo analysis.

3.2. Participants
One hundred and forty-six graduate students, between the ages of 20 and 47 (M = 26.68, SD = 5.18) participated in this study. Most participants had not taken other statistics course before (71.92%), self-identified as female (58.90%), and were Caucasian (58.22%). The majority of students were pursuing a master's degree (54.11%) and had previous programming experience (50.68%). In a multiple-choice question regarding their reasons for taking the course, most students selected the option “Will help improve my academic skills” (76.03%) and “Will be useful to me in other courses” (67.81%). The students represented a variety of departments from across the university, with most of them coming from the College of Agricultural and Life Sciences (e.g., department of Entomology and Nematology, Animal Sciences, Forest Resources and Conservation, and Agronomy).

3.3. Task-value scaffolding intervention
Task value is related to the reasons why learners become involved in the learning experience and how they perceive the task in terms of importance, usefulness, interest, and the associated task demands (Dietrich et al., 2017; Schunk et al., 2014; Wigfield & Eccles, 2002). For this study, the task-value scaffolding prompts were topic-specific, which aligns with the proposition that value is domain specific based on the situated expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002), and were designed to scaffold student motivation by highlighting the value and utility of the statistics concepts and procedures in each module of the online statistics course (Table 1).


Table 1. Task-value scaffolding prompts used in each module.

Modules	Task-value scaffolding prompts	Type of value
Reproducible science and programming	The skills you're developing with R are important not only because the rest of the course will build on them, but also because they will:
•
make it easier for you to organize your data

•
make your statistical analysis more efficient and reproducible

•
be very useful for your career goals inside and outside of academia

Utility & attainment
Data and summary statistics	Learning how to manipulate, summarize, and visualize data is critical to:
•
enable the identification of problems with the data, such as outliers or incorrect values

•
support reliable statistical analysis. As the saying goes: “garbage in, garbage out”

Utility & attainment
Visualizing data and graphing results	Graphs can be very useful to:
•
uncover problems with your data

•
generate novel insights

•
display your results

•
convince your audience (e.g., your advisor, your boss, stakeholders, politicians)

If done correctly, a graph is worth much more than 1000 words.	Utility & attainment
Random variables and probability distributions	The normal distribution is:
•
an important concept for the different statistical models in this course

•
central to most of the standard statistical analysis used in everyday situations, inside and outside of academia

Utility & attainment
Hypothesis testing	A clear understanding of hypothesis testing concepts such as Type 1 error, p-values, and null hypothesis will help you:
•
become a critical consumer of information

•
understand the difference between “statistical” and “practical” significance

•
distinguish reliable results from those based on underpowered analyses

Utility & attainment
Linear models	Learning about linear models is important because:
•
Linear models encompass almost all the models we will see in this class

•
Being able to identify violations of modeling assumptions is critical for the proper use of linear models in your graduate studies and beyond

Utility & attainment
T-tests	As one of the most widely used statistical tests, t-tests can:
•
determine if products meet certain standards or guidelines (e.g., maximum calories in beverages)

•
help you measure the effect of your intervention (e.g., a new fertilizer or a new environmental education initiative)

Utility
Analysis of variance	Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is helpful to:
•
compare more than 2 groups. For example, which of the following crops require the highest amount of water? Corn, eggplants, or potatoes?

•
analyze data from a wide range of different experimental designs where ANOVA is used (e.g., split-plot, randomized block design, etc.)

Utility
Simple regression	If you want to understand how a certain variable of interest is influenced by a continuous variable, a simple regression is useful. For example, here are some relationships that you can investigate using simple regression models:
•
Immunological response as a function of animal age

•
Crop yield as a function of soil fertility

Utility
Multiple regression	It is likely that multiple factors influence the variable that you are interested in. A multiple regression model enables you to disentangle the effect of each of these factors (i.e., determine the effect of a given factor while holding the other variables constant). Here are some real-world applications:
•
life expectancy in a country given its education and per capita income indicators

•
crop production based on season and seed quality

Utility
Categorical data	All the previous models we have seen assume that the variable of interest is continuous. What if both your response and predictor variables are categorical?
Chi-square tests can be very useful to understand the relationship between categorical variables. Possible categories may include:
•
amount of plant damage (undamaged, moderately, or heavily damaged)

•
type of occupation (white, blue, or no collar)

•
gender (male, female, other)

Utility
Monte carlo testing	Most of the statistical tests we have seen rely on several assumptions (e.g., normally distributed errors and constant variance) and are focused on the mean.
Monte Carlo Testing can be very useful:
•
to avoid modeling assumptions

•
when the focus of the analysis is not the mean (e.g., we want to compare medians or variances)

•
to better understand the null distribution

•
to better understand the p-value

Utility
Note: Even though some of the scaffolds are categorized as utility value, they could also be perceived as attainment value depending on how relevant they are to the individuals' career goals and identities.

Based on the definitions of task value elements described by Belland et al. (2013) and Eccles and Wigfield (2020), the task-value scaffolding prompts used in this study align with task value components intended to support learners’ interest in, and perceptions of importance and utility of the statistics topics. More specifically, the prompts we used: a) focused on the importance of the skill learned, b) emphasized short- and long-term utility of learning the skill or content, c) connected the learning content or skill with career goals, d) established meaningful connections with the field of statistics, and e) created awareness of statistics and computing cultures by using field-specific expressions (e.g., “garbage in, garbage out”).

Although task-value interventions are generally easy to implement (Hulleman et al., 2010), we sought to improve the validity of the intervention by aligning the task-value prompts with the learning objectives and overall goals of the course, validating the prompts by a subject-matter expert, and conducting an evaluation of the clarity of the prompts by ten former students. Following the approach used in previous directly communicated task-value interventions (Shechter et al., 2011; Simons et al., 2003), the prompts were kept short, which was also helpful to maintain the intended clean design of the LAD (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (885KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Screenshot of the predictive LAD with task-value scaffolding for Module 4 of the online statistics course in this study.

While this study in centered on the influence of task-value scaffolding on learners’ cognitive and affective outcomes, the design of the LAD was also based on the understanding that monitoring of performance is related to metacognitive processes, self-regulated learning, and motivation profiles (Baars & Wijnia, 2018). For example, Fig. 2 shows that this particular student has 89% probability of receiving a letter grade “A”, 10% probability of receiving a letter grade “B”, and 0% probability of receiving letter grades “C”, or “D/E” at the end of the semester. This learner may use their predicted performance in the course to regulate how much time and effort they should spend studying and engaging with the learning materials in order to achieve their short- or long-term personal goals (e.g., graduate, become a data scientist) based on the utility or attainment value associated with these goals.

3.4. Research design
This study was implemented as a two-group experimental design, where learners were randomly assigned to one of two groups: task-value scaffolding group (treatment) or no-task-value scaffolding group (control). We used a function that generates random numbers in R to randomly assign participants to the treatment and control groups. Throughout the entire semester, learners in the treatment group (n = 74) had access to the weekly task-value scaffolding prompts embedded in the LAD (Fig. 2). Learners in the control group (n = 72) did not receive task-value scaffolding prompts in their LAD.

3.4.1. Motivation Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ)
The motivation scale (31 items) of the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ; Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, & McKeachie, 1991, 1993) was employed to measure learners' pre- and post-intervention motivation in this study. Its value components such as task value (e.g., “I think I will be able to use what I learn in this course in other courses”) and intrinsic goal orientation (e.g., “In a class like this, I prefer course material that really challenges me so I can learn new things”) reflect different components of the situated expectancy-value theory such as utility and attainment value. More specifically, the motivation constructs in MSLQ include: a) intrinsic goal (intrinsic motivation to engage in the task), b) extrinsic goal (extrinsic motivation to engage in the task), c) task value (perceived importance and usefulness of the task), d) control beliefs (how learners perceive the association between their efforts and learning outcomes), e) self-efficacy (expectancy for success related to the task), and f) test anxiety (worry and negative emotions related to taking tests). Using a 7-point Likert-style scale (from (1) “Not at all true of me” to (7) “Very true of me”), participants rated their motivation for and attitudes about the statistics class. The MSLQ instrument has been used in many empirical studies and there is considerable support for the reliability and validity of its constructs (Schutz et al., 1998; Vahedi et al., 2012). In the present study, Cronbach's alpha (α) values ranged between 0.60 and 0.94, indicating acceptable internal consistency of scores (Table 2).

3.4.2. Statistics Anxiety Rating Scale (STARS)
We used the Statistics Anxiety Rating Scale (STARS; Cruise et al., 1985) to collect pre- and post-intervention statistics anxiety scores because its six factors are relevant to the overall construct of statistics anxiety, one of the outcome variables in the study. STARS′ six factors are: a) test and class anxiety, b) interpretation anxiety, c) fear of asking for help, d) computational self-concept (computation anxiety), e) worth of statistics (worth anxiety), and f) fear of statistics instructors (teacher anxiety). In the first 23 items, participants rated their anxiety in different situations involving statistics. For example, students rated from (1) “No anxiety” to (5) “Great deal of anxiety” how they felt about “Interpreting the meaning of a table in a journal article”. For the remaining 28 items, participants rated their perceptions of statistics (e.g., “I wish the statistics requirement would be removed from my academic program”) and statistics instructors (e.g., “Statistics teachers talk a different language”) from (1) “Strongly disagree” to (5) “Strongly agree”. Confirmatory factor analysis studies have evaluated STARS accross different contexts (e.g., face-to-face vs. online) and provided evidence of the instrument's construct validity and internal consistency (DeVaney, 2016; Papousek et al., 2012). The present study supports these results, with Cronbach's alpha values (α) ranging between 0.83 and 0.96, indicating good internal consistency of scores. Table 2 shows the Cronbach's alpha values and the descriptive statistics related to the measures used in this study.


Table 2. MSLQ and STARS′ pre and post Cronbach's alpha values and means (standard deviations) per group.

Pre α	Post α	M pre (SD)	M post (SD)
MSLQ			Control	Treatment	Control	Treatment
Intrinsic goal	0.74	0.77	5.38 (0.95)	5.37 (0.97)	5.18 (1.01)	5.08 (1.11)
Extrinsic goal	0.70	0.60	4.47 (1.24)	4.98 (1.21)	4.54 (1.28)	4.85 (1.03)
Task value	0.85	0.92	6.00 (0.87)	5.93 (0.78)	5.67 (1.13)	5.55 (1.19)
Control beliefs	0.65	0.77	5.48 (0.91)	5.70 (0.74)	5.51 (1.00)	5.47 (0.99)
Self-efficacy	0.92	0.94	5.55 (0.94)	5.36 (1.01)	5.56 (0.99)	5.24 (1.14)
Test anxiety	0.80	0.86	4.03 (1.44)	4.33 (1.28)	4.12 (1.58)	4.37 (1.38)
STARS			Control	Treatment	Control	Treatment
Test and class anxiety	0.88	0.90	3.09 (0.92)	3.15 (0.80)	2.98 (1.00)	3.25 (0.85)
Interpretation anxiety	0.91	0.92	2.37 (0.89)	2.42 (0.76)	2.20 (0.78)	2.42 (0.88)
Fear of asking for help	0.89	0.90	2.39 (1.08)	2.45 (1.00)	2.23 (1.00)	2.62 (1.18)
Computation anxiety	0.90	0.90	1.82 (0.83)	1.92 (0.79)	1.58 (0.68)	1.78 (0.80)
Worth anxiety	0.96	0.94	1.44 (0.71)	1.44 (0.58)	1.36 (0.40)	1.48 (0.66)
Teacher anxiety	0.85	0.83	1.71 (0.83)	1.64 (0.69)	1.59 (0.74)	1.58 (0.70)
3.4.3. Learning performance
Learning performance was measured using learners' scores on course quizzes and the final exam. The weekly quizzes and final exam were presented as auto graded multiple choice questions covering statistics concepts and data analysis (e.g., “Based on the among group and within group sum of squares calculations, what would you conclude about the dataset?“). There was an average of 30 questions in the weekly quizzes and the final exam consisted of 25 questions covering topics from all modules. The items used in the quizzes and final exam were validated by two statistics professors who teach the course and are co-authors in the present paper. For our analysis, we used the percentage of correct responses for both final exam and total quiz scores, calculated as the total number of points divided by the maximum possible number of points (range: 0–100) as shown in Table 3. Cronbach's alpha values for the final exam in both semesters indicate that the final exam has good internal consistency: Fall 2019 (α = 0.86) and Spring 2020 (α = 0.87).


Table 3. Mean (M) and standard deviation (SD) for the final quiz and the final exam per group.

Control (n = 72)	Treatment (n = 74)
Learning performance	M	(SD)	M	(SD)
Total quiz scores	90.12	(6.21)	90.13	(6.36)
Final exam	82.99	(17.16)	83.27	(16.51)
3.5. Data analysis
3.5.1. Model for learning performance
To evaluate if learning performance was influenced by task-value scaffolding, we relied on total quiz and final exams scores. An important feature regarding both of these scores is that they have an upper limit of 100. As a result, because the range of the data is constrained by this upper limit, the actual variation in performance may not be fully captured by the variation in scores obtained in these quizzes and final exams. In other words, this ceiling effect keeps us from noting outcomes greater than 100, a feature that is due to the design of our quizzes and exams, not the phenomenon being observed. To circumvent these ceiling effects, we relied on a Bayesian Tobit regression model to evaluate if learning performance was influenced by task-value scaffolding. This model avoids the bias in parameter estimates that is introduced due to ceiling effects when using a regular paired t-test, analysis of variance (ANOVA), analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), or other regression models (L.Wang et al., 2008).

3.5.2. Model for MSLQ and STARS
We adopted a similar Tobit model to analyze the results from the MSLQ and STARS constructs, given that these scores are also bounded between 1 and 7 (MSLQ) and 1 and 5 (STARS) and that some students have obtained the minimum and maximum possible scores. However, we had to modify the standard Tobit regression model to accommodate for the fact that both the pre-intervention scores and post-intervention scores suffer from ceiling or floor effects. For example, ceiling effects can occur because, even if a student is very anxious or very motivated, MSLQ and STARS constructs cannot be greater than 7 and 5, respectively. As a result, we assume that the MSLQ and STARS outcomes only provide partial information on the actual anxiety or motivation of the students whenever these instruments are at their minimum or maximum.

It is important to note that, aside from not accounting for ceiling or floor effects, the standard approaches to analyze these data (e.g., paired t-test, ANOVA, or ANCOVA) have other important limitations. The ANOVA model does not account for the pre-intervention baseline differences between learners whereas a paired t-test and an ANCOVA model accounts for these differences but assume that the effect of the treatment is constant. In other words, in the paired t-test and ANCOVA models, there are no interaction terms and, as a result, the effect of the treatment cannot be influenced by the pre-intervention differences (e.g., the treatment cannot have stronger effect on more anxious learners). To avoid these problems, we relied on a linear Bayesian Tobit regression model that included the treatment effect, the pre-intervention scores, and an interaction term between these two.

3.5.3. Priors and model fitting
We fit these models in a Bayesian framework. For the Tobit model applied to learner's performance, we specified standard uninformative priors that are commonly adopted in Bayesian models for the precision and intercept parameters (Gelman et al., 2009). However, we adopted an informative prior for the slope parameter because it is likely to yield more conservative results given that it tends to shrink this parameter to zero, reducing the chance of finding spurious significant results. This encapsulates the prior belief that our intervention is unlikely to significantly influence multiple constructs and performance metrics.

For the modified Tobit model applied to the MSQL and STARS constructs, we adopted similar uninformative priors for the precision, intercept, and the slope for the pre-intervention scores. On the other hand, we used informative priors for the parameters associated with the task-value scaffolding prompt to reduce the chance of obtaining spurious significant results. These models were fit with a Gibbs sampler algorithm, using customized R code. We relied on posterior predictive checks to determine if the proposed models represented the data well (Gelman et al., 2009). More specifically, we calculated the proportion of observations that fell within the 95% predictive intervals and models were judged to be adequate if this proportion was close to 0.95. Finally, we calculate as a measure of evidence, similar to p-values, the minimum of the posterior probability that  is smaller or greater than zero (i.e., . All of the different models that we have employed were determined to adequately represent our data. For more details regarding these models, see Valle et al. (2021b).

4. Results
4.1. RQ-1: the influence of task-value scaffolding on learners’ motivation
Results from our modified Tobit model (Table 4) showed no statistically significant differences between the treatment and control groups for the motivation constructs – intrinsic goal (intrinsic motivation to engage in the task), extrinsic goal (extrinsic motivation to engage in the task), task value (perceived importance and usefulness of the task), control beliefs (how learners perceive the association between their efforts and learning outcomes), self-efficacy (expectancy for success related to the task), and test anxiety (worry and negative emotions related to taking tests). These results indicate that participants' motivation did not change overtime as a result of the task-value scaffolding intervention. Ultimately, highlighting the importance and utility of topics covered in the course did not increase learners’ motivation.


Table 4. Results from the Bayesian modified Tobit models for the motivation constructs.

MSLQ	Parameter		p
Intrinsic goal	Intercept	1.51	< 0.001
Treatment	−0.08	0.383
Pre-score	0.68	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.00	0.490
Extrinsic goal	Intercept	1.81	< 0.001
Treatment	0.21	0.220
Pre-score	0.62	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	−0.06	0.176
Task value	Intercept	0.43	0.232
Treatment	−0.15	0.311
Pre-score	0.87	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.03	0.277
Control beliefs	Intercept	1.91	< 0.001
Treatment	−0.14	0.317
Pre-score	0.66	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.00	0.500
Self-efficacy	Intercept	1.59	< 0.001
Treatment	−0.13	0.331
Pre-score	0.72	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	−0.01	0.402
Test anxiety	Intercept	1.40	< 0.001
Treatment	0.03	0.458
Pre-score	0.67	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.00	0.473
4.2. RQ-2: the influence of task-value scaffolding on learners’ statistics anxiety
Results from our modified Tobit model indicated that the task-value scaffolding intervention influenced two of the six anxiety constructs measured in this study: computation anxiety (anxiety related to mathematical calculations) and worth anxiety (negative attitudes towards statistics). More specifically, the intervention emphasizing the importance and utility of the knowledge, skills, and content covered in the course had a negative impact on learners' final computation anxiety, especially for learners who started the course with higher levels of computation anxiety. In other words, the statistically significant interaction (Treatment*Pre_computation_anxiety = 0.26, p < 0.05) reveals that learners’ who received the task-value scaffolding intervention were more likely to have greater levels of computation anxiety if they already had high computation anxiety at the beginning of the course compared to learners in the control group with similar initial anxiety (Fig. 3a).

The task-value scaffolding intervention also had a statistically significant effect on worth anxiety (Treatment*Pre_worth_anxiety = 0.61, p < 0.001). As shown in Fig. 3b, the detrimental effect of task-value scaffolding was remarkably prominent among learners who started the course with higher levels of worth anxiety compared to learners in the control group who also started the course with similar levels of worth anxiety.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (469KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The influence of the task-value scaffolding (TV) was dependent on learners' initial levels of computation anxiety (a) and worth anxiety (b). Higher scores indicate higher levels of anxiety.

There were no statistically significant differences between groups for the following anxiety-related constructs: test and class anxiety (anxiety experienced when taking a statistics test or attending a statistics class), interpretation anxiety (anxiety when interpreting statistical results), fear of asking for help (anxiety experienced when help seeking is considered), and teacher anxiety (negative attitudes toward statistics teachers) as shown in Table 5.


Table 5. Results from the Bayesian modified Tobit models for the statistics anxiety constructs.

STARS	Parameter		p
Test and class anxiety	Intercept	1.08	< 0.001
Treatment	−0.09	0.368
Pre-score	0.61	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.11	0.098
Interpretation anxiety	Intercept	0.98	< 0.001
Treatment	−0.12	0.297
Pre-score	0.50	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.15	0.062
Fear of asking for help	Intercept	0.72	0.003
Treatment	−0.01	0.474
Pre-score	0.61	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.16	0.061
Computation anxiety	Intercept	0.39	0.010
Treatment	−0.30	0.070
Pre-score	0.59	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.26	0.004
Worth anxiety	Intercept	0.85	< 0.001
Treatment	−0.71	< 0.001
Pre-score	0.32	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.61	< 0.001
Teacher anxiety	Intercept	0.35	0.046
Treatment	−0.20	0.168
Pre-score	0.63	< 0.001
Pre-score x Treatment	0.16	0.094
4.3. RQ-3: the influence of task-value scaffolding on learners’ learning performance
Results from our Tobit model found no statistically significant differences between groups for total quiz and final exam scores, suggesting that the task-value scaffolding intervention did not influence learners’ performance outcomes (Table 6).


Table 6. Results from the Bayesian multiple regression for learning performance.

Assessment	Parameter		p
Final exam	Intercept	8.37	< 0.001
Final exam	Treatment	0.04	0.433
Total quiz	Intercept	9.01	< 0.001
Total quiz	Treatment	0.00	0.493
5. Discussion
We used a two-group experimental design in a semester-long study to examine the influence of task-value scaffolding embedded in a predictive LAD on learners’ motivation, statistics anxiety, and learning performance in an online statistics course. To this end, participants were randomly assigned to a group with or without task-value scaffolding. The task-value scaffolding intervention was implemented as weekly prompts emphasizing the value and utility of different statistics concepts and skills.

5.1. Influence on motivation
Despite the premise that task value (the value associated with a task) is a key motivational element for learners' engagement in a task (Eccles et al., 1993; Eccles & Wigfield, 1995; Pintrich, 2000a, 2000b; Schunk et al., 2014), results from our analysis indicated that the use of task-value scaffolding did not support motivation as measured by the MSLQ instrument, including subjective task-value. These results do not corroborate other studies that used task-value interventions designed to help students and parents consider the relevance of the course material and the usefulness of STEM courses or to enhance students' interest in math or phycology (Harackiewicz et al., 2012; Hulleman et al., 2010). Furthermore, differently from Rosenzweig et al. (2020), who found that their task-value intervention supported students' competence-related beliefs in comparison to the control group, our study did not influence self-efficacy or control beliefs. However, in their study, the task-value intervention focusing on utility value and cost reduction did not influence learners' perceptions of utility value or cost, the very variables that they manipulated (Rosenzweig et al., 2020). These later results align with the lack of statistically significant differences between the treatment and control groups for task value outcomes in our study, which is particularly intriguing given that the task-value scaffolding was designed to support learners’ motivation, especially subject task value.

Taken together, the outcomes of the present study suggest that integrating motivation prompts into LADs can be challenging and will not necessarily impact learners' motivation as expected. It is worth mentioning, however, that the way we implemented task-value scaffolding is only one of many possible ways and the exploration of other approaches is warranted before ruling out task-value scaffolding interventions embedded in LADs from the toolkit of technology-enhanced pedagogical approaches to support learner's motivation in STEM-related courses. For instance, it is possible that if students are asked to generate relevant connections between the academic task and their lives (self-generated task value intervention), their task-value or competence-related beliefs may change (Rosenzweig et al., 2020; Rosenzweig & Wigfield, 2016). While self-generated interventions are less scaffolded than interventions where the task-value is directly communicated to the learner, they may also support greater reflection by the learners (Albrecht & Karabenick, 2018).

5.2. Influence on statistics anxiety
Learners who reported higher levels of computation anxiety and greater negative attitudes towards statistics as measured by STARS at the beginning of the semester and who received the task-value scaffolding presented higher levels of computation anxiety scores and worth anxiety at the end of the semester than those with similar characteristics in the control group. These findings corroborate the interplay between learners' characteristics and the level of anxiety developed when task value interventions are used (Lawrence, 1962; Nie et al., 2011). Our results mirror those from Lawrence’s (1962), where task-value intervention was used to emphasize the importance of the task but ended up generating higher levels of anxiety particularly in learners with low achievement motivation. Nie et al. (2011) also noted that high levels of task importance were related to high levels of test anxiety, especially among learners with low self-efficacy. It is possible that, by emphasizing the importance and utility of the task, the intervention actually compounded learners' fears of failing at the task (e.g., not learning the content), representing an important psychological cost from the perspective of the situated expectancy-value theory (Barron & Hulleman, 2015; Eccles & Wigfield, 2002, 2020; Flake et al., 2015).

Our results regarding the detrimental effect of the task-value intervention contribute to a deeper understanding of the interplay between task value and intrapersonal characteristics and illustrates how even theoretically grounded technologies can have unintended effects in promoting anxiety, especially for learners with higher levels of computation anxiety and negative attitudes towards statistics. This result aligns with other studies where higher task value was associated with higher levels anxiety (Boehme et al., 2017; Nie et al., 2011), indicating that high utility value is likely to increase anxiety due to increased perception of failure (psychological cost) when the task is highly valued (Boehme et al., 2017). It is worth noting that in Nie et al. (2011), academic self-efficacy moderated the maladaptive relation between task value and anxiety. Therefore, researchers and practitioners should be cognizant of the risks associated with increased task value because if the task is deemed to be important by learners, the intensity of positive (e.g., enjoyment) or negative (e.g., anxiety) emotions associated with the task is also higher (Bieg et al., 2013). Thus, the present study highlights the importance of careful evaluation of new educational technology applications to both minimize unintended consequences and optimize benefits for learners (de Alvarez & Dickson-Deane, 2018; Nworie & Haughton, 2008; Tawfik et al., 2016) as the design of these applications can substantially impact learners’ anxiety.

Taken together, these results have important implications for the design of LADs and suggest that unintended consequences of task-value scaffolding interventions represent a real risk in the domain of statistics, particularly when these design elements interplay with learners' intrapersonal characteristics such as initial levels of anxiety (Rosenzweig & Wigfield, 2016; Song & Chung, 2020). To that end, further studies are needed to understand what types of task-value scaffolding interventions embedded in LADs could be beneficial to reduce learners' anxiety and under what circumstances. In other words, this result substantiates the call that other researchers have made regarding the urgency for more systematic, theory-driven approaches to investigate how LAD applications could be used to support learners’ motivation (Hooshyar et al., 2020; Matcha et al., 2019). Online learning is witnessing a surge of opportunities for technology innovations and digital developments driven by the COVID-19 crisis (Dhawan, 2020) and robust research studies around these technologies are critical to minimize the risk of unintended consequences, such as increased emotional distress (e.g., anxiety) that can potentially jeopardize the learning experience.

5.3. Influence on learning performance outcomes
In the present study, there were no statistically significant differences on learning performance outcomes between learners who received the task-value scaffolding and learners who did not. These results are consistent with one of two experimental studies presented by Hulleman et al. (2010) where task-value and control conditions were compared. In their study (Study 1), the intervention (treatment) focusing on the usefulness of a math activity did not show statistically significant differences between groups regarding performance outcomes. On the other hand, other studies have revealed a strong influence of task-value interventions on performance outcomes (Hulleman et al., 2010, 2017; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). In these studies, however, a trend of interactions and mediated effects exist. For example, Hulleman et al. (2010) conducted a study in which students in the treatment condition were asked to connect a topic from their psychology class to their lives. The authors found that the positive influence of the task-value interventions on performance was mediated by learner's increase in utility value (Hulleman et al., 2010). A similar interaction was discussed by Hulleman and Harackiewicz (2009), who found that the task-value intervention positively influenced performance for learners with low success expectancies in the context of ninth-grade science courses (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). Our results also differ from those reported by Durik et al. (2015) who uncovered discrepancies between learners' increased interest, promoted by the task-value intervention, and performance outcomes. They suggested that before presenting task value information to learners, it may be helpful to support learners' expectancies for success first.

Importantly, while the task-value scaffolding intervention used in this study did not improve learning performance outcomes, it was not detrimental for learners’ performance either. It is possible that our study was not sensitive enough to detect changes in learning performance outcomes. For example, one potential reason for this is that, differently from the motivation and statistic anxiety metrics, we did not collect baseline learning performance outcomes and, as a result, we could not take into account the baseline characteristics of each learner and how the intervention modified these characteristics. It is possible that the task-value intervention did not promote adaptive cognitive engagement to the point where differences between groups could be noticed in our performance metrics (e.g., final exam and total quiz scores). It is also possible that the frame of reference (self-created vs. externally enacted task value prompts) may play a role in the efficacy of task-value interventions to support performance outcomes (Durik et al., 2015).

6. Implications
The authentic setting and semester-long implementation of LADs in the present study provide important ecological validity for the findings regarding the influence of task-value scaffolding on graduate students’ motivation, anxiety, and learning performance. Additionally, rooted in the situated expectancy-value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020), this experimental study generated useful insights related to the theory and practice of LADs in online learning environments:

•
The effect of task-value scaffolding interventions may depend on learners' initial anxiety level in a given domain (Saadé & Kira, 2009). Thus, an initial assessment of learner's initial levels of anxiety can be beneficial in the development of LADs that will support learners' motivation without increasing their anxiety. For learners with higher levels of anxiety, it may be advisable to implement an intervention that will support both learners' subjective task value and control cognition (Boehme et al., 2017).

•
The very emphasis on the importance and utility of the knowledge, skills, and content covered in a course may contribute to increase learners' anxiety due to fear of failing in the task. These negative emotions could be described as psychological costs associated with learners' perceptions of the task, its importance, and consequences of not attaining it (Barron & Hulleman, 2015; Eccles & Wigfield, 2002; Flake et al., 2015). To mitigate issues related to psychological costs, future designs of LADs could use a combination of task-value scaffolding and cost reduction interventions in which task-related challenges are presented alongside strategies that could be used to address them (Rosenzweig et al., 2020).

•
To better support learners' positive emotions and learning outcomes, designers and practitioners need to carefully evaluate the effect of task-value interventions in the context of statistics or other domains that may create high levels of anxiety among learners (e.g., math, chemistry) due to its potential of having unintended adverse impacts on learners.

•
Future task-value interventions should strive to support different types of learners by helping them balance their subjective task value and topic- or situation-specific anxiety. For example, an adaptive scaffolding approach could combine task-value and self-efficacy scaffolds as a way to reduce the possible negative effect of emphasizing the importance and utility of the content or task, helping learners better regulate their learning (Azevedo et al., 2004).

•
Future studies could implement self-generated task-value prompts embedded in LADs to investigate whether this frame of reference (self-generated instead of directly communicated task-value) would help learners calibrate their subjective task value according to their current competencies with the topic or task (Albrecht & Karabenick, 2018; Durik et al., 2015).

•
Future research could also investigate whether the temporal implementation of the task-value scaffolding (prospective vs. retrospective) would generate different affective and cognitive outcomes. For example, learners could receive the task-value scaffolding prior to being exposed to the content or task or after they have been exposed to it.

7. Limitations
Informed by the situated expectancy-value theory, the present study represents a valuable approach in using a semester-long task-value intervention embedded in a LAD to provide novel insights into the unexplored possibilities and risks associated with the design of innovative educational technologies. Despite its theoretical and practical value, the study and its results have several limitations, including: a) sample size: a larger sample size would allow more sophisticated analytical approaches such as path analysis to understand whether there were mediation effects (e.g., related to students' gender and ethnic backgrounds); b) statistics pre-test scores: we did not use pre-test scores in the study to account for learner's initial understanding of statistics topics. This information would be useful to measure change in performance across groups, which would provide another layer of information regarding the possible effects of the intervention on performance outcomes beyond final exam and quiz scores; c) directly-communicated task-value: the directly-communicated task-value prompts used in the study is relatively different from self-generated task-value activities, limiting the comparability of our results to those that used self-generated task-value information. Thus, future studies could investigate whether the use of self-generated task-value interventions embedded in LADs would generate different results based on learners' psychological profiles (Canning & Harackiewicz, 2015b); and finally, d) absence of control cognitions: the use of control cognitions to support learners' development of more adaptive attributions in terms of efforts and achievement could help to mitigate the anxiety that develops from learners' enhanced value cognition (Boehme et al., 2017). This approach would be particularly important because the relationship between value and control and how they relate to academic emotion has been largely neglected in empirical studies (Boehme et al., 2017). We invite readers to consider these limitations as they read and use the information presented in this study.

8. Conclusion
There is a limited number of experimental studies that evaluate the influence of task-value interventions in learning and instruction and the critical influence that subjective task value has on predicting learners' future engagement with STEM-related content and careers (Harackiewicz et al., 2012; Hulleman et al., 2010). This knowledge gap is even more pronounced when innovative educational technologies such as LADs are considered, where there is a lack of comparative studies addressing different LAD design options and their impact on learning and motivation (Hooshyar et al., 2020; Shneiderman et al., 2016). In this context, the present study provides critical insights into how the effect of task-value interventions embedded in a LAD may depend on learners' motivational and emotional profiles (Rosenzweig & Wigfield, 2016). Furthermore, the domain-specific approach used in this study is warranted by the situated expectancy-value theory, by the existing body of literature on task-value interventions, and by the growing developments in LADs (Van Horne et al., 2018). However, the negative impact of task-value scaffolding on learners’ computation anxiety and attitudes towards statistics observed in this study underscores the need for further investigations across different domains and for a critical evaluation of using task-value scaffolding embedded in LADs to support learners and their learning experiences. Future investigations across different domains will be beneficial to understand whether the results described are relevant to other domain-areas (e.g., language and arts) given that task value is inherently domain-specific (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). As the fields of motivation and LADs are further integrated, we need to recognize that good intentions and theoretically based designs are essential, but can still create unintended consequences, making studies like this one the more relevant and necessary to uncover these risks