The purpose of this article is to explore physical education teachers' perspectives on their readiness to use and integrate wearable technology as an innovation in physical education. The article presents a case study grounded on an analytic induction logic with a constructivist epistemology and involves semi-structured interviews with 38 public school physical education teachers. Based on a thematic analysis of interview data, the study identifies eight themes on attitudinal shifts, adequate capabilities, convenient use, injury prevention, effective exercises, non-sedentary behavior, and system access. These themes reflect the technological and organizational conditions that enable physical education teachers’ readiness to use and integrate wearable technology in physical education. The article concludes with discussions on theoretical and practical implications of the research, limitations and future directions.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Kuwait

Physical education

Teachers' perspectives

Technology integration

Wearable technology

1. Introduction
Wearable technologies, such as fitness trackers (e.g. Fitbit Charge and Garmin Vivosport) and smartwatches (e.g. Samsung Galaxy Watch and Apple Watch), provide teachers with innovative means for instruction since research suggests that these digital innovations have received interest in monitoring users health, fitness, and surroundings (Soltani & Morice, 2020), and have been used to improve teaching and learning experiences (Motti, 2020). Bodies such as the OECD (2019) go further in arguing that such technologies could hypothetically guarantee personalized and universal access to education. However, the success of such innovations usually depends on how the teachers develop their professional and ICT knowledge (OECD, 2016; Vincent-Lancrin, Urgel, Kar, & Jacotin, 2019). This causes a different type of challenge which has more to do with teachers’ readiness for these innovations and their ability to integrate them in their instruction (OECD, 2016). Irrespective of readiness level, innovation remains crucial for progress in many sectors and education is no different. As an outcome and a process, innovation systemically develops education as an indispensable social institution that needs to be comprehensive, sustainable, and focused to meet unpredictable challenges (Serdyukov, 2017).

Research studies (Borthwick, Anderson, Finsness, & Foulger, 2015; Demir & Demir, 2018; Motti, 2019, 2020) offer diverse design and practical perspectives, along with educational affordances of wearable technology (Bower & Sturman, 2015), to highlight how various wearable technologies can be used and integrated in education. Regardless, physical education teachers' perspectives tend to be frequently overlooked. This constitutes the research gap for this study where it underlines physical education teachers’ perspectives on wearable technology integration in physical education.

The aim of this study is to explore physical education teachers’ perspectives on their readiness for wearable technology integration and to develop a conceptual model for integrating wearable technology as digital innovation in physical education. The study presents insights from an inductive case study with public school physical education teachers that analyses conditions under which physical education teachers are ready to use and integrate wearable technologies in their instruction and how wearable technology design could affect their readiness to use such innovations in physical education.

Evidence suggests that over the past twenty years or so, digital innovations have offered more options to facilitate learning within and beyond class settings (Chatterjee Singh & Duraiappah, 2020). While technology may not necessarily imply innovation in educational practices, its presence in schools has become an important driver of innovation in educational environments (Vincent-Lancrin et al., 2019). Moreover, digital innovations have four main roles in the context of education which are; (a) educational technology for teaching and learning, (b) instrumentation for metrics and measurements, (c) ICT for communication and networking, and (d) as a new discipline or subject area (Alemán de la Garza et al., 2019). However, challenges such as the current Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic have often been a catalyst for innovation in many sectors including education (Cornell University, INSEAD, & WIPO, 2020). Such crises accelerate educational institutions implementation of technological innovations that usually take place within years, making them occur within a matter of months or even days (Daniel, 2020, pp. 1–6). Governments invest and transform their educational systems to cope with changes in different ways including instructional packages, radio education, televised education, online instructional resources and methods (OECD, 2020). Suspending schools have disrupted physical education in particular where online instruction proved to be problematic for physical education teachers and their instruction delivery (Varea & González-Calvo, 2020). Assessing perspectives of physical education teachers’ on digital innovation is crucial during COVID-19 since school-based physical education has been suspended in most parts around the world (Hall, Laddu, Phillips, Lavie, & Arena, 2020) – necessitating the use of digital avenues for instruction to maintain learning and teaching during the crisis. The post COVID-19 era could also benefit from insights on readiness studies for technology integration to minimize the discomfort and struggle physical education teachers face through inconvenient online delivery of physical education (Varea & González-Calvo, 2020).

This study seeks to address the aforementioned shortcomings by focusing on physical education teachers' readiness to use and integrate wearable technology. The rationale for this study is that understanding physical education teachers’ perspectives on their readiness for wearable technology integration can provide technical and innovative solutions to enhance physical education instruction, and contribute to wearable technology design space for seamless integration in physical education, especially in view of the current global shift towards distance and e-learning caused by the ongoing pandemic.

The significance of this research is twofold. First, the research is potentially significant in providing educators with new and innovative technology-inspired ideas for instruction in physical education. Evidence suggests that traditional educators frequently view technology as counterproductive for physical education due to the practical nature of physical education as a subject (Silverman, 1997). That perception needs to change, particularly in light of the recent COVID-19 pandemic that caused the postponement of day-to-day physical education instruction globally (Varea & González-Calvo, 2020). With focus on readiness, this study sheds light on potential enabling factors for the productive use of wearable technology. Second, the research has significance for strategizing and policymaking on how to adopt and integrate technology into physical education. Combined with factors that could influence teacher readiness for technology (Al-Awidi & Aldhafeeri, 2017), the results of this research seeks to provide empirical evidence for policy makers to draw upon in their quest for improvement to the educational system in general.

The subsequent sections of this article present research background in terms of wearable technology, innovation in education, and readiness for integration. Next, the article presents the methodology and the findings of the case study. The article concludes with theoretical and practical implications, limitations, and directions for future research.

2. Research background
2.1. Wearable technology: an overview
Wearable technologies, also referred to as wearable devices or wearables for short (Demir & Demir, 2018), have become a prominent symbol of modern-day technology with their various designs, functionalities, and applications. However, the concept of wearables has its roots way back in history when analog examples of wearables were made to augment human capabilities such as the eyeglasses during the 13th century in Italy, pocket and wristwatch during the 16th century in Germany, as well as the first abacus ring which was made during the Qing Dynasty in 17th century China (L. M. Baumann, 2016; Motti, 2020; Wilson & Laing, 2018). While these examples may not be deemed advanced technology in present-day interpretations of the word they still serve an important role for the design and functions of recent wearables (L. M. Baumann, 2016).

It was not until the introduction of digital technology in mid 20th century that we have seen revolutionary examples of wearable technology. More specifically, in 1961 the first functional wearable computer, along with modified shoes, was invented by Edward Thorp and Claude Shannon to assist in gambling by predicting the velocity and position of the roulette ball (Thorp, 1998). Subsequent examples from the 1970s include HP and Pulsar calculator watches, Polar Electro heart-rate monitor, and Sony Walkman (Wilson & Laing, 2018). Not very long after, Steve Mann who is known as the father of wearable computing developed the first headset with embedded cameras and microphones in 1980 (Mann, 1997).

Even though these developments opened new frontiers for applications, wearables were bounded by hardware and software capabilities at the time, which eventually led to limiting the technology to academic research and lab developments during early 1990s (Motti, 2020). By mid to late 1990s, wearable technology started to regain some newfound interest when companies such as BodyMedia commercialized wearable sensors for personal health and wellness (Motti, 2020). This is crucial because by early 21st century wearable technology evolved significantly with other technologies such as the integration of Bluetooth with wearables. This integration allowed collaboration opportunities between different digital technology, fashion and clothing companies to innovate, such as the collaboration between Apple and Nike when they introduced Nike+ in the form of a fitness tracking kit (Amft & Lukowicz, 2009; L. M.; Baumann, 2016) and Celio Club suit for controlling an Apple iPod from an embroidered patch in what seemed to be an early form of e-textiles (Wilson & Laing, 2018).

By late 2010s and onwards, wearable technologies witnessed extensive development in different sectors, most significantly in healthcare, sports, and fitness sectors (Wilson & Laing, 2018). This exponential growth of wearable technologies can be attributed to increased scientific research together with maturing computer technology to reduce size, improve sensors, lower costs, increase computational power and reduce power consumption (Motti, 2020; Wright & Keith, 2014). More importantly, health-related devices such as personal and fitness trackers flourished during these years making it possible to monitor and track different physiological and health behaviors throughout the day (Goodyear & Armour, 2018; Soltani & Morice, 2020; Wright & Keith, 2014).

2.2. Wearable technology, innovation and education
Even with the ubiquity of wearable technology in recent years, there still is a lack of research on wearables in education (Bower & Sturman, 2015; Labus, Milutinović, Stepanić, Stevanović, & Mililnović, 2015). Bower and Sturman (2015) argue that this scarcity of research causes the educational field to miss out on harnessing the true possibilities of wearable technologies in teaching and learning. According to Huang, Spector, and Yang (2019), there are four emerging types of technologies that have the potential to improve learning and instruction and wearable technology is one of them, the rest being artificial intelligence, learning analytics, and adaptive learning. In education, wearable technology offers many opportunities in teacher-student interaction, student engagement, contextual learning, evaluation, feedback and more (Demir & Demir, 2018). It can also contribute to learning in the context of technology-modified lifelong learning theory and situated learning theory by serving as a tool that is highly portable, individual, unobtrusive, ubiquitous, useful and intuitive (Sharples, 2000). Thus, there is a need for empirical research to understand the extent and nature of wearable technology in education (Sawaya, 2015).

Silverman (1997) foresaw the impact of technology in physical education as to contribute to students’ activity levels, and promote health and enjoyable physical activity. More distinctly, fitness and activity trackers are valuable tools for learning physical activities which usually require monitoring physiological data, repetitions, feedback and motor skills (Motti, 2019). One study looked into the possibility of adapting wearable technology for physical education in the form of exercise games or what is known as “exergames” and found that the gamification approach, in combination with wearable technology, was efficient in keeping students engaged and their heartrate elevated (Lindberg, Seo, & Laine, 2016).

Innovation has been a key factor for human progress in every discipline including education. Links emerge between industry and education sectors when looked at through an innovation standpoint where every half a century or so, new paradigms of educational, pedagogical, and curricular revolutions occur that are caused by Kondratieff's cycles (T. Baumann, Mantay, Swanger, Saganski, & Stepke, 2016). Various theories and models have been the basis of research on innovation in different sectors including education (Demirci & Ersoy, 2008; Khakurel, Immonen, Porras, & Knutas, 2019). These include, but not limited to, diffusion of innovation theory (Rogers, 2003), disruptive innovation (Christensen, 2003), theory of reasoned action (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991), technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989), and technology readiness index (TRI) (Parasuraman, 2000).

Innovations in education frequently address learning and teaching theory and practice, with emphasis on curriculum, learners, instructors, support system, community and culture (Serdyukov, 2017). These are either evolutionary “sustaining” innovations, leading to incremental improvements through constant efforts, or revolutionary “disruptive” innovations, leading to drastic changes in a short time (Serdyukov, 2017). Such innovations start with a perceived need or desire to change, or a tendency to explore new possibilities (Borthwick et al., 2015). However, their success is based on how disruptive and innovative the application is to its users (Soltani & Morice, 2020). Moreover, due to human, organizational and technological factors, these innovations are prone to fail just like in any other sector (Huang et al., 2019). Thus, pinpointing some of these factors is essential for the success of innovations in education.

Technology advancements continue to support and enhance the objective monitoring of school-based physical activity using wearable technology (Ye & Chia, 2008), making wearables prominent in physical education research (Kretschmann, 2016). However, literature on the use and integration of wearable technology in physical education remains dominated by fitness and activity trackers. The reason behind this is that for physical education instructors such wearables are unobtrusive, easy to use, not restricted to age, and cost-efficient (Baert, 2011). Fitbit, Garmin, Polar, Xiaomi, Withings, and Apple, as shown by Fig. 1, are some examples of these trackers.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (403KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Examples of fitness and activity trackers (from left to right: Fitbit Flex, Garmin Vivosmart HR, Polar A370, Xiaomi Mi Band 5, Withings Pulse HR, Apple Watch).

Studies of these kinds of wearables examine the monitoring of physical performance with heart-rate monitors to maintain healthy heart rate within a target zone (Furger, 2001), and the use of inertial sensors and heart rate meter to detect physical activity (Lindberg et al., 2016). There are also research interests in obtaining and learning about data from physical activities using wearable fitness trackers (Lee, Drake, & Williamson, 2015), and examining the feasibility of using wearable devices to measure physical activity in physical education (Schaefer, Van Loan, & German, 2014).

2.3. Readiness for technology integration: a conceptual framework
In the context of this research, one of the prominent human factors that determine development and innovation in education is teachers' readiness for technology integration and implementation (Al-Awidi & Aldhafeeri, 2017; Gülbahar, 2007; Singh & Chan, 2014). Since innovation and technology readiness measures are greatly aligned (Moyle, 2010), it is crucial to explore teachers' readiness to integrate technology because it determines the conceptual capacity and attitude in initiating, developing, or adopting innovations in education (Wall, 1996). Literature reveals that teachers have shown their readiness and ability to adopt technology in different subject areas (Culp, Honey, & Mandinach, 2016; Summak, Bağlıbel, & Samancıoğlu, 2010). However, as new innovations keep surfacing with newer potential applications, the need to continuously reassess teachers' readiness for technology integration is essential. More specifically is physical education teacher’ readiness and attitudes to integrate technology into their subject which has limited coverage in scientific research (Borysova & Vlasyuk, 2014).

Motivation theories such as Expectancy-Value Theory (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000) offer constructs to explain the motives behind teachers' readiness for wearable technology integration in physical education. The theory posits that individuals' motivation is fostered by their expectancy and value beliefs for immediate or future success during their tasks (Andersson & Palm, 2018). Using the theory, a recent study found that expectancy and value beliefs were strong, yet differential, predictors of teachers’ technology use and integration in classrooms (Cheng, Lu, Xie, & Vongkulluksn, 2020).

2.3.1. Wearable technology design and use
Research suggests that wearable technology designs that promote fitness also delivers positive cognitive, behavioral, and affective effects (Barbee, 2017), allowing for use in various settings such as work and education. Evidence also suggests positive links between frequency, intensity, and time (FIT) values and the use of wearable tracking devices, thus enabling educators to build upon wearable technology use into theory-based course curriculum (McFadden & Li, 2019).

Technological factors on the other hand deal greatly with design aspects (Huang et al., 2019). The vast majority of new digital innovations are not necessarily designed with their intended use in education yet they still find their way in educational settings (Sawaya, 2015), even when some of their features (i.e. small screens or short battery life) negatively influence their integration in education (Churchill & Hedberg, 2008). Wearables that are comfortable, have engaging features, and fit the wearer properly are estimated to have the best level of compliance with physical education (Schaefer et al., 2014). Hence, design-based research and design methodologies have been adopted in educational research to systemically plan, integrate, and implement innovations that iteratively emphasize design by continuous collaboration and involvement of teachers (Huang et al., 2019). Generally, researchers, developers, and designers of digital innovation in education need to consider teachers’ technology readiness when adopting technology-enhanced teaching approaches for effective teaching presence (Geng, Law, & Niu, 2019).

2.3.2. Technological innovation conditions and integration in physical education
Literature on innovation conditions in schools suggests that leadership and organizational factors play a critical role in the emergence and sustainability of technological innovations (Law, 2008). Creating conditions for innovation aids in developing necessary capabilities and behaviors within organizations (Arshi, 2016). Personal development through training also presents conditions for innovation (Murray, Caulier-Grice, & Mulgan, 2010), qualifying teachers to become specialists in spotting, developing, and growing innovative ideas.

The literature also argues that professional development and physical education teacher education (PETE) programs must guide faculties on how to integrate technology seamlessly in physical education (Baert, 2011). According to Kretschmann (2016), integrating technology into physical education classes can be beneficiary in different contexts including; (a) coursework and theory, (b) knowledge input and output, (c) learning stations, (d) feedback, in addition to (e) tracking physical activity.

This study argues that when teachers, namely physical education teachers, are presented with new digital innovations such as wearable technologies that could contribute to their subject and encompass new teaching methods, their readiness plays a great role for that technology to be successfully integrated. Thus, inadequate readiness and poor wearable technology design could impede the success of wearable technology integration in physical education. Therefore, this study is important because it empirically explores physical education teachers’ perspectives on their readiness for wearable technology integration in physical education. With that in mind, this study conceptualizes a preliminary model, as shown in Fig. 2, constructed from literature insights to answer the following questions:

RQ.1

What conditions of wearable technology determine physical education teachers' readiness for integrating digital innovation in physical education?

RQ.2

How does wearable technology design influence technology use in physical education?

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (237KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Preliminary model of readiness for wearable technology integration.

3. Research methodology
This research applies a case study design (Yin, 2017) positioned within a constructivist epistemology (Duffy & Jonassen, 2013) to capture perspectives of different expert respondents i.e. physical education teachers. The constructivist view argues that constructing knowledge is heavily influenced by life experiences that may not necessarily be individual or subjective without external reference (Beck & Kosnik, 2006). This view also contends that meaning is rooted and indexed by experience, and we impose that meaning to the world rather than it existing independently of us, thus situating cognitive experiences in authentic activities (Duffy & Jonassen, 2013). Therefore, constructivist epistemology guides researchers towards inductive reasoning of modern society (Cox, 2018), and this research opts for this philosophy to enable the physical education teachers’ offer insights based on their cognitive experiences.

Similarly, the case study design was selected because: (1) the focus of this research is on the “what?” and “how?” digital innovations can be integrated in physical education (see Appendix A); and (2) inability to manipulate or influence physical education teachers’ behaviors (Baxter & Jack, 2008; Yin, 2017). Furthermore, an overview of the most frequent approaches to qualitative research in education (Fraenkel, Wallen, & Hyun, 2019) reveals that case study design is the most appropriate since the primary aim of this research is to capture the perspectives of expert physical education teachers on readiness for wearable technology integration in physical education.

3.1. Data collection
Data for the research involves the State of Kuwait where the educational system consists of the common 3-level school system with physical education being a basic school subject for all grades and spanning all three-school levels. According to Kuwait's Central Statistical Bureau (2019), the total number of teachers in Kuwait's 3-level public school system excluding kindergarten is 63,110, as shown in Table 1. The total number of Kuwaiti teachers is 39,254 (62%), with 2691 (7%) physical education teachers.


Table 1. Total teachers in Kuwait 3-level public educational system.

School level	Kuwaiti teachers	Non-Kuwaiti teachers	Total
Male	Female	Male	Female
Elementary school	Boys	999	7219	897	3471	12,586
Girls	0	10,019	0	2936	12,955
Middle school	4408	9184	4968	3791	22,351
High school	2296	5129	3653	4140	15,218
Total	7703	31,551	9518	14,338	Grand total
63,110
39,254	23,856
Note. Adapted from (Central Statistical Bureau, 2019).

Due to the unforeseen circumstances of the ongoing coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic and enforced curfew laws, as well as the postponement of the educational system in the State of Kuwait, a purposive sampling (Fraenkel et al., 2019) was adopted. For this sample, the study purposively identified four different categories for selecting physical education teachers to ensure inclusiveness; years of experience (>10 years), academic level (bachelor, master, PhD), school level (elementary, middle, high), and current position (teacher, head of department, department supervisor, administrative position). Initial participants selected according to these categories were then requested to recommend other participants who would be willing to enroll in the study. Data gathered for the study is based on interview responses from 38 public school physical education teachers, including one assistant principal and one department supervisor who were former physical education teachers. Case participants were all males with years of experience ranging from 11 to 23 years (M = 16.05, SD = 3.162), with various career experiences, academic degrees, and teaching at different school levels, as shown in Table 2. Due to uncertainty and anxiety caused by COVID-19 and inherent personal and cultural concerns typical of the GCC region, the females PE teachers contacted during the study were unwilling to take part in the study. Participants identities are kept anonymous and their names were replaced with codes (INT_01 to INT_38) to maintain their privacy (see Appendix B).


Table 2. Descriptive statistics of case study participants.

Frequency	Percent
School level	Elementary School	9	23.7
Middle School	11	28.9
High School	18	47.4
Total	38	100.0
Academic degree	Bachelor's	10	26.3
Master's	14	36.8
PhD	14	36.8
Total	38	100.0
Current position	Teacher	27	71.1
Head of Department	9	23.7
Assistant Principala	1	2.6
Department Supervisora	1	2.6
Total	38	100.0
a
Former physical education teacher.

Due to COVID-19 physical distancing mandates, and with growing evidence suggesting that telephone interviews can be as productive as traditional face-to-face interviews (Bolderston, 2012); all semi-structured interviews were conducted over phone calls between April and May 2020. Interviews were conducted using a Sony Xperia Z5 Premium smartphone running on Android mobile operating system version 7.1.1. Calls were recorded electronically with interviewees consent using the Call Recorder app version 6.07.1 which automatically saves calls into an AMR audio format. The interview calls lasted between ~20 and 60 min (M = 38.66, SD = 10.006) after which interview sessions were transcribed verbatim using Microsoft Word.

3.2. Data analysis
This study uses analytic induction (Hammersley, 2004; Katz, 2001) to support framing of insights from collecting interview data to theory formation, as conceptualized in the preliminary model. Generally deemed the most common form of qualitative inquiry; analytic induction requires rich analysis of complex social phenomena through examination, comparison, coding and organization of data (Pascale, 2010).

ATLAS.ti software version 8.4.4 for qualitative data analysis was used on Apple MacBook Pro running macOS Catalina version 10.15.5 to analyze the data. The analysis of the data was based on thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006) to code and interpret summaries and key features of large bodies of data. The software was chosen because of its capabilities in storing, organizing, managing and analyzing case study research with thematic grouping and coding functionalities, facilitating cross- and within-case analyses (Bassett, 2010).

Three qualitative research techniques during the study ensure the validity and reliability of the data. First, member checking, a procedure involving participants in validating the accuracy of qualitative research documentation (Fraenkel et al., 2019), was used to send each interview transcript back to the participant for review and reporting on their revision or confirmation of the transcript. Second, external auditing, a method of involving independent expert review in providing objective assessment of the process and results in qualitative research (Bolderston, 2012), was conducted by an independent and experienced assistant professor at Kuwait University for evaluation as well as providing backward translation for data consistency. This process also benefits from comments on the identified themes by a panel of seven independent researchers during a workshop conducted virtually (due to COVID-19 restrictions) to get feedback on the main research findings. Third, data analysis triangulation (Evers & van Staa, 2010) was conducted through two approaches, (a) data source triangulation; gathering data from physical education teachers from different academic, career and school levels, at different hours throughout the day, and (b) data type triangulation; audio recorded interviews and documented transcripts, in parallel to following up with informal text messaging. Fig. 3 demonstrates data analysis process.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (311KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Data analysis framework.

4. Findings
Focusing on dimensions priorly conceptualized in Fig. 2, this section presents the main case study findings as eight main themes derived from the data, summarized by Table 3.


Table 3. Main themes from case study.

Dimension	Case themes	Theme description	Sample responses
Technological innovation conditions in education	Attitudinal shift through training and timeliness	Ensuring readiness through professional development and changing mindsets	“Teacher readiness including expertise and training on how to use the technology, as well as awareness.” (INT_20)
“… physical education teachers' ICT general expertise which can be improved with personal development and training sessions and seminars.” (INT_34)
Adequate capabilities through investment and infrastructure	Emphasizing administrative expenditure policy and preparation of physical education facilities	“The ministry should consider raising physical education department budget and try to spend more on improved facilities by preparing them for technology applications.” (INT_09)
“Preparing technology infrastructures for both indoor and outdoor physical education facilities.” (INT_35)
Adaptive use for performance and practicality	Anticipating adaptability through practical solutions to assess physical performance	“I cannot visualize how it can be implemented in physical education since it's a practical subject and needs practical solutions but I'm sure there are ways to do so, albeit I cannot comprehend how.” (INT_22)
“We have 25–30 students in each class and there's only one teacher, and one of the most important parts of our lessons is physical fitness … It will be almost impossible to teach them all equally or attend to them all during a short period of physical exercises because they all have individual differences. If you do not use the right tools and technologies to assist you in knowing who's performing correctly or who's underperforming then you won't reach good results.” (INT_31)
Wearable technology design considerations for physical education	Device customization and comfort to support convenient use	Design options for aesthetics and increased comfort through convenience and inclusion	“It should be very light, preferably without a screen because it may cause distraction during class. Better yet, the overall design should be customizable (with/without screen, different types of band materials, different colors). This way it will be easier to make each device grade specific or to avoid any personal differences with students such as allergy to the band material.” (INT_22)
“I think it suits schools better because it can be customized by fit and color for each grade. If that is not possible or if becomes too bulky with batteries then the wristband design is the second choice. Other than that, the device must be light and customizable.” (INT_25)
Material safety and simplicity to prevent user injuries	Design precautions to guarantee safe-use and improved wearability	“I think a wristband design is the best for students. It should be simple, light and made from rubber material so that it doesn't cause any injury to the one wearing it or anyone near him during exercise.” (INT_05)
“Device location should be somewhere that doesn't harm the student or those around him so I think the upper arm is the best location, and it should be very light and easily attachable/detachable.” (INT_36)
Wearable technology use for physical education	Positive tracking and transformation to promote effective exercises	Progressive tracking of physical activity for better provision of data and transformative physical activity results	“I've used smartwatches but only with limited functions, I didn't use all its functions. It's a great tool that helped me keep track of time during my classes.” (INT_10)
“I've used fitness trackers before and they were good in tracking my daily activity. It was a very optimistic experience when I first got my tracker which made me exercise more often than usual. I just love seeing the results after playing football.” (INT_12)
Vital information and indicators to curb sedentary behavior	Digital quantification of vital data with alerts to encourage more physical activity	“It tells me how good I have performed and what exactly have I achieved today.” (INT_04)
“… it alerts me to stand up or drink water which is a good reminder with notifications than sedentary behavior especially in the workplace.” (INT_02)
Technological innovation integration in education	Flexible connections and costs to improve system access	Conceptualizations of system availability, interconnectivity, cost-effectiveness and administrative accessibility.	“The best available system is the smartwatch or smart band. Their costs are becoming cheaper lately and I can see how they might have some potential in teaching physical education.” (INT_07)
“A lot of people use apple devices and they are all interconnected but the measurements that the apple watch takes isn't necessarily accurate. I cannot recall their brand names but there are other devices and systems more efficient and accurate for application in schools and physical education. I think one of them is called Fitbit. Those are more accurate because they are made for athletes and active people, unlike the apple watch which is more of a personal device that has some fitness tracking features. Even though I think you don't really need accuracy more than practicality for education.” (INT_11)
4.1. Technological innovation conditions in physical education
Since good education systems, greater levels of technological readiness and innovation are regarded essential for economic progress (Moyle, 2010), it is necessary to examine themes associated with conditions that enable physical education teachers’ readiness for wearable technology use and integration in physical education.

4.1.1. Attitudinal shift through training and timeliness
Interview data suggests that physical education is a practical subject with minimal to nonexistent use of technology in Kuwait. Even though the physical education teachers interact with technology on daily basis (like using their mobile phones, and more specifically wearable peripherals such as wireless headsets and smartwatches) there is a general agreement in the study that technology integration in physical education depends on professional development through training, seminars, workshops or any means of preparing physical education teachers for technology integration, for instance interviewees noted that:

“We will need proper training and workshops to prepare teachers to use any new technology” (INT_02)

“There are too many but, in my opinion, having extensive workshops for teachers is the most important” (INT_04)

Training physical education teachers for wearable technology integration during physical education classes is not only to give them hands-on experience with wearable technology, rather it is necessary to create a mindset shift. This is very evident in the present situation where most major school subjects are transitioning towards distance learning in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic whereas physical education as a subject is perceived as being left behind, as follows:

“Mental readiness and cognitive competence, because these technological tools are already available in the market but we need a shift in the mindset of our teachers and students, as well as preparing them to adopt these technologies” (INT_31)

“This begins way before education; we need to reconsider our methods of selecting physical education teachers when they enter college or specialize in physical education. They need to be enthusiastic about their future job or new career. They need to understand that their job requires continuous self-development. We need to make sure they have the right mindset and attitude for the job. Once we manage to provide schools with qualified physical education teachers, we will have better chances in succeeding with any new educational approach such as introducing technology to physical education” (INT_23)

Interviewees also showed concerns regarding time consumption, noting that integrating wearable technology should not consume time from an already short class period, i.e.

“Now, if the technology we want to implement in physical education doesn't consume time or space from the lesson then I can see how it might be useful” (INT_18)

“Preparing adequate time and place for technology. Those two are the most important factors for applying technology in physical education” (INT_33)

4.1.2. Adequate capabilities through investment and infrastructure
An important theme from the case revolves around the need for adequate capabilities where the ministry facilitates physical education departments’ expenditures by allocating budgets, investing in quality tools and equipment, and improving indoor and outdoor facilities (INT_09, INT_16, and INT_35), but most importantly is a need to invest in new technologies, with comments on:

“Our education budgeting in Kuwait is fairly good but we need a committee to organize the expenditure and focus on bringing new useful technologies to schools” (INT_24)

“… finding what's new and unique in the field of educational technology and finding ways to make them fit in our educational system” (INT_07)

Moreover, since physical education facilities are designed for physical activity and sports use, there appears to be a perception that the subject rarely ever has good infrastructure for technology integration. Thus, for readiness, some interviewees pointed out the need for investing in the infrastructure to better accommodate new technologies, as follows:

“Well prepared facilities with good infrastructure to incorporate different types of technologies” (INT_18)

“Infrastructure, such as providing the right tools and equipment, and tech support for that technology” (INT_27)

4.1.3. Adaptive use for performance and practicality
Another important theme is derived from the practicality of physical education as a subject. Practical issues need practical solutions. This notion, combined with the current mindset of physical education teachers, result in uncertainty regarding the practicality of using technology in general for physical education, i.e.

“Using it (wearable technology) for physical education is not a good idea as physical education is a practical subject” (INT_37)

“Its (wearable technology) importance significantly drops for physical education due to the practical nature of the subject” (INT_38)

However, unlike other types of technologies, wearable technologies could be adapted for practical use even if they are not guaranteed to be highly accurate, as one interviewee indicates:

“Even though I think you don't really need accuracy more than practicality for education.” (INT_11)

Furthermore, interviewees emphasize that in order to adopt and integrate wearable technologies in physical education these particular technologies have to be adapted for student performance, noting that:

“If you do not use the right tools and technologies to assist you in knowing who's performing correctly or who's underperforming then you won't reach good results” (INT_31)

“It (wearable technology) could make them (students) discover how to improve their performance without having to ask for assistance from someone else” (INT_34)

4.2. Wearable technology design for physical education
There was a broad consensus among interviewees regarding wearable technology design for physical education. In this theme, innovation supports device customization and comfort, material safety and design simplicity of wearable technology for convenient use in physical education.

4.2.1. Device customization and comfort to support convenient use
Interviewees were eager to share their conceptualizations of wearable technology designs for physical education. One of the subthemes mentioned was wearable devices customizability. This ability is important because it can help in distinguishing different school grades or genders as well as addressing students’ individual differences. One interviewee commented:

“… the overall design should be customizable. This way it will be easier to make each device grade specific or to avoid any personal differences with students such as allergy” (INT_22)

Moreover, interviewees acknowledge that wearable devices must be light, convenient, and easy to wear (INT_12, INT_03 and INT_24), which offers wearable technology design hints for use in physical education.

Some wearable technology designs are more convenient for use than others. According to one interviewee, “the headset isn't comfortable around the nose” (INT_32), with most interviewees agreed that the best type of wearable technology for physical education is a wrist-worn band design (see Appendix C). One interviewee who worked on designing wearable technologies for professional athletes noted:

“I prefer wristband designs. Wristband design is perfect for students because chest strap/belt design usually have some issues like having to remove clothes in order to wear it” (INT_31)

4.2.2. Material safety and simplicity to prevent user injuries
Ensuring students' safety is of utmost importance in school environments. Interviewees showed their concerns regarding wearable technology as it might cause student injuries during class. One interviewee commented “it shouldn't cause any injury to the one wearing it or anyone near him during exercise” (INT_05). Here, the material plays a significant role in preventing injuries, i.e.

“… it (wearable technology) has to be very secure and safe to use, no harmful material or rough edges” (INT_10)

“the material should be rubbery and somewhat stretchable, does not have sharp or hard edges so that it doesn't cause harm or injury during exercise” (INT_12)

Wearables are being used to assess physiological and psychological attributes. They can also be used to moderate safety risks. Even so, one interviewee has the impression that even with some of the aforementioned precautions there is no way of ensuring the device safety unless every design aspect is taken into consideration.

“… even in this location (wrist-worn) it could be potentially dangerous for physical activity unless there are safety measures taken into consideration with soft and rubbery and elastic material that doesn't have any sharp edges.” (INT_22)

Another design element in wearable technology is device simplicity. This is acknowledged by interviewees when they argued that “just make it as simple as possible” (INT_31) and “It (wearable technology) should be simple” (INT_05).

4.3. Wearable technology use in physical education
This dimension concentrates on wearable technology use in the context of physical education to unravel their potential application. The general focus here is on exercise tracking, physical activity transformation, vital information and indicators, as presented in the next subthemes.

4.3.1. Positive tracking and transformation to promote effective exercises
Fundamental for facilitating the use of wearable technology in physical education is the device's ability to track and promote physical exercise and daily activity. Fitness and activity trackers have become a prominent type of wearable technology for exercise. According to one interviewee:

“It was a very optimistic experience when I first got my tracker which made me exercise more often than usual” (INT_12)

Wearable devices like fitness trackers not only keep track of exercise and daily activity rather they positively (INT_23) and effectively (INT_04) promote more exercise through transforming the individual's physical activity. One interviewee noted:

“It's really impressive how it transformed my physical activity. When my effort is around 80%, I tend to push a little bit more thanks to the tracker data. Even when I don't feel like exercising that day, like any other human we have ups and downs, my effort could be as low as 50% and I raise it up to 70% just by following the data on my wristband” (INT_20)

Furthermore, the concept of using wearable fitness trackers for physical education should not be exclusive to class time or school days. As one interviewee suggests, the tracker “can be taken home so that it keeps tracking physical activity throughout the day” (INT_14), expanding its use beyond class time. The same interviewee continues;

“Physical exercises are not exclusive to physical education classes so taking the device home will give the student more time to perform the exercises, as a homework for example, where the goal is set by the teacher” (INT_14)

4.3.2. Vital information and indicators to curb sedentary behavior
Wearable technologies, specifically fitness and activity trackers, use their embedded sensors to provide various information on health indicators. This collection of data can be very useful for physical education. More specifically, vital and soft biometric data can be used to improve performance, as noted:

“I think it was a great device that gave me insights on some of my vital variables. When I used it, I started seeing the effect of physical exercise on my body being quantified like heart-rate in beats per minute or oxygen level being circulated in my body and so on” (INT_11)

Another facet of wearable technology for physical education is key indicators that serve as notifications for the user. Notifications work as alerts to keep track of the timetable (INT_09) and display brief results and achievements (INT_12), but most notably work as a reminder to promote healthy habits and reduce sedentary behavior. According to one interviewee:

“it alerts me to stand up or drink water which is a good reminder with notifications than sedentary behavior” (INT_02)

4.3. Technological innovation integration in physical education
Recognizing the conditions, design and use of wearable technologies potentially paves the way for technology integration in physical education and this dimension offers themes on improving system access and creating innovative learning environments, as presented in the next subsections.

4.3.1. Flexible connections and costs to improve system access
Flexible connections are discernable when a bigger image is drawn to connect a larger network of users and give access for different ministries or multiple parties beside students and teachers, as noted by interviewees.

“Make the system interconnected between the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health so that in case a student has an unknown health condition the system will alert the teacher as well as health officials and vice versa” (INT_23)

“The system should provide access for all those who are involved … students, teachers, parents, administration personnel, supervisors and so on” (INT_35)

As wearable technologies become more ubiquitous, their costs become lower, making them obtainable, thus facilitating their integration into physical education learning environments, i.e.

“Their (smart bands) costs are becoming cheaper lately and I can see how they might have some potential in teaching physical education” (INT_07)

4.3.2. Innovative learning environments
Analyzing the interview transcripts shows four key contexts for innovative learning environment to integrate wearable technology in physical education: (a) collaboration-based learning environment to encourage joint and shared learning experiences between students and their peers, teachers, and support systems; (b) competition-based learning environment to support spirited and lively learning experiences that contribute to student excitement; (c) engagement-based learning environment to gain students attention and keep them engaged; and (d) evidence-based learning environment to log performance and provide evidence to shape student motivation. Some responses have a combination of two or more contexts for innovative learning environments and have been grouped accordingly for clarity with interview excerpts (see Appendix D).

5. Discussion
Overall, the findings from the case study suggest a range of themes that encompass physical education teachers’ readiness to use and integrate wearable technology for their instruction. Fig. 4 uses these themes to revise the preliminary model of readiness for wearable technology integration previously outlined in Fig. 2, while the next subsections discuss theoretical and practical implications of this revised model and the study as a whole.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (591KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Revised model of readiness for wearable technology integration.

5.1. Theoretical implications
From a theoretical perspective, this study contributes to academic literature in two main ways. First, this research is original in empirically exploring physical education teachers' perspectives on readiness to use and integrate wearable technologies as an innovation in physical education. Despite research previously undertaken on teachers' perspectives in various subject areas (Borthwick et al., 2015; Motti, 2019, 2020), and their use and integration of diverse types of wearable technology innovations in the educational sphere (Bower & Sturman, 2015; Demir & Demir, 2018; Lindberg et al., 2016); limited studies have focused on physical education teachers’ perspectives, especially their readiness to integrate wearable technologies in their instruction. This study offers insights to address this important gap by elaborating on technological and organizational conditions, shown by Fig. 4, concerning readiness for wearable technology integration, derived from the themes in the case study.

Second, the case findings support theorizations on the need for shifts in the mindsets of educators to embrace digital innovation during teaching and learning with students. Physical education teachers in the case study rarely use technology in their instruction since the perception is that physical education is mainly a practical subject. Thus, their views and attitudes towards technology in general are bound by technological and organizational constraints due to conditions from Fig. 4, as conceptualized in Fig. 5. These constraints play a major role in affecting their readiness for wearable technology integration, complementing prior studies on teachers' readiness for acquiring and developing their ICT skills through ongoing training and professional development (Al-Awidi & Aldhafeeri, 2017), and the use of digital innovations for physical education in educational organizations (Borysova & Vlasyuk, 2014). In that sense, if both technological and organizational constraints are low, physical education teachers tend to have fewer concerns in using and integrating wearable technology. Whereas if both technological and organization constraints are high, denoting most constraints are not met, physical education teachers are mostly not ready to integrate wearable technology. Moreover, if technological constraints are high and organizational constraints are low, physical education teachers require more training on that technology in order to be ready to integrate it in their instruction. Conversely, if technological constraints are low and organizational constraints are high, new wearable innovations and solutions are required to encourage integration. This is in line with literature regarding educational organizations’ readiness to initiate, develop, and adopt innovations (Wall, 1996).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (245KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Readiness for wearable technology integration.

The TRI model (Parasuraman, 2000) is unique in assessing propensity for technology use and this work supports such discourse but with focus on physical education. Since readiness is a broad term and has many interpretations beyond technology, the findings of this study expand on technology readiness by indicating conditions and constraints for physical education innovations. In particular, readiness constraints in terms of technological and organizational conditions should be taken into account for such innovations to be disruptive in physical education. As COVID-19 continues to disrupt physical school attendance throughout the world, physical education has become one of the few subjects with unique co-presence challenges for teachers and students due to the crisis. The implications for theory in this regard is the need for readiness conditions in technological innovations to accommodate for adequate capabilities by investing more in the infrastructure of technology for physical education, adapt the use of such innovations to improve exercise performance during physical education, and provide design considerations based on physical education teachers' perspectives. Thus, this study posits that physical education teachers' readiness for wearable technology integration is contingent upon the aforementioned technological and organizational conditions therefore addressing constraints in light of wearable technology educational affordances (Bower & Sturman, 2015) could facilitate the integration of future innovations in physical education. With innovation prospects post-COVID-19, insights formulated from physical education teachers' perspectives could pave the way for more technology use in physical education, transitioning it from typical face-to-face settings to ‘a new norm’ where hybrid approaches (Soltani & Morice, 2020) are more viable for instruction without physical interaction.

5.2. Practical implications
This study has three practical implications. First, given challenges to innovate for a post-COVID-19 era, there is an urgent need for developers of wearable technology to work on educational solutions, particularly for practical school subjects such as physical education. Findings suggest that physical education teachers need wearable technology to save class time rather than needlessly consume times. In other words, instead of having a technology that overwhelms through long setup and fitting times, wearable technologies need to be more practical for use through better wearability, making wearables such as fitness and activity trackers more convenient for physical education. This is evident in the case theme associated with adaptive use, and is supported by the findings in Appendix C where most physical education teachers consider fitness or activity tracker type as the most convenient type of wearable technology. Additionally, the findings of this study support crucial wearable technology design considerations for physical education in themes emphasizing device customization and material safety that allows comfortable use, improved wearability, and injury prevention during use in physical education class. The case also shows that at least one physical education teacher (INT_22) had concerns regarding the design of wearable technologies that have screens which could potentially cause distraction and hinder the learning process. This finding pertains to the negative side effects of prolonged access to information, leading to short attention and memory problems (Soltani & Morice, 2020). Therefore, developers and researchers should consider variables of readiness during multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary research for enhanced design and ergonomics of physical education wearables. Such design should provide solutions for physical education teachers in critical times when physical interaction is no longer an option.

Second, study findings have implications for institutional considerations. Since physical education contributes more in attaining a holistic life than any other school subject (Ahmad, 2015), a focus on readiness encourages collaboration between sectors and industries to bring out the best innovative solutions for physical education. Significantly, case study findings suggest the need for collaborations between the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health with a focus on managing and reducing general health risks through early detection and progressive health-related fitness tracking. Themes such as positive tracking, vital information and flexible connections urge collaborations that require interconnectivity between both ministries, and accessibility for different databases and user information. It does, however, require an immense level of security to maintain users’ privacy.

Third, the findings of this study suggest the importance of innovative learning environments for wearable technology integration in physical education. The findings indicate that physical education wearable devices should help achieve, in essence, collaborative, competitive, engaging, and learning experiences and environments based on evidence derived from the collected vital data to promote physical performance. Collaborative and competitive learning can provide interactive learning opportunities through wearable technology where students can interact with their peers and teachers. Engagement and evidence-based learning gives the user more freedom through tracking for better self-directed exercise performance. Hence, multifunctional tracking features and gamification approaches must become a focal point for researchers, developers and innovative teachers.

5.3. Limitations and future directions
While this study provides valuable findings, along with several theoretical and practical implications, it should be viewed in light of a few limitations. First, this study has been conducted in the State of Kuwait, which largely delimits its global generalizability even though evidence suggest applicability of the findings on a regional scale since Kuwait is part of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries that share similar culture and economy (Durugbo, Al-Jayyousi, & Almahamid, 2020). Future research should replicate this study in other countries and regions, and conduct comparative research between different cultural and economic samples. Second, Kuwait's educational system has gender segregation at all school levels. For this study, insights are limited to the perspective of male PE teachers within this system and there is a need to capture the views of female PE teachers for a more grounded view of readiness for countries and regions with similar contexts. In addition, the system also margins teaching career ladder to rarely exceed 20 years of experience since teachers frequently get nominated for promotion to administrative roles by that time. Future research should consider female physical education teachers and teachers with even more experience than the current sample as part of their study. Third, despite providing multiple perspectives in the case study, some divergent responses may have been omitted. For instance, a couple of interviewees (INT_8 and INT_27) had no first-hand experience with wearable technologies which rendered their response to a few questions insufficient. Thus, future research should consider cross-case and within-case analyses to determine possible outlier cases. Researchers should also consider examining physical education teachers' motivations for, and expectations of, wearable technology using motivation theories such as the Expectancy-Value Theory, and essentially, students' perspectives as they are the main end-user for technology as digital innovation in education.

6. Conclusion
Technology remains important for realizing practical solutions to challenges in everyday life, especially during times of crisis when innovation is essential. Wearable technologies are devices worn in proximity to the body, providing their users with data and information that could enhance learning in many ways. With educational prospects in areas of teacher-student interaction, engagement, evaluation, and feedback, these technologies offer innovative and practical solution for physical education delivery and assessment.

This article presents a case study that explores physical education teachers' perspectives on their readiness to use and integrate wearable technologies as an innovation in physical education. Positioned within a constructivist epistemology with inductive logic, the study derives concepts from literature and analyzes interview data collected from 38 Kuwaiti physical education teachers. The study addresses two main questions: ‘What conditions of wearable technology determine physical education teachers’ readiness for integrating digital innovation in physical education?’ (RQ.1), and ‘How does wearable technology design influence technology use in physical education?’ (RQ.2).

Findings from the case study suggest that physical education teachers’ readiness for wearable technology use and integration depends on a combination of technological and organizational conditions. These conditions involve attitudinal shift through timeliness and training, adequate capabilities through infrastructure and investment, adaptive use for practicality and performance, device customization and comfort, material simplicity and safety, positive tracking and transformation, vital information and indicators, and flexible connections and costs (answering RQ.1). Further findings suggest physical education teachers have concerns about design aspects of wearable technology in regards to material design and device convenience for physical education. Addressing these concerns calls for innovative learning environments that influence technology through collaborative, competitive, engaging, and evidence-based learning experiences in physical education through wearable technologies that provide comfortable use, improved wearability, and injury prevention (answering RQ.2).

Theoretically, this study expands on literature by shedding the spotlight on readiness constraints for innovations in physical education. Practically, the study broadens institutional considerations and urges interconnectivity through collaboration between different sectors and industries to provide a practical subject with practical solutions using wearable technologies. In summary, this study seeks to advance research on wearable technologies in physical education by focusing on teachers' readiness as a premise for enhancing use and integration. The expectation is that the study's findings will add to and support the discourse, debate, design and development of future digital innovation for physical education.

