Dashboards have been hypothesized to facilitate adaptive guidance in classrooms. Thus far, however, empirical studies in this domain are badly missing. We present a dashboard, which enables teachers to observe concurrent groups as they engage in mathematical tasks using Dynamic Geometry tools and to guide groups when their intervention is needed. We rely on a case study with this dashboard in which a single teacher could successfully orchestrate the progression of several groups working on difficult problems in geometry, when being sent realtime alerts about critical moments, moments whose occurrence may impinge on further co-construction of knowledge. In the present study, we chose six 20-min long demo videos of small groups in a variety of sessions of unguided group work, where each video describes the work of one of six small groups (dyads or triads) dealing simultaneously with identical set tasks. Two versions of this demo were prepared, one with alerts of critical moments generated according to predefined rules, and the other without alerts. The teachers observing concurrent groups and being updated about critical moments (N1 = 21) better understand progression in groups than teachers that are not informed about these critical moments (N2 = 18). In a second study we found that the dispatching of alerts impinges on the ways the teachers navigate across rooms. In particular, they pay attention to certain alerts and at the same time, focus on learning processes in mathematics. We conclude that such tools may help bringing collaborative settings more often in classrooms.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Computer-supported collaborative learning

Collaborative learning

Orchestration

1. Introduction
Peer interaction is essential for learning and development (e.g., Rogoff, 1990). It is not necessarily productive, though. Learning or development mostly occurs when all participants are active and coordinate their actions – when collaboration takes place. Influential agencies such as OECD have included collaborative skills among those to be acquired in the 21st century (OECD, 2016). Such agencies as well as Ministries of Education consider the acquisition of collaborative skills beyond their instrumental role in promoting learning and development, seeing this acquisition as an end in itself (Ludvigsen et al., 2015). The implementation of collaborative practices in classrooms is however a challenge (Wise & Schwarz, 2017). The natural setting for enacting collaboration is the small group. Guidance which is adaptive to the needs of the learners is necessary for collaboration to occur (Rummel, Walker, & Aleven, 2016). Arranging the class in multiple small groups turns the role of teacher, in the adaptive guidance of coordination of actions to be very complex (Dillenbourg, 2013).

In the last decades, researchers in the Learning Sciences have identified the potentialities of technologies for fostering collaboration. They established an important direction called Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) for fostering collaboration in learning tasks. They identified technological design principles for enabling what they called orchestration (Dillenbourg, 2013) – the adaptive guidance of multiple groups working in a classroom, and developed dashboards for such guidance. The actual use of such tools in real classrooms has relatively remained an untrodden path in the research field. It is not clear whether tools facilitate orchestration or add insurmountable complexity to the role of teachers in guiding students arranged in small groups.

The present paper capitalizes on existing CSCL software – Virtual Math Teams (VMT) (Stahl, 2009), for solving geometry problems in collaborative small group settings and on Dynamic Geometry tools for developing a dashboard to facilitate the orchestration of multiple groups. We used Machine Learning techniques to provide teachers real-time alerts about what we called critical moments as they occurred in groups working simultaneously. We investigate whether the dashboard and the alerts we provided can help teachers in orchestrating multiple groups simultaneously engaged in learning tasks. Since comparing orchestration in different classes may involve confounding variables, we decided to provide the teachers with the same simultaneous work of multiple groups as demo clips that display interactions of parallel groups in the dashboard. The teachers could navigate in the dashboard in any way they wished. In a first study, we compare what we call (and clarify later on) the understanding of group progression whose necessity for orchestration of group work rises from our review of the research in two conditions: with and without alerts about critical moments. In a second study, we compare the tactics teachers in the two conditions adopt for navigating across the rooms of the groups. The two studies provide new paths about the potentiality of dashboards for helping teacher orchestrate learning of students collaborating in groups in classrooms.

2. Theoretical background
2.1. Collaborative learning and educational settings
The potential of collaborative settings for learning and development in classroom settings has been recognized by researchers in mathematics education. For example, Cobb and colleagues (Cobb & Bauersfeld, 1995; Cobb, Stephan, McClain, & Gravemeijer, 2001) showed that the small group is an essential context for instilling social or socio-mathematical norms, and for fostering mathematical reasoning. However, the collaborative context is not sufficient in itself and a body of evidence suggests that, for group discussion to be productive, students should share their ideas and support them with reasons, discuss different views and resolve these to achieve group consensus (Howe, 2010; Mercer & Howe 2012; Mercer & Littleton, 2007). Other studies have shown that collaborative settings may even be detrimental for learning. For example, Barron (2003) studied small groups of students engaged in solving mathematical problems and showed that collaborative settings often lead smart students to fail in coordinating their actions, and in solving the problems presented.

Until the end of the last millennium, traditional (non-collaborative) methods of instruction have still remained dominant in schools (Jacobs et al., 2006; Kawanaka & Stigler, 1999). According to Barnes (2000), the main reason for the persistence of non-collaborative practices was practical: The difficulties in the transition to more active use of collaborative pedagogy can be explained by the fact that organizing and sustaining collaborative learning is very challenging for teachers, as it demands that they coordinate and perform multiple educational tasks interchangeably. What adds to the difficulty, as Barnes points out, is an apparent conflict between the practices of this teacher who introduced a collaborative learning approach into her classroom with norms of competition and rote learning, which prevailing in the school in general, and in other mathematics classes in particular. Staples (2007) assumed that the lack of implementation of collaborative learning could be attributed to “an underdeveloped understanding of the roles teachers must enact to successfully organize and participate in collaborative classroom practices” (p. 211).

In spite of these difficulties and of mitigated results concerning the productivity of collaborative settings, the potential of collaborative activity for promoting students’ learning and group work has turned the implementation of collaborative settings to quite common throughout the world (Galton & Hargreaves, 2009; Howe, 2010; Mercer & Littleton, 2007; Slavin, 2009). In an interesting study, Hofmann and Mercer (2016) observed how mathematics and science teachers in secondary schools intervene in classrooms in which their students are arranged in small groups. The study showed that teachers intervene in three cases: when groups (a) attain a correct solution, (b) have no idea or (c) propose a wrong idea/solution. Also, the interventions were often authoritative. Hofman and Mercer did not report on teachers' monitoring of solution processes, beyond watching and listening. The study is important because it is a large scale study that shows that teachers try to help collaborative work in classrooms (see Stein, Engle, Smith, & Hughes, 2008, for similar results). However, the organization of small-group collaborative problem solving in classrooms in say, 5 to 8 groups of 3–4 learners make it difficult for teachers to provide adaptive guidance of groups of learners in classrooms. In the next section, we will see that a new scientific community has developed a research direction based on the design of dedicated technologies to overcome the above constraints.

2.2. The Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) agenda
The Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) community sees collaboration not (only) as a means to attain beneficial cognitive or social outcomes, but as an end in itself. At the beginning of this ideological movement, CSCL scientists designed numerous technologies in order to replace human guidance by providing computer affordances for desirable actions (Stahl, Koshmann & Suthers, 2006), thereby facilitating unguided 5 collaborative work by students. The technologies enabled new discourse practices with different synchronies and enriched blended multimodalities (oral, chat, computermediated actions, gestures). The CSCL community rapidly recognized that human guidance was indispensable and began studying how teachers could use CSCL tools to scaffold collaboration (e.g., Dillenbourg, Jarvela, & Fischer, 2011). The impact of the CSCL community on the implementation of collaborative practices in schools is limited, though. The large-scale case studies undertaken in Hong Kong and Singapore (Chan, 2011; Law et al., 2013; Looi, So, Toh, & Chen, 2011) are exceptions. The difficulties CSCL scientists encounter are linked to the aforementioned challenge of teachers’ guidance of learning processes in and across several small groups working concurrently. They began handling this challenge by providing dedicated technologies for orchestration.

2.3. Guidance of small groups and orchestration in educational settings
We already reported that collaborative settings have become common in classrooms, but that the interventions of the teachers are generally not very elaborated. The research literature on the effectiveness of collaborative learning in classrooms shows that it depends both on the quality of student interaction (e.g., Soller & Lesgold, 2007), and on the teacher's guidance over collaboration (Gillies et al., 2008). Kaendler, Wiedmann, Rummel, and Spada (2015) showed that this guidance must include monitoring, supporting, consolidating and reflecting – a difficult endeavor to accomplish in classrooms, where students work in parallel small groups. Webb (2009) has used understanding learning processes in groups to describe what the monitoring component of the guidance of parallel small groups. We use the term understanding of group progression to stress that this monitoring is a real-time process.

CSCL scientists call the management of real-time guidance over multilayered activities in a classroom context orchestration (Dillenbourg, 2013). The basic assumption of CSCL scientists is that dedicated technologies can facilitate orchestration of collaborating groups. Accordingly, orchestration tools were recently developed. They take data concerning collaborating students as input and provide analyses or visualizations of the data to teachers for the benefit of more effective teacher guidance of student collaboration (van Leeuwen & Rummel, 2019). Orchestration tools often build upon learning analytics (measurement, collection, analysis, and reporting of data about learners and their contexts, for purposes of understanding and optimizing learning and the environments in which it occurs (Lang, Siemens, Wise, & Gasevic, 2017). Such orchestration tools is called by Schwendimann et al. (2017) learning dashboards in the following terms: “a single display that aggregates different indicators about learner(s), learning process(es) and/or learning context(s) into one or multiple visualizations.” (p. 8). van Leeuwen and Rummel (2019) reviewed current research on the orchestration tools, and identified its three main functions -- mirroring, alerting, and advising. Mirroring dashboards provide information about learners to support monitoring of collaborative activity (interpretation is leaved to the teacher). Alerting dashboards provide the classroom status and indicate students in need of attention. Advising dashboards provide not only the classroom status and alerts about groups that may be in need of support, but also offer advice on how to address those issues. Recent research explores how dashboards can be designed to support teachers in realtime, in real-world classrooms (Matuk, Tissenbaum, & Schneider, 2019). Additionally, it takes a critical look at some of the challenges related to using real-time data. For instance, Tisselbaum and Slotta (2019) found that the teachers' access to real-time alerts about group work, informed at key moments, and had a significant impact on students’ physics problem-solving approaches. van Leeuwen, Rummel, and Van Gog (2019) claimed that despite increasing development of teacher dashboards, the process of how teachers find and interpret relevant information from dashboards, and which help they need during this process, remains largely unexamined. The present research stems from a study we conducted in mathematics classrooms (Schwarz, Prusak, Swidan, Livny, & Gal, 2018), in which teachers could orchestrate multiple groups engaging simultaneously in problem solving in geometry through the use of SAGLET (System for Advancing Group Learning in Educational Technologies) – an orchestration tool that provides alerts to teachers. The present research capitalizes on the same platform, but is held in a laboratory, in order to find conditions under which orchestration, as an already existing practice in classrooms, can be improved. We elaborated the theoretical idea of critical moments, whose identification facilitates orchestration.

2.4. Critical moments
When people interact to achieve a task, they create events where learning can occur. The importance of these events is not uniform. There are special moments, whose occurrence impinges on what Ludvigsen calls further trajectories of participation (Ludvigsen, 2009). Damşa and Ludvigsen (2016) identified moments with beneficial or detrimental implications in a posteriori analyses of series of interactions leading to (lack of) learning. They called these moments key moments. Designers plan and develop environments that invite the emergence of moments they are interested to triger. They want to identify such moments a priori. As designers, Tissenbaum and Slotta (2019) refer to key moments as moments for which teachers are needed. However, beyond the recognition that there are such moments, they do not suggest any operational way to identify them on the fly. We 8 claim that it is possible to identify moments for which a prediction about learning can be done. We defined critical moments as moments whose occurrence may have beneficial or detrimental implications for the further learning of students. The awareness of critical moments may help teachers intervene to improve the students’ further trajectories of participation. The awareness of critical moments does not have to lead to direct action, as teachers should always apply diverse considerations on whether and how to intervene in group work.

The tangibility of the idea of critical moment depends on its operationalization, and on the extent to which AI techniques can be used to help teachers identify them. Research findings on social interactions during learning tasks, and during collaborative argumentation-based learning or to collaborative inquiry helped us operationalize the idea of critical moment. The first moments whose advent has been shown by research to impinge (detrimentally) on learning involve idleness and off-task engagement (Romero, 2010). Another moment involves reaching the solution. The absence of feedback of the teacher is important, whether the solution is correct or not (e.g., Tudge, Winterhoff, & Hogan, 1996). Events of confusion are often beneficial for learning (D’Mello, Lehman, Pekrun, & Graesser, 2014). Another phenomenon concerns challenges, whose occurrence is beneficial for knowledge construction (Asterhan & Schwarz 2016; Leitão, 2000 .; von Aufschnaiter, Erduran, Osborne, & Simon, 2008). Events of idleness, off-task engagement, of attainment of a solution (correct or not), of challenge, or of confusion are critical moments, whose occurrence may have beneficial or detrimental implications for the further learning of students. The term ‘may’ indicates that the implications largely depend on the reactions of the teacher. For example, the teacher's (lack of) feedback to a correct or to an incorrect solution has been shown to have implications students' learning (Tudge et al., 1996). At any rate, the teacher should know about these events. If he knows about them in real-time, his guidance may be more effective. The teacher may of course decide not to intervene, for example if the teacher on formed about an event of confusion deliberately decides his students to face failure and to overcome it. Our final list of critical moments included: (a) idleness; (b) off-topic discourse; (c) technical problems; (d) challenge; (e) confusion; (f) correct solution; and (g) incorrect solution. We added “technical problems” to the research-based critical moments because they distract students from engaging in the tasks. Interestingly, three of the seven critical moments (idleness, correct and incorrect solution) echo the cases identified by Hofmann and Mercer (2016) in which teachers naturally intervene in a context of collaborative work in classrooms. The fact that we bring to the attention of the teacher such cases (instead of leaving the teacher identifying some of them in some groups) suggests that teachers may capitalize on alerts for their monitoring of solution processes among groups.

In multiple pilot studies, we observed students working in one group. The multiple observations yielded a data-base from which we could develop algorithms for identifying critical moments. We do not report here on the algorithms elaborated for identifying critical moments (see Segal et al., 2017). We only mention here that two research teams collaborated. The Learning Sciences team provided many examples in the form of short protocols they collected. They labelled each example as a moment of idleness, off topic discourse … or an incorrect answer. The Computer Science team gathered all the moments of the same kind – for example, the moments of idleness, and proposed a rule for automatically recognizing a moment of idleness. The rule was checked by the Learning Sciences team and negotiated with the Computer Sciences team. After the two teams agreed upon the rule, the Learning Sciences team provided unlabeled protocols. The Computer Sciences team proposed critical moments (based on the agreed rule), and these moments were checked by the Learning Sciences team. In a to-and-fro process, rules were sharpened until the automatic recognition was approved in more than 85% of the cases. The elaboration of rules was made possible since it was largely based on keywords (e.g., for off-topic and (in)correct solutions) in the domain hierarchical structure of shapes for which the vocabulary is limited (Segal et al., 2017).

The starting point in our research situation is the conjecture that if a teacher is automatically informed about critical moments for all the groups in the class in real time, he/she may better understand the progression of groups working in parallel. Consequently, his/her intervention may change the development of the interactions to be more beneficial (or less detrimental) at the epistemic level. This means that the teacher can capitalize on information on critical moments to guide several groups in parallel.

This conjecture may be refuted: Alerts may deter the attention of teachers, as, for example, while a teacher traces the work of one group, is informed about a critical moment in another group. However, recent research conducted by Dimmel and Herbst (2018) on how mathematics teachers evaluate geometry proofs seems to support our assumption that alerts may help. Dimmel and Herbst showed that mathematics teachers are inclined to notice fundamental details and to ignore superficial ones when proof checking in geometry. Providing alerts at critical moments as students construct a geometric proof seems to strengthen the teachers’ inclination to look at the fundamental over the superficial.

Our overall purpose was to investigate whether teachers observing multiple groups of students can capitalize on critical moment alerts when guiding several groups working concurrently. As afore mentioned, we already conducted a case study in which one teacher successfully used alerts in the SAGLET system to orchestrate multiple groups of students solving challenging geometry tasks in her classroom (Schwarz et al. 2018). In the present article, we undertake a controlled study in which the effect of the provision of alerts is considered. We ask whether providing information about correctness of answers, validity of proofs, the generation of ideas, moments of confusion, idleness or off-task behavior of all the groups is helpful for understanding group progression, which we have shown to be crucial for successful orchestration. We now move on to describe SAGLET, a platform that enables simultaneous monitoring of multiple work groups by informing teachers about critical moments through visualizations.

3. The SAGLET platform
Although many technologies have been developed to support small-group learning, these technologies are not commonly used in classrooms. SAGLET enhances an existing online CSCL tool designed to help one group of students by (1) providing a dashboard for following multiple groups, (2) which is capable of identifying critical moments of emergent learning in these groups and (3) provides visualizations to teachers for facilitating their guidance. SAGLET dispatches alerts that the teacher may capitalize on, to orchestrate concurrent groups (in up to 12 virtual rooms) engaged in learning tasks.

Specifically, SAGLET enhances VMT. This environment supports groups of students to work together online viewing, dragging and constructing dynamic-geometry figures and chatting about what they are doing (Stahl, 2013). The VMT interface includes two parts (Fig. 1). First, in the inquiry space, small groups can explore together and co-construct geometric shapes (part A). When one student drags or constructs a shape, the others attend his/her actions. The chat window (part B), provides room for discussions.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (282KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The VMT interface.

As a dashboard, SAGLET enables teachers to follow the work of concurrent groups engaged in tasks with VMT in different rooms and, when they think it appropriate, to guide the groups. It is possible to operate SAGLET with and without alerts. In the first mode (the experimental condition), as groups advance in their work, SAGLET dispatches alerts about critical moments. For example, in Fig. 2, an alert about an off-topic (blue frame) discourse in one room is dispatched, and another alert about a technical problem (yellow frame) in another room. In the second mode (the control condition), the VMT screens of each group are shown, but no alerts are displayed.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (446KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The teacher is informed about an off-topic discourse in room 454 and about a technical problem in room 486.

4. Description of the experiments
4.1. Working hypothesis and research questions
The working hypothesis that guided us is that informing teachers about critical moments may help them better understand group progression. Considerations that support or challenge this hypothesis are mentioned above. The three following research questions examine this hypothesis:

1.
To what extend receiving alerts about critical moments affect the teacher awareness of group progressions?

2.
How the teachers navigation across the virtual rooms explain their awareness of the group progression?

3.
How the navigation behavior predict effective orchestration?

Study 1 investigates the first question. Study 2 investigates the two others. We undertook a pilot study to develop a tool for measuring the understanding of group progression.

4.2. Pilot study
Answering the research question about the beneficial contribution of alerts to the understanding of group progression depends on a tool for measuring the understanding of group progression. In a pilot study undertaken in 2017 (Prusak, Swidan, & Schwarz, 2019), 11 teachers observed six groups working in parallel on solving geometry problems in the SAGLET system with and without alerts. Three tools were used to measure how the teachers perceived group progression: a questionnaire, interviews, and videos of the teachers’ screens. The questionnaires and interviews are not described. They served as the basis for the tools in Study 1 and Study 2. The Pilot study indicated that alerts helped teachers better regulate their observations (Prusak et al., 2019). The encouraging findings obtained in the pilot study encouraged us to conduct a controlled study on a larger scale in expectation of confirming these findings and delving more deeply into what teachers understand when presented with small groups working in parallel on challenging mathematical problems.

4.3. The first study
4.3.1. Participants
The participants in this study were 39 teachers teaching in (junior) high schools in Israel, whose age ranged from 25 to 55 (M = 38.4, SD = 3.1). Twelve teachers had 2–5 years of experience, twelve teachers had 6–10 years, seven teachers had 11–16 years, and eight teachers had more than 16 years of experience (M = 10.05, SD = 5.3). The teachers earned a BA degree in mathematics education. All of them certificated for teaching mathematics. We recruited teachers who employed dynamic-geometry software and collaborative settings in their classes.

4.3.2. The activity in geometry
To examine the teachers’ awareness of the groups progression, we provided the teacher with videos of students solving an inquiry geometrical activity. We designed such a challenging activity to trigger the collaborative learning among the students. In this way, we could follow the awareness of the teachers who watched the videos that document the group works in the virtual rooms. Fig. 3 presents an activity in Geometry. It includes three tasks that we designed for Grade 9 students regarding the relations of quadrilaterals and their hierarchical classification.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The activity in Geometry used in the experiment.

The three tasks in Fig. 3 are about these hierarchical relationships. In Task 1 students are asked which kind of quadrilateral fits the definition of having diagonals of equal length that are perpendicular to each other. The answer is that many quadrilaterals have these properties, but these properties do not characterize any well-known family of quadrilaterals. The goal of the first task is to provide a situation in which two properties of the diagonals are given and yet these properties are not sufficient for generating a specific type of quadrilateral. We assumed that students would hypothesize that the quadrilateral should be either a kite or a rhombus, and that the dragging option of the Dynamic Geometry software would generate argumentation and stimulate the need for proving.

In Task 2, the two properties are perpendicularity and bisection of one of the diagonals: the answer is a kite, which is characterized by both properties. In Task 3 the two properties are perpendicularity and bisection of both diagonals. The answer this time is a rhombus. We also asked whether the quadrilateral is a kite. All these tasks are difficult. The goals of the second and third tasks are: i) to realize that the diagonals’ properties are sufficient for generating a specific quadrilateral; ii) to realize that while dragging and exploring, the shape of the quadrilateral might change, but some of its properties nonetheless remain constant – the very properties that characterize the type of quadrilateral; iii) to construct hierarchical relations in the family of quadrilaterals.

The unexpected answer to the first task – i.e., that there are many quadrilaterals whose diagonals have equal lengths and are perpendicular to each other, is uncommon in schools, where answers to questions are traditionally determinate. In a case study we conducted (Schwarz et al. 2018), we showed that the uncommon character of the first task and the challenging character of the second and third tasks led to rich argumentative processes over which a teacher orchestrated facilitation through caring but non-intrusive interventions (Prusak et al., 2019).

4.3.3. The procedure
In order to compare teachers’ understanding of the progression of groups with and without alerts, we undertook a controlled study in which we ran a demo. The demo presented the same six rooms in which groups of two or three Grade 9 students worked on the same tasks on the hierarchical classification of quadrilaterals (see Fig. 3).

To demonstrate group work, we chose six 20-min long demo videos of small groups in a variety of sessions of unguided group work, where each video describes the work of one of six small groups (dyads or triads) dealing simultaneously with identical set of tasks. Two versions of this demo were prepared, one with alerts of critical moments generated according to predefined rules, and the other without alerts.

The experiment comprised two stages. The first stage includes the following steps:

•
In the first stage, we explained to the teachers that the experiment could help them gain experience in facilitating group work in their classes. We first gave the teachers a lecture on mathematical proofs. We explained that proofs are tools for checking that mathematical conclusions are correct and leave no room for doubt about their correctness. We also explained that students have difficulties in understanding the role of proofs in mathematics (Hanna, 2000). In addition, we shared with the teachers what computer-supported collaborative learning is. We explained that collaboration may help in understanding abstract ideas (Schwartz, 1995) such as mathematical proofs, and that when collaboration is supported by dedicated computer tools, it is often more effective.

•
The teachers then experienced the VMT environment in small groups, and solved the tasks appearing in Fig. 3. The research team then asked a representative from each group to recapitulate the processes involved in solving the tasks. In this way, the participants experienced multiple ways of solving the task. The research team presented to the participants the idea of critical moments.

•
The participants watched a video that presented the SAGLET system and showed the demo on how to pass from one room to another.

At the second stage, the teachers in the two experimental conditions (with and without alerts) are presented with six simultaneously active virtual “rooms”. Of course, each teacher observes one “room” at a time. In both conditions, at any given moment, a teacher can choose which room to monitor. A teacher enters the “room” by clicking the appropriate tab (numbered from 1 to 6). However, when set to “with alerts” the teacher can choose the room in an additional way—by clicking the specific alert, which indicates the room number and the type of alert (e.g., “6 (the room number) Correct Solution (type of alert)”). Teachers thus have to make two basic choices during the experiment (which room to monitor, and how long to stay in each room).

Before starting to navigate through the rooms, the participants were told that at the end of the experiment, they would be requested to fill a questionnaire on their understanding of the groups progression. In Fig. 4, a flowchart displays the stages of the experiment.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (692KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. A flowchart of the stages of the experiment in Study 1.

4.3.4. Tools and data analysis
We expanded the questionnaire on awareness of group progression (Table 1) based on the interviews and the questionnaire of the pilot study to include items on awareness of (1) correctness of answers, (2) cases of idleness, (3) non-mathematical discourse, (4) mathematical ideas constructed during group work, (5) difficulties encountered, (6) mathematical errors made, and (7) appraisal of the proofs written by the students.


Table 1. The questionnaire for assessing awareness of group progression and explanations for scores.

Items	Score	Explanation
1	Did all the groups get the right answers? How many questions did they answered correctly?	0–4	0 - no answer, incorrect answer or “I don't remember”
1, 2 and 3 - for partially correct answers (the three scores reflect whether the work of one, two or more groups was correctly reported)
4 - for full correct answers.
2	Have you noticed cases of idleness? Where?	0–2	0 - no answer, incorrect answer or “I don't remember”
1 - for partially correct responses, or answering one of the two questions.
2 - for a full correct answer.
3	Have you noticed non-mathematical talk in the chat rooms? Explain your answer	0–3	0 - no answer, incorrect answer or “I don't remember”
1, 2 - for partially correct answer (1 and 2 depending on whether only one or more cases were correctly reported).
3- for fully correct answer.
4	What were the mathematical ideas that were constructed during group work
5	Were there cases in which the students had difficulties? Explain your answer
6	Have you noticed mathematical errors in the chat rooms? Explain your answer
7	To what extent are you satisfied with the proofs that the students wrote? Justify your answer
The range in scores for the items measuring teacher awareness of group progression was from “0” to “4” (from “no answer”, incorrect answer, to (partially) correct answer, for item 1. For item 2, the range was “0” to “2” (“1” for partially correct responses, and “2” for a fully correct answer). For items 3–7 we ranked the teachers’ responses on a scale of “0” to “3”.

4.3.5. Results
Awareness of group progression was factor analyzed through principal component analysis using SPSS 21.0 (IBM Corporation, 2012). The analysis extracted 1 factor, as determined by the screen plot, which explained 46.5% of the total variance. All items loaded (>0.40) on this factor – groups progression awareness. Table 2 displays descriptive statistics and factor loadings. The internal reliability of the scale (Cronbach Alpha) was 0.79. Therefore, we created an average score by averaging across the 7 items.


Table 2. Descriptive Statistics and Exploratory Factor Analysis Factor Loadings of the 7 items of the questionnaire (N = 39).

Item	Item text	Mean	SD	1
1	Awareness of the correctness of answers	2.26	1.19	.71
2	Awareness of idleness	0.97	0.58	.72
3	Awareness of non-mathematical talk	1.18	0.91	.61
4	Awareness of mathematical ideas	1.61	0.81	.71
5	Awareness of students' difficulties	1.38	0.94	.52
6	Awareness of mistakes	0.87	0.80	.52
7	Awareness of the validity of proofs	0.87	0.69	.48
Factor loadings > 0.40 are in boldface.

An independent sample t-test revealed that participants who received alerts (M = 1.67, SD = 0.45) scored higher in group progression awareness than participants who did not receive alerts (M = 0.89, SD = 0.41), t(39) = 5.64, p < .001, d = 1.82. Seniority was not found to be a significant predictor of the effect (p = .616).

The questionnaire showed the beneficial effect of the alerts on the observations of the teachers. While the questionnaire checked teacher awareness of discrete events, it did not check their ongoing influence on how teachers observed the rooms overall, how they entered a room after receiving an alert, whether they remained in a room although an alert was posted in another room, or remain in situ if an additional alert was posted in that room. This information is crucial for foreseeing actual orchestration of multiple rooms with or without alerts. We knew from the pilot study that the videos of the teachers were not sufficient to interpret teacher actions and that additional information was needed. We did not pose further questions to the teachers in Study 1, since their participation had already been very demanding. We preferred to undertake another study in which we could trace their navigation over the dashboard while observing groups working in parallel.

4.4. The second study
The second study was qualitative. It constituted the second phase of the first study: it was aimed at adding information to the already observed higher awareness of teachers who received alerts, to check whether this awareness could be explained through analysis of the navigation of teachers across the rooms in the demo, and whether this navigation behavior could predict effective orchestration. In addition, we sought to characterize the diversity of teachers' navigation tactics in both conditions (with and without alerts). Twenty-one teachers participated in the second study. Ten watched the demo with alerts, and eleven without. The teachers underwent a similar procedure as in the first study. The only difference was that after having watched the demo, teachers were asked to answer a questionnaire in which they were asked: What were your considerations in moving from one room to another? How did you divide your time among the rooms? Which factors influenced your choice to enter or leave a room? We assumed that these questions would help to understand how teachers handle their attention in a context of multiple rooms and dispatching of alerts (which relates to the second research question), and how this 19 attention predicts effective orchestration (third research question). The identification of the tactics and the answers to the questionnaire led to answer to the two research questions.

4.4.1. Tools and data analysis
We used screen-recording software (Camtasia 8.1) to capture the teachers’ choices while navigating in the dashboard. While watching the screen-capture recordings, we prepared a schematic representation of the navigation of the teachers. A scheme indicates the path the teacher chooses in her passage from one room to another, the time of passage from room to room, the time spent in each room and possible reasons for passage. We labelled reasons for passage to another room in the following way: In cases where a teacher moved to a room through an alert button, it was recorded as an “alert” passage (Fig. 5a). In other cases, we identified a cluster of passages. The first cluster was about passages made from room to room in a certain order (for instance, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, see Fig. 5b). In a few cases, the cluster contained frequent inclusions of one particular room number (like “1, 2, 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 1, 6”). The cluster sometimes contained frequent passages between two particular rooms. In the remaining cases, the cluster was labelled as “random”.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Patterns of two teachers' transitions between rooms. Change of color indicates a new cluster. Blue highlights transition following an “alert". (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

We used an additional tool for analyzing some of the Camtasia videos. The tool provides a timeline analysis (Fig. 6), in which the time passed is displayed on the horizontal axis, and the alert types appear on the vertical axis. The alert display and the teacher's reaction to the alerts are made visible. The upper row displays the teacher's entry into the virtual room not as a result to a specific alert. Each square in the timeline diagram signifies 5 s. In this figure we present an empty timeline for explaining the way we used it.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (632KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Timeline analysis diagram of a teacher's actions.

4.4.2. Teachers tactics for monitoring multiple groups
There was a difference in the monitoring tactics of teachers who received alerts for critical moments and those who did not. Table 3 displays a summary of the tactics in the two conditions.


Table 3. Teachers' monitoring tactics under different conditions.

Condition (number of teachers)	Monitoring tactics	Number of uses
Without alerts (11)	Orderly inspection of rooms	10
Navigating randomly until finding something mathematically worthy	3
With alerts (10)	Entrance and exit triggered by alerts	5
Attention to alerts, but more to mathematics	3
Alerts or order	3
We discerned two tactics in the no alert condition (some teachers used more than one tactic):

•
“Orderly inspection of rooms”. This tactic is characterized by systematic orderly probing of each room. Fig. 5b shows one teacher who provided a striking example of this strategy. She completed 65 passages, organized in 11 blocks with six rooms visited in the same ascending order. This teacher described her tactics as a “systematic passage in an orderly manner from room to room”. Almost every teacher in the no-alerts condition used this tactic at some point. It is noteworthy that teachers who performed better than others (in terms of their awareness of group progression) made a relatively large number of passages from one room to another. It seems that this tactic variation of orderly inspection of rooms was developed as compensation for not knowing what is happening in five other rooms while monitoring one.

•
“Navigating randomly until finding something mathematically worthy”. This strategy is characterized by random zipping between rooms (at least initially), in search of students' mathematical activity that is worthy of attention from a mathematical point of view. One of the teachers described this tactic as “quickly jumping from one room to another till I find positive or negative development, which needs deepening”.

It is noteworthy that the teachers in the “alert” condition started receiving alerts within approximately 1 min of their watching the demo. In this first minute, their tactics were remarkably similar to the abovementioned tactics of the teachers operating in “without alert” mode. When they started to receive alerts, the picture changed.

We discerned three main tactics in alert mode:

•
“Entrance and exit triggered by alerts”. This tactic is characterized by a frequent response to alerts and by transitions made almost immediately by “clicking” the alert button. For the teachers that chose this tactic, alerts dictated when they entered or left rooms. For instance, in response to the question “Which factors influenced your choice to enter or leave a room?“, one teacher answered: “Alerts: [for example] confusion, constructing an idea; non-mathematical discourse”.

•
“Ingenious attention to the alerts”. This tactic is characterized by a low rate of responses to the alerts, and a commitment to mathematical developments in particular rooms. This tactic was characterized by a relatively small number of passages between the rooms. The answers to the questionnaire helped us understand that alerts enable teachers to be aware of what is happening in each of the rooms (general picture) and to react specifically to students' flow of ideas (particular). For example, one teacher explained: “I navigated through the alerts box all the time; [I tended to stay in a group] in two distinct situations … if I saw they were making good progress and being serious, or when they were stuck or engaged in a non-mathematical discourse because of lack of mathematical knowledge.”

•
“Alerts or order”. This tactic is characterized by an alternate entrance to rooms subsequent to the posting of an alert and systematic orderly probing of rooms (see 5a). As follows from teachers' responses to the questionnaire, this tactic was an attempt to regain control and order: “The alerts did help me, but I was still lost. Although I chose to enter rooms mainly after receiving alerts, I also entered rooms in an orderly fashion."

The tactics we identified in both conditions suggest that SAGLET as a dashboard provides broad coverage of what is happening, and gives teachers the possibility of monitoring multichannel collaborative learning of their students. In other words, beyond the conditions, most of the tactics – driven by the dispatching of an alert, by maintaining order in the inspection of rooms, and by observation of mathematical developments) explained a high awareness of the group progression (Research question 2). Moreover, alerts point at critical moments. The tactics teachers follow in response to these alerts suggest that they are attentive both to the general and the significant (in particular in the case of the ingenious attention to alerts). This double attention may explain the superiority of teachers in the alerts condition.

Although the present experiment does not focus on actual orchestration, it is reasonable that this dual attention prepares some teachers for a kind of orchestration that is adaptive to the needs of groups of students. It definitely appears to be the case for those teachers who adopted the “ingenious attention to the alerts” tactics. We used the timeline analysis table to delve deeper into the navigation of some teachers. Fig. 7 shows the timeline analysis of one of the teachers who applied this tactic. The teacher declared: “I'm a very fast reader. So, naturally, by zipping (through the rooms) to absorb the information, I could learn a bit more from the alerts in case of more important one's which identify critical moments and create a tactics of zipping.” The teacher's observation that some alerts are more important (for him) is strengthened by our timeline analysis. At first, each ‘confusion’ 23 alert leads him to enter the room where the confusion happens (2–4:30, row confusion), while the ‘off-topic’ alert in room 2 is ignored (3:05, row off-topic). This seems to indicate that the teacher did not pass automatically from one room to the other as a result of the dispatching of the alerts. He sometimes preferred one alert over another (see another example at 8:40, when the system provided two alerts concurrently – a ‘correct solution’ in room 6; and ‘constructing an idea’ in room 3. The teacher chose to enter room 6 (8:50). In general, this teacher remained in the same room for 15–45 s, and stayed more than 30 s after ‘correct solution,’ ‘wrong solution,’ and ‘constructing an idea’. Such comportment suggests that alerts involving meaning making led the teacher to take his time to better understanding the students' progression. We suggest that for such a teacher, the navigation predicts successful orchestration (Research question 3). We come back to this issue in the discussion.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (514KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The Timeline Table of a teacher whose preferred tactic was “ingenious attention to alerts”.

5. Discussion
We enquired whether teachers could understand the progression of groups engaging concurrently in conceptual geometry tasks through SAGLET, a type of dashboard that provides alerts about critical moments. The first study was designed in a controlled setting in which we asked whether providing alerts helped teachers to be aware of critical moments. We showed that the provision of alerts helped in this awareness. Beyond this clear effect, the first study showed that the dashboard provides a lot of information to teachers about groups working concurrently: The scores of the teachers in the “without alerts” condition were not very high, but the teachers were able to report afterwards on a number of facts they perceived while navigating through the rooms.

5.1. The provision of alerts impinges on the ways teachers navigate across rooms
There is however a gap between the awareness of critical moments and the understanding of work progression in the groups. The qualitative analysis of the videos we presented lessens this gap, since we could observe the monitoring tactics with SAGLET as a dashboard in both conditions. The alerts provided do not recommend teachers to take any action. They can disregard them. Monitoring in the “without alerts” condition was either random or orderly – two ways to face complexity without any clue about the work of the groups. In the “with alerts” condition, the three tactics, “entrance and exit triggered by alerts”, “ingenious attention to alerts” and “alerts or order”, show that the alerts impinged on the ways teachers navigated in the dashboard. At the very least, the final two tactics listed suggest that SAGLET allows teachers to perceive progression in the work of multiple groups, as alerts are used to complete the mathematical picture the teacher draws as she observes groups at work. The teacher whose timeline is displayed in Fig. 7 suggests an interesting judgment that combines attention to certain alerts (for example “confusion”) and focus on learning processes in mathematics. In this instance, we can assert that the teacher understands the progression of group work. These findings echoe a study done by van Leeuwen and Rummel (2020), in which they provided teachers with standardized, fictitious collaborative situations on mirroring and advising dashboards and asked them to detect the group that was in need of support. Teachers in the advising condition more often detected the problematic group, and often started by checking the given alert, but also that they tried to look at as much information about other groups as they could. In the mirroring condition, teachers generally started by examining information from class overviews, but did not always have time to check information for individual groups.

5.2. From understanding groups progression to orchestration: some reflections
We are fully aware that the two studies we conducted did not focus on orchestration. However, as aforementioned, understanding the progression of group work predicts the effectiveness of the teacher guidance (Webb, 2009). Of course, the understanding of group work during orchestration may involve details that are different from what we defined as critical moments. One may argue that we deal with a kind of group work that is characterized by the phenomena that triggered alerts. Are these really the key parameters of group work as relevant to teacher orchestration? Does what the computer identifies as X (off-topic behavior, mistake, idleness, etc.) really correspond with what a good teacher would identify as X or what the students in the group would identify as X? These are important issues, to which our study does not provide a definitive answer. We are aware that finding precise conditions that optimize orchestration is an impossible endeavor, though. As noticed by Looi and Song (2013), orchestration itself is unplannable: Orchestration depends on what is happening in real time classroom and how the teacher handles the dynamic environment, good pre-design can provide cues, structures and scaffolding to support and guide a teacher what to do. However, the list of types of alerts we proposed is rooted in experimental studies that show that, say, being too much off-task or that providing a final reasoned answer which is incorrect, is detrimental to learning. The alerts rouse attention but do not necessarily lead to action. The videos of the teachers who observed groups working while in “with alerts” mode show that for many, alerts did not necessarily lead them to observe what actually triggered the alert. And indeed, the case study that we led with SAGLET in a classroom confirmed what the observation of the navigation of some teachers in the alert mode suggested: In her orchestration of several groups in parallel, the teacher took into consideration some of the alerts in her interventions and took no action when she estimated that inaction would be superior (Schwarz et al. 2018). An analysis that focused on the students' actions subsequent to the teacher's interventions, showed that such interventions boosted students' conceptual learning (Swidan, Prusak, Palatnik, & Schwarz, 2019). We suggest that this happened due to the teachers' gain of a higher level of understanding of the learning situation, thereby inducing pedagogical actions that support learning (van Leeuwen et al., 2019).

The tough questions we raised and our difficulties in clearly defining what understanding progression of group work is, as well as the good indications that orchestration is possible for conceptual learning in mathematics, may lead us to adopt a new theoretical direction. Instead of defining the understanding of progression of group work in predetermined terms as suggested by Looi and Song (2013), we may frame it as an on-going process in which the teacher, who observes the discourse and manipulations of the groups, hypothesizes as to the students' needs. Technologies may be of assistance: the teacher has at his or her disposal previous e-discussions of students in their groups, as well as alerts that suggest they pay attention to something that may be beneficial or detrimental further on, and that may need an intervention. Awareness about critical moments among groups has to do with identifying students’ needs on the fly. Our findings suggest that with SAGLET and its alerts, the teacher better sees the progression of collaborating groups in the sense that she has more resources for scaffolding group inquiry and argumentation.

5.3. Generalizability of the findings of the two studies
The findings about effective monitoring of collaborative learning in mathematics through dashboards, and the beneficial effect of alerts were obtained in a study where the sample size is quite small. Replications should then be undertaken to confirm these findings. Their generalizability to other domains seems to depend on the extent to which AI techniques can be developed for dispatching alerts about critical moments. Tasks for which the vocabulary used is limited (like in our case, in geometry) enable the identification of keywords that help identifying critical moments. At any rate, the fact that even teachers who did not receive alerts could notice some critical moments, indicates that teachers may use dashboards even without alerts to successfully facilitate inquiry and argumentation in small groups. We attribute this awareness to the ability of SAGLET users to roam between virtual rooms in a smooth and immediate way.

In spite of these promising results, we are aware that further controlled experiments are necessary, preferably in classrooms in which teachers use the SAGLET system as an intelligent dashboard to orchestrate the work of multiple groups so that the effectiveness of the provision of alerts can be more thoroughly checked. The fact that for half of the teachers, the passage from one room to another is triggered by alerts and not by pedagogical considerations suggests that orchestration is still a challenging task. It echoes the issue raised by Van Leeuwen and Rummel (2018) on whether orchestration tools afford or constrain teachers’ orchestration. Our research team is currently studying whether the pace in the delivery of alerts to teachers should be reduced in order not to complicate them in their orchestration.

5.4. Explaining differences in understanding of group progression: a hypothesis
A particularly interesting research direction is the characteristics of a good teacher in terms of understanding group progression and eventually orchestration. We saw that seniority does not predict better understanding. Our observations of the navigation of teachers between rooms uncovers differences of tactics among teachers in both conditions. The “Ingenious attention to alerts”, which was adopted by some teachers encourages us to speculate that the ability to follow the work of parallel groups, while handling alerts, to understand their progression, is partly related to executive function performance. It is reasonable to hypothesize that the division of attention among different sources of information, and the monitoring of in-depth learning processes that characterize orchestration, is related to high executive function performance. The student whose navigation is displayed in Fig. 7 reported ‘I am a fast reader’, an indication that we may be in the right direction. This hypothesis should be checked empirically, though.

5.5. Coda: providing alerts in dashboards should teachers orchestrating collaboration in a classroom context
We began this article by stressing that adaptive guidance of collaborating groups in classrooms has been too challenging for most teachers. Our study indicates the potential of dashboards to provide effective support for teachers to guide multiple small groups of students collaborating on mathematics. It suggests that a system of alerts may help the teacher provide subtle guidance that combines care with non-intrusiveness in a classroom context. As previously stated, the alerts should help the teacher decide whether and when to intervene in a classroom context, without altering the subtle processes of meaning-making and co-construction of knowledge.

