The growth in online professional development opportunities for teachers, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, prompts us to question what the most effective practices of facilitating professional development online are and what design elements of online professional development (OPD) programs improve teachers' content and pedagogical content knowledge (PCK). These questions are critical to the successful design and delivery of OPD for teachers. To date, there is no systematic review that provides answers to these questions. Hence, this review presents a synthesis of 11 studies that systematically examine experimental and observational studies that tested or evaluated formal OPD programs for teachers. Eight studies were quantitative and three were mixed methods detailing evidence of teachers' OPD program effectiveness, including design elements, that lead to teachers' improved: content knowledge; PCK; beliefs about teaching; self-efficacy; and instructional practices. Design elements identified included a focus on learner supports, further acquisition or development of PCK, engagement, flexibility, individual difference in learners and learning styles, practical learning activities, reflection, relevance and application of knowledge and skills. The analysis uncovers a primary issue that few available publications of teachers' OPD are strong methodologically. This systematic review's findings report on design elements that lead to effective OPD learning experiences for teachers.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online professional development

Online teacher professional learning

Design elements

Systematic review

Teacher learning

1. Introduction
Globally, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the provision of education. With the full scale of the virus and its impacts still unknown, schools and universities alike have witnessed an unprecedented uptake of online collaboration tools and applications to support the continuing education of students and educators. The scale of digitally supported remote learning or online education increased exponentially in 2020 for those with access to connected digital devices, and likely changed the provision of education forever (Li & Lalani, 2020). It is unquestionable that effective teacher professional development and learning, that is offered exclusively online, will be an integral part of this new global educational landscape. Consequently, this systematic review's findings for online professional development (OPD) for teachers that positively impacts their content knowledge; pedagogical content knowledge (PCK); beliefs about teaching; self-efficacy; and instructional practices, is well-timed and highly relevant.

Given the rapid and compulsory shift to online learning as a result of the pandemic, effective OPD for teachers that assists them with designing and delivering high-quality online education is critical to continuing educational provision for students (Reimers, Schleicher, Saavedra, & Tuominen, 2020). Therefore, understanding evidence-based design elements of successful OPD for teachers is vital. The need and desire to develop effective OPD, however, comes with several challenges (Misra, 2018; Powell & Bodur, 2019; Tondeur, Forkosh-Baruch, Prestridge, Albion, & Edirisinghe, 2016). Where teachers have digital devices and access to the internet, these challenges pertain to accessing high-quality effective OPD; the steep learning curve for successfully learning and teaching online; and, teachers’ adoption of online learning to enhance and improve their online and face-to-face teaching practices. Program designers of OPD for teachers face an unprecedented, adaptive and transformative challenge, to better understand how to successfully design robust programs for delivery during, and after, the pandemic. To facilitate this responsive and anticipatory approach to the successful design of OPD for teachers, this systematic review synthesises the current evidence on effective practice in OPD for teachers. Additionally, it provides an evidence-based overview of the design elements that are reported to result in productive learning outcomes. This paper identifies where there are limitations in knowledge about OPD, thus indicating new directions for future research.

The paper is structured as follows. The background provides an overview of OPD for teachers, its need and value, leading to the theoretical constructs and justification for this systematic review. The methodology section describes the procedure for conducting this systematic review, including the data selection process and the methodological steps followed to analyse the selected papers. The results section presents the findings, categorisations, and analysis of results. The discussion lays out the summary of the evidence, identified research gaps, limitations, and suggestions for future studies.

2. Background
New and emerging technologies, communities and platforms provide teachers with increased access to OPD (Çelen & Seferoglu, 2020; Lantz-Andersson, Lundin, & Selwyn, 2018). Prior to the current COVID-19 pandemic, teachers' OPD was, and remains, a powerful vehicle for delivering high-quality, low-cost, accessible training to teachers, particularly those in geographically outlying areas (Dede, 2006; O'Dwyer, Carey, & Kleiman, 2007). Program providers now offer engaging self-determined, anytime, anywhere OPD for teachers at scale, reaching larger and geographically dispersed audiences, who hold similar interests and educational concerns (Davis, 2009; Stanford-Bowers, 2008), while meeting educators' need for flexibility (Blaschke, 2012). Outcomes from a small-scale body of research illustrate that OPD for teachers, specifically when it designed using andragogical and heutagogical methods is productive in meeting these needs (Blaschke, 2012; Bradley, Rachal, & Harper, 2014; Chametzky, 2014; Means, Toyama, Murphy, Bakia, & Jones, 2009; Powell & Bodur, 2019).

For the purpose of this review, ‘online professional development’ (OPD) is defined as structured, formal professional learning that is provided entirely online, resulting in changes to teacher knowledge, behaviour and practices. Evidence of the effectiveness of such learning may include increased teacher capacity to collaborate with internal and external co-workers; increased ability to reflect on their practice; increased confidence in their teaching practice; or the implementation of teaching practices learnt from OPD and their effect on student outcomes.

OPD offers a choice in high-quality PD delivery for participants. Critically it addresses two major challenges of providing face-to-face PD; cost and access (Magidin de Kramer, Masters, O'Dwyer, Dash, & Russell, 2012; Means et al., 2009; O'Dwyer et al., 2007; Suppo & Mayton, 2014). Advocates contend that OPD for teachers programs encompass the effective elements of face-to-face professional development that foster teacher expertise, support a learner-centred approach, improve teachers' content knowledge and PCK, foster school-wide collaboration, and improve teacher retention (Erickson, Noonan, & Mccall, 2012; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; So, Lossman, Lim, & Jacobson, 2009). OPD for teachers is more productive than traditional face-to-face PD for strengthening learning and critical thinking skills (Şendağ & Odabaşı, 2009) when it is: relevant to teachers' professional learning needs (Farris, 2015); promotes social aspects of learning (Holmes, Signer, & MacLeod, 2010); includes content that is readily transferred to classroom environments (Reeves & Pedulla, 2011); and, encourages self-reflection (Scott & Scott, 2010).

OPD, when facilitated via an online community of practice, fosters teachers’ social participation that leads to prosocial commitment through shared interests and similar professional roles (Tseng & Kuo, 2014; Wenger, Trayner, & De Laat, 2011). OPD for teachers offers the potential for developing teacher knowledge by connecting them to a global community of peers with common professional learning goals who share resources and knowledge. OPD within online teacher communities maintains professional interaction and fosters ongoing peer-to-peer support (Lantz-Andersson et al., 2018). Additionally, the community building of OPD for teachers contributes to retaining them within the workforce (Shaha & Ellsworth, 2013).

When considering successful models of OPD for teachers, two theoretical pillars of adult learning theory, andragogy or self-directed learning (Merriam 2001; Knowles 1996) and heutagogy or self-determined learning (Blaschke, 2012; Hase & Kenyon, 2000) were useful in analysing OPD for teachers. OPD that fosters teachers' responsibility for their own learning is andragogical. Where teachers acquire competencies and capabilities to acquire new knowledge and skills to apply to new and unfamiliar situations is heutagogical. But these characteristics are largely subjective or may not be explicitly stated in the goals of OPD for teachers or reported in the program's design elements.

Existing literature reviews of OPD for teachers have synthesised varying topics, including the benefits of a blended learning approach for pre-service teachers (Atmacasoy & Aksu, 2018); the types of knowledge and skills required to teach online (Moore-Adams, Jones, & Cohen, 2016); the instructional practices and interventions teachers need to employ to augment simulation learning (Scholtz & Hughes, 2019); and, the relationship between teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and their educational uses of technology within their classroom practices (Tondeur, van Braak, Ertmer, & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2017). Lantz-Andersson et al. (2018) synthesised the evidence from twenty years of online teacher communities, highlighting the strengths and weaknesses of formally organised and informally developed professional learning groups. Their findings highlight that while both types of communities addressed different needs amongst teachers and supported different outcomes, they shared several common characteristics, and they were seen to have the potential to develop supportive and collegial professional practices. Another systematic review focused on professional development in teams in the context of higher education for teachers participating in online training (Gast, Schildkamp, & van der Veen, 2017). After completing the training, these teachers reported significantly increased use of technology-enhanced learning in the classroom and confidence in their overall technological pedagogical content knowledge “TPACK” (Mishra & Koehler, 2006, p. 1017). These reviews covered important aspects of OPD for teachers. However, after an extensive desktop search, we are not aware of a systematic review that a) brings together the evidence of the effectiveness of current practices in OPD for teachers, b) articulates which design elements contribute to positive outcomes, c) investigates the different ways OPD for teachers fosters engagement, and d) provides an appraisal of the methodological quality of those studies.

To facilitate such a process, we proposed the following research questions:

1.
What are the characteristics of the studies included in this review?

2.
What are the reported outcomes of online professional development (OPD) for teachers?

3.
What are the design elements of the online professional development (OPD) programs for teachers of the included studies?

2.1. What is the methodological quality of the included studies?
Given the scale and speed in which education and professional development have moved online as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic caught many governments and their educational institutions off guard, this systematic review is warranted. The need for OPD for teachers that is effective and leads to improved evidence-based outcomes is practical, more now than ever before. Equally important is an understanding of the design elements of effective OPD programs so that those tasked with designing, building and delivering OPD for teachers in the face of the current pandemic, and future crises, are both efficacious and prepared.

3. Methods
To ascertain whether a systematic review of OPD for teachers was warranted, we conducted a scoping search on existing literature reviews which returned no reviews fitting our objective. A research protocol was established before the commencement of the review, circulated among all authors, and discussed until consensus was achieved. Three months into the project, we adjusted the protocol for the first time, limiting the scope to teacher learning, rather than adult learning. Due to a high volume of search results, we experimented with the chosen timeframe of the publication date and settled on the previous ten-year period from 2010 to 2019. The second adjustment in December 2019 served to finalise the inclusion and exclusion criteria to further minimise the return of irrelevant evidence.

3.1. Inclusion/exclusion criteria
We consulted an expert librarian in the field of education to assist in establishing a sound search strategy. To maximise the chances of including evidence from reliable sources and of high-quality standard, we considered papers for inclusion on experimental and observational studies that tested or evaluated formal OPD for teachers programs delivered to in-service or returning to work teachers, published between 2010 and 2019, in the English language. Excluded were conceptual and descriptive papers, papers that focussed on online education in general (children, young people, and adults, but not teachers), face to face instruction, blended learning (components of face to face and online instruction), self-determined learning not conducted entirely online, computer-assisted learning, teacher networking and sharing of online resources, field placements, and professional development programs as part of teacher training at tertiary level institutions. Although these excluded approaches to professional learning are meritorious, they are not specifically wholly online professional development programs. Additionally, OPD that focused specifically on the mechanics of teaching online was excluded as the intention of this systematics review was to examine OPD that improve teachers’ PCK. The focus of this systematic review is to gain deeper understanding into formal OPD for teachers to inform the future design and development of this rapidly growing area in response to COVID-19 and future crises that may impact the provision of OPD for teachers.

3.2. Search strategy
The following databases were systematically searched for peer-reviewed literature: Academic One File, Emerald Insight, ERIC ProQuest, Informit A + Education, MathSciNet, SAGE, Scopus, Web of Science, EBSCO, and Google Scholar. The search was completed in February 2020. The original search string consisted of some or all of the following terms and was tailored to the specific requirements of individual databases: learn* OR develop* OR educat* AND online OR virtual OR self-directed OR self-determined OR distance OR blended OR computer-assisted OR technol* AND teacher* OR educator*OR adult OR “school leader”. Also, we searched the grey literature (government and industry reports, education clearinghouses, professional development websites) and hand-searched reference lists of existing systematic reviews for relevant articles. As our searches returned a high volume of papers which we were unable to process within the limitations of our resources, we adjusted our inclusion criteria as described previously in section 3.1.

3.3. Data management
Author three (MH) exported all results from the database searches into the referencing management software program Endnote. Additionally, all citations for the results from grey literature searches were manually created in the same Endnote library. Duplicates were removed and all steps of the process documented in an MS Excel file to ensure transparency and replicability of the search process.

3.4. Study selection
Author three (MH) undertook the first step of the study selection process, comprising of the screening of titles, and if necessary, abstracts, to determine relevance. Authors one, two and three screened all remaining titles and abstracts (to equal parts) to determine eligibility against the inclusion criteria. Through regular meetings and discussion, a consensus was achieved on those items the three authors were either unclear or disagreed. Our database and additional searches returned a total of 6028 records. After the removal of 804 duplicates and 4827 irrelevant items, we accessed and screened the full texts of 397 papers to determine their eligibility for inclusion in this review. A total of 11 papers were accepted for inclusion. Reasons for exclusion of 386 papers were: conference presentations without data (n = 63), course or program design (n = 37), utilising ICT and mobile technologies (n = 44), not a formal program or course (n = 3), not online, or virtual, blended, or hybrid learning (n = 30), theoretical or conceptual papers (n = 47), utilising social media (n = 5), wrong focus (n = 52), wrong target group (n = 35), no access or insufficient information to retrieve paper (n = 22), and other reasons (n = 48). The process used for the study selection is detailed in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) (Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, & Altman, 2009) (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (613KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. PRISMA flow diagram.

3.5. Data extraction and analysis
Resource limitations did not allow for two independent authors to extract all data on the study characteristics. Nevertheless, to ensure high-quality systematic review procedures, we followed the (Cochrane Collaboration, 2019) recommendations in such situations, which request a second author (LB) to independently extract at least the outcomes data. Both authors (LB, MH) combined their results and discussed any disagreements until consensus was achieved. The study characteristics were described and presented in tabular form (Table 2, see Appendix) and reported outcomes thematically analysed.

3.6. Quality appraisal
The methodological quality of the included intervention studies was independently assessed by authors one and three (LB, MH). Results were compared and discussed until consensus was achieved. Two different tools were utilised, depending on the type of study. Quantitative research studies were assessed with the Effective Public Health Practice Project (2009) (EPHPP) Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies. The EPHPP tool consists of the following eight components of rating: selection bias, study design, confounders, blinding, data collection methods, withdrawals and dropouts, intervention integrity, and analyses. Although originally developed for the appraisal of health and medical literature, we chose the EPHPP tool because it allows for varying types of randomly and non-randomly assigned qualitative studies, investigating a comprehensive set of design components (selection bias, study design, confounders, blinding, data collection methods, withdrawals and dropouts, intervention integrity, and analyses). Qualitative research studies were subjected to the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (2018) (CASP) Qualitative Research Checklist. The CASP tool assesses the applicability, reliability, and validity of published qualitative research, according to a series of ten questions concerned with the aim of the research, methodology, research design, recruitment strategy, data collection, relationships between researcher and participants, ethical considerations, data analysis, findings, and the value of the research. Studies that used mixed methods were assessed with both tools, respective to their quantitative and qualitative components.

4. Results
Eleven studies were included in the review. Two of the 11 publications included several studies. In one of them, we focused only on the study that was concerned with program effectiveness (Marquez et al., 2016). The other study included 4 Randomized Controlled Trials (RCT) of which we only focussed on the eighth-grade math trial because the other three trials were published in separate papers included in our review (Dash, Magidin de Kramer, O'Dwyer, Masters, & Russell, 2012; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; Masters, Magidin de Kramer, O'Dwyer, Dash, & Russell, 2012).

4.1. Study characteristics
The study characteristics included the year published, country of origin, target group, aim, program details, delivery mode, study design, study sample, data collection methods, and outcomes (Table 2).

4.1.1. Year published and country of origin
Five studies were published in 2012, two each in 2010 and 2016, and one each in 2014 and 2018. Ten of the 11 studies were published in the US and one in the Philippines.

4.1.2. Target group
Teachers and educators were employed across the broad spectrum of K-12 classrooms, with five studies reporting on teachers in elementary and five in secondary schools. One study was particularly concerned with rural educators. Four studies reported on teachers/educators of students with disabilities, communication needs or those struggling with a particular subject. In order of frequency, subjects taught by the teachers included Mathematics, English Language Arts (ELA), Biology and Physics.

4.1.3. Aim of study
The study aims included examination of program effectiveness on teacher's content knowledge [CK] (6/11), pedagogical content knowledge [PCK] (3/11), instructional practices (7/11), professional competency (1/11), academic performance (1/11), data-based decision making [DBD] (1/11), classroom management practices (1/11), teacher beliefs (1/11), perceived sense of self-efficacy (1/11), and program satisfaction (1/11). Student outcomes covered the areas of academic achievement (5/11) and behaviour (1/11).

4.1.4. Program details
Program details varied considerably in terms of their module's length of time, total hours of engagement required, and over what period the programs were offered. Seven studies provided information about the total hours of OPD teachers spent in the programs, ranging between 30h and 38h (2/7), 70h (1/7), and 100h (4/7). Of the nine studies that provided information on the program length, the times ranged between 1 and 2.5 years (4/9), eight months (1/9), between 7 and 15 weeks (3/9), and four weeks (1/9). Examples of the length and frequency of individual modules include five modules being offered over one year in two 4-weeks periods, or three 7-week modules offered over three semesters.

4.1.5. Delivery mode
Information provided on the mode of online program delivery included fully asynchronous (8/11) and a mix of asynchronous and synchronous modules (2/11). One of the mixed-delivery mode programs provided all modules asynchronously, except for one synchronous online professional meeting where participants were required to share their culminating experience of the program in a PowerPoint presentation (Griffin et al., 2018). The other program included one synchronous introductory session, followed by several asynchronous online modules, plus one synchronous session to discuss difficulties in learning concepts, performing lesson activities, and accomplishing requested outputs (Orleans, 2010).

4.1.6. Study design and sample
Among the 11 studies were seven RCTs, three cohort studies, and one cohort analytic study. Eight studies were quantitative, three mixed methods and eight were controlled. Participant numbers in teachers ranged from 9 to 255 and in students from 165 to 2798.

4.1.7. Data collection
The most common form of data collection from teachers were surveys (Brown & Woods, 2012; Dash, Magidinde Kramer, O'Dwyer, Masters, & Russell, 2012; Erickson et al., 2012; Goldenberg, Culp, Clements, Anderson, & Pasquale, 2014; Griffin et al., 2018; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; Marquez et al., 2016; Masters, Magidinde Kramer, O'Dwyer, Dash, & Russell, 2012; O'Dwyer et al., 2010), followed by assessment tests (Brown & Woods, 2012; Erickson et al., 2012; Orleans, 2010), videos (Brown & Woods, 2012; Orleans, 2010), interviews (Orleans, 2010) and student data (Jimenez, Mims, & Baker, 2016). Data for student achievements and behaviour were collected via assessments (Goldenberg et al., 2014; Griffin et al., 2018; Marquez et al., 2016; O'Dwyer et al., 2010) or tests (Dash et al., 2012; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012). Most studies collected data pre/post and at times during the program. One study collected follow-up data, 15 weeks after post-test (Marquez et al., 2016).

4.1.8. Outcomes
Reported outcomes pertained to teachers only and the corresponding changes in their content knowledge (CK), instructional practice, pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) and collaboration; perceptions of participant self-efficacy; beliefs about teaching; participant satisfaction; and the translation of learning into classroom practice. Improved content knowledge in teachers was one of the most frequently reported outcomes, being recorded in 9/11 studies. Reasons for the remaining two studies not reporting such improvements were either because of a strong emphasis of the study on determining changes in PCK (Dash, 2012) or an investigation into teacher's ability to use student data to influence future instructional decisions (Jiminez, et al, 2016). Notwithstanding the differing program contents and instructional methods, more than half (6/11) of the studies reported improvements in teacher's instructional practices. Less than half of the studies (4/11) reported high participant satisfaction with the offered program. Participants of three studies reported perceived improvements in self-efficacy (Table 1).


Table 1. Reported outcomes.

Outcome	Number of studies and 1st author
Improvement in teacher's CK	9 = Brown; Erickson; Goldenberg; Griffin; Magidin de Kramer; Marquez; Masters; O'Dwyer; Orleans
Improved instructional practices	6 = Brown; Erickson; Griffin; Magidin de Kramer; Masters; O'Dwyer
High participant satisfaction	4 = Brown; Erickson; Griffin; Marquez
Improvement in participant self-efficacy	3 = Brown; Griffin; Marquez
Improvements in PCK	2 = Dash; Orleans
Increased collaboration	2 = Dash; Erickson
Improved teacher beliefs about teaching in general and students with disabilities in particular	1 = Griffin
Improved teacher inquiry	1 = Griffin
Teacher intentions to incorporate their learning in their classroom practice	1 = Marquez
While Jimenez et al. (2016) reported no changes in practices and behaviour, but improvements in knowledge, these improvements were statistically insignificant. Despite the fact that two studies reported improved student achievements (Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; O'Dwyer et al., 2010), four studies reported either no difference in student achievements or statistically insignificant changes (Dash et al., 2012; Goldenberg et al., 2014; Griffin et al., 2018; Orleans, 2010).

4.2. Program design elements
Building on these study characteristics, attributes of reported program design elements and their explanation are provided in Table 3. The most frequently reported design elements pertained to the accommodation of individual differences in learning styles and program length (11/11 each), participant engagement (9/11), provision of learner supports (8/11), acquisition or further development of PCK (7/11), practical learning activities (6/11), application of acquired knowledge and skills in practice (5/11), and flexibility of study mode (4/11). Other design elements included relevance (3/11); and goal orientation, individual differences in learners, and reflection (2/11 each).


Table 3. Program design elements.

Design elements	Program Design Explanation	Number of studies and 1st author
Individual differences in learning styles	Caters for diverse learning styles with differentiated activities (e.g., reading, observing, practising, discussions, assignments, exhibiting new skill learnt), and different applications (online resources, videos, existing classroom material, notebook work).	11 = Brown; Dash; Erickson; Goldenberg; Griffin; Jiminez; Magidin de Kramer; Marquez; Masters; O′ Dwyer; Orleans
Program length	The period of time a program runs (e.g., number and length of sessions, number of semesters, length of delivery period).	11 = Brown; Dash; Erickson; Goldenberg; Griffin; Jiminez; Magidin de Kramer; Marquez; Masters; O′ Dwyer; Orleans
Engagement	Fosters social interaction, collaboration, and resource sharing, either facilitated or non-facilitated, between peers, online program facilitator and students, inter-organisational collaboration, and the Learning Management System. Teacher engagement happens through asynchronous activities (e.g., discussion boards or activities) or synchronous online meetings.	9 = Brown; Dash; Erickson; Goldenberg; Griffin; Magidin de Kramer; Masters; O′ Dwyer; Orleans
Learner supports	Supports learners through asynchronous and synchronous activities, resources, and interactions (e.g., facilitator-learner, peer-peer, and learner-computer).	8 = Dash; Erickson; Goldenberg; Griffin; Jimenez; Magidin de Kramer; Masters; Orleans
Pedagogical content knowledge	Focuses on acquiring or further developing the knowledge needed to make the subject matter comprehensible to students.	7 = Brown; Dash; Goldenberg; Masters; O′ Dwyer; Orleans; Magidin de Kramer
Practical learning activities	Embeds practical, hands-on activities and real-life observations in the online learning materials.	6 = Brown; Goldenberg; Griffin; Marquez; O′ Dwyer; Orleans
Application of knowledge and skills	Requires or encourages teachers to connect and apply their newly developed knowledge/skills to their teaching practice and context.	5 = Dash; Griffin; Magidin de Kramer; Marquez; Masters
Flexibility	Provides opportunities for teachers to engage in self-directed learning where they study content they choose at their own pace.	4 = Brown; Dash; Erickson; Orleans
Relevance	Caters to teachers' interests and self-identified learning needs through the provision of a diversity of relevant resources.	3 = Brown; Marquez; Orleans
Goal-orientation	Includes goal-oriented content and activities.	2 = Brown; Orleans
Individual differences in learners	Takes into consideration existing individual life experiences and learners' previous experience learning online.	2 = Brown; Orleans
Reflection	Encourages continuous teacher reflection on the content and the learning experience.	2 = Brown; Erickson
4.3. Study quality appraisal
The quality appraisal comprised of eight (8/11) quantitative and three (3/11) mixed methods studies. Quantitative studies were scored with the Effective Public Health Practice Project (2009) tool (EPHPP) and qualitative studies with the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (2018) tool (CASP). Studies that employed mixed methods were scored with both tools, respectively (Table 2; Table 4).


Table 4. Study quality appraisal.

Study	Year	Quantitative	Mixed methods	Total score EPHPP	Total score CASP
Brown	2012		x	Moderate	Strong
Dash	2012	x		Weak	
Erickson	2012		x	Weak	Strong
Goldenberg	2014	x		Weak	
Griffin	2018	x		Moderate	
Jimenez	2016	x		Weak	
Magidin de Kramer	2012	x		Weak	
Marquez	2016	x		Strong	
Masters	2012	x		Weak	
O′ Dwyer	2012	x		Weak	
Orleans	2010		x	Weak	Moderate
4.3.1. Quantitative studies
The assessment of the quantitative research studies with the EPHPP tool resulted in one study scoring strong (Marquez et al., 2016), one moderate (Griffin et al., 2018), and six scoring weak (Dash et al., 2012; Goldenberg et al., 2014; Jimenez et al., 2016; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; Masters et al., 2012; O'Dwyer et al., 2010). The scores were achieved by the following EPPHP global rating scale of strong = no weak ratings, moderate = one weak rating, weak = two or more weak ratings. Among the studies that received a weak overall score, the areas where they performed well included a description of the strength of the study design in terms of bias, for example, the existence of a control group and the allocation of participants to both groups (Dash et al., 2012; Goldenberg et al., 2014; Jimenez et al., 2016; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; Masters et al., 2012; O'Dwyer et al., 2010); whether confounders were being controlled in the design or analysis of the study (Dash et al., 2012; Goldenberg et al., 2014; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; O'Dwyer et al., 2010); or a discussion of the numbers and reasons for dropouts and withdrawals (Jimenez et al., 2016).

4.3.2. Mixed methods studies
The assessment of the mixed methods studies (3/11) with the EPHPP and CASP tools resulted in one study scoring moderate on its quantitative and strong on its qualitative part (Brown & Woods, 2012). While Erickson et al. (2012) scored weak on its quantitative and strong on its qualitative part, Orleans (2010) scored weak on its quantitative and moderate on its qualitative part. The scores were calculated by achieving between 8 and 10 yes = strong, 5–7 yes = moderate, and 1–4 yes = weak (Table 4).

5. Discussion
This review aimed to systematically examine best practice in OPD for teachers with particular attention paid to the studies’ characteristics, reported outcomes, design elements and their methodological quality. In the following section, we discuss the summary of the evidence, limitations and present a conclusion that provides an interpretation of the results.

5.1. Summary of evidence
The results demonstrate successful OPD for teachers leads to improvements in their content knowledge and PCK, as well as in their beliefs about teaching, individual self-efficacy and instructional practices. The programs included in the systematic review found successful OPD for teachers for those rated strong and moderate in the quality appraisals included design elements that: fostered activities and engagement that accommodated individual differences in learning styles; fostered participant engagement; provided learner supports; focused on the acquisition or further development of PCK; embedded practical learning activities; encouraged the application of acquired knowledge and skills in practice; and are flexible, relevant and goal oriented (Brown & Woods, 2012; Erickson et al., 2012; Griffin et al., 2018; Marquez et al., 2016; Orleans, 2012). A strength of the evidence of this systematic review is the inclusion of mixed-methods studies that offer rich contextual information on teacher views and experiences in undertaking OPD. Additionally, the assessment of the quality of included studies was fully conducted by two independent raters, hence, ensured strong inter-rater reliability.

Mapping the relationship between design elements and positive outcomes (Fig. 2) provides key stakeholders with elements to consider when designing, developing or engaging in OPD. Of the 11 studies reviewed, three studies reported high learner satisfaction in programs that provided activities accommodating a variety of learning styles (Brown & Woods, 2012; Erickson et al., 2012; Marquez et al., 2016). Design elements found in programs that positively affected learner satisfaction were practical programs (Griffin et al., 2018; Marquez et al., 2016), and programs that fostered engagement either between peers or online program facilitators and students, or inter-organisational collaboration (Brown & Woods, 2012; Erickson et al., 2012). Increased content knowledge outcomes were reported in programs that were content focussed (Griffin et al., 2018; Orleans, 2010), took into account individual differences in learners (Griffin et al., 2018; Orleans, 2010), and included strong engagement practices (Dash et al., 2012; Griffin et al., 2018). Programs that embedded practical and authentic activities in the learning material noted improved outcomes in participants’ instructional practices (Brown & Woods, 2012; Orleans, 2010). The relationship between two of the design elements, learner supports and program length, and positive outcomes were not identified in any of the reviewed papers and therefore claims cannot be made about their impact.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (563KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Relationship between program design elements and positive outcomes.

5.2. Program support strategies and resources
Studies have shown that regular structured support for learners increases program satisfaction (Gregori, Zhang, Galván-Fernández, & de Asís Fernández-Navarro, 2018; Pelissier, 2019) and reduces attrition (Walsh, Mital, Ratcliff, Yap, & Jamaleddine, 2020). Additionally, studies have found learner computer supports (e.g., interactive tools such as, videos, FAQs, AI agents) foster positive outcomes (Vlasova, Avksentieva, Goncharova, & Aksyutin, 2019). Highlighting aspects of these learner supports is important for understanding how to design and deliver successful OPD for teachers. While learner supports (Table 5; Table 6) appears to be a critical design element in the success of OPD programs for teachers, across the 11 studies included in this review, the outcomes reported are not correlated to the supports mentioned in 8 of the studies (Dash et al., 2012; Erickson et al., 2012; Goldenberg et al., 2014; Griffin et al., 2018; Jimenez et al., 2016; Magidin de Kramer et al., 2012; Masters et al., 2012; Orleans, 2010).


Table 5. Learner supports available in OPD for teachers.

Study 1st author	Learner supports
Brown	No learner supports described.
Dash	Trained online program facilitators monitor teachers' completion of program activities.
Erickson	Syllabus outlining assignments, expectations, and due dates. Detailed technical assistance instructions with screenshots. Evaluation outcomes from collaboration and resource-sharing posted on the course website.
Goldenberg	Course facilitators were certified science teachers trained by PBS TeacherLine. Each session begins with a set of learning objectives and an essential question that participants are expected to be able to answer by its end.
Griffin	Technological support (hardware, software, Internet, video, and/or audio difficulties) and responsive (within 24 h) support for program-related issues provided by project faculty and graduate research assistants.
Jimenez	Modules used a compass rose that leads the educator through the introduction of the topic, the background of the topic, the specific content of the topic, and a summary with feedback and a final self-evaluation report.
Magidin de Kramer	Online workshop facilitators determined whether each teacher participant successfully completed all requirements.
Marquez	No learner supports described.
Masters	Online workshop facilitators determined whether each teacher participant successfully completed all requirements.
O'Dwyer	No learner supports described.
Orleans	Orientation session provided on the nature and the delivery approach of the training and technical support available. Sample training material to explore and familiarize with the navigation structure of the module. Synchronous discussions to address difficulties in learning concepts, performing lesson activities, and accomplishing outputs. Queries needing immediate attention were answered through emails and short-messaging-system provided by local telecommunication companies.

Table 6. Program learner support strategies and resources.

Support strategies	Resources
No learner supports described	Orientation session	Program facilitators	Technical support	Syllabus information	Subject-specific support	Evaluation reports	Readings	Web-based resources	Interactive activities	Videos	Discussion forums	Notebook work	Action Plan
Brown	x													
Dash			x					x	x	x	x	x		
Erickson				x	x		x					x		
Goldenber			x		x			x			x	x	x	
Griffin				x		x				x		x		
Jimenez					x		x		x		x	x		
Magidin de Kramer			x					x		x		x		
Marquez	x										x			x
Masters			x					x		x		x		
O'Dwyer	x							x		x		x		
Orleans		x		x		x		x				x		
Table 6 provides insights into the types of learner supports offered in these studies’ OPD programs. These supports have been categorised into support strategies and resources. Support strategies included orientation sessions, program facilitators, technical support, syllabus information, subject-specific support, and evaluation reports. Resources included readings, web-based resources, interactive activities using rapid authoring tools (RAT), peer-to-peer discussions, notebook work, and an action plan. While the learner supports varied across the studies, a notable feature of most of the studies (9/11) was the inclusion of peer-to-peer discussion, which is understood to foster student interactions (Yang, 2006) and importantly contributes to learner satisfaction (Lee, Srinivasan, Trail, Lewis, & Lopez, 2011). Four of the studies included utilising a program facilitator. Understanding the actions taken by these facilitators highlight the kinds of learner supports likely needed for successful OPD for teachers.

OPD for teachers that improves their content knowledge and instructional practices can be perhaps leveraged to assist them to design and deliver high-quality online education for their students. Given the COVID-19 pandemic spanning across elementary to university and vocational education levels, and any future crises that have the potential to disrupt educational provisions, teachers' knowledge and experience with OPD may have potential benefits in this mostly uncharted territory of wholly online instruction. Improvements in teachers’ self-efficacy and PCK through participating in collaborative and satisfying OPD may assist them in overcoming the steep learning curve for successfully learning and teaching online. In turn, with improved teacher beliefs and intentions to embed their learning in their practice, teachers can access OPD to improve both their online and face-to-face teaching practices during and after the pandemic.

5.3. Limitations
The validity of this systematic review may be threatened by factors at the study and outcome levels. At the study level, the review employed comprehensive selection criteria that included an appraisal of the methodological quality of the studies. Our investigation suggests that few available publications of teachers’ OPD are strong methodologically, even though the review included papers over ten years from 2010 to 2019. As a result, only 11 studies were selected. Given the comprehensive selection criteria, the validity of our conclusions regarding the outcomes is within the scope of methodologically sound studies.

A possible limitation in the outcomes reported is that they emerge primarily from older studies before 2014. Furthermore, the programs' design elements that led to successful outcomes are often not discussed in sufficient detail and are often quite disparate. This is an identified research gap in the literature as programs’ design elements are usually discussed in the fields of learning design, user experience (UX) or learning experience design (LXD). Despite these limitations, the review successfully conducted an evidence synthesis and drew conclusions from both quantitative and mixed studies, and rated the studies as either weak, moderate or strong using the CASP and EPHPP tools. Despite having included only evaluation studies from peer-reviewed journals, this may offer some assurance regarding the quality of the articles and the value of their outcomes. Another limitation is at the review level, we excluded conference presentations and conceptual studies which could have potentially contributed relevant outcomes to the field of OPD for teachers. A further notable limitation is the unavailability of some studies or the return of search results that did not provide enough detail to locate certain studies. Due to the heterogeneity of the studies in terms of program design, metrics, participants, sample sizes, settings, and outcomes, a meta-analysis was not conducted.

5.4. Identified research gaps
In accordance with the findings and observations from this review, an issue that has not been reported in-depth in the reviewed papers but is of particular interest to designers of OPD for teachers is design elements, in particular learner supports. A majority of the studies included OPD programs which were mostly asynchronous, however, in reporting these studies not enough attention is focused on the design elements and activities within these programs to support positive outcomes, as well as the theoretical underpinnings informing the program design. Further, these studies were inconsistent in the depth of detail provided about the structured learner supports offered to participants during the delivery of these OPDs programs.

6. Conclusion
In conclusion, this systematic review of the literature is the first to evaluate the successful design and delivery of online professional development that leads to teachers’ improved: content knowledge; PCK; beliefs about teaching; self-efficacy; and instructional practices. We identified a sizable body of research that had not been formally evaluated in this manner to understand and draw conclusions on best practice in OPD for teachers, with particular attention paid to design elements. An evidence-based overview of the design elements of OPD that result in productive learning outcomes for teachers is timely given the disruption to more traditional forms of teacher professional development as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; specifically, for providers who will design and deliver future OPD programs for teachers. The findings suggest that specific design elements have the potential to successfully accommodate individual differences in learning styles, foster participant engagement, provide learner supports, and foster the acquisition or further development of PCK. This systematic review provides a stimulus for exploring new ways to incorporate the design elements identified across these 11 studies for the design and delivery of future OPD for teachers. However, this work has revealed there is more to learn about how to design and develop OPD that considers using self-determined approaches for enhancing learning and teacher satisfaction. Clearly teachers are facing other formidable obstacles including the content of PD. Future exploration of structured program learner supports and resources is critical in enhancing OPD effectiveness. This review is a useful aid for supporting program designers and extends its impact to decision-makers when seeking to identify robust OPD for their staff.

6.1. Future research recommendations
The impact of COVID-19 on the uptake of OPD for teachers is anticipated to be significant moving forward. Therefore, a greater understanding of the design elements and learner supports that contribute to successful OPD is vital to further improvements in OPD conceptualisation, design, build and delivery. It has not yet been fully established which of these design elements or learner supports play the greatest part in achieving the positive outcomes reported in this systematic review. This warrants future research to establish if and how program design elements, specifically learner supports, assist teachers in gaining knowledge and skills through interactives or engaging in self-reflection through metacognitive interactives. The exploration of the types of support offered to teachers by OPD facilitators that lead to positive outcomes is ripe for future consideration. This systematic review of the literature has focused on the teacher's experience of OPD, however, with the rapid growth of online learning, exploration of the transferability of effective design elements for adult learners could be examined for their suitability and engagement of younger learners. Additionally, studies should examine the non-personnel program resources (videos, FAQs, AI agents, etc.) that are shown to foster positive outcomes. The list of design elements found in this review may not be exhaustive, and thus future research will address this gap.