This article reports on a study that investigated user acceptance of a high-immersion virtual reality learning environment to learn English paragraph writing structure. 134 undergraduate university students participated in the study by using a high-immersion virtual reality system combined with an in-house developed virtual reality learning environment program for the purpose of learning paragraph structure. A post-session questionnaire was used to collect data. A partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) analysis was then conducted to test an extended technology acceptance model conceptualized from a priori theoretical deduction and previous empirical findings. The extended model featured the constructs of Imagination, Immersion, and Interaction as exogenous variables with Perceived Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness in mediating roles leading to the endogenous construct of Behavioral Intention to Use. Results of the confirmatory PLS-SEM analysis revealed inherent problems with the model's application to the high-immersion virtual reality system and program used. Considering these findings, a PLS-SEM exploratory model optimization analysis was conducted which saw the variable of Immersion best relocated to be a predicator for both the Interaction and Imagination constructs. This exploratory model showed superior predictive relevance and improved significance of the relevant construct paths. Based on these results, this paper provides new theoretical reasoning that is in line with these statistical findings, namely that the construct of Immersion is best positioned as a singular external exogenous variable impacting Interaction and Imagination for the high-immersion virtual reality technology acceptance model used in this study.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Virtual reality

Pedagogical issues

Human-computer interface

High-immersion

Virtual learning environment

1. Introduction
Today's virtual reality learning environments use interfaces that provide sensory immersion through visual and auditory stimuli as well as haptic cues that allow users to navigate as they would in the real world, with the digital setting responding to them (Liu et al., 2017). Studies investigating users' behavioral intention to use (ITU) virtual reality (VR) for learning purposes (Huang et al., 2016; Luse et al., 2013; Sagnier et al., 2020) have primarily relied upon two theories, which are Davis's (1989) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and Venkatesh et al.’s (2003) Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT). Although numerous studies have utilized Venkatesh et al.‘s UTAUT to investigate high-immersion VR user acceptance (Kunz & Santomier, 2019; Shen et al., 2019), Davis's (1989) TAM, which suggests that the perceived usefulness (PU) and perceived ease of use (PEU) of technology influences users behavioral ITU the technology, has been the most influential and widely adapted parsimonious model investigating users' acceptance and therefore behavioral intention to use VR systems (Disztinger et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2016; Huang & Liaw, 2018; Majid & Shamsudin, 2019).

Immersion, interaction, and imagination (III), which are frequently viewed as innate qualities of VR (Sheridan, 2000; Burdea & Coiffet, 2003; Mulders et al., 2020), are indicative of VR systems and tools as multi-dimensional principal features that influence system users. III were first discussed cohesively by Sheridan (2000) who explored the nature of presence in its relation to immersion, interaction and imagination, the latter being defined as the suspension of disbelief. Burdea and Coiffet (2003) revisited the theory of III as the prevailing framework for conceptualizing VR technology. Burdea and Coiffet (2003) define interaction as a virtual environment's (VE) real-time response to user input, and define immersion as the stimulation of multiple sensory channels which affords a sense of inclusion in the VE. Furthermore, they reconceive Sheridan's (2000) idea of imagination to mean the mind's ability to perceive non-existing things. The application of III to the TAM has been employed with encouraging results in numerous studies (Huang et al., 2010, 2016; Madini & Alshaikhi, 2017) using a variety of differing VR systems.

Given that the degree to which the qualities of VR have changed over time, ascertaining the value of adding III to the TAM, as reported in the extant literature on leveraging VR for learning purposes, proves difficult. For example, the experience of learning via a low-immersion VR device (e.g., interacting with a 3D virtual environment displayed on a computer screen by means of mouse and keyboard) is conceptually different to learning via a high-immersion VR system that affords motion tracking, six degrees of freedom, and haptic feedback via a Head Mounted Display (HMD), motion sensors, and hand-held controllers. However, the role that III, and immersion in particular, may have in shaping users’ acceptance of high-immersion VR technology for educational purposes is not well understood (Bower & Jong, 2020).

The primary impetus behind the current study, therefore, was to investigate how the constructs of III can be best integrated into the TAM when using high-immersion VR for educational purposes; it does so by investigating students' acceptance of a high-immersion virtual reality learning environment to learn English paragraph writing structure. The study used partial least square structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) to conduct a confirmatory test of an adapted and extended version of Davis's (1989) TAM conceptualized from prior theoretical deduction (Burdea & Coiffet, 2003; Sherman & Craig, 2019; Szabó, 2019) and empirical evidence (Huang et al., 2010, 2016; Huang & Liaw, 2018; Madini & Alshaikhi, 2017). This model places immersion, interaction, and imagination as external latent variables that affect both users' PU and PEU. The latter two serving as mediating variables that in turn shape users ITU the technology. Based on the results from the confirmatory model testing, a PLS-SEM exploratory optimization analysis was then completed using a new model that saw the construct of immersion being best relocated as a singular external exogenous determiner.

2. Research model and hypotheses
2.1. Technology acceptance model
Davis's (1989) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is underpinned by the psychosocial theories of Reasoned Action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) and Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 1991) which seek to explain and predict a specified behavior. This original TAM consists of two external exogenous constructs. The first of these is perceived usefulness (PU), which can be defined as “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would enhance his or her job performance” (Davis, 1989, p. 320). The second exogenous construct is that of perceived ease of use (PEU), which Davis (1989) defined as “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort” (p.320). These two constructs directly predicate the endogenous construct of users' behavioral intention to use (ITU) a technology.

Numerous studies have shown that of the two exogenous constructs, PU is the strongest predicator of users' ITU a particular technology. Ma and Liu's (2004) meta-analysis of results from 26 empirical studies found coefficients ranging from 0.09 to 0.91 with a mean of β = 0.49. By contrast, coefficients for the PEU pathway ranged from 0.07 to 0.059 with a mean of β = 0.27. Furthermore, a subsequent meta-analysis of a larger number of empirical studies by King and He (2006) found PU to ITU path coefficients to be between 0.14 and 0.88, resulting in a mean of β = 0.50. Inversely, the coefficient effect of PEU on ITU was found to be weaker with a coefficient mean of 0.19. Relevant to smaller values in these types of analyses, Hair er al. (2017) mention that weaker coefficients are less likely to be found significant. Overall, there is a lack of consensus (Agarwal & Prasad, 1997; Davis et al., 1989; Yousafzai et al., 2007) over whether PEU is a direct determinant of a users' ITU a technology, or its effect is indirect and best mediated by PU. However, King and He's (2006) findings suggest that in contexts using newer technology the direct effect of PEU on ITU remains highly important.

Davis's (1989) TAM has been extended to fit an increasing number of different technologies (Choi & Ji, 2015; Koul & Eydgahi, 2018; Rafique et al., 2020), different contexts (Ahmad et al., 2020; Zheng & Li, 2020), and different users (Guner & Acarturk, 2020; Venkatesh & Morris, 2000). A large number of model extensions have been proposed to Davis's (1989) original TAM (Marangunić & Granić, 2015) that often include external variables whereby PU and PEU are positioned in mediating roles (Chow et al., 2012; Venkatesh & Davis, 2000). The external model variables chosen often differ according to the technology (Bassiouni et al., 2019), context (Min et al., 2019), or users (Kim, 2016) investigated and their inclusion seeks to increase the predictive ability of the TAM within a specific domain (Chow et al., 2012).

Research that has incorporated Davis's (1989) TAM to examine users' ITU virtual reality (VR) has provided evidence of its applicability to this technology because users' ITU was determined by PU and PEU (Bertrand & Bouchard, 2008; Chow et al., 2012; Fetscherin & Lattemann, 2008; Tokel & İsler, 2015). In these studies, as well as others (Tokel & İsler, 2015; Huang et al., 2016; Majid & Shamsudin, 2019) that are particularly relevant to the present study, users' PU of the VR system and program was a far stronger determinant of their ITU than was their PEU. These findings then inform the first two hypotheses of this present study.

H1

PU will have a strong, positive, and significant effect on learners' ITU the VR system.

H2

PEU will have a weak, positive, and nonsignificant effect on learners' ITU the high-immersion VR system.

Research examining users' VR acceptance has extended Davis's (1989) TAM by the inclusion of external latent variables such as enjoyment and control or active learning (Makransky & Lilleholt, 2018; Makransky & Peterson, 2019), user attitude (Fetscherin & Lattemann, 2008; Majid & Shamsudin, 2019), and reflective observation (Shen et al., 2019). However, Avci Yucel and Gulbahar's (2013) meta-review of prior studies investigating influential predicators of the TAM found that variables incorporating the examination of system and tools were the most successful external determiners for Davis's (1989) base TAM. The constructs of III, as potential external latent variables to the TAM, and as qualities of VR systems, merit further discussion.

2.2. Qualities of VR (III)
2.2.1. Immersion
VR is defined as an immersive technology, albeit individual systems are often described as being located at different points along a cline of immersion. The continuum of VR immersion from low to high has been conceptualized by Milgram and Kishino (1994) and Kim and Leathem (2018). According to this taxonomy, users of VR systems that are further toward the high end of the continuum would feel increasingly as if they were participating in an unmediated reality (Cummings & Bailenson, 2016; Makransky & Lilleholt, 2018). In contrast, VR that displays a 3D digital environment on a conventional computer monitor, that allows interaction through an input device like a keyboard or mouse, has been termed as desktop VR or low-immersion VR (Lee & Wong, 2014; Makransky & Peterson, 2019).

Immersion is a multi-dimensional construct which has been interpreted pluralistically throughout the literature. Nilsson et al. (2016) provide an overview of conceptualizations of immersion, which range from a property of the VR system, to perceptual responses, and into responses to narratives and challenges within a virtual environment. Immersion as an objectively measurable system property is clearly at odds with the view of immersion as a subjective psychological response from a user. Slater and Sanchez-Vives (2016) refer to immersion as an objectively measurable attribute of a VR system, wherein a system can be described as more immersive if it can simulate the qualities of another system. In their example, an HMD VR system can completely simulate the use of a desktop computer VR system, but the reverse is not possible. Slater and Sanchez-Vives's (2016) conception of immersion is useful for understanding the immersive capacity of VR systems, but less so for understanding the perceptual response of the user or the way users react to virtual media, which is a subjective assessment of immersion (Mütterlein, 2018). These varying interpretations of immersion demonstrate its multi-dimensional nature, as immersion can be perceived as an aspect of the technology, as an entirely physical sensation, like being bodily immersed in a medium such as water, or as a completely psychological reaction, such as when we are immersed in a good book (Sherman & Craig, 2019; Witmer & Singer, 1998).

Presence is described as the psychological sense of “being there”, where an individual feels like they are in an environment and the events of that environment are plausibly occurring (Slater, 2009). It is debated whether physical immersion precedes or occurs concurrently with psychological immersion, although it is generally accepted that psychological immersion is either responsible for arousing a sense of presence (Witmer & Singer, 1998) or synonymous with it (Sherman & Craig, 2019). Jennet et al. (2008) posit that presence is derived from greater degrees of immersion. They describe immersion as occurring in stages, wherein users first feel an engagement with a virtual environment (VE). This leads to engrossment, which involves an emotional connection and mastery of the system controls. And finally, total immersion, which involves a sense of presence. Other researchers have also found that by controlling for immersion at the sensory stages (the stimulation afforded by VR systems through aural and visual media), the sense of presence can be affected (Buttussi & Chittaro, 2017; Cadet & Chainay, 2020; Cummings & Bailenson, 2016; Makransky & Lilleholt, 2018).

Given the multiple and sometimes conflicting views of immersion, and following the recommendations of Suh and Prophet (2018) who advocate that researchers clearly state their definition of immersion, we define it here as the physical sensation of being included in a VE (minimally, visual and aural input are provided), this is coupled by a sense of engagement with the VE (Jennett et al., 2008; Shu et al., 2019), and is concomitant with a psychological sense of being present in the VE.

When applied to Davis's (1989) TAM, immersion has been found to have a significant direct effect on users' behavioral intention to use VR (Disztinger et al., 2017). Additionally, Huang et al. (2016) reported a positive and significant association between immersion and PU, but a non-significant association with PEU. In partial explanation of immersion's behavior, Huang et al. (2016) mention that the VR devices used in their study were not “true immersive VR” (p. 16), and that interaction with the system was limited to a few basic functions such as zoom and rotation of a 3D object. No known structural equation modelling studies have since analyzed the impact of immersion on PU or PEU of a high-immersion HMD-based VR system. A high-immersion device operating a program with multiple interaction features may find immersion to have a positive and significant effect on PEU. Therefore, we adopt the following hypotheses.

H3

Immersion will be a strong, positive and significant predicator for PU.

H4

Immersion will be a positive and significant predicator for PEU.

2.2.2. Interaction
Interaction is another multi-dimensional construct, describing aspects of human-computer interaction and also computer-mediated communication between humans, such as in multi-user virtual environments (Lan et al., 2013). The majority of high-immersion VR systems incorporate a natural interface through which users interact with a VE in real-time with hardware such as a HMD, motion sensors, and handheld controllers. This natural user interface provides users with the perception of interacting with an environment as opposed to with a computer, affording a sense of embodiment and agency (Johnson-Glenberg, 2018). The ability of users to undertake embodied actions such as view control, navigation, and object manipulation can increase the degree to which they may influence the form and content of the VE (Steuer, 1992). Enabling users with the power to interact in this way has multiple educational benefits as it increases experiential and situated learning (Dalgarno & Lee, 2010), enhancing the PU of VR. Huang et al. (2016) also suggest that interaction with simulated worlds facilitates the learning process, through real-time and natural manipulation of objects by users, which may manifest as an influence between the constructs of interaction and PU.

Some researchers approach VR SEM analysis with formative constructs such as VR Features, consisting of representational fidelity and immediacy of control, or usability, consisting of PU and PEU (Makransky & Peterson, 2019). Makransky and Peterson (2019) observed a large and significant impact from the features of interaction when coupled with aspects of immersion such as realism; together, these had a large and significant influence on usability. Similar findings were reported by both Lee et al. (2010) and Makransky and Lilleholt (2018), with the latter reporting that increased immersion led to greater interaction and in turn greater PU and PEU. However, these studies did not measure the individual effect of interaction on other variables in their models, opting instead to combine interaction and representational fidelity, and PU and PEU into the corresponding multi-variable constructs of VR features and usability. It is therefore unknown what interaction's individual contributions are in their models.

Kwon (2019) conducted a study in which the use of a more natural user interface was compared to interaction through a joystick interface in head mounted display (HMD)-based VR. His findings indicated that users had an easier time interacting through the natural user interface, which also afforded more opportunities for experiential learning. Similarly, Mikropoulos and Strouboulis (2004) also found that users preferred interaction through HMD-based VR, compared to keyboard and mouse interfaces. Furthermore, VR is becoming a major commercial industry which is predicted to add $1.5 trillion to the global economy over the next ten years, and devices are now designed by major tech companies with usability being a key marketing feature for consumers (PwC “Seeing is Believing” report, 2019). Therefore, interaction is likely approached by VR designers from an ease-of-use perspective, and even though the relatively recent popularity of natural user interfaces is novel compared to low-immersion interfaces (Szabó, 2019), it is theorized that the construct of interaction will have a positive association with the construct of PEU. This, coupled with the aforementioned possible facilitation of learning, inform the following hypotheses for interaction.

H5

Interaction will be a strong, positive, and significant determiner for PEU.

H6

Interaction will be a positive and non-significant predicator for PU.

2.2.3. Imagination
The third quality of VR included in this study incorporates the software component of systems. Burdea and Coiffet (2003) describe imagination as an attribute evoked by the content of virtual environment applications which is explored by a user's mind's capacity to perceive non-existent things. Cowan and Dai (2014) extrapolate this definition further by positing that imagination is the mind's visions resulting from the combination of pre-existing information and new information in the sensory environment which in turn evoke the core process of high-involvement. This high-involvement can lead to user agency when incomplete pre-existing or new information is presented, and thus imagination is an integral and mediating factor in the creation of agency (Sherman & Craig, 2019).

The unique nature of VR experiences affords users the ability to visualize situations and concepts that other forms of multimedia cannot render (Chen, 2016). Yet, Liu et al. (2017) dispute the construct of imagination as a core quality of VR, arguing that program content may actually detract from imagination if users are engaging in the same virtual experiences. However, Cowan and Ketron (2019) propose that “co-creation is an alternative mechanism, in addition to the imagination, through which high-involvement can be achieved” (p. 488). Madini and Alshaikhi (2017) found that the variable of imagination was a highly important feature for high-immersion VR systems that utilized HMDs. Furthermore, Huang et al. (2010) proposed that VR is extremely useful when addressing issues that require creativity and visualization because virtual reality learning environments can simulate the real world which then initiates the imagination of the learner, helping the mind's capacity to conceptualize (Wetzel et al., 1994). Therefore, creative imagination enables learners to visualize new ideas and concepts in their minds that are not immediately presented to their senses (Singer, 2000) and aids users in achieving learning goals in VR learning environments (Huang et al., 2010).

Burdea and Coiffet (2003) posit that imagination should be considered when evaluating user attitudes toward the acceptance of VR learning systems. Huang et al.’s (2010) study found that virtual reality learning environments that evoke imagination are good tools for learners to improve their problem-solving abilities. It then follows that problem solving during virtual reality learning environment task completion may be a positive indicator of a VR program's usefulness for learning content. Huang et al. (2016) confirmed this with their bi-variate relationship results from exploring learners' acceptance of desktop and projection-based display systems for medical education which showed that Imagination had a positive impact on learners' PU (β = 0.61, p < .01) and predicated PEU (β = 0.51, p < .01), which were both contributors to the behavioral intention of learners to use VR. Furthermore, Huang et al.’s (2016) regression results for these technology acceptance paths were β = 0.29, p < .001 (Imagination-PU) and β = 0.36, p < .001 (Imagination-PEU). Moreover, imagination was found to be the most important contributor to the dependent variable of PEU (26%).

Given the importance of imagination to students’ VR learning experience, and that it has been found to be a positive determiner for both their PU and PEU of a VR system for learning purposes, the following hypotheses were proposed for this current study.

H7

Imagination will exhibit a medium to large, positive, and significant effect on PU.

H8

Imagination will exhibit a medium, positive, and significant effect on PEU.

2.3. Theoretical confirmatory model
3. Method
3.1. Population and sample
The study was conducted at a Sino-British English Medium Instruction (EMI) university in mainland China. A non-probability voluntary response self-selection sampling method was used to recruit first-year undergraduate students in their initial semester of instruction at the tertiary level and who were receiving intensive English for academic purposes provision. Students involved in the self-selection sampling method were representative of the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) A2/B1 English proficiency levels as determined by their completion of an Oxford Placement Test (Oxford University Press, 2021). 134 students confirmed their availability to participate when the details of data collection session days and timings were published. Subsequently, all 134 participants who had made themselves available completed their allocated data collection sessions. Standard ethical institutional procedures were undertaken to ensure participant anonymity, and instructions and disclaimer were read and signed by participants that specified the procedure to be taken if symptoms of cybersickness were experienced. Additional participant information is recorded in Table 1.


Table 1. Demographics.

Variable	Value	Frequency	% (rounded)
Sex	Male	51	38
Female	83	62
Age	18	91	68
19	30	23
20	2	1
No Reply	11	8
English ability	Beginner	5	3
Elementary	61	46
Intermediate	64	48
Advanced	4	3
Familiarity with VR	Never use	23	18
Rarely use	52	38
Sometimes use	55	41
Often use	4	3
n = 134.

3.2. Instrument
A survey instrument was developed to measure participants' technology acceptance of high-immersion VR for learning purposes. The questionnaire was drafted using dimensions of measurements from previously published research (Burdea & Coiffet, 2003; Davis, 1989; Lai et al., 2009; Mantovani, 2003) with minor contextual adaptions. The initial draft of the instrument contained: (1), 12 potential items for the three constructs of Immersion, Interaction and Imagination (III); (2), 12 items for Davis's (1989) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) constructs. Therefore, a 24-item instrument was first proposed.

The initial 24 questionnaire items were subjected to content validation (Rubio et al., 2003) to provide evidence of each measure's reliability and validity. Results were collated and three items consistently noted as being less representative or crucial were excluded. Three measures of content validity for the resulting 21-item instrument were calculated. Results found a 0.916 inter-rater agreement, a content validity index of 0.959, and a factorial validity index of 0.842. As all three measures exceeded the 0.80 value that Rubio et al. (2003) recommend, the instrument was considered content valid.

The final version of the instrument was translated into the participants' first language (Mandarin Chinese) and administered with a 7-point Likert scale (ranging from 1 which signaled ‘strongly disagree’ to 7 which indicated ‘strongly agree’). Although the demographic and VR familiarity related items were identified with subheadings immediately before their presentation at the beginning of the questionnaire, all items relating to III and the TAM were presented randomly, and hence not sub-headed to elicit non-choreographed responses which could later be recompiled and compared with the data retrieved from other items measuring each construct investigated. Descriptive statistics for each item are presented in Table 7, Appendix A.

3.3. Virtual reality learning environment
The VR program used for the learning environment was in-house developed through a partnership between the School of Languages and the School of Computer Sciences and Software Engineering at the higher education institution where this study was conducted. A detailed description of the program can be found in (Pack, Barrett, Liang, & Monteiro, 2020), and an illustration of the virtual learning environment used is presented in Fig. 2 below.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (435KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Virtual learning environment.

An Oculus Rift + Touch system was used to provide participants with the fully-immersive VR experience. A large external screen was linked to display the participants' view as they navigated the virtual reality learning environment to complete the program's tasks. This external screen allowed for easier interaction with the participants throughout their use of the high-immersion VR system.

3.4. Experimental procedure
The mean length of a data collection session in minutes was 12.16 (SD = 3.04) and sessions were organized into the following four procedural stages: (1) Orientation - Participants were introduced to the hand controller functions required for exploration of the virtual environment and completion of the program's tasks. Assistance was given in the correct fitting of the Oculus Rift HMD. The users were then given time to orientate themselves within the virtual world; (2) Controlled practice - A low difficulty level paragraph text was chosen for the participants. They were then aided in physical movement and control via verbal instructions in order to successfully complete the task introduced. Verbal feedback to their completion of the task was provided; (3) Freer practice - Participants were asked to use self-assessment to determine their proficiency at completing the previous task and select an appropriate level of paragraph text to use for their second task. No instructions were given unless the participant requested, or required, intervention at this stage of the task. Verbal feedback was provided to the participant on completion of the task; (4) Data collection instrument completion - Participants were asked to complete a paper and pencil hard copy of the questionnaire. Researchers were available for participants to request clarification of any questionnaire items they deemed to be challenging for them individually. No participant reported feeling symptoms of cybersickness; however, a small proportion of those who wore corrective eyeglasses experienced minor discomfort in wearing the HMD.

3.5. Model assessment methodology
Partial least square structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) was employed to conduct a confirmatory test of an adapted and extended version of Davis's (1989) TAM (see Fig. 1) conceptualized from prior theoretical deduction (Burdea & Coiffet, 2003; Sherman & Craig, 2019; Szabó, 2019) and empirical evidence (Huang et al., 2010, 2016; Huang & Liaw, 2018; Madini & Alshaikhi, 2017). Based on the results from the confirmatory model testing, further PLS-SEM exploratory analyses were then completed to determine model optimization for the data retrieved.

SmartPLS v.3.3.2 (Ringle et al., 2015) was utilized to execute the PLS-SEM multivariate analyses in this study. Through combining ordinary least squares regressions with principal components analysis, partial least squares structural equation modelling estimates partial model structures. PLS-SEM analyses were chosen to assess the models presented in this study for two primary reasons: (1), limited previous research had been conducted using variations of the confirmatory model constructs in the context of high-immersion VR (Huang et al., 2016), and therefore analysis was concerned with testing a theoretical framework from a prediction perspective (Garson, 2016; Hair et al., 2017, 2019); (2), a method of analysis was needed that was suitably proficient for exploratory research, in addition to being able to conduct confirmatory model testing (Garson, 2016; Hair et al., 2017).

Supplementary PLS-SEM attributes notable for its application in this study were twofold: (1), the distributional assumptions made by covariance-based structural equation modelling are restrictive, whereas PLS-SEM does not assume the normality of datasets (Hair et al., 2014, 2017), and that PLS-SEM is non-restrictive on data distribution was important for this study, due to Likert data being neither continuous nor Gaussian in distribution (Mircioiu & Atkinson, 2017); and (2), a causal-predictive approach to SEM that emphasized prediction in estimating statistical models and whose structures are designed to provide causal explanations was required.

4. Confirmatory model measurement and discussion
4.1. Measurement model assessment
A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) led to two further items being deleted as only those with a factor loading of > 0.05 were retained. This resulted in a final total of 19 items to form the bases of the confirmatory reflective model analyzed. Table 2 shows the results from internal consistency reliability and convergent validity analyses.


Table 2. Cronbach's alpha (α), composite reliability (CR), and average variance extracted (AVE).

Immersion	Interaction	Imagination	PEU	PU	ITU
α	0.835	0.715	0.837	0.872	0.801	0.858
CR	0.901	0.838	0.902	0.913	0.883	0.913
AVE	0.752	0.634	0.754	0.723	0.716	0.778
Given that all constructs had values greater than the α = 0.7 threshold (Dörnyei & Taguchi, 2010, p. 95), and the results of the CR test, with constructs' values being measured at greater than the suggested minimum of 0.70 but less than the recommended value of 0.95 (Hair et al., 2017), internal consistency reliability was established, in that variables were not measuring the same phenomenon and were thus valid measures of the constructs. Next, the constructs' average variance extracted (AVE) values were analyzed to assess convergent validity (CV). All values exceeded Hair et al.’s (2017) minimum threshold of 0.5 which indicated that the constructs explained more than half of the variance of their indicators.

Constructs’ discriminant validity (DV) was firstly analyzed by using the Fornell-Larcker (1981) method that compares the AVE and squared correlation coefficients of the constructs. Table 3 shows the results of the DV analysis. As all related squared correlation coefficients were smaller than the AVEs of the two constructs, it was concluded that the level of DV was appropriate.


Table 3. Fornell-Larcker Discriminant validity (DV).

ITU	Imagination	Immersion	Interaction	PEU	PU
ITU	0.882					
Imagination	0.634	0.868				
Immersion	0.691	0.520	0.867			
Interaction	0.376	0.382	0.486	0.796		
PEU	0.366	0.360	0.431	0.731	0.850	
PU	0.765	0.755	0.580	0.380	0.396	0.846
The heterotrait-monotrait (HTMT) criterion is the item correlations' mean value throughout constructs relative to the geometric mean of the average correlations for the items measuring the same construct. Recent research (Henseler et al., 2015; Voorhees et al., 2016) has proposed that Fornell and Larcker's (1981) traditional metric could be replaced by the HTMT criterion as it may better identify DV. Therefore, HTMT inference results at the 95% confidence level were obtained through conducting a complete bootstrapping procedure with 5000 samples. All constructs were found to have appropriate HTMT values of <1 (Hair et al., 2017).

4.2. Structural model assessment
PLS-SEM analyzes a structural model by the indicators of: (1), collinearity – tolerance (TOL) and variance inflation factor (VIF) values; (2), path coefficient effect size; (3), coefficient of determination (R2) values of endogenous constructs; (4), f2 R-square change effect; (5), Stone-Geisser's Q2 value (Geisser, 1974; Stone, 1974) for constructs' predictive power; (6), and the relative impact of predictive power (q2). Firstly, collinearity was examined through the TOL coefficients and VIF values. TOL coefficients were found to be > 0.25 which is the standard minimum value for this indicator of collinearity (Garson, 2016; Hair et al., 2017); whilst the VIF values (see Table 8, Appendix B) were all much less than the recommended threshold of <5 (Hair et al., 2017) These results confirm that collinearity did not reach a critical level in the predictor constructs for this model.

The structural model's direct path coefficients were analyzed, which represent the relationships' effect between constructs. The significance of relationships and estimates were obtained by performing a bootstrap analysis with 5000 samples at the 95% confidence level. Analysis of the coefficient relationships within Davis's (1989) original TAM variables revealed support for H1 in that the PU-ITU path had a large positive effect that was also statistically significant (β = 0.736, p < .001). In addition, the PEU-ITU (β = 0.075) direct coefficient showed a small positive effect and was nonsignificant; hence, H2 was confirmed. The immersion-PU path showed a low effect (β = 0.248), albeit significant at the level of p < .01, supporting H3. However, H4 was rejected, as immersion had a nonsignificant effect in the immersion-PEU path (β = 0.071). The interaction-PEU (β = 0.671, p < .001) relationship was large and significant, whereas the interaction-PU (β = 0.023) path coefficient was small and nonsignificant albeit still positive, supporting H5 and H6 respectively. And lastly, the imagination-PU (β = 0.618, p < .001) pathway exhibited medium to large effect and was significant at the level of p < .01, whilst the effect of imagination on PEU (β = 0.066) was small and nonsignificant. These results support H7, in that a strong positive effect was shown, but the small and nonsignificant loading onto PEU from imagination resulted in the rejection of H8. See Fig. 3 for a full representation of the loadings.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (401KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Confirmatory model results.

The coefficient of determination (R2) measures a model's in-sample predictive power by representing exogenous latent variables' combined effects on an endogenous latent variable. R2 values of 0.25, 0.50, or 0.75 for the endogenous construct can be described as weak, moderate, and substantial, respectively (Hair et al., 2017). Due to R2 values not being adequate indicators for understanding the model's predictive power in and unto themselves, f2 effect sizes were also analyzed. f2 effect values determine the change in an R2 value when a specified exogenous construct is omitted from the model. f2 values of 0.02, 0.15, and 0.35 indicate an exogenous construct's small, medium, or large effect, respectively, on an endogenous construct (Hair et al., 2017). Table 4 provides the results of the R2 and f2 analyses, and the values show that endogenous constructs' R2 had a medium predictive relevance. However, the predictive effect of the exogenous variables PEU, immersion, imagination, interaction on endogenous constructs were not very pronounced.


Table 4. Confirmatory model in-sample and out-of-sample predictive relevance.

R2	f2	Q2	q2
Full-model
ITU	0.590	–	0.409	–
PU	0.619	–	0.414	–
PEU	0.545	–	0.374	–
Partial-model
ITU excluding PU	0.136	1.114	0.099	0.524
ITU excluding PEU	0.585	0.012	0.407	0.003
PU excluding Imagination	0.351	0.708	0.226	0.321
PU excluding Immersion	0.581	0.102	0.392	0.037
PU excluding Interaction	0.619	0.001	0.417	−0.005
PEU excluding Imagination	0.542	0.007	0.374	0
PEU excluding Immersion	0.542	0.007	0.374	0
PEU excluding Interaction	0.211	0.735	0.142	0.371
A blindfolding procedure (D = 7) was executed, deleting one exogenous variable at a time, to obtain Stone-Geisser's Q2 value (Geisser, 1974; Stone, 1974) which measures a model's out-of-sample predictive relevance for each endogenous construct. The resulting Q2 values larger than 0 indicated that the exogenous constructs had predictive relevance for the endogenous construct under consideration (see Table 4). To determine the impact of model exogenous constructs on their reflective endogenous constructs, q2 values were then analyzed (see Table 4). q2 values of 0.02, 0.15, and 0.35, respectively, indicate that an exogenous construct has a small, medium, or large predictive relevance for a certain endogenous construct (Hair et al., 2017). PU-ITU (q2 = 0.524) and interaction-PEU (q2 = 0.370) demonstrated that large predictive relevance was found; however, PEU-ITU (q2 = 0.003) and interaction-PU (q2 = −0.005) were seen to have little predictive power, with the latter's q2 value being noted as negative for predictive relevance. As a result of the analyses for out-of-sample predictive relevance, it was observed that just four variables showed an effect.

4.3. Discussion of confirmatory model
Davis's (1989) TAM construct of PU proved to be the dominating influence on the learners' ITU the high-immersion VR system for learning paragraph structure compared to PEU. This finding conforms to other related studies' results in that PU, and not PEU, was found to have a large and significant effect on users' ITU (Huang & Liaw, 2018; Huang et al., 2016; Sagnier et al., 2020). This result could be attributed to learners being accustomed to high learning curves when it comes to new or complex technologies; they understand that new technologies will likely become easier to use with prolonged use, and therefore do not allow initial difficulties to project onto their intention to use the technology.

It was unsurprising to find imagination dominating influence on PU, as the creative connection to the learning content afforded by VR would be deemed useful for accomplishing learning goals. Similarly, interaction's dominant impact on PEU was also not unexpected, as a learner's ability to perform actions within the virtual reality learning environment would lend to their PEU of the VR system. These results suggest that the high-immersion VR system afforded learners an enhanced understanding of the learning content, and that learners felt the interaction features of high-immersion VR were not difficult.

Interaction and imagination had much larger and more significant impacts on PU and PEU than did the immersion provided by the device. The marginal effect of immersion within the confirmatory model is emphasized when taking into account its predicative relevance (Table 4). Removing immersion from the model results in a negligible reduction in predictive power (R2). Furthermore, PU and PEU maintain a large predictive relevance (Q2 = 0.392 and 0.374, respectively), when immersion is excluded from the model. The evidence of immersion's ineffectiveness is further reinforced by its weak or non-existent f2 and q2 effect sizes. This leads to the probability that immersion within high-immersion VR devices appears not to have a strong direct influence on how useful or effortless learners perceive VR to be, compared to other qualities of the VR system.

The counterintuitive observation that immersion within high-immersion VR has little predicative power or predictive relevance in relation to PU and PEU could suggest that immersion's position within the model is not optimal. Although immersion was shown by Disztinger et al. (2017) to have a small and significant direct influence on the ITU (β = 0.228, p < .05), it is possible that immersion may have a stronger influence in relation to the other two qualities of VR. A sense of immersion may lead an individual to behave with increased harmony with a natural user interface, facilitating interaction and leading to a greater PEU. Furthermore, this sense of being immersed in an unmediated reality may help put an individual in a suitable frame of mind to perceive non-existent things, tapping VR's ability to activate cognitive apparatuses that help stimulate users' imaginative capacities (Mulders et al., 2020). This signifies the likelihood that the construct of immersion is better placed predicate to interaction and imagination.

Although the confirmatory model proved to be informative and resulted in evidence supporting 6 out of 8 hypotheses, the incongruous leverage that immersion demonstrated on the TAM constructs, and the four out of eight loadings which were not significant, signified that the model ought to be reevaluated. Furthermore, the hypotheses for the confirmatory model relied heavily on research conducted with low-immersion VR systems, compared to the increased immersive capacity of the VR system used in this study. This prompted an exploratory revision of the model's external latent variables wherein it was considered that the construct of immersion be relocated as a predicator of both interaction and imagination.

A corresponding exploratory model was therefore conceptualized wherein immersion was located as a singular external exogenous construct (see Fig. 4). This revised model was subsequently tested by partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM), as this method of analysis is ideally suited when the research objective “is to better understand increasing complexity by exploring theoretical extensions of established theories (exploratory research for theory development)” (Hair et al., 2019, p. 5). Results from this exploratory model testing are presented in the following section.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (200KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Theoretical exploratory model.

5. Exploratory model assessment and discussion
5.1. Measurement model assessment
The use of the confirmatory model's constructs and items resulted in identical Cronbach's Alpha results (see Table 2, section 4.1). The CR and AVE results were also mostly indicative of the previously assessed confirmatory model, although minimal deviation was experienced for the construct of interaction, with the composite reliability value increasing from 0.838 to 0.839 and the AVE from 0.634 to 0.636 respectively. The results of a Fornell-Larcker test revealed all square roots of AVEs were greater than the inter-construct correlations. Furthermore, an HTMT analysis through a complete bootstrap with 5000 samples revealed results at the 95% confidence level as being <1 (p < .05). Therefore, an appropriate level of DV was exhibited.

5.2. Structural model assessment and results
Assessment for collinearity was completed for this exploratory model preceding structural relationships being assessed. TOL coefficients were again found to be > 0.25. The VIF values (see Table 9, Appendix B) were found to be minimally lower than values for the confirmatory model, and were much less than the recommended threshold of <5, with PU–ITU and PEU–ITU representing the highest values at 1.186. It can therefore be concluded that collinearity was not problematic in the predicator constructs for the exploratory model.

An examination of path coefficients (see Fig. 5) revealed that PU-ITU remained a strong relationship that was significant (β = 0.735, p < .001). Moreover, two external exogenous constructs’ relationships with their endogenous counterparts were also strong and possessed marked significance. These were imagination-PU (β = 0.714, p < .001) and interaction-PEU (β = 0.685, p < .001). Furthermore, immersion-imagination (β = 0.524, p < .001) and immersion-interaction (β = 0.494, p < .001) were medium effect paths that were both highly significant. A path coefficient relationship with relatively weak effect and low significance was interaction-PU (β = 0.107, p < .1), and further weak and nonsignificant relationships were imagination-PEU (β = 0.095), and PEU-ITU (β = 0.075).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (398KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Exploratory model results.

Results of R2 values with f2 effect size, and predictive relevance cross-validated Q2 redundancy measures, calculated using a blindfolding procedure (D = 7), and q2 effect sizes are presented in Table 5. R2 measures for ITU, PU, and PEU exhibited moderate effect; while interaction and imagination that were trialed endogenous constructs in this exploratory model both showed low to medium effect. The f2 effect sizes for imagination and interaction without immersion were of moderate level. A low to medium predictive power (Q2) for both imagination and interaction was found.


Table 5. Exploratory model in-sample and out-of-sample predictive relevance.

R2	f2	Q2	q2
Full-model
ITU	0.590	–	0.409	–
PU	0.581	–	0.392	–
PEU	0.529	–	0.365	–
Interaction	0.244	–	0.148	–
Imagination	0.274	–	0.200	–
Partial-model
ITU excluding PU	0.136	1.111	0.099	0.524
ITU excluding PEU	0.585	0.012	0.407	0.003
PU excluding Imagination	0.147	1.035	0.098	0.484
PU excluding Interaction	0.571	0.023	0.388	0.007
PEU excluding Imagination	0.521	0.016	0.361	0.006
PEU excluding Interaction	0.129	0.848	0.089	0.435
A mediation analysis was conducted to assess the indirect effect of immersion on the PU and PEU constructs through interaction and imagination as mediators. The indirect effect of immersion on PU was partially mediated by imagination, β = 0.374 (t = 6.82), p < .001 (95% confidence ranged from 0.24 to 0.41). Additionally, the indirect effect of immersion on PEU was fully mediated by interaction β = 0.345 (t = 6.36), p < .001 (95% confidence ranged from 0.23 to 0.45). The indirect effects of immersion on PU and PEU in the exploratory model proved much larger and more significant than the direct effects it had on those same constructs in the confirmatory model (see Fig. 3 for immersion's direct β values, and Table 6 for t- and p-values).


Table 6. Confirmatory and exploratory model direct effect t-value and p-value comparison.

Confirmatory model	t	p	Exploratory model	t	p
Immersion ⇨ PEU	0.931	0.352	Immersion ⇨ Imagination	7.600	0.000
Immersion ⇨ PU	2.908	0.004	Immersion ⇨ Interaction	7.710	0.000
Imagination ⇨ PEU	0.945	0.354	Imagination ⇨ PEU	1.371	0.171
Imagination ⇨ PU	9.453	0.000	Imagination ⇨ PU	16.940	0.000
Interaction ⇨ PEU	11.233	0.000	Interaction ⇨ PEU	12.795	0.000
Interaction ⇨ PU	0.342	0.732	Interaction ⇨ PU	1.855	0.064
PEU ⇨ Intention to use	0.944	0.345	PEU ⇨ Intention to use	0.943	0.346
PU ⇨ Intention to use	10.284	0.000	PU ⇨ Intention to use	10.225	0.000
5.3. Discussion of exploratory model
There are three key points of interest within the exploratory model results. Firstly, the t- and p-values for exogenous construct loadings improved (see Table 6). Three paths in the exploratory model remained below significance thresholds. However, of the three, imagination-PEU and interaction-PU saw strong improvement in their p-values over confirmatory results. Secondly, immersion proved to have much higher loadings in its influence on interaction and imagination, both of which were highly significant, compared to its confirmatory model loadings. Further to this, immersion was found to have a strong and significant indirect effect on PU and PEU when mediated by imagination and interaction respectively. Lastly, the R2 values for interaction and imagination, as the new endogenous variables in the exploratory model, although low, were higher than expected given immersion was the singular predictor.

The construct of immersion appears to be better positioned linearly affecting the other two qualities of VR. Results suggest that as users became more immersed in the VR learning environment, they find it easier to interact with and feel increased imaginative connectivity to the learning content. This adjustment in the relationship between exogenous constructs increased the usefulness of the model in interpreting how attitudes toward VR might predict learners’ future use of it.

Despite the strong statistical support in the present study for placing immersion as the singular exogenous predictor in the exploratory model, context-specific empirical-based evidence to explain this superior performance appears nonexistent in previous published research studies. However, theory-driven literature provides some insight. Some researchers have conceptualized immersion as a response to elements of interaction and imagination (Nilsson et al., 2016), however, the evidence in the present study points towards the possibility that the relationship is more complex. System immersion, as in the sense of being involved in and engaged by a virtual environment (VE) through what we can see and hear as supplied by the system, appears to be a precursor to an individual's interaction and cognitive engagement with that VE. This can be understood in part with Slater's (2009) characterization of immersive VR systems by the sensorimotor contingencies they support. These sensorimotor contingencies are the actions humans know to perform in physical reality in order to perceive, the use of which can be extended to virtual realities. Within a VR environment, we can, for example, perform the action of turning our heads to view the environment from different perspectives just as we would in a physical reality. The sensation of immersion in VR rapidly activates the brain to support a user's natural inclination to engage these sensorimotor contingencies (Slater & Sanchez-Vives, 2016). Johnson-Glenberg (2018) also attests to the ability of immersive VR to “immediately transport the user to a limbically heightened emotional space that can have positive effects on attention and engagement” (p. 2). Theory therefore seems to support the idea that immersion is a precursor to, and likely affects, interaction and imagination.

However, the sensorimotor contingencies supported within a VE or by a VR system are dependent on the programming of the environment, the particular system's hardware, and the digital or virtual literacies of the user (Barrett, Pack, Guo, & Wang, 2020). Whereas, for example, many programs which utilize HMD VR systems will support viewing a VE from different perspectives by turning one's head, other interaction features such as using one's hands to pick up virtual objects in a VE are less uniform in their manifestations. HMD use, which is conducive to high-immersion experiences through the occlusion of physical reality, relies on the expert design of programs that take advantage of users' intuition in how they interact with the VE. With programs that fail to do so, some individuals are likely to struggle with interaction as they are visually cut-off from the system's hand controllers by the HMD and must fumble about in the dark, so to speak.

As Jennet et al. (2008) mentioned, mastery of the system controls is an aspect of engrossment, a higher stage of immersion than the physical immersion afforded by sensory stimulation. This could help explain immersion's weak direct effect on PU and PEU in the confirmatory model. System immersion may not be conspicuously perceived by users within VR environments because feeling immersed is not an uncommon experience in a world saturated with immersive experiences like reading books, playing video games, and watching movies. Therefore, a sense of immersion may not directly influence a user's PU or PEU of a VR system, but the indirect effect of immersion's activation of sensorimotor and cognitive contingencies instead could cause an increase in the PU and PEU of the system as mediated through an individual's interaction and imaginative engagement in the VE. Take for example painting using a computer mouse and desktop application compared to painting in VR using the same physical movements one would use when painting a canvas in physical reality. Higher states of immersion, however, made possible by well-designed natural user interfaces, sophisticated systems, and digitally literate users, would likely be influenced by interaction and imagination and possible directly affect PU and PEU.

Ultimately, the III model only captures a part of a larger picture. Immersion has typically been narrowly defined in literature which employs the III model, compared to the pluralistic views presented in Jennet et al. (2008) or Nilsson et al. (2016). Looking forward, aspects of immersion theory and the evidence from the present study permit that system immersion occurs as soon as the senses are stimulated. This leads to greater interaction and imagination within the VE, supporting a sense of embodiment, which leads to psychological immersion, where a sense of presence likely occurs as an effect of the preceding stimuli (Dengel & Mägdefrau, 2019; Slater, 2009, 2017). Therefore, the III model would be improved by incorporating the plurality of immersion, and the concept of presence.

5.4. Educational implications
The results of the present study may well be meaningful in educational contexts involving high-immersion VR. Research continues to demonstrate the educational benefits of high-immersion VR (Di Natale et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). However, understanding the function and effect of the finer mechanisms of immersion may lead to better designed immersive learning experiences.

Looking at immersion's direct effect on the PU and PEU of VR, utilizing a VR learning environment which is high on immersion and less so on interaction and imaginative engagement, such as 360° videos viewed on a HMD, may find a diminished influence on the perceived usefulness of the device for attaining educational goals. Stemming from this, VR technology that is high on interaction or imagination, but low on immersion, such as desktop VR, may still be found quite useful and easy to use by learners but will of course lack the educational benefits of high-immersion VR, such as using natural sensorimotor contingencies and having an egocentric point of view which improves skills transfer to real world situations (Di Natale et al., 2020).

Educators and developers might therefore focus on designing interactive and engaging virtual learning environments compatible with high-immersion VR systems. Focusing on complete immersion in the first instance (both the physical properties of immersion such as sensory stimulation, and the psychological factors such as those proposed by Jennet et al. (2008)), could lead to a greater sense of interaction and imagination in a VE. Well-designed high-immersion virtual learning environments such as these are likely to be easier to use, help learners achieve learning goals better, and are more likely to be adopted for future use by learners.

6. Conclusion
This study has approached the research topic of technology acceptance of high-immersion VR for educational purposes by the completion of a confirmatory analysis of an established theoretical and empirical model (Davis, 1989; Huang et al., 2010, 2016; Madini & Alshaikhi, 2017). This was then followed by an exploratory analysis of an alternate exploratory model that proved to better capture the relationship among VR qualities (III) and their influence on the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) for this study's users.

An important contribution made by this study includes the demonstration that an established empirical model describing the qualities of VR does not optimally portray the relationships between those qualities, nor how those qualities interrelate with technology acceptance theory. Based on the comparison of the analyzed confirmatory and exploratory models in this study, similar results from Makransky and Lilleholt (2018), and other theoretical explorations of immersion, interaction, and imagination (e.g. Johnson-Glenberg, 2018; Mulders et al., 2020; Slater, 2009), the construct of immersion appears best positioned as a variable impacting the constructs of interaction and imagination, which in turn serve as mediators for immersion's significant indirect effect on the constructs of PU and PEU. The empirical evidence presented here substantiates previous propositions on immersion's influence on users' interaction and imagination in a virtual environment.

On the note of prior conceptualization of variable relationships, it is necessary to revisit the relationships formed through conjoining Davis's (1989) original TAM variables and the VR feature constructs analyzed in this study. The relationships between interaction and perceived ease of use (PEU), and imagination and perceived usefulness (PU) were empirically significant and could be theoretically previsioned, because, for example, the latter could imply that the more cognitively active a user becomes, the more engagement with the virtual reality learning environment is experienced, and therefore more usefulness for learning program content is perceived. More challenging is justifying further investigation of the relationship between the VR feature of interaction and Davis's (1989) PU as there is less clarity on how these two constructs are conceptually related.

As high-immersion VR devices continue to be developed and improved in the future the immersive experience is likely to become more convincing and influential on the user. Knowledge of how immersion, as a property of the system, influences the interaction and imaginative qualities of VR and how those in turn can lead to predictions of behavior in adoption of VR technology for learning purposes will prove useful as high-immersion VR becomes more prevalent in learning spaces.

6.1. Limitations and future research
When interpreting the findings of this study, the following limitations should be considered. First of all, forthcoming updates to SmartPLS include a cross-validated predictive ability test (Liengaard et al., 2020) that will conduct a pairwise comparison of competing models. This, as yet, unavailable update may better clarify the prediction relevancy or power of the confirmatory and exploratory models in this study than the included Stone-Geisser's values (Geisser, 1974; Stone, 1974) and relevant q2 effect sizes.

Secondly, due to limitations in the practical application of the data collection instrument used in this study, confounding factors such as cyber sickness or cognitive load, which have sometimes been associated with high-immersion VR system use (Moss & Muth, 2011; Gorham et al., 2019; Makransky et al., 2019), were not included. The instrument also only allowed a cross-sectional measurement, making inferences on causal relationships between constructs theoretical only.

Three avenues for future research are suggested. Firstly, the inclusion of other external model variables in future studies to ascertain how these exogenous constructs may or may not influence aspects of acceptance of high-immersion VR technology is recommended. Secondly, as the present study explored acceptance towards using high-immersion VR for learning academic writing structure, the actual efficacy of such practice remains unknown. Therefore, studies investigating the efficacy of using high-immersion VR for language learning purposes, and task-technology fit studies, are also called for. Lastly, immersion's effect on presence is well known (Cummings & Bailenson, 2016), but the two constructs warrant additional study in their specific relationship with interaction, imagination and other TAM variables. Immersion has been found to have a significant and positive association with the behavioral intention to use VR (Disztinger et al., 2017) but presence has been shown not to (Sagnier, 2020); thus, exploring the place of presence as an independent variable in the model may prove informative.

