This exploratory study engaged teams of elementary and middle school students in the collaborative design of digital games. Game design is theoretically examined in this study as a form of knowledge-creating learning that is characterized by collaborative efforts to advance a shared object of activity, i.e., the game being designed. Using mixed methods, we examined how students experienced the game design project and how the project fostered connected learning, that is, integration of students’ personal interests and supportive peer relations with their schoolwork, and how their self-assessed digital competences developed.

Methods
The digital competences of 98 comprehensive school students across Finland were traced using pre- and post-questionnaires. The post-questionnaire also included validated measures on connected learning. Quantitative methods were used to analyze structured measures, and qualitative methods were used to analyze open-ended measures.

Findings
Students experienced game design as an inspiring, challenging activity. Game design engaged student teams in sustained, collaborative efforts to create shared digital artifacts. Their efforts involved a great deal of mutual support and knowledge sharing. Participation also improved students’ self-reported technical and artistic digital competences. The game design project fostered informal, interest-driven, sociodigital participation; inspired learning engagement; and improved schoolwork practices.

Contribution
The game design project appeared to be a pedagogically meaningful way of engaging students in knowledge-creating learning and of connecting students' formal and informal learning. The project sparked students’ motivation to learn, fostered digital competences, and enriched the learning environment.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Collaborative learning

Game design

Game making

Interdisciplinary projects

Knowledge-creating learning

21st century skills

1. Introduction
This exploratory study examined the effects of participation in a nationwide game design competition on students’ digital competences and on the interconnection between formal and informal learning. In order to bring elements of maker culture to schools and foster knowledge creation in learning (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2014), the project challenged elementary and middle school students to design and create digital games using the Scratch, GDevelop, or Unity platforms. To support further design-based pedagogic improvement efforts (Collins et al., 2004), the project engaged regular teachers across Finland to orchestrate collaborative game design projects in their classrooms. Successful functioning in a digitalized, innovation-driven knowledge society appears to require the ability to solve non-routine and open-ended problems and create epistemic artifacts through various multi-professional teams and projects. Participation in learning-by-making is likely to elicit such creative 21st century capabilities (Binkley et al., 2012; Blikstein and Worsley, 2016, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen, 2017).

We consider game design to be part of an educational maker culture (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014) that relies on the recently emerged ecosystem of wireless and mobile technologies, integrating numerous applications from social media to digital fabrication. As argued by Karaganis (2007), Orlikowski and Scott (2008), and Rheingold (2012), novel digital technologies are socially defined; their meanings are shaped through social activities, and practices of technology use are shaped by social contexts. Consequently, we use the term “sociodigital participation” (Hakkarainen, Hietajärvi, Alho, Lonka, & Salmela-Aro, 2015; Hietajärvi, Salmela-Aro, Tuominen, Hakkarainen, & Lonka, 2019; Hietajärvi, Lonka, Hakkarainen, Alho, & Salmela-Aro, 2020) to refer to young people's personal and social practices of technology use. Arguably, collaborative game design, mediated by digital platforms and surrounding virtual communities, is a valuable form of creative sociodigital participation.

1.1. Fostering connected learning through collaborative knowledge creation
Despite the recognized achievements of the Finnish educational system, increasing numbers of students, especially those who use digital technologies extensively, are losing school-learning motivation; longitudinal investigations reveal that their alienation is increasing year by year (Hietajärvi et al., 2020). A widening gap is appearing between youth culture and educational practices, with young people's self-directed, super-social, inter-networked, and digitalized out-of-school activities in deepening conflict with their externally directed, individualistic, and reproduction-oriented school activities (Hakkarainen et al., 2015). Such alarming findings have inspired investigators to seek novel pedagogical approaches for bringing elements of maker culture into schools and engaging students in pursuing technology-mediated creative projects (Blikstein and Worsley, 2016, Stahl & Hakkarainen, 2021). Knowledge-creating learning, inspired by Papert's (1980) constructionism, entails participation in sustained collaborative efforts of designing, developing, and making shared artifacts, such as digital games, through open-ended and nonlinear team efforts (Mehto, Riikonen, Hakkarainen, Kangas, & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, 2020).

Although the emergence of accessible mobile and wireless technologies enables new cohorts of young people to use digital technologies intensively (Anderson & Jiang, 2018; Hietajärvi, Seppä, & Hakkarainen, 2016; Rideout et al., 2010), their practices of sociodigital participation are heterogeneous and often rather shallow. The creative participation gap (Jenkins et al., 2006) and innovation inequity (Barron, 2004) are indicated by the fact that only some students have access to the resources and social support required for creative participation and reaching advanced levels of digital competence. Although some schools have successfully integrated digital technologies with traditional schoolwork, the educational use of digital technologies often remains relatively superficial, focusing mainly on basic digital skills and the completion of reproductive assignments. To deepen their interest-driven activities, young people need the support of knowledgeable peers, as well as teachers, parents, and other adults, to learn advanced practices of technology use beyond mere recreational activities (Barron, 2006).

Schools should play a critical role in improving innovation equity (Barron, 2004) in terms of giving structured pedagogic support for the creative and academic use of digital technologies (Hakkarainen et al., 2015; Ito et al., 2013). Engaging students in constructionist gaming (Kafai & Burke, 2015), which involves collaborative efforts of designing and making digital games, provides ample opportunities for such creative sociodigital participation. According to the connected learning framework of Ito et al. (2013), fostering school engagement requires that students' in-school learning should be better interconnected with their extra-curricular learning. Young people's educational activities begin to merge with their informal activities when peer-supported creative production becomes a part of school practices. Learning engagement is inspired when students are able to use their informally developed interests and skills in their schoolwork. Connectedness entails that learning should be 1) anchored on and powered by students' own interests, 2) supported by peers and fellow inquirers, and 3) oriented to support students' academic studies. These three learning principles elicit both in-school learning and planning for the future (Ito et al., 2013; Maul et al., 2016).

The connected learning framework involves three design principles emphasizing the importance of engaging students in collaborative pursuits of learning and creation (Ito et al., 2013). Accordingly, collaborative activities should be 1) focused on advancing shared purposes (i.e., the object of invention), 2) be oriented toward the creation of tangible products, and 3) openly networked so that everyone has the opportunity to participate and access distributed epistemic resources. When formal school learning is connected with students’ interests and peer activities, the participants are likely to commit to it and become inspired to learn (Ito et al., 2013). Connected learning is fostered when creative experimentation with technologies and the systematic development of advanced digital competences occur at school; the present game design project was intended to have similar effects. Participation in game design is likely to elicit inclusive education in terms of providing diverse learners with inspiration and encouraging learning experiences (Hughes-Roberts et al., 2020).

1.2. Synthesizing earlier studies on game design
Gameplay, gamification, and game design in primary and secondary education (K-12) have extensively been investigated across the last decade. Although results vary, investigations provide a positive view of the educational benefits of gaming, especially when gaming practices are pedagogically anchored (Clark et al., 2016). From the perspective of learning and motivation, participation in creative game design may, however, be more important than mere gameplay (Kafai & Burke, 2016). Vos et al. (2011) found that constructing a game was more motivating for students and stimulated deeper learning strategies than merely playing a game. Investigators appear to agree that participation in game design fosters learning engagement and motivation (Hwang et al., 2014; Kafai & Burke, 2015; Owston et al., 2009; Vos et al., 2011). Game creation has, beyond game design (Akcaoglu & Koehler, 2014; Cakir et al., 2017; Melander Bowden, 2019), been investigated under the terms game construction (Vos et al., 2011), game development (Owston et al., 2009; Wu & Wang, 2012), and game making (Hughes-Roberts et al., 2020; Ke, 2014). In this paper, we use concepts of game design and game making interchangeably to refer to a holistic, iterative process of game creation from initial ideas to computational implementation and production of the playable final product.

Although many game design studies are descriptive, some studies have relied on quasi-experimental designs and used control groups and rigorous pre- and post-test designs for determining the specific impact of game design on personal learning gains and the development of individual cognitive capabilities. In many experimentally oriented game design projects, academic researchers are themselves functioning as orchestrators and instructors of game design courses or projects (e.g., Akcaoglu & Koehler, 2014, Akcaoglu and Green, 2019; Cakir et al., 2017; Dishon & Kafai, 2020). Some game design projects involve intensive, structured training of various aspects of game development. Extensive research has revealed that game design is associated with numerous personal academic learning effects. Denner et al. (2019) reviewed 68 studies of children's designing and programming of computer games and concluded that game design could lead to improvements in programming knowledge, problem solving skills, computer science attitudes, and confidence, although the evidence for learning benefits was mainly descriptive. Students have developed their problem-solving capabilities by tinkering with games being designed (Akcaoglu & Koehler, 2014).

Investigations have further accumulated evidence that game design improves students' mastery of content knowledge regarding STEAM (Baytak & Land, 2010; Hwang et al., 2014), mathematics (Ke, 2014), arts and humanities (de Paula et al., 2018), and literacy (Owston et al., 2009). Ke (2014) found that participation in designing Scratch-based math games for younger students improved middle school students' dispositions toward mathematics, although the students spent more time designing the games than focusing on the integration of math content. There is also some evidence that game design fosters the acquisition of programming knowledge and the development of computational thinking (Werner et al., 2014). Further, Akcaoglu and his colleagues (Akcaoglu & Koehler, 2014; Akcaoglu & Green, 2019) revealed that game design improves students' system thinking. By building and exploring interactive game systems, students improve their understanding and cultivate their system analysis and design skills. In addition, students’ attitudes regarding computer science as well as academic studies at school appeared to change as a function of participating in game design.

Kafai and Burke (2015) synthesized 55 articles regarding game design and learning and distinguished three lines of research regarding the designing and making of games: personal, social, and cultural approaches. The above examination already revealed the multifaceted personal learning effects of game design, from learning programming and computational thinking to measurable advancement in gaining disciplinary content knowledge. As indicated by Kafai and Burke (2016), Earp (2015), and Denner et al. (2019), the social aspect of game design has, however, been much less frequently studied. In the studies reviewed by Kafai and Burke (2015), collaborative game design occurred mainly in the context of informal online (e.g., Scratch) communities. However, the emerging practices of game jams focus on co-creating games within a limited timeframe (Meriläinen et al., 2020). The participants learn various soft skills, such as collaboration and communication, via joint efforts of designing and creating games. Collaborative game design teaches students valuable competences, such as creative teamwork (Kangas, 2010), which involves socially shared regulation of design processes (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015), joint reflection of advancement, and collaborative creation of knowledge. Denner et al. (2019) emphasize that the social interaction involved in co-design has unique potentials for fostering the appropriation of computational skills. Similarly, Wu and Wang (2012) conclude that social interaction has positive effects on the game design process.

Sociocultural underpinnings of game construction constitute a further neglected aspect of game design research (Kafai & Burke, 2015). The cultural level is involved when students are engaged in designing and making publicly shared computational objects. Game design engages students in computational participation that involves developing, testing, and refining these objects (Kafai & Burke, 2016), discussing them with peers and larger audiences (Dishon & Kafai, 2020), receiving feedback and critiques (Hwang et al., 2014; Melander Bowden & Aarsand, 2020), and creating and sharing meanings (Akcaoglu & Koehler, 2014). Melander Bowden (2019) examined social identities enacted by students in a pairwise game design process. Her study revealed that students either positioned themselves in the gamer identity, which led to more persistent problem solving in difficult situations, or in the student identity, which made it easy to give up due to the lack of instructions from the teacher. Similarly, Øygardslia's (2018) findings reveal that interlinking students' informal gameplay to formal schooling could cause tensions as students had disagreements about whether game design was about learning academic content or creating gaming tools for leisure time (see also Ke, 2014).

In order to overcome such tensions and foster the interconnection of students' informal and formal learning, we allowed students to design fantasy games rather than anchoring game design on curricular concerns in accordance with serious gaming. Simultaneously, it is critical that the teacher sets ground rules for the game design activity as “hard fun” (Papert) in terms of challenging students in long-term co-design efforts. It is also crucial that the teacher pays attention to team sizes and students’ teamwork skills, guiding them to organize their work and agree about their roles and shared collaboration rules (Wu & Wang, 2012).

Peer learning appears to be an inherent aspect of digital youth culture (Gee & Hayes, 2011; Ito et al., 2010) and sometimes occurs also in individual game development projects. Hughes-Roberts et al. (2020) examined individual game design in elementary schools and found that in an intervention context (a school focused on special education) both student engagement and collaborative activity were enacted more often during game design lessons than in the control group. In regular primary schools, the more capable students began to help others with their games. Melander Bowden's (2019) study reveals that students spontaneously asked for advice from their peers rather than the teacher when constructing similar games. In the context of higher education, Altanis and Retalis's (2018) study reveals that students asked for help from fellow students more often after the game design project than prior to the project.

The present investigation contributes to filling research gaps in the field by addressing the social and cultural aspects of game design. By building on Kafai and Burke's (2016) approach and Ito et al.’s (2013) connected learning framework, we employ collaborative game design to connect students' learning, gaming, and creating activity at school with their informal, creative sociodigital participation. Although such maker activities as game design are generally associated with after-school clubs and informal learning, especially in the United States, the Finnish tradition of craft studies and emphasis on cross-disciplinary projects enables integrating game design with formal schooling and blending formal and informal learning (Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen, 2017). Students are engaged in using game design platforms (Scratch, GDevelop, or Unity) as instruments of creative production, expression, and storytelling (Resnick, 2017). We presume that productive participation in collaborative game design requires sophisticated skills due to the complex intellectual, technical, social, and aesthetic challenges that have to be overcome to construct the envisioned game. Participation in such processes is also likely to inspire girls' interest in digital technologies. Collaborative game design appears to integrate many aspects of 21st century skills, such as collaboration, computational thinking, and the creative use of digital technology (Kafai & Burke, 2015; Van Laar et al., 2017).

Finally, we explore the social dimension of game design as part of a broader pedagogic effort to bring elements of maker culture into schools (Kafai and Peppler, 2011, Riikonen, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2020). Learning by making is likely to make school learning more inspiring, collaborative, and creative, as well as increase learning engagement among diverse students (Blikstein & Worsley, 2016; Halverson & Sheridan, 2014). Simultaneously, maker pedagogy assists students in developing a sense of themselves as active, creative agents whose contributions matter in collaborative activities (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2014). The present integrative game design projects were organized at schools to overcome the creative participation gap (Jenkins et al., 2006) and provide students with equal opportunities to learn to use digital technologies as tools of knowledge creation and innovation (Barron, 2004). The students were expected to create novel games from scratch by using available game design platforms.

1.3. Research questions
The present exploratory study examines digital activities that elementary and middle school students participated in as part of a national game-making competition, which engaged young people in designing and creating digital games. The study represents the first iteration of design-based investigation (Collins et al., 2004) aiming at integrating collaborative game design with school activity. In this paper, we describe students’ collaborative game design projects and the various ways they contribute to the projects by using the connected learning framework. The research questions are as follows.

1.
What kinds of games did the students make during the game design project, and what roles did they assume? To examine game design from the students' own perspectives, we asked them about the games they made as well as the design roles they assumed. Previous studies have indicated the importance of teamwork roles in collaborative game design (e.g., Melander Bowden, 2019; Øygardslia, 2018).

2.
What were the students' game design projects like in nature, and to what extent did participation in the project connect students' informal and formal learning? We expected that participation in collaborative game design would foster connected learning (Ito et al., 2013). To test this assumption, we examined the extent to which students' experiences of game design shared features of connected learning, both during the design projects and after their completion.

3.
What kinds of digital competences did the participants master, and how did these competences relate to gender, age, and gaming background? How did the game design project affect the participants' self-assessed digital competences? We expected that the participation in game design would enhance students' perceived digital competences. In order to test this assumption, we examined the personal outcomes of game design on students' digital skills across their technical, artistic, and academic dimensions.

2. Methods
2.1. Research context
This study was carried out in the context of a game design pilot project (2018–2019) organized by Innokas, Finnish teachers’ national school innovation network and coordinated by the University of Helsinki. The project aimed to facilitate the collaborative design of digital games for a new competition series in a national programming and robotics tournament in May 2019. This study reports the first iteration of our design-based intervention (Collins et al., 2004) for cultivating the productive practices of integrating game design with educational activity.

The game design competition had two series, Scratch and Junior Track, which relied on the Unity and GDevelop game development platforms, respectively. Thirteen teachers from four cities and eight schools across Finland volunteered to take part in the project. In accordance with research-practice partnership (Penuel & Gallagher, 2017), the teachers were allowed to organize game design projects according to their local preferences. The network trained the teachers to master the computational methods needed for designing digital games, such as using programming to integrate storyline, functionality, and visual appearance. Scratch, GDevelop, or Unity were used as game design tools. We did not give the teachers a strict framework to implement the project in their classrooms, and, consequently, they organized the project in various ways. Many of the teachers organized the project for elective technology and science courses in middle schools (grades 8–9), but teams from elementary schools (grades 4–6) also participated in the project as part of their regular school studies.

Students began the game design at the beginning of 2019, and most students worked on their games during weekly lessons. Altogether, 250 students participated in the project in teams, relying on digital fabrication instruments, such as Scratch, Unity, GDevelop, Pexel, Paint, Inkscape, and GarageBand. Students began by ideating the kinds of games they would like to make. The idea of the game design project was that students would themselves design and draw all the characters and environments in their games, construct the scripts, design and create sounds, and finally program the entire game as a functional system. Teachers were instructed to function as orchestrators and coaches so that the students would retain leadership and responsibility. Some students who participated in the tournament and were most enthusiastic were also working in their leisure time to finish their games. The teachers encouraged students to participate in the tournament, but this was voluntary.

2.2. Data collection and participants
We used self-report questionnaires to collect data from the students through Qualtrics (https://www.qualtrics.com). The data were collected in two stages, with a pre-questionnaire administered at the beginning of the project and a post-questionnaire administered after the tournament. The post-questionnaire involved both structured and open-ended items in accordance with a mixed-methods approach (Johnson et al., 2007). Participation in the study was voluntary; teachers distributed informed consent forms and collected written permission from students and parents for participation in the study. Furthermore, the teachers showed students video instructions for responding to the online questionnaires over a two-to-three-week period. Altogether, 145 students from across Finland responded to the two questionnaires.

Before analyzing the data, the students’ answers to the pre- and post-questionnaires were combined according to name, class, and school. After combining the two datasets and dropping responses with missing identification data, the pre- and post-measure data consisted of responses from 98 students, indicating a 40% response rate. Of the respondents, 60.2% participated in the tournament.

As indicated by Table 1, approximately one-third of the respondents were girls, and two-thirds were boys. One-third of the participants studied in elementary school and two-thirds in middle school. There were more respondents from students in middle school, where game design projects were mostly organized in elective technology and science courses, which may explain the bias in gender breakdown. The participants were asked to estimate in full hours how much time they spent playing digital games in a typical week. On the basis of this self-report, we grouped the participants according to their gaming activity: a) low gaming intensity (0–3 h per week), b) intermediate gaming intensity (4–19 h per week), and c) high gaming intensity (more than 20 h per week).


Table 1. Participants according to background variables.

Background variable	Group	Frequency	%
Gender	Girls	32	32.7
Boys	66	67.3
Age	10–12 years old	29	29.6
14–17 years old	69	70.4
Weekly gaming time	0–3 h/week	21	21.4
4–19 h/week	45	45.9
20–80 h/week	32	32.7
2.3. Measures
The present study relied on the game design inventory, which included structured digital competence measures, connected learning measures, and open-ended questions. Digital competences were assessed by using earlier self-report measures for tracing students' skills and practices when using computers (Hakkarainen et al., 2000) and their technological fluency (Barron et al., 2007); the measures were revised and updated to represent the current state of young people's digital activities. Cross-validation with interviews (Hietajärvi, Seppä, & Hakkarainen, 2016) as well as testing with several bodies of data (Forsström et al., 2021, Hakkarainen, Hietajärvi, Alho, Lonka, & Salmela-Aro, 2015, Hietajärvi, Seppä, & Hakkarainen, 2016, Hietajärvi, Lonka, Hakkarainen, Alho, & Salmela-Aro, 2020) revealed that the instrument provided sufficiently reliable accounts of students' self-reported digital competences. Hence, the pre- and post-questionnaires involved similarly structured digital competence measures containing 15 items designed to trace academic (e.g., “I can make multimedia presentations”), technical (e.g., “I can make digital 3D drawings or models”), and artistic (e.g., “I can draw or paint with painting and graphic programs”) skills. Scale reliabilities (Cronbach α) were, respectively, 0.79, 0.80, and 0.78 (see Appendix Table A.2). In the context of each item, the student was asked to assess his or her technological fluency (Barron et al., 2007) via the question “How well can you do the following things related to digital technology?” and using a scale from 1 (not at all) to 5 (very fluently).

The post-questionnaire included open-ended questions, such as “What was your role in the game project? What did you do?” and “What kind of game did you make?” These open-ended responses were analyzed using qualitative content analysis to code and categorize the data (Saldaña, 2015).

To assess whether the game design project supported the connected learning framework, the post-questionnaire included structured connected learning measures (Maul et al., 2016) adapted to fit the game design context. The measures were tested in extensive field studies and cross-validated with interviews by Maul et al. (2016). The investigators translated the items from English to Finnish. The nature of the work during the game design project was investigated using one shared purpose and one peer support measure, as well as three overall questions investigating whether designing and making games was 1) fun, 2) interesting, or 3) difficult. Students were instructed to indicate their agreement with items using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The measure for shared purpose involved six items (Cronbach α = 0.84) relating to whether the team members had a joint objective and whether they felt they had participated and contributed significantly (e.g., “In the game project, everyone is trying to achieve the same goals”). The peer support measure (Cronbach α = 0.86) included six items assessing the collaborative nature of work and peer-to-peer assistance and ideation (e.g., “When I get stuck I can get helpful suggestions from someone about how to solve the problem”).

The effects of the game design project were examined with two measures of interest powered and one measure of the academic orientation principles. The first interest-powered measure (Cronbach α = 0.88) included four items, which were assessed with a five-point Likert agreement scale on whether participation in the game design project had led to recognition of new talents or sparked further interests or future professional aspirations (e.g., “By participating in the game project, I discovered a talent or an interest I didn't know I had”). In the other interest-powered measure including five yes-or-no items, participants were asked whether they had conducted certain self-directed, interest-driven activities after starting to work on the game design project (e.g., “Looked for information related to game making on your own”). The academic orientation measure included five yes-or-no items related to the effect of game design on school-going activities (e.g., “Through game making, I have developed new skills that have helped me do better in school”).

2.4. Data analysis
This study used a mixed-methods approach, integrating quantitative and qualitative analyses. We employed qualitative content analysis (Saldaña, 2015) to answer the first research question concerning the roles of participants and types of games. The participants were asked to report their game design roles and describe the kinds of games they had made using at least three sentences; however, many responses were shorter. The first open-ended question enabled us to categorize different roles that students assumed in their game design teams. The categorization was not mutually exclusive, so a student could report several parallel roles. Because the students' responses were mostly compact, analysis of game design roles was straightforward; we identified diverse role categories, such as coder or sound designer, using the students' own expressions. Through corresponding methods, we used the answers to the second open-ended question to identify the types of games made during the project based on students' reports. The coding was done by the first and second authors separately, after which we calculated Cohen's kappa to establish inter-rater reliability. Cohen's kappa values were strong, ranging from 0.78 to 1.00 for the different role categories, as well as for the number of roles authors separated for each student (κ = 0.80). Types of games were coded likewise by two authors separately, and the κ-value was 1, a perfect score.

Statistical methods were used to answer the research questions regarding connected learning measures, students' digital competences, and changes in these competences. We conducted principal component analyses (PCA), one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA), and paired samples t-tests, which were performed with IBM Statistics SPSS version 25. Before conducting these further analyses, we performed a missing value analysis. An examination of the data revealed that there were no missing values in the three background variables, and the response rate varied between 98.0% and 100% for the other variables. Altogether, there was only 0.4% missingness, and the values were missing completely at random (MCAR) according to Little's MCAR test (p > .05). Due to the low proportion and complete randomness of the missing values, we decided to rely on complete case analysis (i.e., listwise deletion, see Graham, 2012).

We used PCA to analyze connected learning measures to answer the second research question and to examine the digital competence components for the third research question. As PCA clusters variables into components, sum variables can be formed on the basis of item means. The third research question also addressed how digital competences were related to age, gender, and gaming background. In order to examine these potential effects, we performed one-way ANOVAs separately for each variable. This approach was selected because we did not consider it plausible that these variables together would have had a significant interaction effect. For pairwise comparisons, we chose to use Bonferroni correction as the compared sizes of gaming background groups were not equally distributed. Further, the third research question addressed how game design affected the participants' self-assessed digital competences. We examined change from the first to the second measurement across digital competence components with paired samples t-tests performed separately on each component. To examine the Matthaeus effect, we analyzed rank-order stability to reveal whether students’ self-assessed competences varied or whether they remained in the same order.

3. Results
3.1. Types of games developed and students’ roles during the game design project
3.1.1. The types of games developed
The students' post-questionnaire responses regarding the kinds of games they had developed were analyzed through qualitative content analysis of open-ended responses. As indicated in Table 2, many students were able to name the types of games developed, such as platform games or car games. When the type of game was not explicitly provided, the students’ descriptions of game activities and functions enabled us to identify the game type.


Table 2. Examples of students’ game descriptions.

Types of games	Extracts of students' game descriptions
Platform game	“The game is pretty simple. The idea is to destroy Stormlord and win the field. The others think that it is a very addictive game.”
“You collect diamonds in the game and try to perform as fast as possible.”
“It was a platform game where a watermelon tried to get to school through obstacles.”
Labyrinth game	“The game we made is a top-down labyrinth where you try to survive by collecting coins.”
Adventure game	“2d-adventure game where you destroy evil litterbug robots.”
Fighting game	“Top down shooter-game.”
“Fighting game made Mortal Kombat style. Dueling against various kinds of enemies, but the battle engine was never completed.”
Car game	“Top-down car game.”
Fig. 1 provides screenshots of four games designed by students. Most respondents reported that their teams were making platform games (57.1%), wherein the player aims to progress from one field to another by collecting items, such as keys, while avoiding obstacles and evading enemies. In some platform games, it was also possible to shoot enemies. Some students made labyrinths (6.1%) that could be considered platform games in practice as they involved collecting items while moving through the labyrinth toward the goal. Beyond platform games, some students constructed fighting games (9.2%), in which a player fights with or shoots at an enemy. Few reported constructing adventure games (5.1%) or car games (3.1%). Not all games were completed during the project, and incomplete games were not presented at the tournament.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (946KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Screenshots of selected Scratch games made by elementary students. A) Crazy Skate is a platform game that involves collecting garbage to gain access to new levels; B) Diamond Hunt is a platform game that involves collecting keys to move in any direction; C) Treasure Hunter involves shooting enemies to reach the next level; and D) Läbirintti V2 involves collecting (yellow) points and avoiding dynamically moving enemies (fire and ghosts).

3.1.2. The game design roles of the students
We used qualitative content analysis to analyze the design roles that students reported enacting. Students worked in groups of two to seven, with group and role distribution organized in various ways depending on the teacher. In some cases, students were asked to choose which activities interested them, and the teachers divided students into groups based on their interests. In other cases, students were allowed to select their teams freely and agree about roles themselves. In an open-ended question, students characterized their own roles in game design or described what they had contributed to the project. Table 3 summarizes the five role categories identified: graphic designer, coder, game designer, sound designer, and producer.


Table 3. Examples of students’ role descriptions.

Roles	Extracts of students' role descriptions
Graphic designer	“I made textures and animated all kinds of things.”
“I was the graphic designer, I made the character and enemies, and their animations.”
Coder	“I coded and built fields together.”
Game designer	“I wrote dialogues between different characters and some aspects of the narrative of the game.”
Sound designer (and graphic designer)	“I made music and sounds. A little bit of graphics as well.”
Producer (and graphic designer)	“My role was producer. I kept a diary of game-making. I wrote and made levels to the game.”
Manifold role (not a clear role)	“Well, everybody sort of did everything. We made background and characters together. We have not had time to program yet.”
More than half of the participants reported working as graphic designers (52.0%), which was the broadest and most versatile role. Their task was to design, draw, and animate game characters, fields, and levels. While some graphic designers produced field backgrounds with hand drawings, others employed drawing tables or drawing programs to create graphics. The second most common role was coder (37.8%). The coder's job was to program the game and implement its functionality, for instance, determining characters' actions and movements in response to game controls or in interaction with the game environment. Game designers (19.4%) ideated and designed the overall idea and plot of the game and wrote the script. Sound designers (10.2%) were responsible for designing game sounds by utilizing internet resources or making their own music. Producers (7.1%) coordinated the overall working of the game design team, distributed tasks, listened to each team member's ideas, kept a game diary, and wrote reports. In some schools, it was the producer's task to introduce the game at school, and some schools organized events in which the teams presented their games to a student audience.

Most students (62.2%) reported having one designated role, but many students also reported helping team members in other tasks outside those roles. Approximately one-third of the students (29.6%) reported having served in two or three roles, with ample opportunities to develop new skills. Only a few students (7.1%) reported that all team members did everything together, with students lacking clear roles.

3.2. Connected learning in the game design project
Game design projects rely on the collaborative creation of knowledge (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2014). Here, students worked in teams to design, invent, and make a shared epistemic object—a digital game—by sharing their competence and efforts. To assess whether the participants had experienced collaborative knowledge creation, we used connected learning measures related to peer support and shared purpose, as well as three general questions about the overall game design project assessed by a Likert-type agreement scale. Because the connected learning items were adapted for the present purpose, we examined their structures using PCA after the examination of item correlations confirmed that the data were suitable for factoring (e.g., Bartlett's test of sphericity p < .001; KMO = 0.84). We used PCA with promax rotation, and according to our expectations, the items formed two principal components, the first of which represented collaborative working and peer support and the second working with shared object and purpose (see Appendix Table A.1). Two components explained 59.3% of the total variance. The components correlated with one another in a statistically significant way (p < .001).

The students were inspired by game design, the overall questions revealing that they considered it to be both fun (M = 4.13, SD = 0.99) and interesting (M = 4.02, SD = 1.10). The component about the shared object and purpose (M = 3.91, SD = 0.80) toward which students jointly devoted their efforts was a central aspect of their creative activity. The participants reported that all students were allowed to express their opinions during the working process and that the process was felt to be meaningful. The other component, collaborative working and peer support (M = 3.64, SD = 0.89), characterized students’ game design projects; participants reported being happy for the success of others, receiving useful ideas and solutions from other team members, and being encouraged to try new approaches. Even though they experienced game design as somewhat difficult (M = 3.11, SD = 1.16), participants appeared to react positively to the challenges due to strong peer support.

To measure the extent of participation supporting the connection of students' formal and informal learning, we utilized connected learning measures related to the interest-powered and academic orientation principles. The students' answers indicated that the game design project had positive effects, both on their recreational activities and at school, as indicated by Fig. 2. With regard to effects on students’ recreational activities (upper five items in Fig. 2), many participants sought knowledge to support their game design projects, and they used skills learned in game design in their recreational activities. Especially inspiring is that some students reported having started game design projects in their recreational time. At school (lower five items in Fig. 2), most participants had used the skills in their studies and had improved their confidence in solving difficult problems in other schoolwork.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (479KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The effects of game design project on students' recreational time (upper five items) and at school (lower five items). Note: Percentages indicate how many of the students answered “yes.”

We also used four items to examine whether game design sparked interest that inspired students to think about their future professional aspirations; these were assessed on a five-point Likert scale. Although the means were somewhat below the middle of the scale, standard deviations were high, indicating that some students participating in the project had discovered a new interest or talent (M = 2.90, SD = 1.30), while others had become more curious about things they were not interested in before the project (M = 2.76, SD = 1.34). For some respondents, participation in the project was related to future professional aspirations (M = 2.41, SD = 1.28). It appears that the project even changed some students' minds about their future aspirations (M = 2.38, SD = 1.28). To conclude, participation in the game design project affected students’ activities both in and out of school, and as such, it assisted in integrating formal and informal learning.

3.3. Students’ digital competences
To answer the third research question, we examined students' self-reported digital competences with the 15-item technology fluency measure. After confirming the suitability of the data for PCA (e.g., Bartlett's test of sphericity p < .001; KMO = 0.85), a series of PCAs with promax rotation were conducted for the items. We considered different component solutions based on Cattell's scree test and eigenvalues and selected a three-component solution (see Appendix Table A.2) that corresponds to Forsström et al.'s (2021, submitted) findings. In the three-component model, the components explain 56.6% of the total variance. Item 14 (programming) crossloads on two components, presumably because programming was taught at school. However, it was strongly loaded to only one component, so it was kept in the model. All items were included in the final competence components, and the components correlated with one another at a statistically significant level (p < .01).

We named the first principal component academic digital competences as it consists of relatively common digital competences, such as troubleshooting general computer problems and processing text, which are already needed for educational activities at the primary level. The students estimated that they mastered academic digital competences quite fluently (M = 4.21, SD = 0.81). The second component represents significantly more advanced technical digital competences, such as composing digital music, programming, and building robots; thus, it was named technical digital competences. The students’ level of mastery over technical digital competences was at a relatively low level (M = 2.41, SD = 0.94), indicating that many students had not engaged extensively in the digital activities in question, presumably because maker projects are seldom pursued in schools. The third component represents various artistic skills, such as modifying digital images, drawing digitally, and editing videos; this was termed artistic digital competences. The artistic digital competences were mastered quite fluently (M = 3.28, SD = 1.01). Findings concerning the mean levels of digital competences correspond closely to those of Forsström et al. (2021, submitted), who used the same measures to study digital competences in another context of learning-by-making at school.

Furthermore, we examined the effects of gender, age, and gaming background on digital competences (see Appendix Table A.3 for means and standard deviations). Several one-way ANOVAs were performed, and in the context of weekly gaming time, post-hoc comparisons were carried out with Bonferroni correction after Levene's test revealed that the variances were equally distributed. The analyses indicated that age affected the level of self-assessed academic digital competences (F(1, 96) = 34.00, p < .001, η2partial = 0.26), with middle school students (M = 4.47, SD = 0.52) reporting more fluent mastery than elementary school students (M = 3.57, SD = 1.01). Gender and weekly gaming time had no effect on academic competences. Gender, however, affected the mastery of technical digital competences (F(1, 96) = 6.66, p < .05, η2partial = 0.07), with boys (M = 2.57, SD = 0.95) reporting some extent of mastery of these skills and girls (M = 2.07, SD = 0.83) only reporting experimentation with these competences. Gaming background also had an effect on technical competences (F(2, 95) = 4.09, p < .05, η2partial = 0.08), and Bonferroni correction showed that students who played at least 20 hours per week (M = 2.69, SD = 0.89) reported being more fluent in technical competences than those who did not play games (M = 1.96, SD = 0.77) (p = .016). Age had no effect on the level of technical competences. None of the background variables had an effect on artistic competences.

In order to examine the extent to which the students' self-reported digital competences developed during the project, we constructed the competence components of the post-questionnaire based on the PCA performed on the pre-questionnaire. The post-questionnaire's digital competence components correlated with one another at a statistically significant level, and reliabilities were reasonably high (Cronbach's alphas > 0.70). Paired samples t-tests were used to compare the post-questionnaire's digital competence components one by one with the pre-questionnaire's competence components (see Table 4). In alignment with our expectations, there was no change in perceived academic competences, presumably because those were already at a high level and were not addressed in the project. However, the mean level of technical digital competences grew as much as 0.30 and rose close to the middle of the scale (i.e., mastering to some extent). The level of self-reported artistic competences also rose substantially (i.e., mastering fairly fluently). Apparently, the extensive game design process required students to familiarize themselves with and practice novel technical and artistic skills.


Table 4. Paired samples t-test results for digital competence components from pre-to post-questionnaire.

Pre-questionnaire	Post-questionnaire	t	df	r
Mean	SD	Mean	SD
Academic competences	4.21	0.81	4.21	0.78	−0.01	97	0.81***
Technical competences	2.41	0.94	2.71	0.90	3.69***	97	0.61***
Artistic competences	3.28	1.01	3.52	0.92	3.34**	97	0.74***
**p < .01 ***p < .001.

Pearson's correlation coefficient (r) enables the assessment of rank-order stability. The correlation for academic competences was over 0.80, indicating that the participants' relative level of competence did not change much. For technical and artistic competences, the correlations were lower, indicating varying development in self-reported competences. This finding may mean heterogeneous competence development. Further, we examined the changes in each digital competence in relation to background variables. When examining gender, boys' self-assessment of their technical (t(65) = 3.40, p < .01) and artistic (t(65) = 3.67, p < .001) competences increased, but there was no statistically significant change in girls' competences. As for age, middle school students' assessment of their technical (t(68) = 4.67, p < .001) and artistic (t(68) = 3.68, p < .001) competences increased, but there was no statistically significant change in elementary school students' competences. In relation to gaming background, only those students who reported high gaming intensity assessed their technical (t(31) = 3.03, p < .01) competences higher, and intermediate gamers assessed their artistic (t(44) = 2.28, p < .05) competences higher at the end of the project.

4. Discussion
4.1. Summarizing research results
The present study aimed to bring elements of maker culture to schools through collaborative game design projects. The first research question addresses the games students made during the project and the roles they assumed in the process. Most participants had at least one role (coder, graphic designer, sound designer, game designer, or producer), while several reported having many roles. Some teams reported doing “everything” together. By using Scratch, GDevelop, and Unity, the students designed, invented, and made all aspects of their games. Most of the games developed were platform games in nature.

The second question addresses the extent to which students engaged in collaborative working with the game being designed and whether the project supported the connection of students' formal and informal learning. Connected learning measures revealed that the participants experienced the project as an inspiring yet challenging activity that was characterized by collaborative working and peer support and by working with a shared object and purpose. An examination of the students' interests and academic orientation from the perspective of connected learning revealed that participation in the game design project affected both formal and informal activities. During their recreational time, many students reported seeking knowledge, activities, and people to support their game design using skills learned in game design elsewhere, and even starting new projects of their own. Academic effects involved the use of skills learned in game design projects in other schoolwork, enhanced self-efficacy, attitudes and practices regarding schoolwork, and even enrollment in new game design courses. Although the participants’ future plans were not strongly affected, many reported having identified new talents, reshaping their educational aspirations, or developing new interests, which is contrary to the findings of Schlegel et al. (2019). Overall, game design appears to have assisted in the integration of formal and informal learning.

The third question addresses students' self-reported digital competences and changes in them from the beginning to the end of the project. Although the students' academic digital competences appeared to already be fluent, the artistic and technical competences critical for maker-centered learning were mastered less fluently. The strongest change concerned the technical digital competences, which were mastered to some extent at the end of the project. The level of artistic competences also increased substantially, indicating quite fluent proficiency. The extensive game design process apparently required students to familiarize themselves with and practice novel computational and fabrication-related skills and skills of creative expression. The low rank-order stability indicated heterogeneous competence development of technical and artistic competences, implying no evident Matthaeus effect. The findings indicated that some participants’ competences remained unchanged while others made larger leaps in developing their competences. Because competences develop through effortful problem solving, the level of learning effect is likely to be related to the design roles that participants played in the game design projects.

4.2. Game design as pedagogy for knowledge-creating learning
The game design project was coordinated by the teachers’ national innovation network Innokas; its participatory activities aim to provide teachers with a pedagogical framework for teaching students 21st century skills (Binkley et al., 2012) in an inspiring way. Such transversal skills, including collaboration and the flexible and creative use of digital technologies, are highlighted in the Finnish national curriculum (Finnish National Board of Education, 2016). Technological fluency plays a central role in a digitalized world, and young people must be provided structured and equal opportunities to learn to use digital technologies creatively (Barron, 2004; Blikstein & Worsley, 2016; Resnick, 2017). In this regard, challenging, knowledge-creating projects, such as co-designing digital games, which engage students in collaborative efforts to solve open-ended problems and design, create, and invent shared productions, all play crucial roles (Kafai and Peppler, 2011, Mehto, Riikonen, Hakkarainen, Kangas, & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, 2020, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen & Hakkarainen, 2017).

Game design turned out to provide a fruitful context for integrative thematic study units and learning computational skills and creativity together with arts, crafts, and storytelling (Riikonen, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2020, Silander, Riikonen, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2020). We identified three dimensions of digital competences; technical and artistic digital competences were at a relatively low level at the beginning of the game design project, corresponding to findings of an unrelated, maker-centered learning study (Forsström et al., 2021). A substantial number of students had not previously attempted the digital activities in question, yet the results indicated that participation in the game design project provided supportive conditions for the further development and refinement of digital competences. Perhaps fluency with academic digital competences enabled the focus on refinement and use of technical and artistic competences that game design required. The collaborative design of digital games entails creative sociodigital participation because it involves the use of programming as a tool of production and storytelling, the inventive utilization and integration of existing resources, and the pursuit of novelty in terms of visual, musical, and narrative expression (Kafai & Peppler, 2011; Resnick, 2017). Consequently, it was in accordance with expectations that the students’ technical and artistic digital competences developed during the game design project, while their academic digital competences did not advance.

A comparison of girls' and boys' self-reported digital competences indicated that boys estimated their technical competences to be more fluent than girls; this finding is in line with Hakkarainen et al., 2000, Forsström et al., 2021, and Barron (2004), although in a study by Aesaert et al. (2015), a performance-based ICT competence test revealed gender differences in favor of girls. Although ICT and computer science are typically male-dominated fields, Kafai and Peppler (2011) argue that creative production is opening the field to women. Unlike Authors (submitted), we did not find girls’ self-reported artistic competences to be stronger than those of boys, probably because girls were underrepresented in the sample. It is also possible that the role distribution engaged both genders in the artistic aspects of game design.

Beyond gender, gaming experience was associated with digital competence, with students who played games intensively reporting more fluent proficiency with technical aspects of digital technologies than those who did not play games. This may be because many games force players to stretch the performance of their gaming instruments and engage in repeated troubleshooting. Furthermore, many games engage players in modifying the game and participating in its development (Kafai & Burke, 2016); this may have inspired avid gamers’ interest in programming and other technical applications. It seems plausible, as Forsström et al. (2021, submitted) suggest, that intensive gaming may have a mediating role in moving from shallower to more advanced digital competence.

The successful design and creation of games appear to require effective ways of organizing collaborative working processes (Lahti, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, & Hakkarainen, 2004) and teacher guidance (Øygardslia, 2018, Wu and Wang, 2012). From this perspective, it is important to structure teamwork by providing each member with a meaningful role and ensuring that the team is aligned around a shared object. Some participants did not have a clear design role or responsibility in their teams, with participants reporting working on all aspects together. In some cases, overly loose roles resulted in ineffective teamwork and incomplete games. Fixed responsibilities and agreements about shared working guidelines and joint goals support the socially shared regulation of collaborative activity (Panadero & Järvelä, 2015) and successful completion of projects. Dlab et al. (2020) also indicate that for more difficult tasks, groups without role distribution are less successful than groups with assigned roles. However, overly rigid roles may become an obstacle to success if each team member assumes responsibility only for his own tasks without collaborating with other team members. Although most participants had at least one designated design role, many students reported assisting other team members in tasks unrelated to their assigned roles. This flexibility in role designation may be an important success factor in maker projects involving many unforeseen challenges. Presumably, because the present game design projects were anchored in students’ own interests, we did not observe similar student versus gamer role conflict as Melander Bowden (2019) and Øygardslia (2018).

The present study contributes to pedagogic transformation by intertwining constructionism, collaborative game design, and the interconnection of informal and formal learning. Participation in the present game design project enhanced connected learning (Ito et al., 2013) by engaging students in the creative use of digital technology that usually takes place only in informal contexts (Gee & Hayes, 2011; Ito et al., 2010). The study indicates that the students experienced the game design process as inspirational and challenging, and many reported employing skills learned at school in their recreational activities. Game design provides a promising pedagogical approach to support knowledge-creating learning in terms of working collaboratively with a shared object, capitalizing on peer support and collaboration to solve problems, overcoming obstacles, and learning digital competences relevant for both school curricula and the future. Nevertheless, the results indicate that the integration of creative uses of digital technology with schoolwork is still in its beginning stages. At the end of the project, students believed they had mastered technical digital skills to some extent and felt a little more fluency with artistic digital skills. It appears critical to foster students’ skills and capabilities of the creative use of digital technologies at school as well as support the development of the maker mindset (Dougherty, 2013). Such a mindset entails that students cultivate the creative self-efficacy, innovation capability, and sense of knowledge-creating agency necessary for solving complex design and construction problems with their peers.

This study reports the first iteration of an organized game design competition in Finnish schools; the results were encouraging enough to make it a regular part of the national programming and robotics tournament. In accordance with the research-practice partnership (Penuel & Gallagher, 2017), we provided teachers with a great deal of freedom in how they implemented the game design project in their classrooms. The teachers were given only a general framework and open-ended design constraints (e.g. rules of the competition) to support diverse ways of organizing the project at their schools. It appeared to us that providing teachers freedom for determining how the project was implemented deepened their motivations, inspired their creativity, and generated insights for subsequent pedagogic improvement efforts. The overall data collected provided information needed to develop a more refined pedagogic framework for implementing integrative game design projects in the future. The valuable experiences obtained regarding teacher training, teacher orchestration of maker processes, and students’ teamwork can enable game design to become an integrated part of educational practices in Finland. Learning-by-making elicits a positive orientation to technology and reveals the potential for careers in technology. New technologies mediate all professional activity, including the creative industry. Most future professional positions are connected with digital technology in one way or another, so it is critical that young people be exposed to multi-faceted, inspiring, and agentic co-creative experiences in the field.

4.3. Limitations and future research
The present study has some limitations that need to be addressed in future research. First, the sample size was quite small; 98 students responded to both the pre- and post-questionnaires. Less than half of the students who took part in the game design project responded to both of the questionnaires, but the fact that most respondents participated in the tournament indicates that they were highly motivated. In many cases, the project was implemented in elective groups, so students could have already been oriented toward technology and gaming, potentially making them more competent and engaged than average students. Although the dataset was not large, it was suitable for the analyses performed, and this study provides a comprehensive view of the respondents' game design projects and collaborative teamwork, as well as the project's effects on their digital competences and connected learning. The sample does not, however, provide generalizable results for a wider population, and future studies should broaden the sample.

Another limitation of the study is its reliance on the students' self-reported digital competences, which are subject to well-known biases (Hakkarainen et al., 2000). In future research, to measure the learning outcomes of such collaborative maker projects, we suggest combining students' self-assessment measures with performance-based measures. Further, the study was exploratory in nature, aimed at integrating collaborative game design with regular school activity and anchored on orchestration efforts of volunteering teachers. The study was a design-based participatory intervention in nature and relied on an open framework of implementation, which did not support experimental controls. The mixed-methods approach used in this study, however, yielded valuable information on students' game design experiences and design roles. Further studies are needed to examine more thoroughly the design roles and their relation to gender and the personal outcomes of game design projects. Because games are interactive computational artifacts, the perspective-taking aspect of game making (Dishon & Kafai, 2020) warrants closer examination in future. When conducting similar investigations, it is advisable to complement questionnaire data with student portfolios and students' and teachers’ interviews; this would allow more refined tracing of the collaborative design and creation of games, as well as the design roles assumed during the process.

