Immersive Technology has dramatically changed the concept of teaching and learning. Its academic study is recent, so there is little to no background information that can explain how its stimuli and cognitive reactions can improve students' learning experiences. Therefore, this study set out to analyze the psychometric properties of a questionnaire to measure the stimuli and cognitive reactions inherent in Immersive Technology. Rigorous criteria were considered in the questionnaire's design and validation in order to achieve this objective: theoretical review, expert judgment, cognitive interview, pilot test, and exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis. The instrument was administered to 231 middle school students in Concepción, Chile. Participants responded to the instrument after observing and interacting with science content using augmented reality and virtual reality technologies. After conducting the analyses, a latent structure with a good fit for the data was obtained, consisting of 16 items that underlie the latent variables, interactivity, presence, and flow. The questionnaire, called TINMER, presents a satisfactory level of reliability (0.85). Guidelines for its use are discussed to deepen the potential of Immersive Technology in learning experiences.

Keywords
Augmented and virtual reality
Pedagogical issues
Simulations
Teaching/learning strategies

1. Introduction
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), have become increasingly prominent in society, and particularly in the educational field, evolving from a possibility in the classroom to an indispensable reality in teaching practices and learning processes. In addition to this transformation, multiple interfaces have led to the development of emerging approaches that include new sensory and perceptual stimuli, and new forms of interaction between digital information and the real environment. Therefore, the concept of Immersive Technology, which seeks to create authentic scenarios for learning, has proliferated in ICT.

This technology is changing the way users experience physical and virtual environments from observation to immersion. It is defined as a set of interfaces, applications, and software that create augmented simulations for experiences and perfect interactions between human beings and technology (Tham, McGrath, Duin, & Moses, 2018). The term refers to technologies such as Virtual Reality (VR), which leads the user towards immersion, to experience an artificial scene previously generated by a computer, and Augmented Reality (AR), which visualizes the physical world covered with digital content in real-time and with a three-dimensional record. Both can be understood as technologies that create a specific degree of Mixed Reality (MR) allowing to perceive the real world, the physical world, and objects in a credible and receptive way (Brigham, 2017).

Immersive Technology has received extensive academic attention and a productive interest in educational studies, since their integration facilitates the task of teaching and improves learning experiences (Akçayır & Akçayır, 2017; Cabero-Almenara, Fernández-Batanero, & Barroso-Osuna, 2019; Chavez & Bayona, 2018; Martín-Gutiérrez, Efrén, Añorbe-Díaz, & González-Marrero, 2017). Insight on its effect on learning remains limited and subject to conflicting responses (Alkhattabi, 2017; Han, 2019; Suh & Prophet, 2018). However, some studies have revealed glimpses of educational advantages, such as its usefulness for the study and understanding of complex contents and phenomena (Cheng & Tsai, 2019; Erolin, Reid, & McDougall, 2019; Demitriadou, Stavroulia, & Lanitis, 2019), their contribution to creativity, motivation and commitment in academic tasks by providing attractive and immediate information (Cheng & Tsai, 2019; Di Serio, Ibáñez, & Kloos, 2013; Erbas & Demirer, 2019) and their adaptability to students' characteristics and particularities, allowing them to respond to different learning rhythms (Laínez, Chocarrode Luis, Busto, & López, 2018).

Likewise, its integration is observed in different educational settings: preschool education (Yilmaz, 2016), primary education (Cheng & Tsai, 2019; Demitriadou et al., 2019; Han, 2019), secondary education (Amaya & Santoyo, 2017; Chang, Hsu, Chen, & Jong, 2018; Di Serio et al., 2013) and tertiary education (Badilla & Meza, 2015; Cabero-Almenara et al., 2019; Chang, Warden, Liang, & Lin, 2018). They have also been observed in curricular axes of different disciplines, including: Arts (Di Serio et al., 2013), Mathematics (Demitriadou et al., 2019), Social Sciences (Toledo & Sánchez, 2017), Natural Sciences (Chang, Hsu, et al., 2018; Erbas & Demirer, 2019), Anatomical Education (Erolin et al., 2019), Music (Amaya & Santoyo, 2017).

In summary, given their characteristics and possibilities, Immersive Technology is implied within the constructivist approach, granting students prominence and representations of reality based on their previous knowledge (Alkhattabi, 2017; Huang, Rauch, & Liaw, 2010; Zhang, Bowman, & Jones, 2019). Therefore, the understanding of this paradigm is essential to address the integration of immersive technologies, as it offers a perspective on learning objectives, content choice, teaching methodologies, techniques and resources, and evaluation processes. In this sense, the limits of its integration into the classrooms are not in the technology itself, but in how it is used and what is learned through it (Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2017).

As the literature has shown, the integration of Immersive Technology in different educational contexts is currently on the rise, as well as the varied possibilities for learning. However, empirical studies are scarce when it comes to reporting how students experience these technologies (Han, 2019; Huang, Luo, Yang, Lu, & Chen, 2019). Most of the research in this area has examined the consequences of the use of Immersive Technology, for example, motivation (Di Serio et al., 2013; Erbas & Demirer, 2019) and academic achievement (Badilla-Quintana, Sepúlveda-Valenzuela, & Salazar-Arias, 2020; Demitriadou et al., 2019; Toledo & Sánchez, 2017), without questioning what technological stimuli affect these variables or what internal reactions from the students lead to positive or negative results in motivation, academic achievement or other variables.

In this scenario, Suh and Prophet (2018) suggest a comprehensive framework of factors associated with the use of Immersive Technology and classify them into stimuli, cognitive reactions, and response variables. A stimulus corresponds to a property of the technology that arouses reactions at the mental level in users, while cognitive responses represent mental processes that occur when the user interacts with technology and the response variables refer to the consequences of the use of immersive systems.

An Immersive Technology stimulus is the interactivity conceived as the degree to which a user can engage in modifying the form and content of a virtual environment or object, thus, enabling information exchanges between users or between users with a technological medium (Weber, Behr, & DeMartino, 2014). Although this construct is often defined, its conceptualization is under-theorized and subject to contradictions. In this context, Bucy (2004) infers the following statements to propose a common understanding; (1) it should describe reciprocal exchanges of communication, (2) it should not be considered as an analog of interaction, (3) it should conceive how users experience technologies, and (4) it should consider a perceptual approach. In an educational context, the interactivity of immersive technology provides the student with freedom of navigation, the ability to inquire into the properties of virtual objects, and the capacity to access the specific information needed for learning. Indeed, high levels of interactivity allow students to learn better and obtain more powerful learning gains (Zhang et al., 2019), as well as to trigger cognitive reactions such as presence and flow.

As defined by Steuer, presence is “the degree to which one feels present in the mediated environment, rather than in the immediate physical environment” (1992, p.76); likewise, Witmer and Singer (1998) refer to it as “the subjective experience of being in one place or environment, even when one is physically situated in another” (p. 225). Its terminology and operationalization hinder the gathering of a unified theory. Consequently, Lee (2004) raises the following assertions: (1) presence, unlike associated constructs, telepresence, and a virtual one, does not specify technological domains, (2) it is a psychological structure that deals with the perceptual process of technological stimuli, therefore, it does not apply a differentiation of its construct concerning properties of technology and (3) the generalization of its definition allows the study of other associated phenomena. By integrating immersive technologies into an educational context, cognitive reaction (presence) enables students to immerse themselves in unique situations in the first person, isolating themselves from the physical space; thus, high levels of presence improve students' academic achievement (Alkhattabi, 2017).

In regards to flow, this concept refers to a psychological state, where users engage in an activity in a way that eliminates all thought and perception outside of it (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). This experience, according to Csikszentmihalyi (1998), occurs in the existence of (1) balance between challenge and skill level, (2) absorption in the activity that evokes automatic actions, (3) clear goals, (4) immediate feedback, (5) concentration on activity, (6) sense of control, (7) unconcern for self-image, (8) altered sense of time, and (9) autotelic experience. In the educational field, this cognitive reaction gives students better concentration, acquisition of significant learning, and less stress in academic activities (Chang, Hsu, et al., 2018. Hence the importance of designing challenging and authentic activities under the mentioned conditions achieve a state of flux.

These properties of Immersive Technology, interactivity as a stimulus, and presence and flow as cognitive reactions favor the effectiveness of learning, which is one of the main concerns of the educational system. Although there are contradictory answers regarding Immersive Technology's effect on the learning process, this is attributed to the fact that its integration has not contemplated its inherent characteristics. Artificial realities are incorporated without first designing educational interventions that address the described constructs.

In this context, to advance and deepen the knowledge of Immersive Technology, it is necessary to have valid and reliable instruments, particularly to understand its integration into educational processes. This becomes even more relevant considering that in the national context there are no instrumental experiences that capture the unique characteristics of Immersive Technology, which leads to the following research question: What are the psychometric properties of the TINMER questionnaire for the measurement of stimuli and cognitive reactions inherent in Immersive Technology?

Therefore, the objective of this study is to analyze the psychometric properties of a proposed questionnaire for measuring stimulus and cognitive reactions inherent in Immersive Technology, a proposal that also articulates an intervention strategy based on principles of constructivist knowledge and an integrated framework for its use.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Research design
The research has a non-experimental transactional design, characterized by observing phenomena as they occur in their natural context and crystallizing the data collected in a unique time (Vieytes, 2004).

2.2. Participants
The sample for the validation of the instrument consisted of 231 7th and 8th-grade students who voluntarily expressed their consent. Age ranged from 11 to 13 years (mean = 12.1 years). As for gender, the sample consisted of 108 girls (46.8%) and 123 boys (53%). Regarding educational level, 104 (45%) were 7th-grade students and 127 (55%) 8th-grade students. The students attended four primary schools located in the city of Concepción, Chile.

Sample size considers the approach of the proportion of participants per item to perform the factor analysis (Lloret-Segura, Ferreres-Traver, Hernández-Baeza, & Tomás-Marco, 2014). Specifically, following Gorsuch's (1983) recommendation, a ratio of five participants per item and size of no less than 100 were considered. Therefore, a subsample of 112 participants was used to explore the underlying factor structure through the Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA). Next, to confirm this structure, a subsample of 119 participants was used, this time through the Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA).

2.3. Design of the instrument
Suh and Prophet's (2018) literature review on the state of Immersive Technology was used. 25 of the 54 reviewed articles were extracted, as they address issues related to learning. Next, their purposes, theoretical and methodological approaches were studied, mainly based on their measurements and instrumental proposals. The data was detailed in a record sheet and then reviewed to determine strengths and gaps. Indeed, the first version of the instrument was developed considering the Huang, Riach, and Liaw (2010) questionnaire and the Georgiou and Kyza (2017) ARI questionnaire as theoretical foundations, as well as principles and postulates of literature (Csikszentmihalyi, 1998; Lee, 2004; Steuer, 1992). The first theoretical foundation was developed to examine the attitude and intention of using a virtual reality system, consisting of 25 items distributed in factors such as interactivity, imagination, immersion, collaborative learning, and intention of use. It was validated by expert judgment based on criteria of relevance, writing, and clarity, and had a Cronbach's alpha of 0.92. The second was designed to measure immersion in augmented reality environments, consisting of 21 items distributed in commitment, absorption, presence, and flow factors, with a Cronbach's alpha of 0.90. It also contemplates psychometric validation through exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis. The main reasons for using these instruments lie in: (1) the theoretical perspective, since the conceptualization of constructs is consistent with the approach of the present study, (2) rigorous design and validation processes, (3) instruments specifically designed for students independently of their educational level, and (4) educational intervention as a strategy to contextualize Immersive Technology.

The first version of the instrument was made up of 22 items that contribute to the theoretically defined factors of interactivity, presence, and flow. Table 1 presents an earlier version of the instrument and the origin of the items by dimensions. However, the instrument under the survey technique considers a Likert scale for the items. For each statement, there are 7 response options, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (totally agree). In this way, participants indicate their degree of agreement or disagreement according to the to the phrase Using technology I was able to.


Table 1. Initial version of the instrument.

Dimensions and items	References
Interactivity (stimulus)	Huang, Riach, and Liaw (2010): Items 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
1. Move virtual objects	
2. Rotate virtual objects	Steuer (1992): Items 6 and 7.
3. Zoom in on virtual objects	
4. Move virtual objects away	
5. View virtual objects from different perspectives	
6. Observe different shades	
7. Access information through virtual objects	
Presence (cognitive reaction)	Georgiou and Kyza (2017): Items 8, 9, 10 and 11.
8. Believe that virtual objects exist in reality	
9. Feel that I was experiencing something real	Lee (2004): Items 12, 13, and 14.
10. Be so involved that in some cases I wanted to interact directly with the virtual objects	
11. Feel like my actions affected the activity	
12. Feel like I was physically inside the virtual environment	
13. Have the sensation of being in the middle of the action instead of just watching	
14. Feel the virtual objects around me	
Flow (cognitive reaction)	Csikszentmihalyi (1998): Items 15, 16, 17, 20, 21 and 22.
15. Forget all irrelevant thoughts	
16. Have a sense of how well I was doing	Georgiou and Kyza (2017): Items 18 and 19.
17. Do things automatically without having to think about it	
18. Be focused	
19. Feel like time went by without noticing	
20. Feel like I was able to meet the challenge	
21. Feel like the experience was enjoyable	
22. Have a feeling of total control	
2.4. Validation of the instrument
The validation method considered four processes: (1) expert judgment validation, (2) cognitive interview validation, (3) pilot test, and (4) psychometric validation that included exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis.

2.4.1. Process I. Validation by expert judgment
Experts are people whose professional, academic, and research experience related to the subject of study allow them to assess the content and form of each of the items (Soriano, 2014).

This evaluation was performed by consulting six experts, specifically four national and two international judges with a background in teaching, postgraduate studies, and research lines in educational technology and social research methodologies. An instrument validation format was sent to each judge by email. They were asked to analyze and critically assess each of the items according to categories of sufficiency, clarity, coherence, and relevance through a dichotomous criterion (low level/high level) and point out possible aspects in the measurement of the construct that had not been estimated by the researchers.

Based on suggestions and indications, four items were cut out. In the interactivity dimension, item 6 was eliminated, since, in judges' words, it did not attribute logic to the factor. In the presence dimension, item 10 was eliminated, as its wording evoked confusion. Finally, in the flow dimension item 15 was removed as the word “irrelevant” did not meet the criteria of clarity, and item 22 was eliminated as it was deemed to be like item 17, and the phrase “total control” was said to be complicated. After the elimination of items, the instrument was made up of 18 elements. Next, based on this new version, the validation, cognitive interview, and pilot test processes followed.

2.4.2. Process II. Validation by cognitive interview
This method allows for obtaining evidence of validity in response processes. Following guidelines for the use and application of cognitive interviews by Caicedo and Zalazar-Jaime (2018), three interviews were conducted with students in 6th, 7th, and 8th grades. Generically, the interview began with the greeting and explanation of the activity's objectives. Augmented reality and virtual reality were presented to the student to contextualize the instrument's items. For the next stage, the thinking out loud technique was used, in which the interviewer reads each statement and records the interviewee's process of developing an answer. If he or she pauses extensively, the interviewer asks him or her to verbalize their understanding and thoughts, using their wording to explain the statements.

The cognitive interview showed that three interviewed students had an adequate understanding of items.

2.4.3. Process III. Pilot test
Soriano (2014) indicates that the characteristics of the population for the pilot test should be like the sample to be studied. Also, the instrument must be administered under the same conditions with which it will be applied to consider possible limitations and improve the sample execution. This pilot test considered two aspects: a) the educational intervention, and b) the application of the instrument, in which ten 8th graders participated (six girls and four boys; average age = 12 years).

Two educational activities using Immersive Technology were designed. In the first activity, the students interacted with the QuiverVision application, in which they were able to observe and identify organelles of the cell, animal and plant models, and they were also capable of providing feedback on their learning through a short quiz integrated into the app. In the second, the students visualized an unfamiliar world of the human cell through the InCell VR application, touring environments that involved learning. After the completion of the educational intervention, the response process and main instructions were indicated and the data collection instrument was applied.

The pilot test allowed for modifying the educational intervention's strategy prior to the instrument application to the sample to be studied (n = 231). The following measures were taken: (1) a third activity with augmented reality technology was added; the CellulAR for Merge Cube application was selected, where students could manipulate the cell in the palm of their hands and access specific information from cell structures, (2) to facilitate the intervention small groups of 9 students were formed, and (3) instructions for each activity were given by paper, thus facilitating possible questions from the students.

It should be mentioned that the content of each activity was based on the Chilean national curriculum for Natural Sciences, specifically Biology (Ministerio de Educación de Chile, 2016). At the same time, to carry out the educational intervention, each student had technological resources such as iPads, iPhones, and VR Glasses, as well as graphic templates for associated applications. The educational intervention lasted 20 min in total.

Regarding the application of the instrument, the pilot allowed confirming that the students understand the items raised and determined a reasonable time of application, which did not exceed 7 min per student.

The methods of expert judgment, cognitive interview, and pilot test allowed for obtaining evidence of the validity of content and process, as well as new wording in the items that make up the instrument. Table 2 shows the 18 resulting items of the questionnaire. This version was administered to the subsample of 112 participants to perform the exploratory factor analysis.


Table 2. Instrument items after content and process validation methods.

Items	Content
Interactivity (stimulus)
Item 5	Move virtual objects
Item 7	Zoom in on virtual objects
Item 9	Access information through virtual objects
Item 11	View virtual objects from different perspectives
Item 13	Rotate virtual objects
Item 16	Move virtual objects away
Presence (cognitive reaction)
Item 1	Feel the virtual objects around me
Item 3	Believe that virtual objects exist in reality
Item 8	Feel that I was experiencing something real
Item 12	Have the sensation of being in the middle of the action instead of just watching
Feel like I was physically inside the virtual environment
Item 15	Feel like my actions affected the activity
Item 17	
Flow (cognitive reaction)
Item 2	Feel like the experience was enjoyable
Item 4	Have a sense of how well I was doing
Item 6	Feel like I was able to meet the challenge
Item 10	Do things automatically without having to think about it
Item 14	Be focused
Item 18	Feel like time went by without noticing
2.4.4. Process IV. Psychometric validation
Firstly, to carry out the EFA, a comparison of the factorial solutions was made using the Polychoric and Pearson correlation matrix. After obtaining similar results, it was decided to factor the Polychoric Matrix given the ordinal polyatomic nature of the items. Then, as a preliminary analysis, the univariate and multivariate data normality distribution was studied using the Mardia test.

Secondly, the degree of adequacy of data to the factor analysis was assessed using indicators from Kaiser, Meyer, and Olkin (KMO) and the Bartlett Sphericity Test. For the estimation of factors, the method of Unweighted Minimum Squares (ULS) was used. For the number of factors to be retained, Horn's parallel analysis and theoretical convergence. As for factor analysis rotation procedures, oblique rotation and Promin were used. Regarding the criteria to interpret the saturation of items, the recommendation from Lloret-Segura et al. (2014) was never below 0.40, particularly in this study, since the sample is under 300 cases.

Thirdly, to verify the underlying structure, a CFA was performed. The ULS estimator was used, as it does not require assumptions about variable distribution. Next, Goodness-of-fit statistics were used: Chi-square (χ2), Root Mean Square, Error of Approximation (RMSEA), non-standardized adjustment index (TLI), and Comparative Fit Index (CFI).

Factor analysis was performed using the FACTOR software version 10.9.02 for exploratory analysis and SPSS AMOS version 23 for confirmatory analysis.

Reliability analysis was performed; the internal consistency was corroborated by ordinal alpha using the FACTOR software version 10.9.02.

Finally, Spearman's Correlation was used given the ordinal nature of the variables and the non-normal distribution of the data to establish associations between factors. Fields (2013) points out that the correlation coefficients are numerical indices that allow the degree and sign of the association between two variables to be encrypted. Their values can fluctuate between −1 and +1, where the value indicates the strong or weak degree of association and the sign, the positive or negative direction.

3. Results
3.1. Preliminary analysis
When analyzing the differences in items between the sub-samples of factor analysis, these do not exceed 6.26 in the mean and 1.69 in the standard deviation. For the asymmetry and kurtosis values, an approximately normal univariate distribution is inferred, since their values range between ±2 (Muthén & Kaplan, 1985). However, when corroborating the multivariate distribution, the Mardia test indicates that both asymmetry and kurtosis exceed the values of a normal multivariate distribution (p < 0.001). These assumptions guide our decisions regarding the choice of methods in factor analysis.

3.2. Exploratory factor analysis
Based on the Polychoric Correlation Matrix, the matrix determinant showed a value of p < 0.001, which indicates a high degree of intercorrelation (López-Aguado & Gutiérrez-Provecho, 2019). This value is confirmed by the significance associated with the Bartlett Sphericity Test χ2 (120) = 752.4, p < 0.001, allowing for rejection of the null hypothesis that the correlation matrix is identity, and the Kaiser, Meyer, and Olkin (KMO) adequacy test that showed a satisfactory value of 0.80 (Ferrando & Anguiano-Carrasco, 2010). According to these results, the data matrix is appropriate for factoring.

Horn's parallel analysis indicated the existence of 2 factors; however, it was decided to use the number of factors based a priori on theory: interactivity, presence, and flow. The 3-factor solution obtained with the ULS method explains 62.89% of the variance, where a value greater than 60% is considered satisfactory (Lloret-Segura et al., 2014). Table 3 shows the distribution of factor loads.


Table 3. Factor weights from exploratory factor analysis.

Items	Presence	Flow	Interactivity
Item 8	.86		
Item 15	.74		
Item 12	.69		
Item 3	.64		
Item 1	.60		
Item 2		.76	
Item 18		.70	
Item 4		.67	
Item 6		.52	
Item 14		.48	
Item 16			.85
Item 13			.78
Item 7			.72
Item 9			.70
Item 5			.69
Item 11			.63
Note: Extraction method = unweighted minimum squares, rotation method = promin.

Regarding the reliability analysis, the internal consistency yielded according to ordinal alpha, 0.88 for the interactivity factor, 0.86 for the presence factor, and 0.78 for the flow factor. While the total ordinal alpha of the instrument indicated the consistency of 0.87.

From the results obtained in the EFA, the final version of the instrument was modified and two items were removed. Item 10 was removed as it was grouped within a theoretical factor different from the proposed one, and item 17 was removed as its factorial solution was inferior to 0.40, resulting in a structure consisting of 16 items. Table 4 shows the redistribution of items after the exploratory factor analysis. This new version of the instrument was administered to the subsample of 119 participants to perform the confirmatory factor analysis.


Table 4. Redistribution of items after the exploratory factor analysis.

Items	Content
Interactivity (stimulus)
Item 4	View virtual objects from different perspectives
Item 6	Move virtual objects
Item 8	Zoom in on virtual objects
Item 10	Access information through virtual objects
Item 12	Rotate virtual objects
Item 15	Move virtual objects away
Presence (cognitive reaction)
Item 1	Feel the virtual objects around me
Item 3	Believe that virtual objects exist in reality
Item 9	Feel that I was experiencing something real
Item 11	Have the feeling of being in the middle of the action instead of just watching
Feel like I was physically inside the virtual environment
Item 14	
Flow (cognitive reaction)
Item 2	Feel like the experience was enjoyable
Item 5	Have a sense of how well I was doing
Item 7	Feel like I was able to meet the challenge
Item 13	Be focused
Item 16	Feel like time went by without noticing
3.3. Confirmatory factor analysis
To verify the results of the psychometric properties obtained in the EFA, a confirmatory analysis was carried out. This allows for representing the relationships of latent variables with their observed variables and confirming that the items conform to the proposed model (Bollen, 1989). To assess the mode's Goodness-of-fit statistics, the ULS estimation method and adjustment indicators were used. The Chi-Square statistic indicates that the model does not fit the data (X2 = 168.011, df = 101, p = 0.001). It is suggested to not consider this report, first, due to its sensitivity to the sample size (the larger the sample, the worse the obtained value), and second, it assumes that the model conforms to population parameters, which is very unlikely (Ruiz, Pardo, & San Martín, 2010).

It was decided to consider other indices that seem to be less sensitive to the sample size. The CFI and TLI show an acceptable level of adjustment equal to or greater than the recommended (>0.90), while the RMSEA is considered within the reasonable range (0.05–0.08) as an adequate model adjustment (Browne & Cudeck, 1992). Table 5 presents the obtained goodness of fit indices.


Table 5. Indices of the model's goodness of fit.

Model	χ2	df	CFI	TLI	RMSEA
Theoretical (3 factors)	168.011	101	.91	.90	.07
Regarding the reliability analysis, the internal consistency yielded according to ordinal alpha, 0.83 for the interactivity factor, 0.84 for the presence factor, and 0.79 for the flow factor. Meanwhile, the instrument's total ordinal alpha indicated a 0.85 consistency, which is considered very good according to Landeros and González (2006).

3.4. Correlational analysis
Spearman's correlation coefficient indicates a statistically significant and positive correlation between latent variables. The highest relationship is observed between presence and flow (rs = 0.48; p < 0.01), followed by the relationship between interactivity and presence (rs = 0.46; p < 0.01) and the relationship between interactivity and flow (rs = 0.26; p < 0.01).

4. Discussion
The psychometric behavior through the factor analysis allowed for including items with a favorable internal consistency, good adjustment indicators, and theoretical grouping of proposed items in the final instrument (hereinafter TINMER). In this way, the structure that underlies the 16 items was shaped as follows:

The interactivity factor is composed of 6 items with a factor loads over 0.57. Its internal consistency according to the ordinal alpha is 0.83. The conceptualization of this construct is eloquent with the perceptual approach to interactivity (Bucy, 2004; Huang et al., 2010; Weber, Behr, and De Martino, 2014). The primary instrument was developed by Huang et al. (2010) and although they share a theoretical background, TINMER has the strength to present the exhaustive design and validation processes, while the basic instrument only reports descriptive statisticians and internal consistency overall with a Cronbach's alpha of 0.92.

The presence factor was designed based on Lee's definition (2004), and in coherence with the Augmented Reality Immersion Questionnaire ARI (Georgiou & Kyza, 2017). The results between the TINMER and the ARI agree when identifying the presence as a general construct. On one hand the ARI questionnaire obtains stronger factor loads from 0.66 to 0.78 in the 4 items that make up the factor. On the other hand, the TINMER factorial solutions range from 0.57 to 0.78, and consider 5 items. Regarding internal consistency, both have adequate values, 0.80 according to Cronbach's alpha for the ARI and 0.84 according to the ordinal alpha for TINMER.

Finally, the results obtained for the flow factor and its construct validity as a single factor are consistent with the findings made by Jackson, Martin, and Eklund (2008) in their reduced version of the flow scale. However, considering the Csikszentmihalyi flow theory (1998), the factor items do not respond to each of the nine characteristics of the optimal experience, since the resulting TINMER model confirmed 5 items with factor loads between 0.53 and 0.70 and an alpha ordinal of 0.79. Despite this, it is closer to make a comparison with the ARI Questionnaire of Georgiou and Kyza (2017) given the context and particularities of Immersive Technology. In the ARI instrument, the CFA identified the factor consisting of only 3 items with saturations over 0.73 and a Cronbach's alpha of 0.87.

In the reliability analysis according to an ordinal alpha, the TINMER has an internal consistency of 0.85. The choice of this estimator over Cronbach's alpha lies in the use of the polychoric matrix instead of the covariance matrix and given the ordinal nature of the data (Contreras & Novoa-Muñoz, 2018). This unbiased estimator of reliability is scarcely applied, and it can be explained by the procedure's accessibility, since software such as SPSS does not implement it in its repertoire. Consequently, TINMER differs from the basic instrumental background, because they report internal consistency using Cronbach's alpha.

Depending on the educational intervention strategy, the following preliminary conclusions are inferred:

Firstly, it is necessary to study the characteristics of Immersive Technology, its associated hardware, and software, as well as verify that these are optimal and congruent to the discipline's curricular axes and demands. Next, the learning objective must be specified, since its definition is essential when thinking about the teaching process, in terms of what and how to teach. According to the constructivist paradigm, these elements must be significant for the student, so that they can be assimilated and integrated into existing knowledge.

Secondly, the definition of the learning objective and content involves attending to elements such as students' characteristics, interests, learning rhythms, and previous knowledge. These elements were considered generically in the design of the intervention strategy. Given the characteristics of the participants, 7th and 8th-grade students, a common objective at the educational level was selected and developed, that was also consistent with the curricular progression according to the Science study program.

Thirdly, the challenges of the intervention strategy are directed in such a way that they favor the student's active involvement, where they can interact and be part of the reality that directs them. They also tried to make them authentic and intrinsically interesting. In this sense, constructivism is based on promoting student-centered experiences and providing contact with different representations of reality. Therefore, the intervention strategy considered actions such as: observing, interacting, navigating, experiencing, and accessing information, consolidating the idea of an authentic learning environment, and the acquisition of significant knowledge.

In summary, although this research is based on the fundamentals of the constructivist paradigm, there is a variety of learning theories that emerge: information processing theory, social cognitive theory, experiential learning theory, connectivist theory, ubiquitous learning theory; among others, all of which allow the integration of Immersive Technologies to be addressed. Regardless of the learning theory, it is relevant that the integration is oriented under the constructivist principles because they offer guidelines on learning objectives, content, methodologies, resources, motivation, and evaluation processes. Attending this theoretical aspect implies discovering solid guidelines on how to address the advantages of technology when designing immersive experiences to favor the effectiveness of learning.

5. Conclusions
The comprehensive framework suggests that technological stimuli evoke cognitive and affective states in users, which in turn direct to variations in behavior or consequences after the use of Immersive Technology. The characteristics of this theory are fulfilled to an extent in this study. The preliminary conclusions are:

Given that the study is oriented, prospectively, to understand the integration of immersive technologies in educational settings and determine their effect on learning, study variables have been selected according to the literature associated with learning. Based on this criterion, interactivity (stimulus), presence and flow (organism), and learning effectiveness (response) were considered.

This research sought to analyze the psychometric behavior of an instrument proposal, which is structured in a manner consistent with the perspective of the integral framework that aims to explore the association between factors, including system characteristics, user experience, and results of the use of technology. In this way, direct positive relationships were established between the interactivity, presence, and flow factors. However, despite this, no associations were established between these constructs and the response factor, learning effectiveness, as a measurement was not used, and as previously mentioned, the intervention strategy was designed to pilot and validate the instrument.

The comprehensive framework proposes that individual differences, gender, age, tendency to seek new sensations, among others, have a moderating effect on the results after the use of immersive technology. According to this, and since there is no measurement of learning effectiveness, it is not possible to establish differences by sociodemographic variables.

Specifically, this theoretical platform consolidates the factors associated with Immersive Technology and allows us to move towards the understanding of mechanisms that explain how students' experience and performance can be improved or deteriorated in an immersive environment. Given this, the present study cannot prove or verify the totality of the relationships between proposed and described factors, at least in this instance.

Regarding the TINMER questionnaire, because of a meticulous design and validation process, it is considered a valid and reliable instrument. It is plausible to infer the following. First, its easy and fast application allows for measuring interactivity as a technological stimulus, and presence and flow as cognitive reactions that occur when interacting with Immersive Technology. These constructions resemble the proposed conceptual approach, which gives rise to a direct and significant association between the stimulus and the cognitive reactions. Second, the TINMER application is relevant for middle and high school students, because a sample based on literature guidelines was used. Despite this, it is possible to use this questionnaire at any higher educational level, given that the elements that compose it are easy to understand. Third, the application of the instrument is not aimed at a specific domain of learning. On the contrary, we encourage teachers and researchers to approach different curricular contents through Immersive Technology, ensuring that the design of the activities pays attention to the items on TINMER questionnaire, thereby ensuring that the student manipulates and observes virtual objects from different perspectives, accesses information through them and can grant freedom to navigate and explore different virtual environments. In this way, teachers must seek mobile applications that are consistent with their curricular axes and students' interests. Fourth, as has been pointed out in previous sections, the integration of Immersive Technology into classrooms does not in itself generate learning. Consequently, the instrument can shed light on the effectiveness of learning after knowing how students experience the use of Immersive Technology, since the literature indicates that greater interactivity, presence, and flow result in substantial learning gains. Teachers and researchers can analyze the results after applying TINMER according to the following considerations:

-
The questionnaire takes 7 min. Its application is recommended immediately after the intervention with Immersive Technology, so that the experience is fresh in the students' memory.

-
For each item, a rating scale is included with seven response options (1 = Totally disagree; 2 = Somewhat disagree; 3 = Disagree; 4 = Neither agree nor disagree; 5 = Agree; 6 = Fairly agree; and 7 = Totally agree) where the student must choose the option that best describes their thoughts. It is essential to tell them to select only one option in the most honest possible way, marking it with an X. The student must indicate their level of agreement and refer to the slogan Using technology I was able to.

-
The method to obtain the scores considers calculating the values obtained in each item according to the dimension to which they belong. The Interactivity dimension: View virtual objects from different perspectives; Move virtual objects; Zoom in on virtual objects; Access information through virtual objects; Rotate virtual objects; Move virtual objects away. The presence dimension: Feel the virtual objects around me; Believe that virtual objects exist in reality; Feel that I was experiencing something real; Have the feeling of being in the middle of the action instead of just watching; Feel like I was physically inside the virtual environment. The flow dimension: Feel like the experience was enjoyable; Have a sense of how well I was doing; Feel like I was able to meet the challenge; Be focused; Feel like time went by without noticing.

-
Next, the resulting average per dimension is measured using the PT/NT formula, where PT is the obtained score, and NT represents the number of statements. The score is analyzed on the continuum from 1 to 7. For instance, if a student obtained 42 points in the interactivity dimension, this value is divided by the number of items, that is 6, resulting in a 7 score. The latter allows placing the dimension into the category Totally agree displaying a high degree of approval on behalf of the student.

In the 21st century, where technology has a gravitational role, society needs pedagogical innovation processes through the integration of technologies, since they give students the possibility to control the direction of their learning in an unlimited world of information. In this sense, Immersive Technology conceives learning experiences under a ubiquitous, interactive, and immersive character, blurring boundaries between the real and virtual world. However, despite its educational advantages and sensory attributes, this technology is not capable of generating learning by itself, since its integration into the classroom needs to be based on principles of the constructivist paradigm. Consequently, this study developed an educational intervention strategy, which, although it seeks to integrate Immersive Technology into a pedagogical scenario, does not fully address the principles of constructivist knowledge, since its planning addresses the psychometric validation of the instrument, and contextualize the items. In this way, conclusions are not absolute to any researcher who uses the instrument in the future. However, they allow us to glimpse aspects consistent with the educational paradigm and thus move towards the integration of Immersive Technology into the classroom.

6. Limitations
Although articles from a systematic review (Suh & Prophet, 2018) and articles based on selection criteria were included, there may be significant unidentified knowledge in both reviews.

The TINMER questionnaire construction process was developed under widely accepted standards on the design and validation of instruments. Although a recommendation was followed about the sample size required to carry out the study of psychometric properties, there is literature that has other orientations.

Data collection involved an intervention strategy with Immersive Technology demanding more time and commitment from the schools and their teachers. In some of them, mainly subsidized by the state, a few concerns were generated in participating in the study, since the intervention involved removing students from the classroom, making it somewhat difficult to deliver content.

Finally, a limitation that is recurrent in the literature is the nature of the self-report of the questionnaire. This study followed a similar approach to research that, during instrument development, asks students to respond immediately after the use of technology, which could be criticized for achieving a general grade after the intervention rather than fully capturing the temporality of the immersive experiences.

