This study applied the question-oriented problem-solving (QOPS) pedagogy in Statistics learning and addressed several methodological and theoretical gaps in SNA studies to inform instructional and learning implications for teachers and students. The limitations in SNA studies included the lack of theoretical support in the analysis, the homogeneous medium where the data for SNA is collected, the constraints in the diversity of the network modes, and the lack of associations about the SNA measures with learning outcomes. Thus, we investigated 1) how a learning community based on social media evolved with the implementation of the QOPS activities, 2) changes in instructors and learners' roles in light of their one-mode and two-mode SNA measures, and 3) how different relational ties and SNA measures were associated with student outcomes. Participants were 23 graduate students (females: 52.17%) and an instructional team of three. Seven hundred four messages, including 118 posts and 586 comments, were collected from the private advanced statics Facebook learning group over an 18-week advanced Statics course. Aligned with the QOPS approach, the learning community became more interactive and cohesive, as reflected in their one-mode SNA measures. Besides, the two-mode measures, including density, GCC, reciprocity, transitivity, and strong/weak components, demonstrated that the learning community became denser and more interactive via their shared discussion. The instructional team played unique roles as a leader or facilitator in their interaction with students, while students' roles as a leader and coordinator were identified. Students' outdegree, degree, and closeness centralities have the most consistent predictive validity of their learning outcomes. Higher values in degree or closeness via shared discussion topics such as discussion of quizzes, help-seeking, and course administrative communication also predicted performance. The study results have practical implications for instructors and researchers in designing the hybrid learning environment and providing scaffolds to promote help-seeking.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Cooperative/collaborative learning

Learning communities

Social media

Teaching/learning strategies

Post-secondary education

1. Introduction
In higher education, online discussion is commonly used to complement the face-to-face sessions in hybrid or blended courses, where learners' participation in online discussion and their social and intellectual interaction form the basis of a learning community. Specifically, the posting and commenting behaviors constitute a substantial amount of interaction data that may have meaning in learners' cognitive exchange (e.g., seeking help and responding to questions, (Wu, 2021)) besides social interaction. Some studies have used learners' behavioral data (e.g., content created and consumed) or qualitative content analysis (e.g., dialog transcripts or chat logs, (Wu, Liao, Nian, & Cheng, 2021)) to model the cognitive engagement and interactivity among learners (e.g., Cheng & Tsai, 2019; Kent, Laslo, & Rafaeli, 2016); however, these analytical methods cannot fully reflect the network relationship at both the individual level and the network level.

Social network analysis (SNA) is a kind of analytical technique that provides individual-level and network-level statistics to quantify the interactivity among and within a network of actors/nodes (e.g., learners, instructors, learning materials, or artifacts). Additionally, graphs and visualizations can enable the analysis of relational patterns among actors that interact with one another or with the environment by way of relational ties or lines connecting the nodes (Cela, Sicilia, & Sánchez, 2015; Dado & Bodemer, 2017; Wasserman & Faust, 1994). The individual-level analysis (e.g., centrality measures) underlines how each actor is associated with other actors in the network while the network-level analysis (e.g., density measures) stresses the overall relational patterns in the network (Dado & Bodemer, 2017; Ouyang & Scharber, 2017). Subgraphs or groups of actors can also be created to reveal actors with similar patterns of relations or those who are more closely connected than others (Scott & Carrington, 2011).

Notably, the application of SNA in the computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environment can capture the interactivity among actors assuming that these relational ties, either communication-based (e.g., sending/receiving messages) or association-based (e.g., participating in the same topic of discussion), influence learners' behavior and learning (Dado and Bodemer, 2017, Wu, Liao, Nian, & Cheng, 2021). Researchers have used SNA to explore the participatory roles in a learning community based on the SNA metrics (Marcos-García, Martínez-Monés, & Dimitriadis, 2015), to examine how instructors' facilitation can enhance the cohesion of the learning community (Ouyang & Scharber, 2017), or to investigate the communication structure in an online learning environment regarding time and instructor's participation over a 14-week course (Ergün & Usluel, 2016).

However, there are still methodological and theoretical gaps in the current SNA literature that prevent SNA studies from exploiting their potential to understand the network interactivity and development process with theoretical support. Reviewing 89 papers of SNA under the computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) context, researchers found the SNA papers were limited in the diversity of network modes. 71% of the reviewed articles belonged to the one-mode actor-network of learner-learner interaction or artifact-artifact interaction, and fewer studies involving the two-mode actor-network of learner-artifact structures (Dado & Bodemer, 2017). Moreover, more than half of the included studies (55%) only described the pattern of the sociogram and reported the SNA measures; thus, the study results were constrained in terms of extending the statistical results to the learning outcomes (Dado & Bodemer, 2017). Besides, a review article in learning analytics, where SNA is identified as a frequently used analytical approach, revealed a similar finding that most studies merely describe a phenomenon without a theoretical basis (Viberg, Hatakka, Bälter, & Mavroudi, 2018).

Further, many of the SNA studies were conducted in the context of the Learning Management System (LMS) or content management system (Cela et al., 2015), which was a more closed environment compared to the Personal Learning Environment (PLE) premised social media (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012; Wu, 2015, 2017; Wu & Cheng, 2019). The differences in media where interactivity occurs may also contribute to distinct interaction and learning patterns due to the nature of the media (Wu, Yang, Liao, & Nian, 2021). Therefore, the constraints of the current SNA literature, including limitations in theoretical support, the homogeneous medium where the data for SNA is collected, the constraints in the diversity of the network modes, and the lack of associations about the SNA measures with learning outcomes, need further systematic investigation.

1.1. Research questions and the significance of the study
This study intends to fill the gaps in current SNA studies to provide theoretical and practical implications for fostering students' online collaborative learning. In light of the lack of theoretical basis constraint, we grounded our study on the theory of problem-based learning (Hmelo-Silver, 2004) to test the effect of the question-oriented problem-solving (QOPS) approach on the development and interaction of an online learning community using the SNA over an 18-week Advanced Statistics course. The development of online learning communities has been central to enhancing students' learning progress (Dawson, 2010). Mainly, the formation of learning community is regarded as a collective means of knowledge creation via the interaction among community members to support individual and collective learning (Lin, Lin, & Huang, 2008). Specifically, community members' active participation and mutual interaction are indices for the development of online learning communities. Using an integrated problem-based learning strategies (e.g., blended learning, scaffolding, collective PBL, concept-mapping, learning portfolio), Yeh (2010) revealed that the PBL strategies facilitated the formation of preservice teachers' online learning community, via her analysis of students' online discussion and learning portfolios. Further, Barber, King, and Buchanan (2015) found more enhanced learner autonomy, student engagement and motivation, and considerable teacher-learner role shift after they implemented PBL with a supported learning community in an undergraduate course. These studies indicated that PBL strategies may promote the development of online communities and have the potential to shift the instruction from a teacher-centered paradigm to a student-centered paradigm. Nevertheless, the analytical strategies used by the studies were mainly content analysis, which was relatively time-consuming and confined to subjective interpretation (Bos & Tarnai, 1999) and cannot quantify the degree of participant interaction and community formation. Instead, the SNA is a flexible and objective tool in modeling individual-level and network-level interactivity among and within networks of participants and artifacts. Researchers have used SNA to identify the instructor's role or detect leadership in peer discussion in association with the online community formation (Ouyang & Scharber, 2017; Xie, Di Tosto, Lu, & Cho, 2018). Thus, the novelty of this study is that we harness the SNA strength to model the dynamics of the learning community from the beginning to the end of the course and investigate how the instructional team's role and the interaction patterns over time are aligned with the implementation of QOPS activities and scaffolds.

Regarding the diversity constraint of the network modes, we examine the participant-participant interaction in a one-mode SNA and participant-artifact interaction in a two-mode SNA. The participant-participant interaction can inform how each individual exchanges information with the peer or instructor, e.g., a peripheral, central, or coordinating role (de Laat, Lally, Lipponen, & Simons, 2007; Xie et al., 2018). Meanwhile, it can also provide evidence for the instructors' role change as they implement their QOPS strategies and scaffolds gradually. Moreover, the use of the two-mode participant-artifact interaction can inform the association among the members, or what the common topics the community members are interacting with under the QOPS activities. Empirical evidence has shown that learners' discussion of cognitive contents better predicted their learning performance than their social or non-cognitive interaction (Romero, López, Luna, & Ventura, 2013; Wu, Hsiao, & Nian, 2020). As for the lack of associations about the SNA measures with the learning outcomes, we construct univariate correlation analyses to predict students' learning outcomes based on their SNA measures. Specifically, we asked the following research questions:

RQ1: How does the online learning community evolve with the QOPS pedagogical design?

RQ2: How do the instructional team's roles and some exemplary learners' roles change with the QOPS pedagogy over the 18-week course (as reflected by their centrality measures)?

RQ3: Under the QOPS pedagogy, what topics of posts do learners interact with (two-mode SNA)?

RQ4: How are the participant-participant and participant-artifact interactions associated with students' learning outcomes, including their homework, quizzes, final project, written exams, and final course grades, as reflected by their overall and stratified associations with the one-mode, two-mode and projected one-mode SNA measures?

By targeting the constraints of the current SNA research, this study contributes to the development of the SNA paradigm in modeling participant interaction and community formation under the QOPS pedagogical design. First, the application of both interaction-based (one-mode) and association-based (two-mode) relational ties provides more insights for the relationship among participants and artifacts (i.e., discussion topics) with the implementation of the QOPS strategies. Second, beyond reporting the SNA measures and visual inspection of the sociogram, correlation analyses were constructed between learning performance and the SNA measures to examine how learner interactions were associated with their performance under the QOPS pedagogy. Third, unstructured social media data was collected from a Facebook learning group for the SNA, which extends the application of SNA on a more dynamic and messy data structure to investigate online community development with the QOPS activities. Finally, the longitudinal design and alignment of theory-driven QOPS activities/scaffolds can inform instructional practices to facilitate student learning in the hybrid classroom.

2. Theoretical underpinning
2.1. The problem-based learning approach and the learning of advanced statistics
This study is grounded on the pedagogy of problem-based learning (PBL) for statistics teaching and learning. PBL is experience-based learning that is designed to help students learn in an ill-structured scenario for practical, authentic problem-solving. According to Hmelo-Silver (2004), in PBL, students collaborate in groups to identify resources that are needed to solve the problem while instructors work as facilitators in scaffolding students' problem-solving processes. PBL starts by presenting the problem scenario by the instructor. Next, students analyze the formation of the problem to identify facts and knowledge associated with the problem situation so that they can establish their representation of the problem and have a deeper understanding of the scenario. Then, students propose possible solutions, where students evaluate the gap between the current state and the desired state of their knowledge level needed to address the problem. Knowing the knowledge gap can prompt students for self-directed learning (SDL) to fill their knowledge deficiency and determine their learning issues.

With SDL, students create their learning path and select the materials they want to learn based on their identified knowledge deficiency. In the meanwhile, they applied their newly learned knowledge to evaluate the hypothesis generated for the problem solution and reflect on the abstract knowledge they gained. If the process cannot meet the problem specification and fail to address the ill-structured problem; then, they will restart to assess facts associated with the problem scenario and repeat the process.

However, criticisms about PBL arise, pointing to its minimal guidance on students' learning (Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006). Though students may be delighted with the autonomy-supportive element in PBL/or their choice to select their learning materials and discussion issues, many feel frustrated with the uncertainty regarding the selection of materials for learning (Wijnia, Loyens, & Derous, 2011). Thus, providing an adequate course structure with both autonomy-controlling (e.g., prescribed learning topics) and autonomy-supportive elements (e.g., choices in fellow students for collaborative assignment and the topic of the project) may maintain and enhance students' motivation in learning. In this study, we adopted a PBL approach for students to learn advanced statistics for real-world analytical problem-solving. We included both autonomy-controlling (e.g., preview materials, mini-lectures, quiz) and autonomy-supportive elements (e.g., choices in fellow students for collaborative assignment and the project topics) in an Advanced Statistics course to assist the student in the PBL.

2.2. Scaffolding and help-seeking in PBL
Besides autonomy-controlling and autonomy-supportive elements, researchers suggested that PBL is involved with different forms of scaffolding, including direct instruction to present essential information for students to use in their problem-solving and investigation (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007). Scaffolds are created to enhance students' learning through various forms of support delivered by the instructor, software tools, curricula, or other resources (Lee, 2021; Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005). In PBL, scaffolding helps learners to break down the task and make it more manageable within their zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1987). Specifically, Puntambekar and Kolodner (2005) showed that the design of scaffolding should be distributed across the course materials and sessions, with any possible tool (e.g., script, educational software, or platform) or agent (e.g., instructors, learners themselves, and peer). For example, scaffolds have been used as collaboration scripts to structure complex tasks in university students' online reading (Lee, 2015, 2018b). Researchers also used scaffolds as cross-table note-taking to enhance students' perceptual relevance and top-down reading process in selecting and organizing the online search information (Wu, 2020, Wu and Xie, 2018), and as pedagogical agents to prompt students' evaluation on prior knowledge, current comprehension, and content relevancy (Lee, 2021; Trevors, Duffy, & Azevedo, 2014). The instructor can also dynamically change her role as observer, guide, collaborator, or facilitator to provide scaffolds in students' online discussion (Ouyang & Scharber, 2017). Through skillful scaffolding, teachers can guide students to express their thoughts or identify the gap of their knowledge; they not only redirect students' attention to obtain the knowledge and skills needed for the learning goal but also help them realize why it should be done that way without directly telling them the answer (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2006).

Help-seeking can be regarded as an act of requesting on-demand scaffolds (Wu, 2021). Regarding the help-seeking process, learners may first become aware of the need for help; then, they decide to seek help and identify potential helpers by expressing their difficulties in a suitable way to elicit help; finally, they evaluate help-seeking results and determine if they need to request further help or identify other helpers (Aleven, Stahl, Schworm, Fischer, & Wallace, 2003; R. S.; Newman, 1994). Therefore, learners' help-seeking reflected their metacognition and regulation skills, whereby signaling their understanding of the knowledge deficiency as well as their motivational and cognitive engagement to bridge the gap (Aleven et al., 2003; Ryan & Pintrich, 1997). Specifically, learners' help-seeking behaviors are associated with their achievement goals; students with task-focused goals are more inclined to seek help in order to gain insight, knowledge, and skills in problem-solving while those with extrinsic goals for receiving reward or avoiding punishment stay away from asking for help (Ryan & Pintrich, 1997). Help avoidance, defined as “not seeking help when help use would appear to be beneficial for learning,” (p. 214) was related with poor learning; nevertheless, researchers assumed that help avoidance might be dependent upon learners' knowledge level, with those near the mastery level performing better when given fewer hints (Aleven, Roll, McLaren, & Koedinger, 2016). Therefore, instead of giving learners too many hints/help via automated feedbacks and causing undesired help abuse (Aleven et al., 2016), learner-initiated help-seeking behavior may be more reflective of students' learning needs.

In PBL or other related learning, e.g., inquiry-based learning, students may need scaffolds/help in different aspects, such as to make sense of the learning materials or concepts, to understand the process of learning and task structure, or to reflect on and articulate ideas during learning (Quintana et al., 2004). Help plays a role that functions in a system to support background information and hints for students to actively work in an ill-structured authentic problem (Aleven et al., 2003). Thus, instructors need to create a learning environment where students will not feel threatened to ask for help and can be provided with adequate help if needed. In this study, we create a private Facebook statistic learning group for students to share information, discuss course content, and ask for help, …etc., in a computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environment. We also carefully design our instructional components, e.g., formative assessment via Kahoot! (a student response system, SRS) and question/problem-based assignments and final projects, to engage and scaffold students' in statistics learning. Notably, we examined how the design of the statistics instructional components can help student's social interaction as well as motivational and cognitive engagement in statistics learning via SNA. Below we reviewed the literature concerning SNA measures with student outcomes.

2.3. The use of SNA measures to describe and infer CSCL research
2.3.1. Using SNA measures to describe the learning community
The use of SNA reveals the diversity of students' learning in the productive CSCL environment, where learners and instructors interact with one another and with the artifacts of instructional and technological components via the network or individual SNA measures. The centrality measures are the primary individual SNA measures, which usually include degree, betweenness, and closeness. The individual-level measures can identify active learners, peripheral, central, coordinating, or leading actors (de Laat et al., 2007; Xie et al., 2018) as well as provide evidence for instructors' role as guide, facilitator, or observer (de Laat et al., 2007; Ouyang & Scharber, 2017) via the individual centrality measures. The network-level measures can depict the state or development of community formation. The commonly used network-level measures may include reciprocity, density, transitivity, components, and global clustering coefficient (GCC), which can evaluate the interactivity and cohesiveness of a network (e.g., Ergün & Usluel, 2016; Ullrich, Borau, & Stepanyan, 2010, pp. 432–437). Empirically, researchers showed that the learning community with instructors scaffolding the online discussion had high scores of reciprocity and mutual dyad ratio as well as high density, components, and global clustering coefficient, suggesting that the instructor and students formed an interactive and cohesive community in online discussion (Ouyang & Scharber, 2017). In this study, we included both individual- and network-level measures to evaluate the development of the QOPS statistics learning community and to investigate the instructional team's role and students' role over time.

2.3.2. Using SNA measures to infer students' learning outcomes
The review of CSCL studies with SNA showed that SNA measures are related to learner outcomes in terms of the cognitive, metacognitive, social, and motivational aspects (Dado & Bodemer, 2017). Specifically, Siqin, van Aalst, and Chu (2015) investigated undergraduate students' fixed group collaboration and opportunistic collaboration and found learners' betweenness centrality was correlated with their participation in both phases and their domain knowledge learning during opportunistic collaboration. Cho, Gay, Davidson, and Ingraffea (2007) showed that those who had established a close relationship with all other members in the pre-existing network were less inclined to form new ties in the later periods; however, they tended to have better final grades. Similarly, researchers also found that the degree, closeness, and betweenness centralities were associated with the quality and volume of learners' work and their final grades (Putnik et al., 2016). Moreover, students' outdegree centrality was negatively related with tutor support suggesting that as students' received more support from the tutors, they tend to have fewer outbound messages (Zafar, Safdar, & Malik, 2014); nevertheless, higher individual outdegree predicts better student achievement when students act as the central information source (Reychav, Raban, & McHaney, 2018). Besides, students with high levels of intrinsic motivation to know had a higher degree centrality and were in the center of the discussion (Rienties, Tempelaar, Van den Bossche, Gijselaers, & Segers, 2009). In this study, we will apply the SNA measures to examine how the QOPS approach would associate with students' diverse learning outcomes.

2.3.3. The two-mode SNA for participant-artifact interactions
Besides the study of network interactivity among human actors (e.g., Claros, Cobos, & Collazos, 2016; Marcos-García et al., 2015), researchers also used SNA to illustrate the human and non-human interactivity in the two-mode network, also referred to as bipartite or affiliation networks (Borgatti & Everett, 1997; Latapy, Magnien, & Vecchio, 2008). For example, Lotsari, Verykios, Panagiotakopoulos, and Kalles (2014) built a two-mode network on understanding the discussion threads that each student participated in and how many different students participated in the same thread. They also derived terms from the discussion forum and connected them with the number of posts to form a network of knowledge artifacts. This analytical approach enabled the authors to understand what the important topics of the course are via their qualitative analysis. Rehm, Littlejohn, and Rienties (2018), on the other hand, examine wiki users' editing behavior on predefined topics and the wiki sites that they contributed to, which may have implications for professional development from informal learning.

Reviews of SNA research showed that most SNA studies belong to the one-mode network analysis (Dado & Bodemer, 2017). Though the one-mode network analysis can measure the communication-based interaction among nodes of the same type (e.g., human actors only), the two-mode network can assess more diverse relational ties beyond communication involving two or more types of nodes such as between students and resources/conversations (e.g., Casquero, Ovelar, Romo, Benito, & Alberdi, 2016). However, most of the two-mode SNA studies only described the distribution of the sociogram or reported the descriptive statistics of the SNA measures (e.g., Marcos-García et al., 2015; Tervakari et al., 2012) without further elaborating on how the different dimensions within a relational tie are associated with student outcomes. In this study, we applied both one-mode and two-mode network analyses to study the participant-participant and participant-artifact interaction. We investigated how the human actors are connected with the knowledge artifacts on the Facebook discussion and how the quantity of discussion and the content/topic of discussion is associated with their learning outcomes under the QOPS pedagogy via the SNA approach.

3. Method
3.1. Participants and data collection
Twenty-three graduate students (12 females, 52.17%) from an Advanced Statistics course, along with the instructor and two teaching assistants, participated in this study. The instructor has more than five years of Advanced Statistics teaching experience in higher education. Two teaching assistants have taken the same course a year earlier than the current cohort; thus, they served as the role of more knowledgeable others (MKO) in the class. As an extension of the face-to-face classroom meeting, the instructor created a Facebook group for students to ask questions, share information, and help each other in statistics learning. Although the instructor encouraged students to ask questions if they have questions about their learning, no posting and replying requirements were imposed on students' Facebook participation. Throughout the 18-week class, there were 704 messages, including 118 posts and 586 comments. Fig. 1 visualized the number of posts, comments, and total messages posted by each participant over the 18 weeks. We used the Rfacebook package (Barbera, Piccirilli, Geisler, & van Atteveldt, 2017) in the R program to acquire students' posting and replying data with specific information about authors of the posts, time post created, the content of the post, and the number of posts.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (760KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Visualization of each participant’ posts, comments, and messages within the Facebook statistical learning group over the 18-week semester. The y-axis represents the number of Facebook artifacts, and x-axis represents weeks within a semester.

Note. Node N–W: final grade 0–69 (failed, light blue); I–M: 70–79 (orange); A–H: 80–100 (red); X&Y: TA (light green); Z: teacher (dark green). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

3.2. Course design and alignment with the questions-oriented problem-solving approach
The design of the Advanced Statistics course was based on PBL to develop a series of QOPS activities aligning the phases of a PBL cycle, as shown in the left-hand side of Fig. 2. The primary goal of this course is to help students grasp the main statistics concepts covered in the course and to apply the knowledge and skills learned in solving a real-world problem at the end of the semester. Thus, the final project serves as an integrated measure of students' collaboration, knowledge, and skills in problem solving. As a result, completing the final project becomes the overarching activity that extends from the beginning to the end of the semester, during which diverse QOPS scaffolds (e.g., SRS via Kahoot!, homework assignments, midterm exam, and final exam) are distributed across the semester to facilitate students' self-regulation of their learning. Mainly, in phase 1, the course requirement to complete a final project involving hands-on statistical analysis for solving a real-world problem is presented as the overarching PBL problem scenario in the course. Students have the full autonomy to choose their fellow students for the group assignment and the topic of the final project. However, in order to achieve that goal, students will need to go through a series of PBL processes iteratively over the semester. In phase 2, students need to identify facts and knowledge associated with the problem situation (e.g., what kinds of statistics knowledge and skills are required to solve their problem). They will learn various statistics concepts and analytical techniques over time. Then, in phase 3, students would work together as a group to generate hypotheses for the problem solution and decide which may be the appropriate statistical methods to solve their problem. In phase 4, they evaluate the deficiency of their knowledge, prompt themselves for self-directed learning (SDL) to fill their knowledge gap, and determine their learning issues.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (629KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The framework of problem-based learning with scaffolded question-oriented problem-solving instructional designs and Learner's explicit on-demand scaffolds.

For the first four phases of the PBL, the instructor, along with two teaching assistants, will implement a series of scaffolded PBL materials and activities to assist students' SDL and problem-solving. As shown on the upper-right-hand side of Fig. 2, these QOPS activities and materials included the final project (presented as the ill-structured problem scenario), preview materials and direct instruction, formative and summative assessments (SRS via Kahoot!, midterm exam, and final exam) and homework assignments. Notably, in addition to autonomy-controlling elements such as pre-assigned reading materials, the instructor will have direct instruction on a specific statistics topic each week, followed by the game-based formative assessment of the newly-taught statistics concepts via the student response system (i.e. Kahoot!). Students were also given problem-oriented homework to deepen their understanding of their statistics concepts and analytical skills using the R program.

Examples of in-class Kahoot! and homework questions can be seen in Table 1. As more comprehensive assessments, the midterm and final exams are similar to the homework assignments, which evaluate students' ability to apply their knowledge for transfer and problem-solving. The final project is presented as the overarching problem scenario, which is an integrated assessment that requires students to work as a team to solve an ill-structured real problem, including formulating the research question/hypothesis, collecting one's own data, analyzing data with appropriate statistical methods, interpreting and providing an alternative explanation of the statistical results. These designs are scaffolded QOPS activities as well as formative and summative assessments for students' statistics learning, which can help the instructor to identify specific learning needs, adapt teaching strategies, and provide individualized instructions and feedbacks. Meanwhile, they may also enhance students' metacognition and epistemic cognition as a learner and of what they learn/know on a regular basis (Clark, 2012; Lee, 2018a).


Table 1. Examples of in-class Kahoot! and homework question as PLB scaffolds.



Besides the scaffolded instructional activities, the instructor created a Facebook group for students to share information, discuss statistical questions, and ask for help or request on-demand scaffolds. Learner's explicit on-demand scaffolds are illustrated on the bottom-right-hand side in Fig. 2. The Facebook group is an extension of the face-to-face classroom setting, which allows students to apply their newly learned knowledge to evaluate their solution to the small or major problems (phase 5) through self- or peer-evaluation and reflect on the abstract knowledge they gained (phase 6). For example, a student may summarize his or her thoughts about a statistical concept and ask for others' input or clarification on the Facebook group. If his or her thoughts (or the proposed solution) cannot address the ill-structured problem, he or she may have feedback from the peer students to restart assessing facts associated with the problem scenario and repeat the PBL process.

3.3. SNA measures
This study included both individual-level and network-level SNA measures. The individual-level measures can reflect the participant-participant interactivity to inform the different participant roles and interaction patterns (i.e., one-mode SNA measures) as well as how participants are connected via shared discussion topics (i.e., two-mode SNA measures) with the implementation of QOPS scaffolds. In the one-mode SNA, each participant (i.e., a student or a member of the instructional team) represented a node or an actor in the sociogram. The relational ties were communication-based with direct exchange of information between participants. The ties connecting two or more nodes represented participants' unidirectional or bidirectional interaction to comment on a posted message or reply a comment in the Facebook group under the QOPS approach.

In the two-mode SNA, there were two sets of nodes, one for the participants (set 1) and the other for the artifacts (set 2, i.e., the common discussion topics in the Facebook groups). The relational ties were associated-based, i.e., participants' interaction with the same objects. The ties, then, connected participants to the discussion topics they have contributed to so that we could examine how participants interacted via shared discussion topics with the implementation of QOPS scaffolds at different periods.

The individual-level measures consisted of centrality measures such as degree, closeness, and betweenness. The degree measures can further be divided into indegree or outdegree measures. Indegree describes the number of participants a focal participant receives interactions from, while outdegree denotes the number of participants a focal participant initiates interactions with (Costenbader & Valente, 2003). Closeness quantifies how far away (via direct or indirect relationships) a focal participant is from the other participants in the network, which is defined as the inverse of the sum of the shortest path lengths between a focal participant and all other network participants (Freeman, 1978). Thus, closeness centralities are defined in terms of a focal participant's distance to all other network participants, while degree centralities are defined in terms of the number of participants a focal participant interacts with. The two centralities are highly correlated each other (Li, Li, Van Mieghem, Stanley, & Wang, 2015; Oldham et al., 2019; Valente, Coronges, Lakon, & Costenbader, 2008). In our study, we found similar strong correlations between in- or out-centrality measures. To maintain the result succinctly, we kept the in- and out-degree measures to inform the directionalities of the interactions participants receive or initiate. Meanwhile, closeness was reported to inform a participant’s distance relative to all the other participants in the network. Moreover, the betweenness measure assesses the extent an individual serving as a mediator between two participants with the shortest paths (Freeman, 1978). The individual-level SNA measures can provide insights as to how learners' roles and the instructors' roles change with the implementation of QOPS pedagogy over time.

The network-level SNA measures can delineate the state and development of the Statistics learning community with the implementation of the QOPS pedagogy. We investigated the effect of QOPS scaffolds on the formation of the online learning community over the three different time periods using the network-level SNA measures, which may consist of density, reciprocity, transitivity, components, General Clustering Coefficients (GCC), and cliques. Density is computed as the number of actual connections over the number of all potential connections in a network, which can reveal the connectivity and user engagement level of a network (Lehmann, Lalmas, Baeza-Yates, & Yom-Tov, 2013). Reciprocity is associated with the pairwise relationship between two nodes (i.e., the ratio of mutual dyads over all possible dyads) while transitivity and GCC are involved relationship among three nodes (i.e., transitivity: the ratio of transitive triads over all possible triads; GCC: the fraction of closed triplets over total triplets) (Lehmann et al., 2013; Louch, 2000). Components can be categorized into strong components and weak components. The former is a subset of a graph where there is a node reachable from every other node, while the latter is a directed subgraph that is unreachable from other nodes/actors of a graph or subgraph (Otte & Rousseau, 2002). Finally, a clique is a subset of a network where some nodes are more closely connected than they are to other nodes of the network (Otte & Rousseau, 2002).

3.4. Data analysis
We conducted social network analysis to model the dynamics of the statistics learning community and examine the participant-participant and participant-artifact interaction in one-mode and two-mode SNAs using igraph (Csárdi & Nepusz, 2006) and tnet (Opsahl, 2009) packages on R platform (R Core Team, 2018). Descriptive statistics of the SNA measures were reported to inform the development of the learning community and to identify the instructional team and students' role. Besides, correlation analyses were applied to investigate the association between SNA measures and student outcomes.

For the two-mode SNA, we performed conventional content analysis (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005) and categorized 118 posts into a set of distinct topics. The distinct topics represented the artifacts that participants left on the Facebook group so that we can examine how participants interacted via shared discussion topics. Three researchers reviewed all the posts together and derived codes from the posts during data analysis. Thus, knowledge generated from the content analysis is based on the actual data in the posts with all researchers' consensus to gain a thorough insight into the data. We intended not only to understand how learners interact with one another and with the instructors but also to examine how they interact with the knowledge artifacts on the Facebook group.

For the ease of comparing and describing the interactivity between the participants and artifacts, we transformed the two-mode network through projection, which is performed by connecting two nodes in the same set (e.g., learner A and B) if they are linked to the same node of the other set of nodes (e.g., discussion topic 1) (M. E. Newman, 2001). With these projected one-mode measures, we are able to examine how participants are connected through specific discussion topics as well as how discussion topics are linked through the same participants.

We divided the SNA into three distinct periods based on the beginning weeks, weeks to the midterm exam, and the weeks to the final project, namely Week 1–5, Week 6–9, and Week 10–18. The first period covered topics including the review of descriptive statistics, t-test, ANOVA, and second period covered ANCOVA, Factorial, and Repeated Measures ANOVAs, which were also the topics included in the midterm exam. The third period covered topics including Chi-squared tests, correlation, and regression analysis, path analysis, mediation and moderation analysis, which are the topics included in the final exam. Throughout the three periods, Kahoot! quizzes were given on a weekly basis. During the 2nd period through the 3rd period, homework assignments were given in the form of problem-solving tasks.

4. Result
4.1. The evolution of the learning community: the one-mode network, the weighted two-mode and projected one-mode network over time
Fig. 3 presented the participant-participant interaction network across three periods. The three green circles are the instructor (Z in dark green circle) and two teaching assistants (X & Y in light green circles). The other circles are the 23 learners. Seven high-achieving students with final grades more than 80 were illustrated in red, five students with satisfactory performance between 70 and 79 were put in orange, and ten students who failed with grades below 69 were displayed in light blue. As shown in Fig. 3, the participant-participant networks were getting more connected as more participants joined the network from the 1st to the 3rd period of SNA (i.e., five unconnected circles in the 1st period decreased to one unconnected circle in the 2nd and 3rd periods.) Meanwhile, the instructor (Z) gradually moved away from the center of the network as the semester progressed.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (533KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Participant-participant interaction networks across three periods.

Note. Red circle: Student with final grades from 80 to 100 points; Orange circle: Student with final grades from 70 to 79 points; Light blue circle: Student with final grades below 70 (failed); Dark green circle: Instructor (Z); Light green circle: Teaching assistants (X & Y). . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

Table 2 presented the weighted one-mode, weighted two-mode, and the projected one-mode network measures across three time periods in a semester. As we can see from the weighted one-mode measures, learners and the instructional team formed an interactive network as indicated by moderate to a high degree of reciprocity (0.638–0.667) and transitivity (0.386–0.518) across three periods. Nevertheless, the level of engagement and cohesiveness of the network was only small to moderate, as reflected by low scores of density (0.102–0.155) and medium scores of GCC (0.387–0.474). However, as we observed the weighted two-mode and projected one-mode measures, the density (0.533–0.825), GCC (0.541–0.961), reciprocity (100% across three periods), and transitivity (0.892–0.948) were higher than those of the weighted one-mode counterparts, suggesting the network became more interactive and cohesive through shared discussion topics.


Table 2. The one- and two-mode SNA measures in a hybrid Statistics course across periods.

W1 – W5	W6 – W9 (Midterm Exam)	W10 – end (Final Project)
M	SD	min	max	M	SD	min	max	M	SD	min	max
Weighted One-Mode Network
Node-level Measure
Degree	7.62	7.05	0.00	20.00	8.08	7.27	0.00	28.00	5.31	5.13	0.00	20.00
Indegree	3.81	3.87	0.00	11.00	4.04	4.62	0.00	19.00	2.65	3.17	0.00	12.00
Outdegree	3.81	3.35	0.00	10.00	4.04	3.23	0.00	12.00	2.65	2.13	0.00	8.00
Closeness	.0035	.0010	.0015	.0043	.0041	.0008	.0015	.0048	.0030	.0005	.0015	.0034
Betweenness	18.02	23.33	0.00	77.17	24.03	34.15	0.00	140.5	26.10	40.47	0.00	167.5
Network-level Measure
Density	.146				.155				.102			
Mutual dyads	.102				.105				.068			
Asymmetric dyads	.102				.114				.077			
Reciprocity	.667				.648				.638			
Transitivity	.518				.401				.386			
Opsahl's GCC	.474				.402				.387			
# of clique	33				35				24			
# of strong component	9				9				11			
# of weak component	6				2				2			
Weighted Two-Mode Network
Two-mode Measure
# of media type	2.46	1.82	0.00	5.00	2.92	1.52	0.00	5.00	2.46	1.30	0.00	5.00
Density	.615				.731				.615			
Opsahl's GCC	.708				.708				.541			
Projected One-mode Measure
Degree (* Outdegree)	13.85	7.40	0.00	20.00	21.15	5.05	0.00	24.00	21.46	4.97	0.00	24.00
Indegree	9.35	6.60	0.00	18.53	10.19	4.96	0.00	16.84	7.54	5.38	0.00	16.56
Closeness	.0298	.0101	.0058	.0405	.0224	.0075	.0042	.0303	.0139	.0051	.0056	.0182
Betweenness	4.88	11.93	0.00	50.00	7.19	14.39	0.00	56.35	7.85	20.84	0.00	101.0
Density	.533				.814				.825			
Mutual dyads	.554				.846				.858			
Asymmetric dyads	0				0				0			
Reciprocity	1.000				1.000				1.000			
Transitivity	.892				.937				.948			
Opsahl's GCC	.936				.961				.923			
# of clique	9				5				3			
# of strong component	6				2				2			
# of weak component	6				2				2			
FB(interval)
# of engaged Students	18/23				22/23				22/23			
# of post from teacher	8				4				3			
# of post from TA	8				11				18			
# of post from student	24				21				21			
# of comment from teacher	10				4				5			
# of comment from TA	34				28				38			
# of comment from student	159				197				111			
Total # of posts	40				36				42			
Total # of comments	203				229				154			
Academic Performance
Kahoot!(interval)	59.05	8.74	41.90	77.02	55.45	16.32	25.00	85.00	62.33	9.33	41.67	82.61
Homework (cumulative)					79.78	21.77	0.00	95.00	77.36	22.46	0.00	96.25
Midterm exam					68.79	20.69	20.00	96.00	68.79	20.69	20.00	96.00
Term project									86.63	9.70	64.16	97.49
Final exam									64.86	20.39	24.00	96.00
Grade									68.92	18.15	19.62	89.06
QOPS Instructional Designs
Kahoot!	Unit 1~ Unit 4	Unit 5~Unit 6	Unit 7 ~ Unit 11
HW		HW1 & HW2	HW3 & HW4
Paper-Pencil exam		Midterm Exam	Final Exam
Term Project			Project
Note. *For Projected One-mode Measures, Degree shares the same value as outdegree.

Degree: Total number of connections a participant has in the network.

Indegree: Number of ties that are directed towards a participant.

Outdegree: Number of ties that originate from a participant.

Closeness: How close a participant is to others on average.

Incloseness: Calculated from indegree, the speed of receiving information.

Outcloseness: Calculated from outdegree, the speed of spreading information.

Betweenness: How a participant serves as a mediator in the shortest paths between two participants.

Density: Ratio of the number of existing ties to the number of all possible ties in a network.

Mutual dyads: Ratio of the number of pairs with mutual connections to the number of all possible mutual connections.

Asymmetric dyads: Ratio of the number of pairs with non-mutual connections to the number of all possible mutual onnections.

Reciprocity: Ratio of mutual dyads to non-null dyads in a network.

Transitivity: Ratio of transitive triads to all triads in a network.

Opsahl's GCC: Tendency of participants to cluster together.

Average path length: Average number of shortest paths for all possible pairs of participants.

# of clique: Number of subgraphs that the shortest paths for pairs of participants are one.

# of strong component: Number of subgraphs of participants connected with directed ties.

# of weak component: Number of subgraphs of connected participants.

# in each component: Average number of participants in each component.

Besides, from the 1st period to the 2nd period, students contributed more comments in the learning group (i.e., # of comments from students increased from 159 to 197). For the weighted one-mode measures, ratios of mutual dyads (0.102 → 0.105) and asymmetric dyads (0.102 → 0.114) slightly increased from the 1st period to the 2nd period, suggesting that with the instructional intervention (e.g., Kahoot!, Homework 1&2 and Midterm exam), both learners' unidirectional and bidirectional interaction increased. The increase of asymmetric dyads from the 1st period to the 2nd period co-occurred with the drop of reciprocity from .667 to .648, implying that some learners replied their peer's posts or comments but may not receive further responses probably due to their reliable or meaningful replies, whereby requiring no further responses or interactions. Similar patterns can be seen in the drop of transitivity (0.518 → 0.401) from the 1st to the 2nd period. Meanwhile, the number of weak components decreased from 6 to 2, indicating that fewer learners were isolated from other learners. As for the projected one-mode measures, ratios of mutual dyads (0.554–0.846) were higher than those of their one-mode counterparts, and the ratio of asymmetric dyads was dropped to zero. Those results indicated that participants contributed more and more to each other equally through posting and commenting on the shared discussion topics.

From Week 10 on, learners focused more on their final exam and the integrative term project. Each student was asked by the instructor to post their tentative topic of the final project to have feedback from their peer students. As a result, for the weighted one-mode measures, we observed that the number of strong components increased from 9 to 11 from the previous period with reducing ratios of asymmetric dyads (0.114 → 0.077), showing that more subgroups of learners can be reached by one other directly in the group. Moreover, the number of cliques decreased from 35 to 24 with decreasing ratios of mutual dyads (0.105 → 0.068), implying that there were fewer closely connected subsets of learners because discussion may be more likely to take place for learners of a compact group for the project. Nevertheless, if viewed from the projected one-mode network, the number of strong and weak components both reduced to 2, and the number of cliques reduced to 3, showing that learners were more closely connected if they were linked through the same discussion topics.

4.2. Instructors' and learners' roles as indicated by individual SNA measures
To investigate the change of the network dynamics, we examined participant-participant interaction via the one-mode SNA. Table 3 presented the heat map of the individual SNA measures from the participant-participant one-mode social network. In the 1st period, the instructor(Z) had eight posts to establish the interaction protocol and to demonstrate the interaction in the Facebook learning group while TA(Y) and TA(X) had 6 and 2 posts, respectively. However, as reflected by the indegree, closeness, and betweenness centrality, learners are more inclined to reply TA(Y)'s posts or comments. TA(Y) took the role of a more knowledgeable other (MKO) and tended to initiate an interaction, have close interaction with other learners, and serve as the bridge in the discussion as evidenced by her highest indegree (36), outdegree (21), closeness (0.031), and betweenness centrality (61.8). On the other hand, Learner(E), one of the high-achievers, served as the coordinator role to mediate discussions or participate in arguments as indicated by her moderate level of indegree (24) and outdegree centrality (13) as well as second-highest level of closeness (0.031) and betweenness (53.3).


Table 3. Heat map of the participants' individual SNA measures across three periods.



In the 2nd period, more learners participated in interacting in the Facebook learning group (i.e., only one student did not post any comment in this period) to prepare for their written Midterm exam. TA(Y) continued to have replies and comments by learners and to serve as the intermediary role in the discussion, as shown by her highest indegree (45) and betweenness centrality (125.5). However, several high-achieving learners, such as Learners (B, G, H, C, F), were actively taking the lead in participating and influencing the discussion. For example, Learners(B) had the highest outdegree centrality (30) and the second-highest indegree (28), betweenness (70.7), and closeness centrality (0.027).

In the 3rd period, students' learning goals switched to prepare for their final term project. TA(Y) still had the highest indegree and the second-highest outdegree, closeness, and betweenness centrality. Meanwhile, high-achieving Learner(F) emerged as a leader to initiate interaction, encourage others, and take the bridge role in the discussion, as evidenced by her highest outdegree (23), closeness (0.029), and betweenness centrality (95) and second-highest indegree centrality (26).

Throughout the three periods, TA(X) and the instructor(Z) served as the facilitator role as they had moderate indegree, outdegree, betweenness, and closeness centrality (Reychav et al., 2018; Saqr, Fors, Tedre, & Nouri, 2018). In general, as the semester went, high-achievers tended to be actively engaged in the online learning group, as evidenced by their appearance on the top of Table 3 descendingly sorted by SNA measures. Meanwhile, low or satisfactory achievers were more likely to reply to others' messages but were less likely to initiate a discussion. For example, as a satisfactory performer, Learner(L) seldom initiated a discussion but mainly commented on others' messages, especially on TA(Y)'s message, which resulted in moderate to high values of indgree, outdegree, and closeness measures but very low values in betweenness for the last two periods. As one of the low-achievers, Learner(P) demonstrated a non-consistent pattern of online discussion. Learner(P) actively posted and commented in the 1st and 3rd period with high centrality values, but not in the 2nd period with pretty low centralities (e.g., the betweenness equals to 21 in the 1st period, 37 in the 3rd period, but 0 in the 2nd period.). As we took a closer look at Learner(P)'s messages, most were unrelated to the course and were more for socializing with classmates.

4.3. Learners' interaction with topics of posts
We conducted a series of two-mode SNA to investigate how participants have interacted through shared topics. First, 118 posts on the Facebook group were classified into six topics of discussion via the content analysis: Sharing Statistics Information (SSI), Reflection and Notes of statistics concepts (RN), Kahoot! quizzes (KQ), Help-Seeking on assignments (HS), Course Administrative Communication (CAC), and Final Project Display (FPD). The distribution of the messages to these topics over the three periods was illustrated in Fig. 4. For the 1st period, learners just started taking the Advanced Statistics course so sharing statistics information had the most posts and replies (#SSI1 = 111), followed by the discussion of reflection and notes of statistics concepts (#RN1 = 36) and course administrative communication (#CAC1 = 36). From the 2nd period, students had regular homework assignments and in-classroom formative assessments; thus, help-seeking on assignment (#HS2 = 126) and discussion of Kahoot! quizzes (#KQ2 = 65) had the most posts and replies. For the 3rd period, participants had more posts and replies to course administrative communication (#CAC3 = 99), followed by help-seeking on homework assignments (#HS3 = 39).

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (471KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Distribution of the replies to these topics over the three periods.

Note. SSI: Sharing Statistics Information; RN: Reflection and Notes of statistics concepts; KQ: Kahoot! quizzes; HS: Help-Seeking on assignments; CAC: Course Administrative Communication; FPD: Final Project Display.

Second, three two-mode SNAs were conducted to depict the networks of participants and topics of discussion interaction across three periods, as illustrated in Fig. 5. When projecting participants' interaction onto the one-mode weighted discussion topic network, we found that some discussion topics were in the more prominent and accessible position than others, and mediated the interaction among participants. Specifically, as shown in Table 4, sharing statistics information (SSI) had the highest degree, closeness, and betweenness while reflection and notes of statistics concept (RN) had the second-highest degree and closeness in the 1st period. Fig. 5 (Week 1–5) also reflected the same pattern, where there were thicker and denser lines connecting to SSI and RN. During the 2nd period, help-seeking had the highest degree and closeness as well as the highest betweenness, while Kahoot! quizzes had the second-highest degree and closeness as well as the same highest betweenness as help-seeking. The results were again reflected in Fig. 5 (Week 6–9) with thicker and denser lines connecting to HS and KQ. Finally, in the 3rd period, course administrative communication had the highest degree, closeness, and betweenness, while help-seeking had the second-highest degree, and the final project display had the second-highest closeness and betweenness. The same pattern was shown in Fig. 5 (Week 10-end) with thicker and denser lines connecting to CAC, HS, and FPD.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Participant-Topic interaction networks (Two-mode SNA) within the Facebook learning group across three periods.

Note. Six topics were placed as deep blue circles in the middle. The size of the circle was weighted by the degree measure. SSI: Sharing Statistics Information; RN: Reflection and Notes of statistics concepts; KQ: Kahoot! quizzes; HS: Help-Seeking on assignments; CAC: Course Administrative Communication; FPD: Final Project Display. . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)


Table 4. Number of participants in six discussion topics and projected one-mode centrality measures of participant-topic interaction networks (Two-mode SNA) across three periods.

W1–W5	W6–W9 (Midterm Exam)	W10-end (Final Project)
# of participant	Degree	Closeness	Betweenness	# of participant	Degree	Closeness	Betweenness	# of participant	Degree	Closeness	Betweenness
SSI	16	SSI	108	SSI	.5071	SSI	6	KQ	21	HS	119	HS	.1955	KQ	2	FPD	22	CAC	99	CAC	.1156	CAC	5
KQ	13	RN	36	RN	.3369	RN	0	HS	18	KQ	64	KQ	.1806	HS	2	CAC	17	HS	39	FPD	.1024	FPD	4
RN	12	CAC	36	KQ	.3342	KQ	0	RN	15	CAC	26	CAC	.1704	SSI	0	KQ	10	KQ	23	HS	.0997	SSI	0
CAC	12	KQ	32	CAC	.2713	FPD	0	CAC	12	SSI	23	SSI	.1238	RN	0	HS	8	FPD	16	KQ	.0991	RN	0
HS	11	HS	26	HS	.2405	HS	0	SSI	10	RN	20	RN	.1177	FPD	0	RN	4	SSI	8	SSI	.0525	KQ	0
FPD	0
FPD	0
FPD	.0000
CAC	0	FPD	0
FPD	0
FPD	.0000
CAC	0	SSI	3
RN	5
RN	.0467
HS	0
Note. SSI: Sharing Statistics Information; RN: Reflection and Notes of statistics concepts; KQ: Kahoot! quizzes; HS: Help-Seeking on assignments; CAC: Course Administrative Communication; FPD: Final Project Display.The reported values of Degree, Closeness, and Betweenness measures are weighted based on Opsahl, Agneessens and Skvoretz (2010), that is,  was set for the weighted values.

4.4. The overall correlation of the one-mode, projected one-mode, and the two-mode social network measures with student outcomes
Table 5 presented the correlations among student outcomes as well as the correlations of the SNA measures with student outcomes. Most student outcomes, including homework, Kahoot! quizzes, midterm exam, final exam, final project, and final course grades, were positively correlated with each other, as shown in bold at p < .05 across three periods. Moreover, several of the SNA measures had positive associations with student outcomes.


Table 5. Correlations among student outcomes as well as the correlations of the SNA measures with student outcomes.

W1–W5	W6–W9	W10-end
1	2	3	4	5	6	1	2	3	4	5	6	1	2	3	4	5	6
Performance outcome
1. HW	1						1						1					
2. Kahoot	.654**	1					.476*	1					.614**	1				
3. Midterm	.726**	.476*	1				.726**	.436*	1				.696**	.630**	1			
4. Final	.639**	.459*	.801**	1			.639**	.332	.801**	1			.669**	.546**	.801**	1		
5. Project	.775**	.489*	.747**	.579**	1		.775**	.192	.747**	.579**	1		.802**	.431*	.747**	.579**	1	
6. Grade	.808**	.510*	.906**	.938**	.760**	1	.808**	.382	.906**	.938**	.760**	1	.828**	.608**	.906**	.938**	.760**	1
One-mode measure
Indegree	.280	.131	.254	.294	.205	.350	.173	.034	.463*	.436*	.377	.459*	.284	-.027	.386	.220	.369	.341
Outdegree	.253	.129	.252	.300	.253	.364	.306	.083	.557**	.523*	.448*	.572**	.379	.075	.491*	.374	.424*	.470*
Closeness	.345	.131	.214	.293	.160	.388	.455*	.361	.449*	.479*	.405	.522*	.456*	.183	.385	.395	.419*	.438*
Betweenness	.230	.132	.279	.287	.200	.336	.215	.112	.508*	.439*	.365	.471*	.180	-.086	.284	.172	.221	.259
Projected one-mode measures
Degree	.283	.143	.291	.300	.273	.383	.285	.069	.489*	.454*	.436*	.510*	.377	.042	.458*	.345	.429*	.448*
Closeness	.287	.234	.344	.430*	.204	.475*	.562**	.257	.681**	.714**	.557**	.786**	.735**	.460*	.625**	.711**	.673**	.750**
Betweenness	.188	.026	.166	.136	.200	.203	.225	.024	.258	.290	.260	.322	.245	-.048	.207	.222	.197	.257
Two-mode measures
# of topic types	.366	.206	.379	.355	.242	.464*	.505*	.246	.505*	.548**	.496*	.636**	.623**	.282	.570**	.647**	.579**	.695**
Note. *p < .05; **p < .01.

For the one-mode weighted measures, students' indegree, outdegree, closeness, and betweenness were positively correlated with their midterm, final, and final course grades; additional positive correlations were found between closeness and homework as well as between outdegree and final project in the 2nd period. Students' outdegree was also positively associated with their midterm, final project, and final course grades, while closeness was positively related to homework, final project, and final course grades in the 3rd period.

For the projected one-mode weighted measures, closeness was associated with the final exam and final course grades in the 1st period. Students' degree and closeness centrality were positively related to their midterm, final, final project, and final course grades, while closeness was also positively correlated with homework in the 2nd period. Similarly, patterns of correlations were found in the 3rd period as the 2nd period, except that the association between degree and the final was not statistically significant, and that closeness was positively associated with Kahoot! quizzes in the 3rd period.

Students' two-mode degree, i.e., number of discussion topics they participated in, were associated with final course grades in the 1st period, with homework, midterm, final, final project, and final course grades in the 2nd period, and midterm, final, final project, and final course grades in the 3rd period.

4.5. The correlation of the projected one-mode social network measures with student outcomes by discussion topics
Table 6 presented the correlation of the projected one-mode weighted social network measures with student outcomes by discussion topics. The projected one-mode weighted SNA measures reflected how participants were connected through the same topic of discussion.


Table 6. Correlations among student outcomes as well as the correlations of the SNA measures with student outcomes.

W1–W5	W5–W9	W9-end
HW	Kahoot	Midterm	Final	Project	Grade	HW	Kahoot	Midterm	Final	Project	Grade	HW	Kahoot	Midterm	Final	Project	Grade
SSI
Degree	.172	.174	.141	.178	.248	.245	.237	.065	.326	.166	.283	.281	.183	-.062	.108	.158	.139	.165
Closeness	.189	.230	.357	.368	.229	.411	.212	-.021	.256	.263	.277	.324	.183	-.062	.108	.158	.139	.165
Betweenness	.152	.005	.034	-.042	.161	.055	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
RN
Degree	.184	.084	.287	.318	.141	.353	.262	.011	.080	.061	.176	.173	.159	-.037	-.068	.183	.046	.127
Closeness	.266	.142	.372	.370	.259	.433*	.318	.034	.109	.194	.186	.281	.157	-.012	-.066	.179	.020	.125
Betweenness	.062	.018	.218	.311	.085	.254	.102	-.089	-.019	-.090	.067	-.010	.135	-.103	.024	.150	.171	.133
KQ
Degree	.240	.155	.347	.460*	.220	.430*	.236	.067	.258	.330	.226	.341	.234	-.071	.188	.285	.298	.301
Closeness	.335	.115	.355	.448*	.321	.478*	.537**	.306	.620**	.684**	.521*	.755**	.268	.057	.276	.341	.271	.369
Betweenness	.052	.026	.193	.294	.076	.233	.135	.075	.210	.314	.159	.281	.183	-.062	.108	.158	.139	.165
HS
Degree	.268	-.082	.332	.123	.230	.266	.148	.035	.398	.339	.336	.372	.153	.000	.401	.187	.241	.282
Closeness	.297	.081	.425*	.272	.175	.378	.255	.236	.608**	.528**	.396	.561**	.294	.104	.504*	.422*	.349	.468*
Betweenness	.164	.014	.101	.065	.180	.135	.157	.039	.198	.235	.205	.248	.111	.157	.183	.158	.076	.172
CAC
Degree	.232	.038	.053	.038	.047	.127	.284	.087	.327	.336	.354	.377	.454*	.104	.394	.322	.475*	.429*
Closeness	.259	.187	.188	.199	.058	.270	.297	.076	.356	.464*	.393	.462*	.555**	.231	.590**	.551**	.598**	.616**
Betweenness	-.048	.009	-.358	-.010	-.310	-.152	.184	-.003	.098	.223	.222	.217	-.029	.136	.055	-.145	.244	-.095
FPD
Degree													.751**	.819**	.507*	.473*	.505*	.584**
Closeness													.751**	.819**	.507*	.473*	.505*	.584**
Note. *p < .05; **p < .01. SSI: sharing statistic information; RN: reflection & note; KQ: Kahoot! & quiz; HS: help-seeking & assignment; CAC: course administrative communication; FPD: final project display.

In the 1st period, we observed positive associations between students' closeness with their final course grades through the topic of reflection and note of statistics concepts. Meanwhile, positive associations were found for degree and closeness with scores of the final exam and final course grades through discussion of Kahoot! quizzes as well as for closeness with scores of the midterm exam through help-seeking on assignment.

In the 2nd period, closeness was positively associated with scores of homework, midterm, final, final project, and final course grades through discussion of Kahoot! quizzes, while closeness was also positively related to scores of midterm, final, and final course grades through help-seeking on assignment as well as with scores of final and final course grades through course administrative communication.

Similarly, in the 3rd period, closeness was positively correlated with scores of midterm, final, and final course grades through help-seeking on assignment. In addition, degree was positively associated with scores of homework, final project, and final course grades, while closeness was positively related to scores of homework, midterm, final, final project, and final course grades through course administrative communication. Lastly, degree and closeness were positively associated with all student outcomes in the 3rd period. The correlation coefficients with student outcomes were the same for degree and closeness. That is because one student did not post his proposal for his final project on Facebook, while the other 22 did. As a result, there would be only two distinct values within the degree or closeness centrality. Degree is the number of ties a node has while closeness is the inverse sum of shortest path's length; thus, when we computed the correlation coefficients for closeness and degree, the same factor in the nominator and denominator can be canceled out, leading to the same correlation coefficients between pairs of centrality measures and student outcomes. In this context, the Pearson correlation correlations were the point-biserial correlations, indicating that those who posted their final project proposals had better performance than the person who did not.

5. Discussion
This study advances the PBL literature with the QOPS approach and addresses several methodological and theoretical gaps in SNA studies to inform instructional and learning implications for teachers and students. The SNA methodological and theoretical gaps include failure to reflect the diverse actors and relational ties (i.e., only one-mode SNA) and being limited to descriptive reporting of SNA measures (Dado & Bodemer, 2017), as well as lack of theoretical basis for SNA studies (Viberg et al., 2018) and source constraints of the SNA data (Cela et al., 2015). Thus, we grounded the current study in PBL (Hmelo-Silver, 2004) to employ a series of QOPS activities throughout the 18-week course. We investigated how the implementation of the QOPS activities are associated with the development of the online learning community, and participant interactions and behavioral patterns using the SNA. Both the communication-based and association-based relational ties were included to investigate how participants directly respond to each other in the one-mode SNA and how they interact through a shared discussion topic in the two-mode SNA under the 18-week QOPS pedagogy. The different relational ties and SNA measures were then analyzed regarding their correlation with student learning performance. Below we discussed our analysis findings concerning the development of the learning community, changes in participants' roles, participant-participant interaction and participant-artifact interaction, and implications of the SNA measures with learning outcomes in light of implications for instruction and learning with the QOPS approach.

5.1. The development of the learning community over time with the question-oriented problem-solving approach
The SNA measures offered evidence for the effectiveness of the QOPS design in fostering the development of the online learning community. Overall, the learning community is getting more and more interactive and cohesive with the implementation of the QOPS approach, as evidenced by the weighted one-mode SNA measures. Specifically, the QOPS design, where learners' posting and replying behaviors were driven by their self-initiated needs to ask questions, share information or reply to others' questions and comments, may have benefited the communication among participants, as demonstrated by the medium to high reciprocity, transitivity, and GCC. Moreover, viewing participants' interaction via their shared discussion (i.e. the artifacts in Facebook learning group), we can observe that the learning community is denser and more interactive, as reflected by the high degree of the weighted two-mode and projected one-mode measures. The analysis results demonstrated that participants might become more indirectly connected if they are linked by contributing to the same discussion topics, which were aligned with the implementation of the QOPS homework and assessment as scaffolds across different periods. The findings coincided with the instructional team's attempt to facilitate and guide learners to generate shared discussion topics or interests in the Facebook group, which were regarded as an effective facilitation strategy in forming an interactive and cohesive online learning community (Pallof & Pratt, 2007).

Alternatively, when we examined how discussion topics are linked through the same participants, we can reveal that some topics acted as hubs of the discussion. They converged and diverged information in the network (i.e., high degree centrality), had control over information by bridging the communication between participants (i.e., high betweenness), and can be spread with efficiency (i.e., high closeness centrality). These discussion topics included sharing statistics information in the 1st period, help-seeking and discussion of Kahoot! quizzes in the 2nd period, and course administrative communication in the 3rd period. Especially, the high projected one-mode centrality measures of the help-seeking and discussion of Kahoot! quizzes in the 2nd period provided support for our scaffolded PBL instructional design in students' advanced statistics Learning. In line with previous research (Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005), the study findings had implications for instructors to distribute their instructional scaffolds across different periods to foster the development of the online community and enhance learner interactions. Based on the study findings, we suggested that instructors can facilitate online interaction by sharing real-life examples/information to motivate students' interests in statistics at the beginning stage, assign QOPS homework and assessment to engage students in discussing the course content or asking for help over the weeks, and wrap up the course by posting or replying messages related to course administrative communication.

5.2. The instructional team's role and participants' role over time
The instructional team included the instructor(Z), TA(Y), and TA(X), each of which played a unique role in the QOPS interaction among participants. TA(Y) took the role of a more knowledgeable peer and emerged as the leader of the discussion, as evidenced by her high centrality measures throughout the course periods. Her efforts in initiating the discussion ignited communication and interaction in the community and encouraged different learners to coordinate the communication, take the lead in the discussion, and mediate the discussion. TA(X) acted as a facilitator in the community, as indicated by his moderate centrality measures across the three periods. He usually stepped into the discussion to answer queries if required or to collaborate with learners in the discussion (Marcos-García et al., 2015; Saqr et al., 2018). On the other hand, across the three periods, the instructor had moderate indegree, outdegree, betweenness, and closeness centrality, which also coincided with his attempt to play a facilitating role to oversee the discussion, answer questions if students need assistance, and handle conflicts (Marcos-García et al., 2015; Saqr et al., 2018). Compared with peer facilitation, researchers demonstrated that students engaged more in their learning and felt a higher sense of community in the instructor-facilitated discussion (Phirangee, Epp, & Hewitt, 2016). Particularly, students rated instructors' timely response to their queries and reflections as helpful to increase their engagement in the course and connection with instructors (Martin, Wang, & Sadaf, 2018). It was likely that timely responses may help improve students' understanding of the course content (King, 2014) and enhance their sense of instructor presence. Therefore, instructor facilitation was indispensable for developing a cohesive and interactive learning community. We suggested that instructors can form an instructional team with experienced teaching assistants to offer timely feedback for students or utilize supporting tools via learning analytics to detect learners' need for help (Luan et al., 2020; Van Leeuwen, Janssen, Erkens, & Brekelmans, 2015; Wu et al., 2020).

5.3. The association of different modes of learners' SNA measures with their learning performance
In line with prior research, we found a positive association between learners' SNA measures with their learning outcomes (Cho et al., 2007; Reychav et al., 2018; Saqr & Alamro, 2019; Siqin et al., 2015). Among the SNA measures, learners' outdegree, degree, and closeness centralities have consistent and predictive validity to promote their learning performances in the hybrid classroom. Specifically, learners tended to have better scores in midterm, final, and final course grades when they had more frequent posting or commenting, receiving more replies, taking the intermediary role, and were maximally close to all other members in the discussion in the 2nd period. Participants' high weighted one-mode outdegree, indegree, betweenness, and closeness centrality provided support for our argument. Besides, when learners had more frequent interaction and were more closely connected with other members in the network through the same discussion topics, they yielded better scores in the midterm, final, term project, and final course grade as indicated by their projected one-mode degree and closeness in the 2nd and 3rd period. Finally, the more different discussion topics learners participated in, the higher their scores in homework, midterm, final, term project, and final course grades, as shown by their two-mode degree centrality.

5.3.1. The application of student response systems as QOPS scaffolds to support metacognition and self-regulation
Notably, the implementation of Kahoot! formative quizzes may increase learners' metacognition and self-regulation and subsequently enhance their learning performance. Kahoot! quizzes were administered from the 1st period on a weekly basis. We observed that those who interacted more frequently and were more closely connected with other members through discussion of Kahoot! quizzes since the 1st period had better scores in the final scores and final course grades. Besides, being maximally close to all other members in the 2nd period through discussion of Kahoot! quizzes also correlated with better learning outcomes except for scores of Kahoot! quizzes for the 2nd period. This finding may indirectly support our intention of using Kahoot! quizzes as formative assessments for students to understand their state of knowledge and for instructors to identify learners who need assistance in learning. According to Clark (2012), “Self-regulated students are meta-cognitively, socially, motivationally, and behaviorally active in problem-solving processes” (p. 216). A wealth of research has shown that formative assessment is directly associated with self-regulation (Black & Wiliam, 2009; Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006). Though learners' projected one-mode SNA through discussion of Kahoot! quizzes did not inform their performance of Kahoot! quizzes at the same period, their status of being close with all other members in the discussion of what they have learned or missed in the formative quizzes can be regarded as their active engagement in problem-solving of statistical questions, which was later associated with better scores in all the other learning outcomes.

5.3.2. Using QOPS assignments to engage learners and encourage help-seeking
The implementation of the QOPS assignments largely coincided with patterns of statistically significant correlations between closeness centrality and learning performance through the discussion topic associated with help-seeking on assignments. From the 2nd period through the 3rd period, those who were maximally close with all other members through help-seeking on assignments had better scores in the midterm, final, and final course grades. As previously noted, help-seeking may reflect learners' desire to fill the gap in their knowledge deficiency (Aleven et al., 2003; Ryan & Pintrich, 1997). In the Facebook learning community, a student may seek help on an unknown statistics concept or homework assignment while a peer student may help address his/her question as peer-tutoring. Then, “responsibility for learning is shifted from the teacher to the tutoring pair” (p. 226); the transfer of responsibility may empower students and promote their control over their self-regulated learning (A. King, 1997; Shih, Liang, & Tsai, 2019; Su, Li, Liang, & Tsai, 2019). Particularly, we regarded help-seeking as on-demand scaffolds, which if well-received can enhance students' learning by way of their zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1987). Besides, those who provide scaffolds can also benefit from giving feedback to their peer (Lundstrom & Baker, 2009) due to their efforts in reorganizing and conceptualizing to describe the statistical problem or concept (i.e., The largest projected one-mode density, 0.825, mutual dyads, 0.858 & transitivity, 0.948, were observed in the third period from the two-mode SNA).

5.3.3. Signals of planning and monitoring learning progress: asking and commenting on questions related to course administration
Notably, many statistically significant correlations were found between students' learning performance and their degree and closeness centrality in the 3rd period through course administrative communication. During the third period, learners experienced a heavy load of learning; meanwhile, they also need to wrap up preparing for the final project and the final exam. They frequently asked and commented on course requirements on the project, assignments, and the final exam. To some degree, these behaviors represented learners' self-planning and monitoring of their learning process (Tao, Zheng, Lu, Liang, & Tsai, 2020; Zimmerman, 2002). Thus, through course administrative communication, we observed that those who frequently interacted with all other members had better scores of homework, final project, and final course grades; besides, those who were more closely connected with all other members had higher scores of homework, midterm, final, final project, and final course grades.

6. Limitation and conclusion
This study had several inspiring findings in applying the QOPS pedagogy for learning and filling the methodological and theoretical gaps in SNA research. However, it should still be interpreted with limitations. Though the study design is longitudinal and expands over 18 weeks, it is a single group design without a control group, which limits possible causal inferences. Future research can employ a quasi-experimental design to test the effect of the QOPS pedagogy on student learning. Second, we observed low densities in the one-mode SNA measures. It was likely that threats to the self-concept may stop learners' from asking questions. Particularly, the review of research on help avoidance suggested that concerns about autonomy and competence may limit learners' attempts to ask questions or seek help (Ryan, Pintrich, & Midgley, 2001). Thus, learners' autonomy and competence can be included in future research for a more comprehensive understanding of the SNA interactivity within the learning setting.

In sum, this study advanced the literature in the QOPS pedagogy with the SNA approach in many ways. First, it explored the diverse interaction modes to reveal both the interaction-based and association-based relational ties among participants and artifacts under the QOPS pedagogical design. Second, the analytical techniques included the correlates of SNA measures with student outcomes beyond descriptive reporting of the statistics. Third, data was collected from a Facebook learning group, which was more open in terms of access to various resources and distractors compared with LMS but was also more in line with the challenges that learners would face in their daily life. Moreover, we categorized the instructional team's role based on their SNA measures supplemented with description about what they did in the discussion, which increased the practical significance of the study result by providing instructional strategies to facilitate student-centered learning in the QOPS hybrid classroom. The findings enrich SNA research concerning how students' interaction is aligned with the design of the QOPS pedagogy and explore the possible synergetic impacts of different roles of the instructional team in a single course. The study also has a theoretical impact on understanding the themes in learners' online discourse and the connection between the process of online discourse and learning performance through the various themes/discussion topics. The study results have practical implications for instructors and researchers in designing the blended learning environment or providing scaffolds to promote help-seeking.

