This study examined university students’ online learning profiles in terms of activities purposes and engagement and how the different profiles related to metacognitive regulation and internet specific epistemic justification. Three questionnaires were used to collect data from undergraduate and graduate students in Thailand. The results indicated five emergent clusters as follows highly engaged self driven online contributors moderately engaged self driven online viewers less engaged self driven online learners highly engaged course driven online learners and less engaged course driven online learners. Moreover the students of the five clusters who demonstrated different online learning profiles showed significant differences in their metacognitive regulation and internet specific epistemic justification. Implications are discussed.Previous article in issueNext article in issueKeywordsOnline learning profilesMetacognitive regulationInternet specific epistemic beliefLoading...Recommended articlesCiting articles Theerapong Binali is a doctoral candidate at the Graduate Institute of Digital Learning and Education National Taiwan University of Science and Technology Taipei. His research interests include epistemic beliefs learning styles and strategies and web based learning.Dr. Chin Chung Tsai is Chair Professor and Head at the Program of Learning Sciences National Taiwan Normal University Taipei. His research interests deal largely with constructivism epistemic beliefs and Internet based instruction related to science education. His research work has been published in Learning and Instruction Science Education Journal of Research in Science Teaching International Journal of Science Education Computers Education British Journal of Educational Technology among others.Dr. Hsin Yi Chang is Distinguished Professor at the Program of Learning Sciences National Taiwan Normal University Taipei. Her research interests involve learning with simulation and augmented reality technology curriculum and assessment design and students epistemic belief. Her work has been published in Computers Education Instructional Science Science Education and Journal of Research in Science Teaching among others.© The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd
This study examined university students’ online learning profiles in terms of activities, purposes, and engagement, and how the different profiles related to metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification. Three questionnaires were used to collect data from 389 undergraduate and graduate students in Thailand. The results indicated five emergent clusters as follows: highly-engaged self-driven online contributors, moderately engaged self-driven online viewers, less engaged self-driven online learners, highly engaged course-driven online learners, and less engaged course-driven online learners. Moreover, the students of the five clusters who demonstrated different online learning profiles showed significant differences in their metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification. Implications are discussed.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online learning profiles

Metacognitive regulation

Internet-specific epistemic belief

1. Introduction
Online learning involves individuals using networked computing technology (e.g., the Internet) on- and/or off-campus synchronously and/or asynchronously for the purpose of learning (Moore, Dickson-Deane, & Galyen, 2011). Moreover, with the rapid development of technology, online learning may encompass various learning approaches, such as learning from transmission-based online video clips or learning through online discussion, collaboration, and co-construction of projects with peers (vanOostveen, Desjardins, & Bullock, 2019). Contemporarily, online learning may occur anywhere and anytime, with the purpose of learning driven by a course requirement or for personal needs.

Research on online learning has been addressing the important issue of how to design an online learning environment to best benefit learning (e.g., Weidlich & Bastiaens, 2019). An equally important but less investigated issue is to understand the current status of online learning practiced by students in terms of how and why learners conduct online learning and what factors relate to their online learning experiences. Especially, online learning may take place with various timings, formats, and approaches not limited to on-campus or formal education, which in turn may involve heterogenous learning experiences that are worth investigation (Colson & Hirumi, 2018). Designers of online courses need to take into account learners' online learning experiences from the learner's perspective since constructivist theories have underscored the importance of designing instruction and learning activities building on learners' experiences (Green & Gredler, 2002). Empirical research also indicates that a specific type of online learning support or activity might not suit or be productive for all learners, since learners may differ in their learning preferences and experiences (Cheng & Chau, 2014; Dumford & Miller, 2018; Lee, Srinivasan, Trail, Lewis, & Lopez, 2011). Therefore, in this study we aimed to investigate students' common patterns of online learning experiences, which can help inform researchers and instructors with regard to the current status of learners' online learning experiences as building blocks for consideration of online learning suggestions and curricular designs. Moreover, such investigation reveals common online learning practices based on students' experiences, indicating potential gaps or consistencies between online learning theories and practices for researchers to consider.

In this study, we focus on university students since they are supposed to or are expected to be able to productively and efficiently manage and regulate their own online learning, but how they actually conduct online learning remains to be fully investigated. Also, the increasing growth in online courses and programs in higher education has heightened the need for instructors to understand their students' online learning experiences in order to provide high-quality and effective instruction. The profiles of the university students' online learning experiences were investigated and identified in this study. A student's learning profile provides information regarding how that student viewed and experienced a learning environment, such as their learning preferences, conceptions, approaches, and engagement (Asikainen, Salmela-Aro, Parpala, & Katajavuori, 2020; Lin, Deng, Hu, & Tsai, 2019). The aspects of preferences and conceptions relate to learners' views, whereas the aspects of approaches and engagement relate to learners' experiences.

Focusing on online learning experiences, we investigated three elements of students' profiles of online learning: the types of online learning activities that learners have participated in, the purposes underlying their participation in online learning, and their behavioural, cognitive, emotional, and social engagement in online learning. The activities and purposes of online learning indicate learners' approaches to online learning. Research has started to include both approaches and engagement to understand undergraduate students' profiles of mobile learning (Lin et al., 2019). Although several recent studies have been devoted to identifying online learners’ profiles, they looked into a single aspect in each study; for example, levels of self-regulation (Barnard-Brak, Lan, & Paton, 2010), levels of participation (Tze, Daniels, Buhr, & Le, 2017), or types of motivation (Vanslambrouck, Zhu, Lombaerts, Philipsen, & Tondeur, 2018).

In addition to characterizing learners’ profiles of online learning, we further investigated two important factors which may relate to the profiles, namely, metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification. It is known that use of metacognitive regulation empowers learners to monitor and be aware of their progress in learning as well as to be more confident in using coping strategies, thereby helping them to successfully perform cognitive tasks (Bjork, Dunlosky, & Kornell, 2013; Tsai, Lin, Hong, & Tai, 2018; Vrieling, Stijnen, & Bastiaens, 2018). Online learning environments in particular often require a high level of autonomy among learners, such as learners required to exert greater control over monitoring and managing their cognitive ability and other aspects necessary for learning (Cho & Heron, 2015; Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2005; Garrison, 2003; Schunk & Zimmerman, 1998). Research has indicated that metacognition is a vital predictor of learning outcomes and achievements in both traditional learning settings and computer-based learning environments (Ohtani & Hisasaka, 2018; Veenman, 2013; Zhao & Ye, 2020). In this study we examined how students with different profiles of online learning might show different patterns of online metacognitive regulation.

Internet-specific epistemic justification is paramount for online learning in that an individual has to deal with the vast quantity of information on the Internet during the process of learning (Mason & Boldrin, 2008). Online learning enables learners to identify argument with recognizable evidence, to analyse the veracity of multiple sources of information, and to embrace epistemic decisions and judgments (Hofer, 2004; Tsai, 2008a). Research has found that individuals who justified knowledge epistemically while they were engaged in learning could better correlate the learning process with a task's complexity, reflect on the nature of knowledge, and activate epistemic standards to evaluate their learning process (Chevrier, Muis, & Di Leo, 2019). Moreover, learners employing the Internet-specific epistemic justification more showed better online learning performances such as the ability to adequately comprehend and evaluate online information and exhibition of high engagement in online learning (Bråten, Britt, Strømsø, & Rouet; Chang, Liang, & Tsai, 2020; Cheng, Liang, & Tsai, 2013; Hsu,Tsai, Hou, & Tsai, 2014).

However, few studies have explicitly investigated the relationships among students’ profiles of online learning, their online metacognitive regulation, and internet-specific epistemic justification. In this study, we investigated how students with different profiles of online learning would demonstrate differently in terms of metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification. The present study addresses the following questions:

1.
How did the university students conduct online learning in terms of the types of learning activities, purposes, and engagement of their online learning?

2.
How can the university students be characterized in terms of their profiles of online learning?

3.
How did the students' profiles of online learning relate to their metacognitive regulation of online learning and internet-specific epistemic justification?

The study proposes a way of analysing students' generic online learning experiences into learning profiles. Such work is needed since online learning in the current age may take place ubiquitously in a variety of formats for various purposes and needs. The study reveals an overall picture of the current status of common students' online learning practices, which provides insights into possible gaps or consistencies between online learning theories and practices. Moreover, the results contribute to theoretical perspectives with regard to important factors accounting for students’ online learning profiles. Specifically, the factors of metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification were investigated. The results indicate evidence for the roles that metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification play in online learning profiles, providing insights for online learning researchers and instructors to consider online learning suggestions and to design appropriate learning activities that can effectively foster students of each profile, such as guidelines or design principles on how to help online learners monitor and build up their metacognitive abilities and to advance their uses of epistemic justification for assessing the usefulness and veracity of online information.

2. Literature review
2.1. Profiles of online learning
We define online learning profiles as including three elements: the types of online learning activity, the purposes underlying students’ use of online learning, and student engagement in online learning, since these three elements are salient aspects that can help characterize how learners conduct online learning. There are different types of online learning activity, as students may have either collaborated with others to build knowledge or accessed online learning resources individually (Cheng & Chau, 2014; Hrastinski, 2009). Online learning activities vary according to the learning contexts and situations. For example, in flipped learning, individuals usually conduct online learning before class to prepare themselves and to build knowledge, often by way of watching videos of lecturers delivering classes via web-based technology (Shih, Liang, & Tsai, 2018). Some other types of online learning activities may include online discussion with peers or writing online reflections. Broadly, the process of online learning activities requires students to read, think, communicate, speak and feel, as well as working with colleagues to hone their active and critical thinking skills (Hrastinski, 2009). Despite the fact that research has called for the design of online learning to provide students with various opportunities to carry out learning activities such as reading e-Books, viewing educational videos, and sharing information (Lebeničnik, Pitt, & Starčič, 2015), little research has reported on what types of common online learning activities university students actually participate in. The present study employed interviews and surveys to investigate the types of online learning activity in which the university students commonly participated.

The second element of the online learning profile in this study is the purposes that underpin students' online learning. Identifying these purposes or goals is critical for instructors since this information can guide them to develop relevant learning materials, which results in more successful learning (Williams, Stafford, Corliss, & Reilly, 2018). Studies that explore the purposes behind student participation in online learning are limited, although Williams et al. (2018) investigated this to a certain extent when considering why learners enrolled in massive open online courses (MOOCs), albeit using the term ‘goals’ rather than ‘purposes’. They found that engagement in a course was positively correlated with goals such as ‘to connect with other students who are interested in this subject’; ‘to use this learning in my current or future career’ and ‘to learn more about a topic that really interests me’. The study further indicated that the importance of these goals varies among disciplines; for example, humanities and liberal arts students were more engaged with a course when they felt it enabled the goal of using the knowledge gained in their future or current careers. Conversely, STEM students were less inclined to partake in a course if they adopted this goal. Again, in this study we employed interviews and surveys to understand the common purposes of the university students' online learning.

The third element of the online learning profile in this study is student engagement. Student engagement is considered as a prerequisite for online learning (Guo, Kim, & Rubin, 2014) and a central component of instruction due to its strength in predicting learners’ retention, achievement test scores, learning, and graduation (Appleton, Christenson, & Furlong, 2008; Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004; Hew, 2016). Previous studies have noted that students are likely to engage in online learning when they have a positive perception of active learning, when their contributions in learning activities are valued, when they are confident that they can manage their self-regulation and achieve academic success, or when they recognize that their instructors can provide them with supportive feedback, helpful course resources, and chances to interact with peers (Clayton, Blumberg, & Auld, 2010; Cole, Lennon, & Webber, 2019; Hew, 2016; Swartzwelder, Murphy, & Murphy, 2019).

Student engagement is viewed as multidimensional in nature in the research literature (Martin & Dowson, 2009). Research on engagement is hampered by the absence of agreement on the number of dimensions or subtypes of student engagement. In the literature, there is a prevalence of two-, three-, and four-subtype models (Reschly & Christenson, 2012). These dimensions vary distinctly based on the methods applied in the student engagement research. Regardless of the varying conclusions, researchers have frequently identified student engagement as a construct comprised of three aspects: behavioural engagement, cognitive engagement, and emotional engagement (Fredricks et al., 2004). However, in the context of online learning, an additional dimension, social engagement, should be incorporated into the student engagement construct, as one key characteristic of online learning is encouraging active collaboration, socialization as well as student-student or student-teacher interactions, particularly through online discussion forums (Swartzwelder et al., 2019; Tsai, 2008b; Wen, Tsai, Lin, & Chuang, 2004). In this study, we adapted items measuring students’ self-reported engagement from multiple studies to investigate how the students engaged behaviourally, cognitively, emotionally, and socially in online learning.

2.2. Metacognitive regulation
Metacognition has been defined as ‘knowledge of the process of thinking and learning, awareness of one's own, and the management of them’ (White & Mitchell, 1994, p. 27). Metacognition, hence, can be viewed as a self-regulatory skill which learners use to control and monitor their learning process (Tsai, 2001). Metacognition encompasses two essential elements: metacognitive knowledge and metacognitive regulation (Jacob & Paris, 1987). While metacognitive knowledge entails an individual's knowledge of the learning process and an understanding of strategies to facilitate learning, metacognitive regulation represents a sequence of actions performed by learners to regulate their learning, particularly through the following skills: planning, monitoring, and evaluation (Jacob & Paris, 1987; Schraw, 1998). In this study, we focus on metacognitive regulation since students' online learning behaviour should be closely related to how they employ metacognitive regulation.

Recent studies (e.g., Garrison & Akyol, 2015a, b; Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2018) have emphasised the necessity of broadening perspectives on metacognitive regulation by investigating not only individual but also social forms of regulation, especially the latter which helps students deliberate upon their thinking (Ucan & Webb, 2015), determine shared goals and strategies, and foster ongoing interaction and the construction of joint knowledge (Malmberg, Järvelä, & Järvenoja; Raes, Schellens, Wever, & Benoit, 2016). This socially-shared metacognitive regulation may, to some extent, correspond with the social constructivist theory that prioritizes the process of social knowledge construction, especially in both classroom and online learning contexts that make use of collaborative learning approaches (Lin, Hou, & Tsai, 2016). Following the proposed argument, the present study focuses on two modes of metacognitive regulation, namely, metacognitive self-regulation and metacognitive co-regulation.

According to Garrison and Akyol (2015a), metacognitive self-regulation entails the management and monitoring of skills and strategies when an individual is involved in personal reflective learning processes. Metacognitive self-regulation, in other words, is a learner's contribution to learning. Metacognitive co-regulation is, however, the management and monitoring of skills and strategies when an individual is taking part in a collaborative learning process as a coherent and purposeful group member. More specifically, co-regulation is immersed in the interpersonal interactions and exchanges among learners through regulatory activities such as turn-taking between teachers and learners in sharing reflected thoughts, decision making, and monitoring progress (Hadwin et al., 2018; Hadwin & Oshige, 2011), thereby encouraging learners to actively discuss, regulate themselves in cognitive activities, and practice their own metacognitive skills (Raes et al., 2016). In this study, we modified an existing instrument from Garrison and Akyol (2015a) to measure the students' metacognitive regulation during online learning.

2.3. Internet-specific epistemic justification
Current studies (e.g., Brandmo & Bråten, 2018; Ferguson, Bråten, Strømsø, & Anmarkrud, 2013) present a three-dimensional framework of Internet-specific epistemic justification, comprising justification by personal opinion, justification by multiple sources, and justification by authority. Dimensions that vary within beliefs about the justification for knowing could function more or less independently, implying that an individual might be high in one dimension, while being low, moderate, or high in another dimension at the same time (Bråten, Ferguson, Strømsø, & Anmarkrud, 2013).

There is evidence that the three dimensions of internet-specific epistemic justification might relate to a certain extent with how students perform in online learning contexts. For example, students who considered internet-based knowledge requirements against evidence from multiple sources were likely to use more metacognitive strategies during their online searching, hold self-regulatory perceptions, and display the tendency to search for assistance via online channels (Bråten et al., 2011; Cheng et al., 2013; Hsu, Tsai, Hou, & Tsai, 2014). Similarly, students with strong beliefs in justification by authority would apply sourcing argumentation and skills (Bråten, Ferguson, Strømsø, & Anmarkrud, 2014), and differentiate more or less trustworthy information sources and attach importance to the dependable ones (Bråten et al., 2011). However, students depending on personal justification have a high possibility of believing their own preconceptions on a controversial topic and overlook the chances of engaging the issue in order to form a well-reasoned position (Bråten, Strømsø, & Samuelstuen, 2008), which might result in more biased or superficial processing of information offered by external sources (Bråten & Ferguson, 2014). While research has shown some evidence that learners’ internet-specific epistemic justification relates to their metacognition and search and information processing behaviour during online learning, in this study we investigated how students demonstrating different profiles of online learning may possess different degrees of internet-specific epistemic justification.

3. Methods
This study employed a mixed method research design with an exploratory sequential approach (Edmonds & Kennedy, 2017). This approach consists of two phases: qualitative and quantitative analysis. It is an applicable approach for developing a new instrument or identifying unknown variables for subsequent quantitative analysis. In this study, we used the interview data regarding students' actual experiences of online learning collected from the first phase to develop an instrument for specifically measuring student’ activities and purposes of online learning. This instrument was then used quantitatively together with the other two validated instruments in the second phase. However, due to the scope limit of a journal article this report only focuses on the quantitative phase.

3.1. Participants and procedures
Participants in the quantitative phase (i.e., this study) (N = 389), consisting of 216 undergraduate and 173 graduate students, were recruited from both science and social science majors from two autonomous universities in Middle Thailand. Autonomous universities have previously been transformed from public universities and have more control to enhance their performance, to be more productive and accountable, and to enjoy the freedom of self-governance. Descriptively, the average age of participants was 24.6 years. Of the whole sample, 50.64% (n = 197) were male and 49.36% (n = 192) were female. Overall, Thai university students can access online learning with ease since a large number of higher education institutions across the nation have created their own learning management systems (LMSs) to promote the ubiquity of information and knowledge and to mitigate problems such as unequal opportunities for learners in rural areas, and time constraints. In addition, similar to online education programs in different countries, Thai students can experience online learning in several ways such as blended learning courses, online degree programs, or non-degree online courses for self-development.

Participation in this study was voluntary, and no remuneration was provided. They were specifically recruited from six undergraduate and five graduate classes that required the students to meet online as part of the curriculum, and were taught by instructors who are familiar with the use of web-based technologies to conduct online teaching. The participants from the selected classes had experienced various types of online learning activities; for example, during their online learning, they had searched for relevant information and supplementary resources, read articles from suggested websites, composed and shared reflective learning logs in discussion forums, taken quizzes after watching the selected online educational videos, or used social media platforms and LMSs to collaborate with group members on course projects. The most direct way to understand what online learning activities the students have engaged in should be through systems' logging data. However, in this study with the purpose to investigate the students' heterogenous online learning experiences not limited to a specific online learning environment, it would be difficult, if not almost impossible, to obtain the logging data from all of the various online learning systems or platforms used by the 389 students. Therefore, we developed the online learning profile survey to probe the general online learning experiences. We also adapted instruments to probe the students'online learning engagement, metacognitive regulation, and epistemic justification.

All instruments were translated into Standard Thai, the participants' mother tongue. Two Thai university lecturers who specialize in language education verified the parallelism of the translation. The translated instruments were pilot-tested with 10 Thai undergraduate students to crosscheck the clarity and make improvements to each statement. The surveys were distributed online in mid-March 2019 via a hyperlink sent to the target participants’ email addresses.

3.2. Instruments
Activities and purposes of online learning. Prior to this study, we conducted a qualitative study to interview nine university students in Thailand who had been purposefully selected based on their relevant experiences of online learning to identify types of frequent online learning activities and intended purposes of online learning. The nine participants differed in terms of their educational backgrounds, with three students majoring in language education, two in teacher education, two in mechanical engineering, and two in applied science. The selection of the participants included students in different subject areas such as social science and applied science, aiming to be able to provide information with regard to various online learning experiences. The first author was the interviewer. The interview was semi-structured in nature. The language used in this interview was Standard Thai. The interview questions are listed in Appendix a.1. Each interview took about 30 min. The interviews were transcribed and analysed to identify categories of online learning activities types and purposes using the open coding and thematic analysis approach (Bryman, 2012; Koomen, Weaver, Blair, & Oberhauser, 2016). More specifically, following the recommendations of Charmaz (2006) and Ryan and Bernard (2003), for the process of identifying themes, a code was assigned to each passage of text during the coding to generate the categories. We also paid attention to how the participants expressed their thoughts, especially through comparisons of categories in terms of similarities and differences until a consistent and comprehensive list of categories was arrived at.

Through analysis of the interview data, five distinct types of online learning activities were identified: (1) brainstorming activities, (2) discussion activities, (3) writing reflections, (4) browsing online pages, and (5) watching video demonstrations; nine categories of online learning purposes were also identified: (1) to do a course assignment, (2) to take a course assessment, (3) to collaborate with groups for course projects, (4) to know more people in the field of interest, (5) to consult experts in the field of interest, (6) to search for supplementary learning resources, (7) to reflect on ideas and gain feedback from others, (8) to search for inspiration for future education, and (9) to serve personal learning needs. The list of these learning activities and purposes was then converted into 14 5-point Likert survey items, such as ‘I participate in discussion activities during online learning’, and ‘I participate in online learning to serve personal learning needs’. The participants were required to choose one response for each item from (1) never to (5) always to indicate their estimated frequency of the online learning activity or purpose.

Online learning engagement questionnaire. This instrument assessed students' self-reported engagement in online learning. The instrument was adapted from previous studies on student engagement (Gebre Saroyan, & Bracewell, 2014; Maroco, Maroco, Compos, & Fredricks, 2016; Wang, Fredricks, Ye, Hofkens, & Linn, 2016). The adapted instrument was measured using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5). Minor modifications were made to fit the study's context of online learning. We specifically measured four dimensions of engagement as follows:

1.
Behavioural Engagement (BE) refers to the behavioural involvement in academic, rules, and task-based activities in online learning (4 items). For example, ‘I follow the rules when participating in an online learning community’.

2.
Cognitive Engagement (CE) refers to the employment of cognition in online learning (4 items). For example, ‘When participating in online learning, I try to understand my mistakes when I get something wrong’.

3.
Social Engagement (SE) refers to the presence of interactions and collaboration with peers and faculty and the willingness to establish and maintain relationships in online learning (6 items). For example, ‘I try to help others who are struggling in online learning’.

4.
Emotional Engagement (EE) refers to the presence of emotional reactions to learning content, peers, and faculty in online learning (3 items). For example, ‘I feel excited about the work assigned in online learning’.

The Cronbach's reliability coefficients (α) of the four dimensions as validated in the present study were as follows: behavioural engagement (α = 0.83), cognitive engagement (α = 0.82), social engagement (α = 0.82), and emotional engagement (α = 0.75), and the whole scale (α = 0.86), indicating that the scale is internally consistent to a satisfactory degree.

Metacognitive regulation of online learning questionnaire. This instrument assessed students’ performance of metacognition in online learning, and was modified from Garrison and Akyol (2015a). The instrument was originally developed using a 6-point Likert scoring system and comprised 26 items, ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (6). Minor modifications were required for all items to fit the context of online learning in the current study. The instrument consists of two factors as follows:

1.
Metacognitive Self-regulation (MS) refers to the use of metacognitive monitoring, reflective or managing skills when an individual is involved in online learning processes. For example, ‘When I am engaged in online learning, I question my thoughts’ (13 items).

2.
Metacognitive Co-regulation (MC) refers to the use of metacognitive monitoring, reflective or managing skills during collaboration or interaction with others in online learning. For example, ‘When I am engaged in online learning, I reflect upon the comments of others’ (13 items).

The Cronbach's reliability coefficients (α) of the two dimensions as validated in the present study were as follows: metacognitive self-regulation (α = 0.96), and metacognitive co-regulation (α = 0.95), and the whole scale (α = 0.94), indicating that the scale is sufficiently reliable for assessing university students' metacognition in online learning.

Internet-Specific Epistemic Justification (ISEJ). The ISEJ assessed students’ beliefs about justifications for knowledge and knowing in online learning. The instrument was originally developed and validated in Bråten, Brandmo, and Kammerer (2019) using a 10-point Likert scale. The instrument consists of 12 items ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (10). The ISEJ has three factors as follows:

1.
Personal Justification (PJ) refers to the extent to which individuals evaluate information found on the Internet based on prior knowledge and reasoning (4 items). For example, ‘To check whether information about an educational topic I find on the Internet is reliable, I evaluate it in relation to my own knowledge of this topic’.

2.
Justification by Multiple Sources (JM) refers to the extent to which individuals evaluate online information by checking multiple sources and websites (4 items). For example, ‘When I read something about an educational topic on the Internet, I compare several websites that deal with this topic’.

3.
Justification by Authority (JA) refers to the extent to which individuals evaluate online information based on the competence and expertise of the source (4 items). For example, ‘When I read something about an educational topic on the Internet, I evaluate whether this information is written by an expert’.

The Cronbach's reliability coefficients (α) of the three dimensions as validated in the present study were as follows: personal justification (α = 0.97), justification by multiple sources (α = 0.98), and justification by authority (α = 0.97), and the whole scale (α = 0.98), indicating that the scale is internally consistent to a sufficient degree.

3.3. Data analysis
The five items that measured the participants' frequencies of participation in the online learning activities were grouped into two variables, that is, constructive activities (including brainstorming, discussion, and writing reflections) in which learners need to construct artefacts or generate ideas during the activities, and observational activities (including browsing online pages and watching video demos) in which learners only read or receive information during the activities. The nine items that measured the participants’ frequencies of employing a certain purpose for online learning were grouped into another two variables, namely, self-driven purposes that individuals conduct online learning out of personal interests or needs (including: to know more people in the field of interest, to consult experts in the field of interest, to reflect on ideas and gain feedback from others, to search for inspiration for future education, and to serve personal learning needs) and course-driven purposes that individuals conduct online learning as a requirement of participating in a course (including: to do a course assignment, to take a course assessment, to collaborate with groups for course projects, and to search for supplementary learning resources for a course).

Using SPSS statistical software, we employed descriptive statistics to overview the general picture of the students' online learning. We then conducted a non-hierarchical k-means cluster analysis of the three elements and their sub-categories (a total of eight variables, namely, constructive activities, observational activities, self-driven purposes, course-driven purposes, behavioural, cognitive, social and emotional engagement) to identify the patterns of the university students’ online learning profiles. In detail, we performed a three-, four-, and five-cluster solution to verify which one would yield the most distinct patterns across different classified groups and contribute to a meaningful interpretation of results (Antonenko, Toy, & Niederhauser, 2012). Lastly, we performed one-way ANOVA to investigate the differences in metacognitive regulation and epistemic justification among the different clusters.

4. Results
4.1. Overview of the university students’ online learning
We first investigated how the university students conducted online learning in general. The percentages reported in Table 1 were calculated based on the total number of participants (389 students) who responded to each individual question. We found that the participants tended to conduct the constructive learning activities more frequently than the observational learning activities. Regarding the purposes behind students' participation in online learning, we noticed variations in the patterns of the participants’ ratings across different self-driven learning purposes. This result indicates that individuals come to online learning with various purposes. For the course-driven online learning purposes, to do a course assignment, to take a course assessment or to collaborate with groups for course projects were the major purposes of online learning. For the self-driven online learning purposes, to reflect on ideas and gain feedback from others, to consult experts in the field of interest, and to serve personal learning needs seemed to be the major purposes.


Table 1. Overview of online learning activities and learning purposes.

Online learning profiles	Never (1)	Rarely (2)	Sometimes (3)	Often (4)	Always (5)
Constructive learning activities
Brainstorming	8.2%	12.1%	23.9%	30.8%	24.9%
Discussion	2.6%	12.3%	24.7%	34.4%	26%
Writing reflection	9.3%	18%	21.3%	25.7%	25.7%
Observational learning activities
Browsing online pages	22.6%	26.5%	22.9%	15.4%	12.6%
Watching video demos	20.8%	26.5%	31.4%	15.2%	6.2%
Self-driven learning purposes
To know more people in the field of interest	23.9%	26.3%	23.7%	11.8%	14.4%
To consult experts in the field of interest	15.7%	20.1%	24.7%	21.6%	18%
To reflect on ideas and gain feedback from others	10.8%	18.5%	23.7%	23.4%	23.7%
To search for inspiration for future education	26.5%	24.9%	23.7%	12.3%	12.6%
To serve personal learning needs	16.5%	18.8%	20.3%	20.6%	23.9%
Course-driven learning purposes
To do a course assignment	10.5%	14.1%	21.9%	29%	29.4%
To take a course assessment	13.4%	15.7%	23.4%	26.2%	21.3%
To collaborate with groups for course projects	7.2%	16.2%	22.4%	26.5%	27.8%
To search for supplementary learning resources for a course	15.4%	17.2%	24.2%	23.4%	19.8%
Regarding student engagement in online learning, overall the participants appeared to engage behaviourally, cognitively, socially, and emotionally in online learning with relatively high average mean scores. In detail, the descriptive data as shown in Fig. 1 indicate that the highest rating was given to emotional engagement (M = 3.46, SD = 0.92). This was followed by social engagement (M = 3.42, SD = 0.80), behavioural engagement (M = 3.41, SD = 0.89), and cognitive engagement (M = 3.40, SD = 0.87).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (885KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Overview of student engagement in online learning.

4.2. Characterising students’ profiles of online learning
To further understand the patterns of the university students' online learning, we conducted cluster analysis to characterise the profiles of the students' online learning. As shown in Table 2 and Fig. 2, the results of the cluster analysis showed that the students’ profiles of online learning can be classified into five different clusters, namely, Cluster 1 (highly engaged, self-driven online contributors), Cluster 2 (moderately engaged, self-driven online viewers), Cluster 3 (less engaged, self-driven online learners), Cluster 4 (highly engaged, course-driven online learners), and Cluster 5 (less engaged, course-driven online learners). The characteristics of each profile are presented as follows:


Table 2. The cluster analysis results.

Profile of online learning	Aspects	Overall group (N = 389)
Mean (SD)	Cluster 1 (n = 131)
Mean (SD)	Cluster 2 (n = 48)
Mean (SD)	Cluster 3 (n = 59)
Mean (SD)	Cluster 4 (n = 91)
Mean (SD)	Cluster 5 (n = 60)
Mean (SD)
Online learning activities	Constructive	3.54 (0.66)	4.07 (0.42)	2.74 (0.53)	3.52 (0.57)	3.26 (0.50)	3.46 (0.52)
Observational	2.64 (0.86)	2.74 (0.86)	3.54 (0.65)	2.46 (0.75)	2.45 (0.73)	2.18 (0.77)
Purposes of online learning	Course-driven	3.34 (0.64)	3.16 (0.55)	2.90 (0.56)	3.07 (0.62)	3.83 (0.45)	3.60 (0.62)
Self-driven	2.95 (0.52)	3.10 (0.47)	3.19 (0.41)	3.17 (0.41)	2.88 (0.47)	2.38 (0.40)
Online learning engagement	Behavioural	3.41 (0.89)	3.90 (0.61)	3.03 (0.84)	2.37 (0.54)	3.91 (0.73)	2.88 (0.59)
Cognitive	3.40 (0.87)	3.89 (0.59)	3.21 (0.80)	2.47 (0.65)	3.86 (0.64)	2.72 (0.72)
Social	3.42 (0.80)	3.88 (0.62)	3.41 (0.74)	2.74 (0.71)	3.68 (0.61)	2.75 (0.69)
Emotional	3.46 (0.92)	3.92 (0.73)	3.47 (0.78)	2.35 (0.64)	3.55 (0.84)	3.42 (0.73)
Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (395KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The five clusters based on the profiles of online learning.

Highly engaged, self-driven online contributors (Cluster 1). This cluster had the largest number of participants, reflecting 33.68% (n = 131) of the overall sample, meaning that about one-third of the participants are highly engaged in constructive online learning activities based on personal interests or needs. The activities in the constructive category involve brainstorming, discussions, and writing reflections that all require learners to generate artefacts or ideas. Therefore, Cluster 1 students were labelled as contributors. They had the highest average scores on most dimensions of engagement in online learning, and their scores for self-driven purposes of online learning were higher than the overall mean. Therefore, we named this group of students ‘highly engaged, self-driven online contributors’.

Moderately engaged, self-driven online viewers (Cluster 2). This cluster had the smallest number of participants (n = 48, 12.34% of the overall sample). Cluster 2 members indicated highest average scores for self-driven purposes of online learning and observational learning activities. Of note, the activities in this category include watching video demos and browsing online pages that mainly involve receiving online information. They were hence labelled as viewers. Furthermore, this group showed a moderate level of engagement in online learning as their scores regarding the behavioural, cognitive, and social aspects were close to or only slightly lower than the overall mean.

Less engaged, self-driven online learners (Cluster 3). This cluster reflected 15.17% (n = 59) of the overall sample. Participants in this cluster had the lowest scores on all dimensions of engagement in online learning. Their scores on self-driven purposes for participating in online learning were the second highest after those of Cluster 2, whereas both their constructive and observational learning activity scores were slightly lower than the overall mean. For this reason, we regarded them as ‘less engaged self-driven online learners’.

Highly engaged, course-driven online learners (Cluster 4). This cluster represented 23.39% (n = 91) of the overall sample. Although the scores for both types of learning activities as rated by participants in this cluster were slightly lower than the overall mean, they attained highest average scores regarding course-driven purposes of online learning when compared to other clusters. Moreover, similar to Cluster 1, they gave relatively high scores for all dimensions of engagement in online learning.

Less engaged, course-driven online learners (Cluster 5). This cluster reflected 15.43% (n = 60) of the overall sample. The characteristics of Cluster 5 members were partially similar to those of Cluster 3 in that they achieved relatively low scores on several dimensions of engagement in online learning, whereas their scores regarding constructive learning activities were close to the overall mean, and their scores regarding observational learning activities were the lowest. Students of Cluster 5 differed from those of Cluster 3 in terms of purposes of online learning. They conducted online learning more often due to course requirements than to self-driven learning purposes.

4.3. Exploring differences in epistemic justification and metacognitive regulation among students with different profiles of online learning
The results of ANOVA analysis indicated significant differences among the five clusters in terms of their metacognitive regulation of online learning and internet-based epistemic justification (metacognitive self-regulation, F = 11.10, p < 0.001); (metacognitive co-regulation, F = 64.09, p < 0.001); (personal justification, F = 83.93, p < 0.001); (justification by multiple sources, F = 27.18, p < 0.001); (justification by authority F = 8.26, p < 0.001). Accordingly, as shown in Table 3, we performed subsequent post hoc tests using the Scheffé method to identify the significant differences among the groups.


Table 3. Comparisons of students’ profile of online learning on metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification among the five clusters.

Cluster	Metacognitive self-regulation (Mean, SD)	Metacognitive co-regulation (Mean, SD)	Personal justification (Mean, SD)	Justification by multiple sources (Mean, SD)	Justification by authority (Mean, SD)
(1) Highly engaged, self-driven online contributors (n = 131)	4.12(1.01)	4.42 (0.76)	3.01 (1.21)	6.42 (2.32)	6.47 (2.41)
(2) Moderately engaged, self-driven online viewers (n = 48)	3.78 (0.96)	3.42 (1.17)	4.71 (2.22)	5.70 (2.53)	5.07 (2.52)
(3) Less engaged, self-driven online learners (n = 59)	3.14 (1.05)	2.65(0.91)	6.99(1.95)	3.40 (1.64)	4.68 (1.98)
(4) Highly engaged, course-driven online learners (n = 91)	4.03 (1.26)	4.34 (0.74)	3.26 (1.21)	6.36 (2.32)	6.29 (2.47)
(5) Less engaged, course-driven online learners (n = 60)	3.45 (0.99)	2.93 (1.08)	6.16 (2.31)	4.22 (2.08)	5.43 (2.41)
F (ANOVA)	11.10***	64.09***	83.93***	27.18***	8.26***
Scheffé test	(1) > (3)
(1) > (5)
(4) > (3)
(4) > (5)	(1) > (2)
(1) > (3)
(1) > (5)
(2) > (3)
(4) > (2)	(2) > (1)
(2) > (4)
(3) > (1)
(3) > (2)
(3) > (4)	(1) > (3)
(1) > (5)
(2) > (3)
(2) > (5)
(4) > (3)	(1) > (2)
(1) > (3)
(4) > (3)
(4) > (3)
(4) > (5)	(5) > (1)
(5) > (2)
(5) > (4)	(4) > (5)	
***p < 0.001.

Metacognitive self-regulation. It was evident that the highly engaged, self-driven online contributors (Cluster 1) and the highly engaged, course-driven online learners (Cluster 4) were more likely to possess and apply metacognitive self-regulation strategies to their online learning processes than the two groups of less engaged online learners (Clusters 3 and 5) who differed in terms of their online learning purposes.

Metacognitive co-regulation. The highly-engaged students, regardless of whether their online learning was driven by a course or by themselves, employed significantly more metacognitive co-regulation. In other words, Cluster 1 (self-driven online contributors) and Cluster 4 (course-driven online learners) were both more likely to be metacognitively aware of their group members’ learning process than the other groups. Moreover, moderately engaged self-driven online viewers (Cluster 2) employed significantly more metacognitive co-regulation than the less engaged, self-driven online learners (Clusters 3).

Personal justification. The results indicated that less engaged self-driven online learners (Clusters 3) and less engaged course-driven online learners (Cluster 5) indicated significantly higher scores than moderately engaged online viewers (Cluster 2), and the groups of high engagement profile, that is, the self-driven online contributors (Clusters 1), and the course-driven online learners (4). The moderately engaged online viewers (Cluster 2) had significantly higher scores than the highly engaged online learners (Clusters 1 and 4). The results indicate that, regardless of the activities and purposes of online learning, the more engaged students were more likely to not use personal justification for evaluation of the online information.

Justification by multiple sources. Unlike personal justification, the highly engaged groups including the online contributors (Cluster 1) and the online learners (Cluster 4) as well as the moderately engaged group, which is the online viewers (Cluster 2), appeared to justify online knowledge through cross-checking against multiple sources. These three clusters attained significantly higher scores in this aspect than the groups of less engaged online learners (Clusters 3 and 5). On the other hand, there were no significant differences in terms of justification by multiple sources between the less engaged, self-driven, or course-driven online learners. Also, no significant differences were found between the highly engaged online contributors, the moderately engaged online viewers, and the highly engaged course-driven online learners.

Justification by authority. It was found that the groups of high engagement profiles (Cluster 1's online contributors and Cluster 4's course-driven online learners) were more likely to justify online knowledge claims with regard to the testimony of external authoritative sources. Their scores regarding justification by authority were significantly higher than the moderately engaged online viewers (Cluster 2) and the less engaged self-driven online learners (Cluster 3), respectively. On the other hand, the less engaged course-driven online learners' (Cluster 5) scores were not significantly different from those of the highly engaged groups, indicating that course-driven online learners, regardless of whether they were highly or less engaged, tended to evaluate online information focusing on authority.

In summary, as shown in Fig. 3, the highly engaged, self-driven online contributors (Cluster 1) and the highly engaged, course-driven online learners (Cluster 4) both possessed high metacognitive self-regulation and co-regulation during online learning. The results indicate that students with high metacognitive regulation of online learning were more likely to demonstrate high engagement during online learning or vice versa. Also, these two groups of students often evaluated online information through multiple sources, or considered the competence and expertise of the source, and depended relatively less on personal justification. The two groups were similar in terms of their metacognitive regulation of online learning and Internet-specific epistemic justification. The results indicate that students who value justification by multiple sources and justification by authority, and who employ metacognitive regulation were more likely to be highly engaged in online learning, no matter whether the learning was self- or course-driven.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (344KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The five clusters in relation to their metacognitive regulation and internet-specific epistemic justification.

In comparison, the moderately engaged, self-driven online viewers (Cluster 2) did not value justification by multiple sources and justification by authority as much as the Cluster 1 or 4 students did, but relied more on their personal justification than did the Cluster 1 or 4 students. On the other hand, the Cluster 2 students were still higher in the aspects of metacognitive regulation, justification by multiple sources and justification by authority than the less engaged groups (Cluster 3 and 5). A difference found between the less engaged, self-driven online learners (Cluster 3) and the less engaged course-driven online learners (Cluster 5) was that students who engaged in online learning driven by course requirement were more likely to possess justification beliefs by authority, whereas students who engaged in self-driven online learning were more likely to possess personal justification beliefs.

5. Discussion
This study proposed three components to be included in online learning profiles, namely, activities, purposes, and engagement of online learning, and characterised the online learners’ profiles into five clusters. By doing so we extend the past research (e.g., Barnard-Brak et al., 2010; Shih et al., 2018; Tze et al., 2017; Vanslambrouck et al., 2018) by considering multiple dimensions of online learning profiles. Moreover, as research has recognized the nature of online learning as self-driven and asynchronous (Colson & Hirumi, 2018), in this study we examined how university students actually conducted their online learning. In general, we found that about 60% of the students could be classified as self-driven online learners, whereas about 40% were classified as course-driven online learners, who mainly participated in online learning out of course requirement or needs. We further differentiated these students based on the activities of and their engagement in online learning, and explored their differences in metacognitive regulation and epistemic justification belief.

5.1. Self-driven versus course-driven online learners
In this study, we classified three groups of students as self-driven online learners, including some as highly engaged contributors (Cluster 1, 33.68% of the sample), some others as moderately engaged viewers (Cluster 2, 12.34% of the sample), and yet others as less engaged general learners (Cluster 3, 15.17% of the sample). We also classified another two groups as course-driven online learners, with some of them (Cluster 4, 23.39% of the sample) showing higher engagement while others showed lower engagement (Cluster 5, 15.43% of the sample). The goal orientation theory indicates that students with personally-driven or intrinsic goal orientation regulate their motivation and cognition and demonstrate high levels of involvement in the online learning process, which makes them persist with more challenging learning tasks (Cho & Shen, 2013). However, we found that some students could still be highly engaged and regulated, even if their online learning was mainly course-driven (e.g., Cluster 4). Therefore, in the case of online learning, students could be high or low engaged, regardless of whether the learning is self- or course-driven. Nevertheless, we also found that between the two less engaged groups, the course-driven online learners showed a higher tendency to evaluate online information considering the authority of the source, whereas the self-driven online learners relied more on personal justification. This result provides evidence for the latest perspective on the contextual nature of epistemic belief (Bråten et al., 2019; Green, Sandoval, & Bråten, 2016). It indicates a possibility that the purpose that directs students’ online learning may interact with their Internet-specific epistemic beliefs. Future studies are needed to discern how the purpose of online learning and Internet-specific epistemic belief may shape each other.

5.2. Online contributors versus online viewers
While most of the students participated in both constructive and observational online learning activities, the largest cluster, Cluster 1, demonstrated high frequencies of constructive activities and low frequencies of observational activities. Constructivist learning theories indicate advantages of constructivist learning activities to enable students to actively construct and evaluate knowledge through involvement in debates and discussion (Nunes & McPherson, 2006; Voon, Wong, Looi, & Chen, 2020). We found that the contributors (Cluster 1) in this study demonstrated the highest engagement in online learning. Moreover, these online contributors' characteristics are consistent with self and socially regulated learning (S-SRL) theory, in which the learning process includes interwoven cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational regulatory components (Molenaar & Järvelä, 2014). Students’ knowledge of evaluation strategies, criteria, and epistemic beliefs may well also be achieved or developed by actively engaging in constructive learning activities including discussions and inquiry (Barzilai & Zohar, 2012; Chiu, Liang, & Tsai, 2016; Tsai, Tsai, & Hwang, 2011).

In contrast, the Cluster 2 students were also self-driven but participated less often in constructive online learning, while participating more often in observational activities such as browsing webpages or viewing videos. They were only moderately engaged in online learning. Their metacognitive regulation was on average not rated as highly. Their epistemic justification beliefs seem to be moderate, in between the highly and less engaged groups. We suggest that future research can focus on discerning how learners’ metacognitive regulation experiences and skills or their internet-specific epistemic justification beliefs are shaped as they engage in different types of online learning activities. Also, since the advantages of constructive learning have been recognised, instructors or supporters can consider how to motivate and guide the viewers for more constructive online learning activities.

5.3. Metacognitive regulation and epistemic justification beliefs related to online learning engagement
The results of this study indicate significant differences in metacognitive regulation and epistemic justification beliefs among the five clusters of online learning. Examining the sources of the differences, we found that the students' metacognitive regulation and epistemic beliefs specifically played an important role in their engagement in online learning, no matter whether the learning was self- or course-driven or which types of online learning activities. Research on college students' online self-regulation by Tao, Zheng, Lu, Liang, and Tsai (2020) indicated that low-engagement learners tended to be passive, made fewer efforts throughout the entire learning process, and demonstrated low online self-regulation in areas such as help-seeking, time management, and task strategies, or self-evaluation. Our study found that the two low-engagement clusters (Cluster 3 and 5) demonstrated similar patterns to each other in that they self-rated the lowest not only their metacognitive regulation but also their belief in justification by multiple sources. As research is finding ways to enhance students' engagement in online learning (Clayton et al., 2010; Cole, Lennon, & Weber, 2019; Hew, 2016; Swartzwelder et al., 2019), the results of this study suggest a focus on developing students’ metacognitive regulation skills and epistemic justification beliefs for the possibility of helping students to manage their online learning engagement and to develop adequate online learning strategies for efficient and productive online learning.

6. Conclusion
In this study we have evidenced that the richness and flexibility of Internet-based online learning have allowed the university students to engage in various learning activities that address their needs out of a course requirement or personal interest. Leaners' metacognitive regulation and epistemic beliefs may be developed and further play roles in their online learning engagement. Specifically, in this study the five clusters of students with different online learning profiles showed significantly different metacognitive regulation and epistemic beliefs. Theoretically, this result advances our understanding to build a model for the relationships among online learning profiles, metacognitive regulation, and epistemic beliefs. Practically, instructors or course designers incorporating online learning may consider the differences among the students with different learning profiles, metacognitive regulation, and epistemic beliefs to develop learning activities that best address the learners’ needs.

We have noted some limitations of this study. First, the results of this study might be subject to limited generalizability as the data were collected from undergraduate and graduate students at two competitive-entry universities in Thailand. How well the findings apply in other contexts may need further research. Nevertheless, in general the Thai students who participated in this study had rich experiences of online learning and the use of the Internet in higher education in Thailand, which is comparable to many other countries in the world (Ngampornchai & Adams, 2016; Teo, Luan, Thammetar, & Chattiwat, 2011). The limitation of how well the findings generalize to other contexts would be similar to the majority of studies conducted in countries using advanced learning technology for online learning.

Second, the findings of the study may be limited in that the students' self-reported data were used, given that disadvantages of self-reported data have been discussed (Sinatra, 2016). However, metacognition and epistemic beliefs may be not directly observable but can be reflected on in a survey format. Moreover, to investigate the participants' online learning experiences, we employed mixed methods which included both interviews and surveys in a sequential approach (Edmonds & Kennedy, 2017). That is, we first identified the most common online learning activities and purposes through qualitative interviews, and then developed an instrument based on the interview results so that a larger number of students' online learning experiences could be involved and investigated. Given that the main purpose of the study was to investigate common patterns of online learning experiences rather than experiences in a specific online learning environment, we decided to use surveys which enable quantitative inferences that involve larger groups of participants (Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2018). The engagement was also measured through surveys that involved self-reported data, which is a common method in research on engagement (Henrie, Halverson, & Graham, 2015; Shernoff et al., 2016). To be precise, the self-reported survey measured perceived engagement. Empirical research has established the validity and reliability of the instrument measuring perceived engagement, which has been found to be a good indicator of students' learning experiences (Shernoff et al., 2016). However, future research may combine other methods such as observations, logging data, think-aloud protocols or interviews to understand issues that remain to be fully investigated, such as how learners’ online metacognitive regulation and Internet-specific epistemic beliefs shape their online learning profiles, and vice versa.

