The popularity of MOOCs (massive open online courses) has been increasing rapidly around the world, but there is a lack of research on knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum. This article uses ERGMs (exponential random graph models) to synthesize user attributes from the perspective of social networks, social support and social capital to systematically explore the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum.

Design/methodology/approach
First, the literature related to knowledge diffusion is reviewed to define two forms of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum, i.e., knowledge transferring and knowledge sharing. Second, based on social network theory, research hypotheses related to centrality, reciprocity, and transitivity are proposed; based on social support theory, research hypotheses related to emotional support, information support and sense of belonging support are proposed; and based on social capital theory, research hypotheses related to the number of posts and number of being liked are proposed. Third, “machine learning”, the most popular course on the Coursera platform, is selected as the research object. The data from March 2016 to December 2019 is obtained, and then, ERGMs are used to simulate the network and test the research hypotheses. Finally, based on the conclusions of this study, corresponding suggestions are proposed from the perspectives of MOOCs platform providers, MOOCs providers and MOOCs learners, to promote the development of MOOCs.

Findings
– (1) In the MOOC learning forum, users with high degree centrality contribute more, actively answering questions from other users, and transferring knowledge to others, but knowledge sharing between two users with high degree centrality is unlikely to occur. (2) Significant reciprocity features exist in knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum. (3) There is no significant triangular relationship structure in the knowledge sharing network of the MOOC learning forum, which means that multiple dyad sharing partners are more likely to be formed in the MOOC learning forum. (4) Users with emotion tendency tend to transfer knowledge to other users, and knowledge sharing is likely to occur between individuals with emotion tendency. (5) There is no tendency that users with low learning progress receive knowledge transferred by other users. (6) Teaching assistants, as users with higher knowledge potential in the MOOC learning forum, are prone to transfer knowledge to other users. (7) The trend of knowledge sharing between users in the same region is not obvious. (8) Users with more posts and users with more being liked are more likely to receive knowledge transfer by the other users, and thus, they are easier to obtain answers from. A possible explanation for this result could be that users with more posts and users with more being liked have a higher contribution to the MOOC learning forum, and therefore, questions they raised are more likely to attract attention.

Theoretical implications
First, current research on the MOOC learning forum focuses on the discussion of user behavior, but there is a lack of research on knowledge diffusion. Therefore, in terms of the research perspective, from the aspect of knowledge diffusion, this article defines two forms of knowledge diffusion: knowledge transfer and knowledge sharing. Then, knowledge transfer network and knowledge sharing network are constructed to explore user posting and replying behaviors, to expand the user behavior research in the MOOC learning forum. Second, current research on the user interaction network in the MOOC learning forum lacks comprehensive research on the network structure and user attributes. The micro logic embedded in the network structure must be systematically analyzed. Therefore, the network structure and user attributes are synthesized to explore the influencing factor of knowledge diffusion, which enriches the research content of the MOOC learning forum. Third, ERGMs are suitable for exploring potential factors of network formation, as well as the impact of multiple features simultaneously on network formation. Currently, ERGMs are widely used to research citation network formation mechanisms and social media network formation mechanisms. However, there is still a lack of research on user interaction networks in the MOOC learning forum while applying ERGMs. Therefore, this article introduces ERGMs into the knowledge diffusion research in the MOOC learning forum to provide effective research methods for modeling and simulating the knowledge diffusion networks.

Practical implications
(1) Since high degree centrality users actively answer questions from others, MOOCs platform providers can encourage high degree centrality users to participate in in-depth discussion in forums. Based on the reciprocity of knowledge transfer, MOOCs platform providers can add an information reminder function to remind users to receive information in real time, to promote knowledge transfer between users. Because of the unstable knowledge sharing relationship among learners in the knowledge sharing network of the MOOC learning forum, it is not easy to form a triangular relationship structure. MOOCs platform providers can add a function such as friend circles to enhance the stability of the knowledge sharing relationship and improve the efficiency of the knowledge exchange. (2) Since teaching assistants actively answer questions from other users and play a prominent role in knowledge transfer, course providers can set appropriate incentives for teaching assistants. Because users with emotional tendency are more likely to transfer knowledge, and knowledge sharing is likely to occur between users with emotion tendency, course providers can properly guide users to engage in emotion communication through the participation of teaching assistants, to promote knowledge sharing among users. Because users with low learning progress are usually in a low potential knowledge position, course providers should pay attention to such users to improve their learning interests with help from users in a high potential knowledge position, such as teaching assistants or users who have high learning progress. (3) Because questions raised by users who have more being liked and more posts are more likely to be answered as a result of accumulating social capital, MOOCs learners should actively participate in the course learning forum and have effective interactions with other users. With the increasing number of being liked and the increasing number of posts, users gradually accumulate more social capital to build a foundation for improving their own learning effect.

Originality/value
– First, at present, there are few studies on the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum, and knowledge diffusion research is conducive to exploring the influencing factors of users' learning activities in the course learning forum. Therefore, this paper studies the influence mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum by integrating the network structure and user attributes to expand the knowledge diffusion research on the MOOC learning forum. Second, although SNA has been widely used in knowledge diffusion research, it is difficult for SNA to explore the potential factors for the formation of knowledge diffusion networks. ERGMs are based on relational data and use network local features as statistical items to explore the overall structural characteristics of the network. Therefore, this paper simulates knowledge diffusion networks of the MOOC learning forum based on ERGMs, systematically exploring the influence of the network structure and node attributes and their interaction with knowledge diffusion, which helps to reveal the socialization process and internal mechanism of the knowledge diffusion network.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
MOOCs

Learning forum

Knowledge diffusion

Influencing factors

ERGMs

1. Introduction
MOOCs (massive open online courses) have rapidly increased in popularity worldwide in recent years. Taking advantage of the openness and high connectivity of the Internet, MOOCs allow anyone who is keen to learn to participate in courses around the world, breaking through geographical and educational limitations. Despite the large number of MOOCs learners, according to studies by relevant scholars, the average completion rate of MOOCs is less than 20 % (Sunar, Abbasi, Davis, White, & Aljohani, 2020). One of the important reasons is that MOOCs lack face-to-face participation, and learners feel lonely during the learning process. Fortunately, the MOOC platform provides not only a course discussion forum for learners to communicate with and learn from others but also a course online review function for course rating and evaluation.

Specifically, the MOOC learning forum allows users to participate in forums on different topics and establish associations with other users, thereby alleviating the user's loneliness to a certain extent (Almatrafi & Johri, 2019). The MOOC learning forum has an important impact on the users (Zhang et al., 2018). The current research on the MOOC learning forum is mainly divided into the following three aspects: study how to design the MOOC learning forum for promoting learning better; study the impact of the MOOC learning forum on continuing learning of users; and analyze the user behaviors in the MOOC learning forum. Users interact with others in the MOOC learning forum, and knowledge is transferred and shared in the MOOC learning forum. Therefore, exploring what factors affect the knowledge interaction behavior of the MOOCs users in the forum is conducive not only to enhancing the learning motivation of MOOCs users but also to enhancing the activity in the MOOC learning forum. However, there are few studies on the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in MOOCs learning forums.

The formation of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum is closely related to a knowledge diffusion network. Although social network analysis (SNA) has been widely used in knowledge network research, the MOOC learning forum involves a large number of MOOC users with different backgrounds. The knowledge interaction relationship is complicated, and it is necessary to explore whether the network formation originates from the attribute characteristics of the network members or the relationship structure during the network formation process, but SNA lacks an in-depth understanding of the internal formation mechanism of the network. ERMGs (exponential random graph models) provide an effective method for constructing complex social networks (van der Pol, 2019). Therefore, this paper uses ERGMs to explore the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum, which helps reveal potential factors that explain the formation of networks and promote the sustainable development of MOOCs platforms.

As one of major MOOC platforms in the world, there is a large number of learners and posts in the learning forum of the Coursera platform; as a result, this study takes the most popular course, “machine learning” learning forum in Coursera as the empirical research object. Then, users posting and replying data from March 2016 to December 2019 are obtained to construct a knowledge diffusion network. Third, ERGMs are used to explore the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum. This study expands the theoretical system of the MOOC learning forum research, and practically contributes to improving the value of the MOOC learning forum for knowledge diffusion.

2. Literature review
This paper will first review the related research on knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum as a theoretical basis. Then, we review recent studies of ERGMs to justify how they work.

2.1. Related research on knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum
2.1.1. Knowledge diffusion form
At present, there is a lack of direct research on the form of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum. In related research areas that study online forums, the forms of online knowledge diffusion include knowledge transfer and knowledge sharing.

Knowledge transfer occurs when a user creates a topic post, and other users leave messages under the topic post, receiving or contributing their own knowledge, and thus, knowledge is transferred between users. Taking Yahoo! Finance forum as the research object, the knowledge transfer form can be understood to be, for example, under a topic post created by user A. If user B and user C then reply to user A, it means that user B and user C receive knowledge from user A, and as a result, knowledge flows from user A, who created the thread, to user B and user C, who responded to the thread, forming knowledge transfer (Wu et al., 2015). Similar research takes the online forum as the research object and defines knowledge transfer as the process of knowledge transfer between different organizations or individuals, involving knowledge providers, the knowledge itself, knowledge receivers, and knowledge transfer scenarios. Therefore, in the online forum, knowledge and users are connected into a complex network in the form of question and answer. Knowledge transfer between users is directed. As a result, knowledge flows from users who create topic posts to users who reply to topic posts (Kim et al., 2016).

Knowledge sharing involves the interactive process of two or more participants. It is characterized by sharing personal knowledge. Users actively share their own knowledge with others or obtain the knowledge they need from other users (Hafeez et al., 2019). Users exchange knowledge by various forms of communication channels to expand knowledge recipients or generate new knowledge (Nguyen, 2020). The essence of knowledge sharing in online forums is the process in which the participants transfer knowledge around the discussion topic in the way that users participate in discussions and share knowledge with other users (Shan et al., 2015). If two users reply to the same post, it indicates that the two users have similar interests in the specific topic. Two users may often browse the topic posts, follow and participate in the discussion; during this process, using the topic post as a carrier, the two users share knowledge related to the topic under discussion. For example, under the topic post created by user A, user A, user B, and user C start a discussion by posting and replying to the post. The interaction between user A and user B, user A and user C, and user B and user C means that knowledge sharing occurs. Therefore, users participating in discussions within posts on the same topic are regarded as knowledge sharing, and the knowledge sharing relationship among users is undirected (Wu et al., 2015).

The MOOC learning forum is similar to a question and answer community. It takes a form of questions and answers, in which the asker creates a discussion topic by asking questions to be answered by others, and correspondingly, a knowledge transfer network is formed between users. Therefore, this study defines the form of knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum as user B to user A and user C to user A, where user A is the creator of the topic post, user B and user C are users who reply to the topic post, and knowledge flows from user B and user C to user A, respectively. At the same time, users who participate in the discussion within the same topic post share knowledge related to the topic post. Therefore, this article defines the knowledge sharing form in the MOOC learning forum as knowledge sharing between user A and user B, user A and user C, and user B and user C, where user A is the creator of the topic post, user B and user C are users who reply to topic posts, and knowledge sharing occurs between user A and user B, user A and user C, and user B and user C.

2.1.2. Factors affecting knowledge diffusion
The structural characteristics of the network focus on the topological characteristics of the network and the relationships between the nodes, and the commonly used metrics are centrality and structural holes. Centrality is often used to measure the importance of nodes (Kurt & Kurt, 2020). The number of other nodes directly connected to a node in the network is called the degree centrality of the node. In the directed network, according to the arrow direction, degree centrality is divided into in and out degrees. Based on the measure of degree centrality, in knowledge exchange networks, nodes with a high degree centrality usually have significant connections with other nodes (Mehraliyev et al., 2020).

Through research on knowledge exchange behavior of users in a virtual academic community, it is found that the interaction between users is the basis of knowledge exchange, and users interact through questions and replies, posting and replying. This interaction forms a social network of knowledge exchange, in which users with high degree centrality are at the core position and guide other users to discuss the topic by sharing individual knowledge (Rezaei et al., 2019). Through research on knowledge sharing activities in a Disney Forum, it was found that users with a high degree centrality are more active in the forum, but they might not necessarily receive more responses because of this activity (Li et al., 2018). Structure holes are often used to identify key nodes in the network. Based on structure holes, those nodes that play the role of crossing the boundary of the group can be identified. When the node is located in a structure hole, it will control the knowledge flow in the network with higher efficiency (Ozer & Zhang, 2019).

User attributes in online forums affect the direction of the knowledge flow. In the knowledge sharing network of Disney Forum, there is a large number of adults, but young people are more active than adults, and new users with a low education level post more than other users because they have more questions about Disney (Li et al., 2018). In online health forums, the geographic location of the users affects the direction of knowledge transfer among users (Goh and Agarwal, 2016). According to the research on the formation of user reply networks in online health forums, it was found that the gender and age of the users had no significant effect on the reply relationship, however, the health status and the number of points, friends, posts and replies will affect the reply behavior (Mehraliyev et al., 2020).

Research on the motivation of users to participate in online forums has found that users' participation in online forums can depend on the quality of the knowledge sources, the willingness for knowledge sharing or knowledge acquisition (Zhao et al., 2020), the quality of the knowledge diffusion channels and the ability to use the knowledge. In addition to specific motivations, personal behavior is usually determined by individual attributes (Kim et al., 2020). Based on social capital theory and social cognition theory, a knowledge sharing motivation model for online forums was constructed to find that trust, identity, common views, user roles, culture, and reciprocity affect individual knowledge sharing, and expectations of the results also promote knowledge sharing (Hau & Kang, 2016).

Based on the density and degree centrality of the social network structure in the online learning environment, it has been found that SNA can be applied in evaluating the online learning environment for the purpose of understanding the characteristics of learner participation and teacher interactions over time (Ergun & Usluel, 2016) (Sunar et al., 2020). Using SNA to explore the relationship between the interaction centrality and interaction quality in the MOOC learning forum, it was found that the social interactions between users in the MOOC learning forum present the characteristics of large cardinality, high user churn rate, various influencing factors, and strong randomness. Based on SNA, combined with inductive qualitative analysis, the user interactions in the MOOC learning forum was studied, and it was determined that social relations have a significant impact on course interaction discussions (Lu et al., 1038) (Wise & Cui, 2018).

In the MOOC learning forum, a large number of users exchange various topics related to the learning content, but at present, there is little research on the factors that affects the knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum through integrating the network structure and user attributes. ERGMs can systematically explore how and why network relationships appear, and thus, they can effectively model and simulate knowledge diffusion networks in a multidimensional way (van der Pol, 2019).

2.2. ERGMs
2.2.1. Basic concept of ERGMs
ERGMs is a network statistical model that is specifically for relational data, which can identify which relationship patterns exist in an observation network and which characteristics of the network members can explain the formation of network relationships, including dyad, triad, configuration, observed network, homogeneous assumption, endogenous structural dependency, exogenous attribute, specification and parameters.

The general statistical form of ERGMs is shown in formula (1) (van der Pol, 2019).  is a network generated using ERGMs, which can be directed or undirected；and  is the observation network extracted from the real network. For each node pair , 
 represents whether a node pair  is connected, when 
 indicates that there is a link; otherwise, it means no, and 
 is the observation value of 
. Here,  is the normalized parameter that makes formula (1) satisfy the appropriate probability distribution; 
 denotes configuration , which is a set of nodes; 
 is the parameter of configuration ; and 
 is the statistic corresponding to configuration .(1)
 

Similar to the construction of other network statistical models, the construction of ERGMs is based on the zero model, which is a simple random graph model with only one statistical item, the number of edges in the network. The calculation of the zero model of ERGMs is shown in formula (2) (van der Pol, 2019), in which 
 represents the change statistics with the number of edges as a variable, which indicates that when the network adds an edge (
 from 0 to 1), changes occur in the corresponding statistical items; 
 represents the coefficient of the statistical item that is the number of edges.(2)

2.2.2. ERGMs application research
In recent years, ERGMs have mainly been used to study formation mechanisms of citation networks and social media networks.

In terms of the research on the formation mechanism of citation networks, ERGMs overcome two weaknesses, those of insufficient observation and insufficient statistical inference on the formation mechanism of the citation networks. Taking a nanotechnology patent citation network as the research object, using ERGMs to simulate the knowledge diffusion process, the impact of the invention knowledge interaction and the funding support on knowledge diffusion was studied (Shan et al., 2015). Taking a drug patent citation network as the research object, based on ERGMs, the study researched the main effect, difference effect, convergence effect, transfer effect and network synergy effect of the patent citation relationships (Wang et al., 2018). Based on ERGMs, the study explored the influencing factors of the formation of cooperative networks between scholars from multiple analysis levels (He et al., 2019).

In terms of research on the formation mechanism of social media networks, ERGMs studies focus on the microblog, online health forum and online forum. Taking microblog as the research object, a directed social network of users was constructed to discuss features of the network structure, such as the node degree, average shortest path, intermediary, and so on, which change dynamically over time (Yang & Yu, 2014). Taking online health forums as an example, ERGMs are used to reveal the social support model between users and the impact of user geographic location on the social support, and as a result, it was proposed that online health forums help to reduce the differences in medical care between urban and rural areas (Goh and Agarwal, 2016). Moreover, ERGMs are used to build user time series interaction modes in online communities (Jiang & Chen, 2016). Taking online forums as an example, based on priority connection theory and activity theory, ERGMs are applied to research the formation mechanism of a likes network in an online forum (Song et al., 2015); moreover, a network of friends in a science network from academic factors and social factors is constructed to explore the formation mechanism of academic social networks (van der Pol, 2019).

Existing studies have shown that ERGMs are an effective method for simulating complex social networks, but few studies have applied this approach to MOOC learning forum research. Therefore, this study uses ERGMs to study the knowledge diffusion network of the MOOC learning forum and enrich the research methods in the field of MOOCs.

2.3. Summary of literature review
At present, there are few studies on the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum, and knowledge diffusion research is conducive to exploring the influencing factors of users' learning activities in the course learning forum. Therefore, this paper studies the influence mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum by integrating the network structure and user attributes to expand the knowledge diffusion research on MOOCs learning forums.

Although SNA has been widely used in knowledge diffusion research, it is difficult for SNA to explore the potential factors for the formation of knowledge diffusion networks. ERGMs are based on relational data and use network local features as statistical items to explore the overall structural characteristics of the network. Therefore, this paper simulates knowledge diffusion networks of the MOOC learning forum based on ERGMs, systematically exploring the influence of the network structure and node attributes and their interaction with knowledge diffusion, which helps to reveal the socialization process and internal mechanism of the knowledge diffusion network.

3. Research hypotheses
The formation process of network relationships mainly includes a network self-organization process and attribute-based process. The posting and replying interaction of users in the MOOC learning forum forms a knowledge diffusion network, and the nodes in the network are users. To fully study the mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum, it is necessary to study how user attributes affect knowledge diffusion. According to the characteristics of the MOOC learning forum, user attributes that influence knowledge diffusion can be abstracted into three categories: social network attributes, social support attributes, and social capital attributes (van der Pol, 2019). Therefore, this paper builds an ERGMs analysis framework of a knowledge diffusion network in the MOOC learning forum, as shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (232KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. ERGMs analysis of the knowledge diffusion network in the MOOC learning forum.

3.1. The influence of social network attributes on knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum
Attributes of network structure describe the structural characteristics of the knowledge diffusion network. The ERGMs approach anticipates that network relationships are not isolated, have correlations and are the underlying micropower of the macro structure (van der Pol, 2019). Therefore, analysis of the network structure helps to discuss the endogenous mechanism of knowledge diffusion network formation in the MOOC learning forum.

3.1.1. Network centrality influence
The three commonly used centralities include the degree centrality, closeness centrality, and betweenness centrality. Among them, closeness centrality, and betweenness centrality are not suitable for the analysis of key nodes of large-scale complex social networks due to the large computational cost. Because of its simple and intuitive nature, the degree centrality is suitable for studying the interactive behavior between nodes and becomes the basis for the identification of key nodes in a complex network (Enos & Nilchiani, 2020).

The degree centrality indicates the position importance of the node in the network. Nodes with the advantage of degree centrality have a higher connection probability, which indicates that the larger the value is, the closer the connection with other nodes and the stronger the promotion effect of the knowledge flow (Vazquez-Cano et al., 2017). The degree centrality can be used as an indicator of the importance of their potential communication activities. The central node with more connections is regarded as an opinion leader and has a greater influence than the other nodes (Song et al., 2015). Knowledge sharing is sensitive to small changes in online forums, and small changes in the number of highly centralized users can may have an enormous impact on the knowledge sharing (Kim et al., 2020). Users with high out-of-degree centrality can actively respond to other users and actively establish topic interactions, which play a guiding role for the learning of other users; users with high in-degree centrality can initiate topics that have more value, which enables them to obtain active responses from other users to promote an in-depth exchange of discussion topics (de Lima & Zorrilla, 2017).

Nodes at the interactive center of the MOOC learning forum control the initiative of the network, having high authority and interactive ability to have a high overall contribution (Vazquez-Cano et al., 2017). This study regards the number of posts that a user receives from other users in the MOOC learning forum as the in-degree centrality of the user, and the number of posts in which the user responds to other users in the MOOC learning forum is the out-degree centrality of the user. The sum of the in-degree centrality and out-degree centrality is the degree centrality of the user. Users with a high degree centrality in the MOOC learning forum are key nodes in the knowledge diffusion network to promote knowledge diffusion more strongly by connecting with other nodes closely. Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypotheses.

H1a

Knowledge sharing is likely to occur between two individuals with high degree centrality in the MOOC learning forum

H1b

High degree centrality users are more likely to transfer knowledge to others in the MOOC learning forum

3.1.2. Network reciprocity influence
The reciprocity refers to a subset of two interconnected nodes in the network. It is an analysis of the social network dyad relationship and describes how closely two nodes form a bidirectional connection in a directed network (van der Pol, 2019). The essence of an online forum user is an entity based on social capital exchange and cultural reciprocity. When users perceive the possibility that others will provide feedback based on their own knowledge transfer behavior, their willingness to engage in knowledge transfer will be stronger (Kuciapski, 2019). The research on the online health community found that the knowledge interaction between users is mutually beneficial. Therefore, the online health community has become an important platform for information reciprocity, experience sharing and emotional support (Wu et al., 2015) (Jiang & Chen, 2016).

In online forums, a mutual reply between users is a manifestation of a reciprocal relationship. Reciprocity has a significant role in promoting the diffusion of knowledge among users in the MOOC learning forum. If users obtain revenue through the reciprocity of posting and replying, it will directly affect the willingness and attitude to transfer knowledge (Feng & Ye, 2016). Thereby, users in the MOOC learning forum can form a reciprocal relationship through active discussion and transfer of knowledge and promote knowledge exchange between users. Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypothesis.

H2

Knowledge transfer is reciprocal between two individuals in the MOOC learning forum

3.1.3. Network transitivity influence
Network transitivity is an important property of social networks. The transitivity is defined as follows: when two nodes share the same node, these two nodes tend to establish a connection (He et al., 2019).

The triangle is the basic structure in the network; it indicates that any two nodes have two paths with a direct connection and indirect connection with length 2. The triangle reflects the tendency toward a network community and improves the stability of the network node relationships through the closeness of the connection (van der Pol, 2019). The triangle has advantages in terms of the knowledge efficiency and relationship stability. Therefore, sharing partner parameters have been used to study and simulate the formation of triangle relationships in citation networks and online forums, which explains the knowledge transfer that corresponds to clustering features in the network. (van der Pol, 2019).

The interaction of users under the same topic post in the MOOC learning forum forms knowledge sharing. Research shows that the triangular structure relationship reflects the tendency of users to operate in a group structure (Goh and Agarwal, 2016). Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypothesis.

H3

When two individuals share knowledge with the same individual, knowledge sharing between two individuals are likely to occur in the MOOC learning forum

3.2. Social support influence
The social support theory originates from psychology, and the research on social support theory has not yet formed a unified understanding. In directed networks, social support can promote individuals to be more active, establish more relationships, or enable actors to receive more relationships (Hsu et al., 2018). According to the nature of the resources provided by social support, some studies have divided them into four categories (Hsu et al., 2018), including emotional support, information support, instrumental support, and sense of belonging support. In this study, the emotion tendency, learning progress, user role and user region are involved in emotional support, information support and sense of belonging support.

3.2.1. Emotion tendency influence
Sentiment analysis provides a quantitative assessment of the direction of opinions, the intensity of emotions, and the subjectivity of emotions in the text. The emotion tendency can be transmitted through information, and thus, different emotion tendencies can affect the way that information is transmitted (Asif et al., 2020).

Emotion infection theory defines the process of emotion infection as a process in which people tend to capture and imitate the emotions of others during communication, which ultimately leads to the homogenization of emotions (Mafessoni & Lachman, 2019). Emotions, behaviors and ideas can be spread through various types of social networks in different environments. In the field of social media research, such as online forums and online news portals, users with obvious emotion tendencies usually have higher opinion leadership. Users with the ability to lead opinions cause more attention, discussion, and feedback through posting, thereby transferring knowledge and sharing knowledge (Liu et al., 2019). The more users use emotional expressions in online forums, the more emotional expressions will be repeated in subsequent replies (Weeks et al., 2017). Additionally, users with positive or negative emotion tendencies often express opinions or make suggestions on different topics. As a result, users who participate in the discussion will also have emotion tendencies in subsequent discussion replies (von Stieglitz et al., 2014).

The MOOC learning forum provides asynchronous discussion in the form of text. At present, scholars have conducted sentiment analysis on the text content of the MOOC learning forum posts. Research has found that the MOOC learning forum is not only a knowledge exchange platform but also an emotion exchange platform (Prinsloo et al., 2019) (Hew et al., 2020). Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypotheses.

H4a

Users with emotion tendency are more likely to transfer knowledge to others in the MOOC learning forum

H4b

Knowledge sharing is likely to occur between two individuals with emotion tendency in the MOOC learning forum

3.2.2. Learning progress and user role influence
Relevant studies in online forums and online knowledge platforms have shown that information support plays a unique role in providing reference opinions for other users, bringing academic frontier knowledge, and giving scientific guidance and help (Apps et al., 2019). Research on knowledge transfer in online forums shows that there is a flow of knowledge transfer from a high potential position to a low potential position (Hazir et al., 2018), and users with a high potential position provide information support to users with a low potential position.

In the MOOC learning forum, users have different course learning progress. Users with higher learning progress have a longer learning time for the course than users with a lower learning progress, and they learn more knowledge from the course. Consequently, users with a higher learning progress are in the high potential position in knowledge transfer, while users with a lower learning progress are in the low potential position in knowledge transfer. Therefore, this study proposes the following research hypothesis.

H5

Users with low learning progress are more likely to obtain knowledge transferred by others in the MOOC learning forum

In the MOOC learning forum, the number and diversity of users far exceed traditional classrooms. Therefore, the MOOC learning forum provides a number of teaching assistants, who use their own professional advantages to actively answer questions from users. By transferring knowledge to other users and providing information support, the participation of teaching assistants can make interactive discussions among other users deep (Zhang et al., 2018) (Poquet et al., 2020). Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypothesis.

H6

A teaching assistant is more likely to transfer knowledge to others in the MOOC learning forum

3.2.3. User region
Locality impacts platforms which provide very different MOOCs with varying levels of concentration. This concentration leads to different participation in a specific region (Ruiperez-Valiente et al., 2020). It is believed that individuals with similar or identical attribute characteristics are more likely to form social relationships, communicate or establish connections (Wu et al., 2015). Research on the homogeneity of individuals in online forums shows that many characteristics of demographics can be used to study the homogeneity of individuals. For example, through research on the online medical community, it was found that users tend to reply to users in the same region (Goh and Agarwal, 2016).

Individuals are more inclined to be attracted by people with similar perceptions, which enables them to establish connections and form close relationships, and similar perceptions bring a sense of belonging to individuals. The stronger the perceived similarity, the greater the probability is of forming a sense of belonging.

In the MOOC learning forum, users are nodes in the knowledge diffusion network, and they can have similar or the same region attribute characteristics. It is easier for users in the same region to establish contact because they could have similar culture, interests, hobbies, and common topics, thereby increasing the probability of forming a relationship. Moreover, people of the same region are more likely to agree with each other's views or behaviors when communicating. Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypothesis.

H7

Knowledge sharing is likely to occur between two individuals within the same region in the MOOC learning forum

3.3. Social capital influence
Social capital theory is an important theoretical branch of social network research. In a stable and institutionalized relationship network, social capital is a social structure resource owned by an individual. It consists of various forms of actual or potential resources through the relationships among people. It shows that investment in social relations can accumulate and increase social capital (Kroll et al., 2019). Social capital is mainly formed in the interaction between individuals, and it reflects the social attributes of users (Mpinganjira, 2019). User interactions such as post and reply denote the ability of individuals to actively respond and share information. Thus, user activities in social networks affect the formation of social networks and make users have a preference for the formation of social relationships.

The effects of social capital on knowledge sharing are explored from the individual level and the team level. Studies have shown that both levels of social capital have an impact on knowledge sharing (Martin-Alcazar et al., 2019). Users with higher relational social capital are more likely to obtain more resources in social networks (Mehraliyev et al., 2020). According to social capital theory, the relationships can bring power to the users. For example, the more friends a user accumulates, the higher the probability of forming a friend relationship with other users, and the more favorable it is to gain widespread recognition (van der Pol, 2019).

Users use the learning forum as a platform to establish contact with other users through posts, replies, likes and other interactive forms to form and accumulate social capital (Joksimovic et al., 2018). Thereby, the number of posts and the number of being liked are the reflection of social capital. In the MOOC learning forum, the post reply relationship between users is essentially a social exchange process, and thus, the interactive network of posting and replying is the method of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum.

Based on social capital theory, users with higher social capital are more likely to obtain feedback due to their higher contributions to the MOOC learning forum. Therefore, this paper proposes the following research hypotheses.

H8 Users with more posts are more likely to obtain knowledge transferred by others in the MOOC learning forum.

H9

Users with more being liked are more likely to obtain knowledge transferred by others in the MOOC learning forum

4. Methods
4.1. Research object selection
This article chooses the Coursera platform as the research object for the following reasons.

First, the Coursera platform provides course learning forums. Each course learning forum has different topic subforums, such as weekly forums and theme forums. Users can ask questions and discuss in the forum. The structure of the forum is clear and suitable for obtaining the research variables in this article.

Second, since the region attribute and the course learning progress are the research variables of this study, only in the Coursera learning forum is there a Meet and Greet subforum to encourage users to introduce themselves. Through text analysis, the region attributes of users can be extracted from posts in the Meet and Greet subforum. In addition, the course learning progress of the users is displayed in the course learning forum.

Third, as of December 2019, the number of posts in the learning forum of the top popular course “Machine Learning” in Coursera reached 120,000, which was sufficient to support the research of this study. Therefore, this article selects the Coursera platform as the research object.

4.2. Data collection and processing
The “Machine Learning” course learning forum is divided into the “Meet and Greet” forum, the weekly forum and the theme forum.

In the “Meet and Greet” forum, users are encouraged to introduce their names, jobs and regions, to greet other users, which can be obtained for the user region attribute. In the weekly forum, users discuss content related to the teaching week, for example, learners discuss the first week of class learning in the “Week 1″ week forum. In the theme forum, users mainly discuss topics related to the course; for example, learners discuss MATLAB-related issues in the MATLAB theme forum. Both in weekly forums and in theme forums, the topic posts, follow-up posts and reply posts among the users form a knowledge diffusion network. Among them, topic posts are created directly by users and are arranged in the forum according to the latest chronological order; follow-up posts are replies under topic posts, and therefore, follow-up users are associated with topic post initiating users; reply posts are responses to follow-up posts, and as a result, users who reply are associated with users who post, and users can freely choose which follow-up posts to reply to, but they cannot reply again to the reply. Therefore, this article collects data both from the weekly forum and from the theme forum to build a knowledge diffusion network for the discussion in the “Machine Learning” learning forum.

This article obtained 52,408 topic posts in the “Meet and Greet” forum, 59,573 topic posts, 93,949 follow-up posts and 93,324 reply posts from March 2016 to December 2019 in the “Machine Learning” learning forum.

With regard to the captured raw data, the following processes were conducted. First, removing thread posts without no responses. Second, deleting duplicate post data and post data with only expressions. Third, extracting users with region attributes from the post text in the “Meet and Greet” forum to matching with the users who participated in the discussion in the weekly forum and the theme forum. Finally, 8222 topic post data of 4845 users, 48,571 follow-up data and 45,936 reply data were obtained.

4.3. User attribute acquisition
ERGMs use change statistics and change statistics estimates to predict the probability of node connections in the network. Therefore, the user attributes of network nodes must be processed as category variables (van der Pol, 2019).

4.3.1. Social network attributes acquisition
According to the knowledge diffusion form in the MOOC learning forum defined by 2.1.1, a knowledge transferring network and knowledge sharing network are constructed without considering node self-direction for the “Machine Learning” learning forum.

The knowledge transfer network is constructed as an unweighted directed network with 4845 nodes, 9612 edges and a network density of 0.0004. The minimum and the maximum degree centrality are 1 and 6491 respectively, with the average degree centrality of 3.970 and the standard deviation of 94.297. The network node is a user of the MOOC learning forum. The edge from user B to user A in the network means that user B replies to user A.

The knowledge sharing network is constructed as an unweighted and undirected network with 4845 nodes, 7670 edges, and a network density of 0.00065. The minimum and the maximum degree centrality are 1 and 4,308, respectively, with the average degree centrality of 3.170 and the standard deviation of 62.936. The network node is a user of the MOOC learning forum. If both user B and user C participate in the discussion of the topic posts created by user A, the edge between B and A, the edge between B and C, and the edge between C and A are formed.

Due to the relatively large standard deviation of the degree centrality in both the knowledge transfer network and knowledge sharing network, this paper treats the degree centrality as a two-category variable (Rezaei et al., 2019) (Sunar et al., 2020) (Apps et al., 2019). In the knowledge transfer network, the number of users above the average degree centrality is 1,203, and we set the degree centrality for those users to 1; the number of users below the average degree centrality is 3,642, and we set the degree centrality for those users to 0. In the knowledge sharing network, the number of users above the average degree centrality is 1,055, and we set the degree centrality for those users to 1; the number of users below the average degree centrality is 3,790, and we set the degree centrality for those users to 0.

4.3.2. Social support attributes acquisition
The sentiment score is calculated according to the content of the user posts in the MOOC learning forum, and the minimum and the maximum of the sentiment score are −0.800 and 1.000, respectively, with the average emotion score of 0.075 and the standard deviation of 0.153. This paper treats the user emotion as a two-category variable. The number of users with a non-zero emotion score is 4,410, and we set the emotion score for those users to 1; the number of users with a zero emotion score is 435, and we set the emotion score for those users to 0.

In the “Machine Learning” learning forum of Coursera, the user roles are divided into learners and teaching assistants; and the learning progress is divided into three categories: started, half completed, and completed. Of 4845 users in this study, the number of learners is 4,830, and we set the user role for those users to 0; the number of teaching assistants is 15, and we set the user role for those users to 1; the number of users with started learning progress is 1,551, and we set the learning progress for those users to 0; the number of users with completed learning progress is 1,480, and we set the learning progress for those users to 2; and the number of users with half completed is 1,814, and we set the learning progress for those users to 1.

A total of 108 countries, which can be mapped to five continents, were extracted from posts in the “Meet and Greet” forum. Among the 4845 users of this study, the number of users in Asia is 2,073, the number of users in America is 1,573, the number of users in Europe is 892, the number of users in Africa is 186, and the number of users in Oceania is 121. The region attribute value is set for users in each continent to 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively.

4.3.3. Social capital attributes acquisition
The interaction between the users in the MOOC learning forum promotes the generation of social capital. Therefore, this article takes the number of posts and the number of being liked to measure the social capital owned by the users (von Stieglitz et al., 2014).

The posting volume is the sum of user topic posts, follow posts and replies. The minimum and the maximum of the posting volume of 4845 users are 1 and 8,487, respectively, with the average post volume of 29.34 and the standard deviation of 1280.013, which indicates that there is a large difference in the number of user posts. Therefore, the post volume is normalized as a two-category variable. The number of users below the average post volume is 2,620, and we set the post volume for those users to 0; and the number of users above the average post volume is 2,225, and we set the post volume for those users to 1.

The number of being liked is the sum of the number of being liked from user topic posts, follow posts and replies. The minimum and the maximum of the number of being liked of 4845 users are 0 and 30,456, respectively, with the average value of 9.600 and the standard deviation of 442.993, which indicates that there is a large difference in the number of being liked. Therefore, the number of being liked is normalized to be treated as a two-category variable. The number of users below the average number of being liked is 2,216, and we set the number of being liked for those users to 0; and the number of users above the average number of being liked is 2,629, and we set the number of being liked for those users to 1.

5. Results
In this paper, ERGMs in the Statnet package in R are used to simulate the knowledge transfer network and the knowledge diffusion network, respectively, and Markov chain Monte Carlo maximum likelihood estimation (MCMCMLE) is used to estimate the model parameters. The ERGMs estimation results on the knowledge diffusion network in the MOOC learning forum are shown in Table 1.


Table 1. ERGMs estimation results of knowledge diffusion network.

p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05.

5.1. ERGMs of a knowledge transfer network
The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H1b are 2.171 (p-value<0.001), which indicates that users with high degree centrality in the MOOC learning forum proactively transfer knowledge to other users, and according to , the probability of knowledge transfer by users with high degree centrality is 8.77 times that of the other users. Therefore, research hypothesis H1b is supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H2 are 11.336 (p < 0.001), which indicates that knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum has significant reciprocity characteristics. After receiving the knowledge transferred by others, the users tend to actively provide feedback to form knowledge transfer reciprocity. Therefore, research hypothesis H2 is supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H4a are 0.376 (p < 0.001), which indicates that users with emotion tendency prefer to transfer knowledge to others in the MOOC learning forum. Additionally, according to , the probability of knowledge transfer by users with emotion tendency is 1.46 times that of other users. Therefore, research hypothesis H4a is supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H5 are −0.797 (p < 0.001), which indicates that users with low learning progress have not received more attention in the process of knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum. Therefore, research hypothesis H5 is not supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H6 are 6.831 (p < 0.001), which indicates that teaching assistants tend to transfer knowledge to others. In addition, according to , the probability of knowledge transfer of a teaching assistant is 925.84 times that of other users. Therefore, research hypothesis H6 is supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H8 are 0.820 (p < 0.001), which indicates that users tend to transfer knowledge to those with a higher number of posts. In addition, according to , the probability of obtaining knowledge transfer from users with a higher number of posts is 2.27 tims that of the other users. Therefore, research hypothesis H8 is supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H9 are 0.536 (p < 0.001), which indicates that users tend to transfer knowledge to those with a higher number of being liked. In addition, according to , the probability of obtaining knowledge transfer from users with a higher number of being liked is 1.71 times that of the other users. Therefore, research hypothesis H9 is supported.

5.2. ERGMs of a knowledge sharing network
The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H1a are −0.966 (p < 0.001), which indicates that two users with high degree are unlikely to share knowledge with each other in the MOOC learning forum. Therefore, research hypothesis H1a is not supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H3 are −0.2049 (p < 0.001), which indicates that when two users share knowledge with the same user, knowledge sharing between the two users is unlikely to occur in the MOOC learning forum. Therefore, research hypothesis H3 is not supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H4b are 0.811 (p-value<0.001), which indicates that users with emotion tendency prefer to share knowledge with each other. In addition, according to , the probability of knowledge sharing between users with emotion tendency is 2.25 times than that of the other users. Therefore, research hypothesis H4b is supported.

The parameter estimates for research hypothesis H7 are 0.005 (p > 0.1), which indicates that users in the same region are unlikely to share knowledge with each other. Therefore, research hypothesis H7 is not supported.

6. Discussions
6.1. Influence of network structure attributes
This paper explores the influence of three network structures: degree centrality, reciprocity and transitivity on the knowledge diffusion of the MOOC learning forum. The empirical results show that the influence factors have different effects on the knowledge diffusion.

In the MOOC learning forum, users with high degree centrality contribute more, actively answering questions from other users, and transferring knowledge to others, but knowledge sharing between two users with high degree centrality is unlikely to occur. This finding could be due high degree centrality users being more inclined to answer questions from other users in the MOOC learning forum, and they are not inclined to participate in in-depth discussions of posts on the same topic.

Significant reciprocity features exist in knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum. Reciprocity indicates that users in the community tend to reply to each other. This finding indicates that in the MOOC learning forum, after receiving the transfer knowledge from other users, users tend to actively participate in answering questions and feedback through knowledge transfer, thereby forming a mutually beneficial relationship of knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum.

There is no significant triangular relationship structure in the knowledge sharing network of the MOOC learning forum, which means that multiple dyad sharing partners are more likely to be formed in the MOOC learning forum. This finding occurs because the MOOC learning forum is different from social media and because the form of group learning is weakened and functions such as adding friends or creating learning groups are not provided; as a result, the interaction relationship cannot be saved, and most users learn individually instead of in group study. Consequently, it is difficult to form a stable triangular relationship structure.

6.2. Influence of social support attributes
Users with emotion tendency tend to transfer knowledge to other users, and knowledge sharing is likely to occur between individuals with emotion tendency. This finding occurs because users with emotion tendency are willing to answer questions from others and tend to participate in discussions of posts, and emotion tendency spreads in the process of knowledge transfer; accordingly, users who participate in the discussion of topic posts also tend to respond with distinct emotions. Therefore, users with emotion tendency play an important role in promoting in-depth discussion topics, and knowledge sharing relationships are easily formed among users with emotion tendency.

There is no tendency that users with low learning progress receive knowledge transferred by other users. This finding could arise because when users answer questions, they do not pay attention to the learning progress of the users who asked the question, and thus, users with low learning progress are unlikely to receive social support via information provided from other users in the MOOC learning forum.

Teaching assistants, as users with higher knowledge potential in the MOOC learning forum, are prone to transfer knowledge to other users. This finding occurs because teaching assistants take an active participation in knowledge transfer by providing information support to other users, and as a result, they play an indispensable social support role in knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum.

The trend of knowledge sharing between users in the same region is not obvious. This finding could occur because the MOOC learning forum makes the communication between users overcome time and space limitations, and the geographical restrictions; thus, the consistency of the region of the users has no significant effect on knowledge sharing in the MOOC learning forum.

6.3. Influence of social capital attributes
Users with more posts and users with more being liked are more likely to receive knowledge transfer by other users, and thus, they are easier to obtain answers from. This finding occurs because the number of posts and being liked are the social capital generated and accumulated during communications while participating in the MOOC learning forum. Users with more posts and users with more being liked have a higher contribution to the MOOC learning forum, and therefore, questions they raised are more likely to attract attention; as a result, there is higher probability of obtaining knowledge transferred by other users (Joksimovic et al., 2018).

7. Conclusions, implications and future research
7.1. Conclusions
Due to a lack of research on knowledge diffusion in MOOCs learning forums, this article takes the “Machine Learning” learning forum in Coursera as the research object, collects user posting data and user attribute data from March 2016 to December 2019, and builds a knowledge transfer network and knowledge sharing network through ERGMs to study the influence mechanism of knowledge diffusion in the MOOC learning forum. Among the 11 proposed hypotheses, 4 hypotheses are not supported; therefore, the following conclusions can be drawn.

From the aspect of social network, in the MOOC learning forum, users with high degree centrality contribute more, actively answering questions from other users, thus transferring knowledge to others, but knowledge sharing between two users with high degree centrality is unlikely to occur; meanwhile, significant reciprocity features exist in knowledge transfer in the MOOC learning forum; and there is no significant triangular relationship structure in the knowledge sharing network of the MOOC learning forum, which means that multiple dyad sharing partners are more likely to be formed in the MOOC learning forum.

From the aspect of social support, users with emotion tendency tend to transfer knowledge to other users, and knowledge sharing is likely to occur between individuals with emotion tendency; and teaching assistants, as users with higher knowledge potential in the MOOC learning forum, are prone to transfer knowledge to other users; however, there is no tendency that users with low learning progress receive knowledge transferred by other users and the trend of knowledge sharing between users in the same region is not obvious.

From the aspect of social capital, both users with more posts and users with more being liked are more likely to receive knowledge transfer by the other users, and thus, they are easier to obtain answers from. A possible explanation for this result could be that users with more posts and users with more being liked have a higher contribution to the MOOC learning forum, and therefore, questions they raised are more likely to attract attention.

7.2. Implications for research
Current research on the MOOC learning forum focuses on the discussion of user behavior, but there is a lack of research on knowledge diffusion. Therefore, in terms of the research perspective, from the aspect of knowledge diffusion, this article defines two forms of knowledge diffusion: knowledge transferring and knowledge sharing. Then, knowledge transferring network and knowledge sharing network are constructed to explore user posting and replying behaviors, to expand the user behavior research in the MOOC learning forum.

Current research on the user interaction network in the MOOC learning forum lacks comprehensive research on the network structure and user attributes. The micro logic embedded in the network structure must be systematically analyzed. Therefore, the network structure and user attributes are synthesized to explore the influencing factor of knowledge diffusion, which enriches the research content of the MOOC learning forum.

ERGMs are suitable for exploring potential factors of network formation, as well as the impact of multiple features simultaneously on network formation. Currently, ERGMs are widely used to research citation network formation mechanisms and social media network formation mechanisms. However, there is still a lack of research on user interaction networks in the MOOC learning forum while applying ERGMs. Therefore, this article introduces ERGMs into the knowledge diffusion research in the MOOC learning forum to provide effective research methods for modeling and simulating the knowledge diffusion networks.

7.3. Implications for practice
Based on research conclusions, this article makes corresponding suggestions for MOOCs platform providers, course providers and course users.

Since high degree centrality users actively answer questions from others, MOOCs platform providers can encourage high degree centrality users to participate in in-depth discussion in forums. Based on the reciprocity of knowledge transfer, MOOCs platform providers can add an information reminder function to remind users to receive information in real time, to promote knowledge transfer between users. Because of the unstable knowledge sharing relationship among learners in the knowledge sharing network of the MOOC learning forum, it is not easy to form a triangular relationship structure. MOOCs platform providers can add a function such as friend circles to enhance the stability of the knowledge sharing relationship and improve the efficiency of the knowledge exchange.

Since teaching assistants actively answer questions from other users and play a prominent role in knowledge transfer, course providers can set appropriate incentives for teaching assistants. Because users with emotional tendency are more likely to transfer knowledge, and knowledge sharing is likely to occur between users with emotion tendency, course providers can properly guide users to engage in emotion communication through the participation of teaching assistants, to promote knowledge sharing among users. Because users with low learning progress are usually in a low potential knowledge position, course providers should pay attention to such users to improve their learning interests with help from users in a high potential knowledge position, such as teaching assistants or users who have high learning progress.

Because questions raised by users who have more being liked and more posts are more likely to be answered as a result of accumulating social capital, MOOCs learners should actively participate in the course learning forum and have effective interactions with other users. With the increasing number of being liked and the increasing number of posts, users gradually accumulate more social capital to build a foundation for improving their own learning effect.

7.4. Limitations and future research
The research data in this article come from the “Machine Learning” learning forum in Coursera and lack a comparative analysis with other MOOCs learning forums. Therefore, in future research, multiple MOOCs learning forums can be used for comparative research, to explore the influencing factors of knowledge diffusion in depth.

Second, the content mining of the MOOC learning forum is insufficient. This article conducts only sentiment analysis on the text content of the user posts, but the post content in the course learning forum still includes emoticons and emoji. Therefore, in future research, it is necessary to include the analysis of these emotion characteristics.

Finally, this research builds a directed and weightless knowledge diffusion network based on the user's topic post, follow-up and reply-to behavior, and it explores the influencing factors from the perspective of network structure and user attributes. In future research, it is necessary to consider constructing a weighted knowledge transfer network.

