Cyberbullying affects the majority of undergraduate women, contributing to withdrawal from social media and chilling their participation in the growing world of collaborative online discussions. This pilot mixed-methods study integrates surveys, observations, and interviews of nine undergraduate women at a Mid-Atlantic research university to investigate how the chilling effect of cyberbullying may extend into peer interactions within an increasingly common online instructional practice: online discussion boards. It is observed that, in comparison to their non-victimized peers, participating women with prior cyberbullying experiences enact lower social presence and adopt self-silencing and conflict avoidant coping strategies. In particular, these women avoid ever disagreeing with peers out of fear of starting “drama.” Findings challenge educators to consider the potential unintended consequences of instructional design choices and contributes to our understanding of how to design more equitable online learning environments for today's socially networked learners.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online learning

Social presence

Cyberbullying

Coping strategies

Online discussions

1. Introduction
The ubiquity of social media in American young adults' lives is changing the culture of online communication and is influencing how learners engage in online learning environments (Baldasare et al., 2012). Negative interpersonal experiences like cyberbullying and online harassment are increasingly common in online interactions and often target teen girls and women (Anderson, 2018; Duggan, 2017). Online bullying and harassment have a ‘chilling effect’ on women's online participation as victims tend to adopt defensive coping strategies such as deleting their account, avoiding the social media platform, reducing the frequency that they post, and increasing privacy settings (Alipan et al., 2018; Byrne, 2020; Duggan, 2017). In particular, undergraduate women believe online harassment to be an inevitability when they participate in online discussions and choose to self-censor their posts to prevent provoking negative responses or attention (Chadha et al., 2020). Instead, they change how they engage online to avoid negative interactions both in the immediate to remove themselves from the bullying and, potentially, for years to follow (e.g., Adams & Lawrence, 2011; Holt et al., 2014).

The impact of cyberbullying on young adults' online participation is of increasing concern as online learning becomes more common on college campuses (Baldasare et al., 2012; Washington, 2015). Online and hybrid courses (i.e., both online and face-to-face instruction) often feature an asynchronous discussion board in which students are required to post and comment on a central page like a Twitter or Facebook Newsfeed. These discussion boards are a common pedagogical trend to promote collaborative knowledge building, a sense of community, and Social Presence – the degree to which students sense their online peers as ‘real’ people who are immediately present in the learning environment, as opposed to being unreal and distant (see Lowenthal and Snelson (2017) for a complete review). However, the similarity between discussion boards and social media newsfeeds is concerning considering how cyberbullying victimization can cause some women to feel unsafe in online discussions and chill their online participation across many platforms to avoid future bullying (e.g., Alipan et al., 2018; Duggan, 2017; Vitak et al., 2017).

When previously victimized women find themselves in an online or hybrid college course, their instructor will require them to engage in online peer discussion boards without considering how these women's past bullying experiences have led them to avoid online engagement with people they do not trust. While scholarship has found that the chilling effect of cyberbullying (i.e., the defensive coping strategies adopted by victims) extends into the physical classroom causing students to behave inauthentically to appear desirable to their peers (Marder et al., 2016), these works have not addressed how the chilling effect of cyberbullying might extend into peer interactions in the online classroom. As a result, the current research fails to address if some students are entering the online course with a different attitude or set of strategies for participating on online discussion boards. Without an adequate understanding of the role of prior victimization on behavior in online discussions, instructors may be perpetuating an inequitable learning environment in which cyberbullied women must choose between their instructor's expectations for class participation and their own desire to enact defensive online behaviors to avoid future cyberbullying.

The purpose of this paper is to explore how women with differing experiences with cyberbullying enact and describe their social presence on a discussion board in an online undergraduate course. Specifically, this paper addresses the question, What are the differences, if any, in social presence in online academic discussions between women who were previously cyberbullied and those who were not? Findings from an initial pilot study of a small sample of undergraduate women are presented to explore this issue and direct attention for further research.

2. Literature
Framed by Vygotsky's social constructivism theory (1978), this study connects two disparate literatures: social presence in online learning and the coping strategies of cyberbullying victims.

2.1. Social constructivism in online learning
This work is framed by the theories of social constructivism focusing on the value of learner-learner interaction and that by discussing course concepts with their peers, learners engage in group cognition to develop a clearer and deeper understanding of the content themselves (Stahl, 2005; Vygotsky, 1978). When learners are unable to participate in group discussion, they miss the opportunity to voice their ideas, get feedback from others, and co-construct knowledge with their peers. In an online course, centralized discussion boards are often the hub for these class conversations (Bernard & Rubalcava, 2000; Kim et al., 2011). While some find these open discussion boards to be a great equalizer because everyone can share their ideas without having to be called on by the instructor (Chick & Hassel, 2009), others have expressed concern that students do not feel comfortable discussing controversial subjects on asynchronous boards (Meyer, 2006). This discomfort can extend into collaborative knowledge building activities on discussion boards. For example, Roberts and Nason (2011) found that undergraduate students self-censor opposing opinions about asynchronous collaborative projects because they do not want to offend their peers. Self-censorship is defined as when a person knowingly withholds an idea or opinion from others who may disagree (Hayes et al., 2005). The lack of consensus on the usefulness of discussion boards for providing all students with a space for productive and civil conversation is at the heart of this work.

2.2. Social presence in online discussion boards
Often, constructivist online courses are designed using the Community of Inquiry (COI) framework (Garrison et al., 2000), which prioritizes learner-learner and learner-teacher interaction. Through peer interaction and discussion, students engage more deeply in the course content and hear new perspectives (Richardson et al., 2017). One of the key elements of the COI is Social Presence the extent to which a student engages with their peers in a way that is authentic and reduces the distance in their interactions (Lowenthal & Snelson, 2017). Three indicators define social presence: Affective Expression (i.e., sharing personal details and emotions), Open Communication (i.e., students openly share ideas) and Group Cohesion (i.e., sense of community; Shea et al., 2010). Affective expression refers to how online students project their personalities through sharing personal details, jokes, opinions and other emotions (Boston et al., 2010). Open communication is the extent to which students feel like the classroom climate allows for trust, open sharing of ideas, and comradery. Finally, group cohesion is the degree to which students in the class develop a shared identity as a community of learners and feel like they can learn collaboratively as a group. Together these three indicators are predictive of students’ retention, perceived learning, and satisfaction in online courses (Richardson et al., 2017).

While often measured with an end-of-semester survey, self-reported social presence is an indirect measure that can suffer from social desirability bias (Miller, 2011) - when students report higher social presence than they actually enact in the discussion board. Alternatively, Shea et al. (2010) recommend conducting quantitative content analyses for a direct measure of students' enacted social presence in discussion board conversations. Using a codebook developed by Rourke et al. (1999) and revised by Swan and Shih (2005) and Shea et al. (2010), enacted social presence can be measured and calculated for each of the three indicators. This study adopts Shea et al.’s (2010) published codebook to observe students' discussion board posts. Using observation methods and a follow-up interview, trends in enacted social presence can be documented and discussed in more detail than through an end-of-semester survey.

2.3. Cyberbullying
Students' experiences in online academic discussions are situated within their broader online lives. Upon its inception, online or distance learning was once thought to be a “cyberfeminist utopia” in which women could engage freely and openly in academic discourse without fear of gender-based harassment or silencing (Byrne, 2018; Chick & Hassel, 2009; Lagesen, 2008). Instead, internet-based discussions, whether the users are anonymous or identified, tend to amplify traditional gender power structures – resulting in the silencing of women's voices in online discussions (Chadha et al., 2020; Herring, 1996; Vitak et al., 2017). This study centers on one particular form of online silencing, cyberbullying. Cyberbullying and online harassment are nearly ubiquitous experiences for undergraduate women and have been normalized as inevitable experiences all women will experience if they participate in social media and online communities (Chadha et al., 2020). In response, women alter their online presentations and engagements to prevent provoking aggressors (Alipan et al., 2018; Vitak et al., 2017).

Patchin and Hinduja (2015) define cyberbullying as “when someone intentionally and repeatedly harasses, mistreats, or makes fun of another person online or while using cell phones or other electronic devices in a way in which they don't feel capable of responding” (pg. 73). Cyberbullying is a major issue in higher education (Myers & Cowie, 2017; Washington, 2015). While researchers differ in how they define, operationalize, and measure it (Byrne, 2021), cyberbullying is known to contribute to psychosocial and academic consequences such as anxiety and stress disorders, low self-esteem, suicide and depression, withdrawal from social engagements both online and offline, and academic setbacks (Holt et al., 2014; Selkie et al., 2015; Tokunaga, 2010).

In response to victimization, college students have been found to adopt defensive coping strategies to stop the bullying in the short-term and prevent further bullying in the long-term (Alipan et al., 2018; Chadha et al., 2020). Instead of reporting the bully to their university's support services or seeking counseling, victimized students often adopt technical solutions such as blocking the bully on social media, increasing their own privacy settings, and choosing not to post content on social media (Alipan et al., 2018). Often referred to as the chilling effect of online harassment (Marder et al., 2016), these defensive coping strategies create distance between the victim and the cyberbullying, but can isolate the victim from their online community and self-censor their participation (Alipan et al., 2018; Chadha et al., 2020). This chilling effect serves to avoid interpersonal confrontation, or drama, as it is later referred to in this paper. Women and girls commonly self-censor after negative online interactions like cyberbullying and online harassment (e.g., Duggan, 2017).

Marder et al. (2016) found that the chilling effect of cyberbullying extends into face-to-face and social media interaction finding that college students “normalize” their behavior to perform the role of “the perceived standards, expectations and values of the perceived surveyor” (pg. 583). In the case of cyberbullying, the “perceived surveyors” are peers with social power. This power dynamic is similar to Foucault's (1975) notion of the Panopticon – a prison structure which leverages surveillance and paranoia, so prisoners perform the role of the perfect inmate (Kitto, 2003). A panopticon is typified when individual self-discipline without coercion as a result of being surveilled by powerful agents. Fear of social disapproval from more powerful peers motivates users to self-censor their behavior whether or not there are actual repercussions (Marder et al., 2016). While research has addressed how ‘lateral’ surveillance between peers results in self-censorship and self-discipline on social media (Chadha et al., 2020), these works have not addressed how the chilling effect of cyberbullying might influence peer interactions on an online discussion board.

With the rise of online learning, the impact of cyberbullying on young adults’ online participation is an emerging concern. When discussion boards are the primary space for collaborative learning and knowledge building, previously victimized women who may self-censor as a defensive coping strategy may not have an equitable experience sharing their ideas and engaging in academic discussion. This paper explores how self-censoring coping strategies may be in tension with online teaching practices in which students share ideas on the online discussion board.

3. Method
This paper is part of a larger mixed-methods study on how prior cyberbullying experiences (and their chilling effect) relate to women's social presence in online academic discussions, if at all. The sequential mixed methods design consists of a quantitative phase followed by a qualitative phase (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007): students completed a survey at the beginning of the semester, were observed in the discussion board throughout the semester, and were interviewed at the end of the semester. Because self-censorship may be socially undesirable to report (Andersen & Mayerl, 2017), self-reported methods alone could capture the prevalence or impact of this negative outcome of cyberbullying. To overcome the issue, the study design included two ways of measuring students' self-censorship: self-reported and observed.

3.1. Focus on women
Women's experiences in online courses are often studied in comparison to men's, with the implicit assumption that the traditional, normal student is a man and any differences between the binary gender groups identifies women as the “other,” despite being the majority of online learners. Often these comparisons find that women deviate from the normal engagement, instead of concluding the same about men (Byrne, 2018). For example, Guiller and Durndell (2006) found that undergraduate women posted nearly five times more than men in a discussion with tutors, thus taking up more of the tutor's attention. This paper, instead centers the voices and experiences of women.

Additionally, much of the cyberbullying literature compares the experiences of women to that of other gender groups which potentially confuses the role of online misogyny in women's experience with cyberbullying (Chadha et al., 2020). In other words, because sexism and gender power dynamics often motivate the cyberbullying and online harassment of women, it is better to study women's experiences apart from that of men or other gender groups. Therefore, to better explore the unique experiences of undergraduates who identify as women, this paper centers only on the experiences of self-reported women and their experiences were analyzed only among that of other women, not in comparison to men or non-binary people.

3.2. Context and participants
Study participants were undergraduates enrolled at a large research university in the Mid-Atlantic in one of the University's required online general education courses that focused on learning professional writing skills. The instructors were professional-track faculty hired to teach these online classes only, and were trained and supervised by the same instruction team. The curriculum and learning objectives for the courses were developed to be parallel. The instructional team who oversaw these courses intentionally designed the curriculum to align with the Community of Inquiry model (Garrison et al., 2000) and facilitate students' social presence. Each online course section was limited to 19 students. The University's IRB approved the study.

Participants were part of a larger study of cyberbullying experiences. Of the 155 online students who completed the general pre-test survey, only 10 women met the criteria for the study: to be undergraduates who self-identified as women and were enrolled in one of the partnering instructors’ section of the course. These 10 students consented to be observed during the discussion board conversations and to be invited for an interview. One woman, however, stopped participating in the course discussions (both posting and commenting) after the first observation and is presumed to have withdrawn from the course midway through the semester. She was removed from the final sample, reducing the sample to nine women.

Of the nine participants, four identified as white women, three identified as Asian or Asian-American women, and there was one Latinx woman and one multi-racial woman. See Table 1 for more demographic information and proxy measures of socio-economic status (Pell Grant eligibility) and cultural capital (first generation college student status). Among these nine women, five reported never having been cyberbullied in any way, while four identified as having been previously victimized by at least one form of cyberbullying. All four women had been the victim of Mean Statements and Rumors and one woman had additionally been the victim of Threats.


Table 1. Participants’ cyberbullying experiences, social presence, and word count.

Group	ID	Race	Pell Grant Eligible	First Gen. College Student	Transfer Status	Victim	“Chose Not to Post Online”	Affective Emotion	Open Commun
-ication	Group Cohesion	Social Presence (Enacted)	Total Word Count
Never had been cyber
-bullied	1	Asian American	No	No	No	Never	N/A	5	16	5	26	1407
2	Asian American	No	No	No	Never	N/A	7	17	2	26	1753
3	White	No	No	Yes, from a 4-year institution	Never	N/A	5	17	7	29	1371
(Crystal) 4	Latinx	Yes	Yes	Yes, from a community college	Never	N/A	4	11	8	23	1027
6	White	No	No	No	Never	N/A	4	15	9	28	1563
Yes, had been cyber
-bullied	7	White	No	No	No	Yes	No	1	12	3	16	501
(Jess) 8	White	No	No	No	Yes	No	4	14	4	22	1585
9	Multi
-racial	No	No	No	Yes	Yes	5	16	5	26	1525
10	Asian
American	No	At least 1 of my parents attended college, but neither parent completed a degree	Yes, from a 4-year institution	Yes	No	2	10	5	17	1265
3.3. Data collection
3.3.1. Survey data
Students accessed the survey via an embedded link in their online course site and email announcements. The online survey elicited their experiences with cyberbullying and their coping strategies, their demographic information, and their consent to be observed throughout the semester. Students were incentivized with a $25 raffle.

Student's previous cyberbullying victimization was measured using the 9-item scale developed by Patchin and Hinduja (2015) and validated for a college student population by Byrne (2021). The survey also adopted several binary items from the Pew Research Center's survey on cyberbullying (Anderson, 2018; Duggan, 2017) including if, in response to being a victim of cyberbullying, they “chose not to post something online,” a binary measure of a possible chilled response to cyberbullying. Finally, students were asked to share their demographic identities.

3.3.2. Online discussion observation data
In partnership with the instructors, transcripts were accessed of four assigned online discussions. These weeks were selected because students were prompted to engage in meaningful discussion about a professional writing assignment related to their future careers. For example, students were encouraged to write about their career goals and how professional writing skills may be helpful for them in the future. For each of the women across four online discussion observations, the transcript included one “post” (a two-paragraph written response to an instructor-provided prompt), and one “comment” (a one-paragraph written response to another student providing feedback, opinion, agreement, disagreement, or follow-up questions), resulting in 72 observed posts and comments.

3.3.3. Interview data
Among the participating women, two agreed to be and were interviewed. During the semi-structured interviews, women described their social presence in online class discussions and their thought process and concerns about posting online. The interview protocol adopted the items from Arbaugh et al.’s (2008) nine-item social presence survey, asking students to share their response orally instead of using a Likert scale. Students were asked follow up questions such as “Can you think of an instance during the class discussions when you enacted Group Cohesion communication? Tell me about that.” After these social presence questions, students were asked questions about their attitudes towards online discussions. Questions include, “Briefly, what did you think about when you were preparing to post to the course discussion?; ” “Did you ever draft a message but not actually post it? If so, why?”; “Did you ever hold back from posting an opinion? A disagreement? If so, why?” Interviews were audio recorded and professionally transcribed.

3.4. Data analysis
3.4.1. Content analysis
Using NViVo 12, women's discussion posts were deductively coded in two passes. All transcripts were blinded so women's reported cyberbullying experiences were not known or associated with their discussion board participation. First, each woman's total number of posts and comments, and subsequent Total Word Count were examined. Since the discussions were mandatory, it was not expected that the number would vary significantly between women.

Second, Shea et al.’s (2010) codebook for social presence was used to code the discussion post content. This codebook is based on the three indicators of social presence: Affective Emotions, Open Communication, and Group Cohesion. Each post and comment were coded for each of the 18 social presence sub-indicators using NVivo 12 (see Table 2 for a complete list of indicators and sub-indicators). Then, to quantify these codes, the posts and comments were recoded in Excel noting the presence (1 = yes, 0 = no) of each sub-indicator. The total Affective Emotion, Open Communication, Group Cohesion, Social Presence scores were computed for each woman.


Table 2. Average enacted social presence indicators and sub-indicators by groups.

Cyberbullying Victimization
Yes, Victim	Never
Affective
Emotion	Expressing emotions	0.00	0.20
Use of humor	0.00	0.00
Self-disclosure	2.00	2.80
Use of unconventional expressions to express emotion	0.00	0.00
Expressing value	1.00	2.00
Open Communication	Continuing a thread	3.25	3.80
Quoting from others' messages	1.25	0.40
Referring explicitly to others' messages	3.25	3.80
Asking questions	0.25	0.20
Complementing, expressing appreciation	2.75	2.60
Expressing agreement	1.50	1.80
Expressing disagreement	0.00a	0.80
Personal advice	0.75	1.80
Group
Cohesion	Vocatives	0.00	0.00
Addresses or refers to the group using inclusive pronouns	0.50a	1.80
Phatics, salutations & greetings	3.00	3.00
Social sharing	0.25	0.20
Course reflection	0.50	1.20
Average
Totals	Affective Emotion	3.00	5.00
Open Communication	13.00	15.20
Group Cohesion	4.25	6.20
Social Presence	20.25a	26.40
Total Word Count	1219.00	1424.20
a
Difference is significant at the 0.05 level.

3.4.2. Interview analysis
The interviews were professionally transcribed and deductively coded in NVivo 12 for the three social presence indicators (parent codes) and the 18 social presence sub-indicators (child codes), as well as their attitudes about online interactions overall. The interviews were blinded to not bias the coding with knowledge of their cyberbullying experiences or enacted social presence. Quotes and notes were organized into thick descriptions for each woman.

3.4.3. Statistical analysis
The observational data of previously victimized women and women without any cyberbullying experience were compared in IBM SPSS version 25. The victimization dichotomous variable allows for the comparison of women who reported never experiencing any form of cyberbullying or online harassment with women who had experienced victimization. Mann-Whitney U tests, the nonparametric version of the Student's t-test, were conducted to compare the enacted social presence of these two groups, because it is more powerful and robust for a small sample size (Byrne, 2017). Findings help us understand the association between victimization and enacted social presence.

3.5. Data integration
Findings were integrated to address the research question by creating a master profile for each woman, organizing profiles by if they experienced cyberbullying or not, and then inductively coding and synthesizing themes within each group. Two representative examples are presented to depict the differences, if any, in social presence in online academic discussions between women who were previously cyberbullied and those who were not.

4. Findings
The nine women observed fall into groups according to victimization experiences (four yes vs. five never; see Table 1). In this section, first the statistical analysis of the differences between these group groups is presented. Then, to make meaning of the statistical findings, the frequencies of social presence enacted by groups are presented (see Table 2), including a discussion of how the groups differed. Finally, two representative student cases are presented to elaborate on and understand the broader group differences.

4.1. Quantitative comparison
Having quantified observed social presence into individual scores for each woman (Table 1) and average scores for previously victimized women and never victimized women (Table 2), Mann-Whitney U tests revealed that previously victimized women enacted significantly different social presence than women who had never been cyberbullied before. Specifically, enacted social presence was greater for women who had never been cyberbullied (median = 26.00) than for previously victimized women (median = 19.50; U = 2.00 p = .046; mean rank for victims = 3.00; never victims = 6.60). Specifically, the two groups of women significantly differed in expressing disagreement (U = 2.00, p = .024; mean rank for victims = 3.00; never victims = 6.60) and addressing the group with inclusive pronouns (e.g., we, us, our; U = 2.00, p = .039; mean rank for victims = 3.00; never victims = 6.60).

4.2. Observed differences by victimization
There are subtle differences between women who identified as victims in comparison to women who reported that they had never experienced any form of cyberbullying victimization (see Table 2). Previously victimized women enacted lower social presence overall, and across all three indicators. While these aggregates identify that previously victimized women restrained from engaging in social or emotional communication, overall, clearer differences can be seen by the sub-indicators – especially within Open Communication.

These women enacted less social sharing, and rarely engaged in self-disclosure or ‘Addresses or refers to the group using inclusive pronouns’. These women met the course requirements without revealing much about themselves or their ideas, or discussing anything with their peers that did not have to do directly with the course material. The only times they engaged in self-disclosure was in response to the introductory prompt which asked students to share the career field they were interested in and how it related to the course.

Not one previously victimized woman expressed disagreement in the discussion boards, as opposed to women who were never victimized who disagreed with their peers occasionally. More specifically, four out of the five women who were never victimized were observed disagreeing with a peer on the discussion board at least once, while none of the four women with prior victimization experience engaged in disagreement. Additionally, victimized women rarely provided personal advice to their peers. When students were giving advice, they often noted a weakness or gap in the previous students’ post (focusing on their logic or design) and then offered constructive feedback on how to improve – often, to be more aligned with the course expectations or aesthetic appeal. For example, The only criticism I have would be to include the website text as a hyperlink versus plain text. This would allow the user to click on the resource easily, over copying the link, pasting it and then hitting enter. (Participant 9)

The lack of disagreement or advice is noteworthy because the instructors' assignment for the comments was to give others constructive feedback. Instead of giving personal advice to or disagreeing with their peers, previously victimized women provided feedback through less confrontational means, if at all. Victimized women were observed enacting higher average instances of quoting from others' messages and complimenting, expressing appreciation. For example, “I enjoy and agree with the recommendation that you chose to include … " The practice of quoting and agreeing with their peers may be a tactic for contributing comments without sharing their own voice, potentially as a way to hide behind others' words. Overwhelmingly, women commented with positive and supportive reflections about surface-level content of the previous students’ post. For example, “I thought that this is a good link to relate to this assignment.”

4.3. Cases
To demonstrate these apparent group differences, two representative cases of women are presented (see Table 1 for more information about individual women in each group). Two women (pseudonyms Jess and Crystal) were interviewed about their social presence and attitude about the online discussion board. To build their cases, each woman's survey responses were integrated with codes, notes, and quotes from the discussion boards observations and their interview. In this section, overviews of their cases are presented and compared for how their differences typify the trends between groups.

4.3.1. Jess
Jess is an undergraduate senior studying engineering who identified as a white, cis-gender straight woman. One of her parents completed college and she is not Pell-grant eligible, suggesting that she holds some privileges in terms of socio-economic status and cultural capital. Jess enrolled in the online class because the asynchronous nature of the course provided her with more flexibility to spend more time at her lab internships and limited the amount of days she had to spend on campus.

Jess has been the victim of cyberbullying - particularly Mean Statements & Rumors. She responded to the survey that one time “Someone posted mean or hurtful comments about me online” as well as once “Someone spread rumors about me online.” Her most recent experience was over two years ago. Jess reported on the survey that her victimization experience did not lead her to choose “not to post something online.”

Jess has private Twitter and Instagram accounts, but she said that she usually just likes and retweets other people's content instead of posting her own. “I just retweet things. I don't jump into the fray on anything.” She withholds from sharing her opinions on social media because she fears a possible negative response from known and unknown users. She said, “if someone does one thing wrong or says one thing wrong, everyone's gonna like jump on them and attack them. So like, I never posted on Twitter.” Speaking generally, Jess explains her belief that online disagreements can lead to being verbally attacked by other users.

Her fear of being attacked online likely related to Jess's participation in the online class. For example, while Jess posted the second highest number of words among all women in the sample, she enacted the third lowest social presence (see Table 1). She enacted an average amount of Affective Emotion social presence, but was in the lower half of the Open Communication and of Group Cohesion. Most notably, Jess never expressed disagreement with her peers. During the interview, Jess spoke about how, after submitting her post, Jess would read through her peers' posts and comment on two that she agreed with. As she said in her interview, Like, you can just like much more probably find something that you agree with, that you respond to. Um, I guess it's a kinda a thing here like online communication, like things can get misconstrued. So, you don't wanna like, you just don't wanna like cause drama for no reason when like no ones that invested in it. So, it's like why find a post that you like disagree with when you could just like respond to one that you agree with and like you're gonna get your two points on the assignment either way … So there's no reason to cause drama by finding one to disagree with. If it's just as easy to agree with one.

She chose this approach because she believed that “when it's like a discussion post, people just kinda don't disagree with each other. It's just kinda like, there's no reason to do that.” Except, there was a reason to disagree. During these discussion board conversations, disagreeing with peers and providing differing solutions to a prompt was encouraged by the instructor.

Her fear of creating conflict or “drama” may have led her to this belief. She stated, “I feel like a lot of things can get misinterpreted on, in online communication where you just don't have the like face to face like context and like body language of things … in general you just can't read someone's tone.” Because she did not want to be misinterpreted, she chose to only agree with her online classmates. The lack of community in the online class may have exacerbated her feelings. According to Jess, you just barely know these people so you don't wanna just be coming like, "I disagree with your, like how you interpreted this article …” Like neither of us really care about. Like it's just like why, why do that?…Like so just like you might as well just all agree with each other. Get your two points and move on instead of like making a big deal about it.

Because she did know her peers well (including their opinions and temperaments) Jess was wary about creating disagreement (i.e., conflict or “drama”) on the discussion boards.

4.3.2. Crystal
Crystal is a junior earning a degree in science. She is a recent transfer student from a local community college and a Pell-grant eligible first-generation college student, suggesting that Crystal comes from a lower socio-economic status. Crystal identified as a Latinx, cis-gender straight woman. Crystal signed up for the online course because she heard on RateMyProfessor.com that these online sections were easier than the face-to-face sections. Crystal reported on the survey that she had not been the victim of cyberbullying.

While Crystal posted the second lowest total word count on the discussion boards, she enacted an average amount of social presence made up of the second highest Group Cohesion, the second lowest Open Communication, and average Affective Emotion. Crystal enacted the most amount of course reflection among all the women in the sample. Crystal commented via agreement fewer times than her peers. Instead, I observed her post more disagreement than many of her peers.

During her interview, Crystal shared that she liked the online class because she feels more comfortable sharing in an online discussion than in a physical classroom because no one is looking at her.

There's more anxiety in class than online … So, like in class, I just won't comment at all … But like online, it's just easier … Because online it's like … if you're wrong, I mean there's no like, there's no like feeling the judgment … Like if you were in person, if you said something that like it's kind of weird. It wasn't like what we were going towards, but like in person you'd be like … like everyone would look at you kind of like, “uh, okay.” But online, you can't really get that feeling … 'Cause you can't see them. You don't see, like, their reaction. And people are a lot nicer online.

Crystal always read the comments people left on her posts and was disappointed that everyone agreed with her instead of providing constructive feedback. She said, “well, so like comments to my own, to my own posts, I would always look at to see like what people would say. But it was always, it always ended up like being very polite, very like … not very constructive.” Accordingly, she tried to give her online classmates feedback that could help their learning, saying, “I would always, like, if I found something to be constructive to someone else's, I would try to like, like say it. I would try to like point out something or, like, you know.”

She may have felt confident to post critical feedback because the classroom did not have a climate of conflict or blunt debate. In her interview Crystal commented that, Like, most of the time I didn't really feel, like, uncomfortable disagreeing 'cause no one really commented back. No one really like said anything back once you disagreed. And so that was, so that was like pretty comfortable. And, yeah. That, that was pretty much it. I would disagree all the time.

At times, however, she said that she withheld giving the same person several pieces of critical feedback out of sensitivity to that person's feelings. She stated, that's why, like, when I went on to do the second peer review … I held back because I wasn't sure if that was, like, too much. Like, if it was just too much to like, like … I guess point out the flaw in their paper. But it was something like basic that I think we should've already been like doing … Because I question myself. Like, is this too much? Like are they gonna like be upset that I'm, like, really, like, picking at their, like, essay?

Crystal may have filtered her comments in this manner because, “I know I have been, like, a little, like, upset when I get too much [critical feedback].” She goes on explain the tension in giving feedback between being gentle and inspiring growth, stating, “Well, 'cause like, but I, like, it's good but I … it also does hurt my feelings.” Her sensitivity and empathy for others informs how much critical feedback she provides to her peers. It is noteworthy, however, that her understanding that others might be hurt by her comments did not stop her from engaging in disagreement or sharing a differing viewpoint because she saw it as part of the learning process.

5. Discussion
The purpose of this initial pilot study is to explore the differences in enacted social presence in an online discussion board between a small sample of women with differing cyberbullying victimization experiences. Integrating survey, observation, and interview data provided initial evidence that women who have previously been cyberbullied enact statistically significantly lower social presence than their nonbullied peers. While these findings are not necessarily generalizable, this relationship indicates the potential tension between coping with victimization and enacting social presence in an online class.

Typified by Jess's case, previously victimized women were observed to avoid disagreement out of concern about writing a comment that could be misunderstood by their peers and starting “drama” among their classmates. In comparison, Crystal and the other women who were not victimized did not shy away from disagreeing with peers. Instead, Crystal expressed that disagreement is constructive for learning. While Crystal empathized with her peers when she disagreed with their posts, she did not withhold from posting, which might represent a healthy level of conscientiousness and thoughtfulness that exemplify netiquette in online learning (Shea et al., 2010). Jess, instead, enacted a more superficial engagement with her peers by complimenting and agreeing in lieu of academic disagreement. While the observation that women tend to agree with their peers in online discussion boards is not new (Guiller & Durndell, 2006), it is the differences between these two groups of women that is novel and warrants further research. In particular, it was the difference between Jess and Crystal's concern about backlash. Crystal disagreed with a peer to support their learning process; she did not express concern about backlash.

Social media culture appeared to be salient to Jess when deciding whose post to comment on and what she would write, focusing her attention on the people she agreed with and avoiding posts with which she disagreed. Using the same defensive communication strategy across social media environments and formal online course discussions might suggest that Jess learned a general heuristic for how to engage in online communication. Similar notions have been posed by cyberbullying and online harassment researchers (Alipan et al., 2018; Chadha et al., 2020); that victims adopt a set of defensive strategies they use across many online communication contexts. Findings from this study indicate that these general defensive strategies might extend into online course discussion boards, as well.

While some might argue that cyberbullied students extend their coping strategies across platforms because of fear of their bully finding them (Alipan et al., 2018), it is important to recall that these women were enrolled in a highly-structured, private online course, hosted within a Learning Management System that identified all posts with their full names. This was not a case of context collapse, i.e., when academic and social networks overlap causing students to self-censor to clearly distinguish a classroom identity and a social identity (Dennen & Burner, 2017). These women were not in a collapsed media environment and their bully was, very likely, not enrolled in the course. Regardless, this sample of previously victimized women were observed potentially self-censoring even in the private online course, thus suggesting the notion that the online discussion board is situated within students’ broader online lives and connected, in some way, to how they experience online communication as a whole.

5.1. Implications for online teaching and learning
The tentative, yet statistically significant, difference in enacted social presence between previously cyberbullied women and their peers raises concerns about the quality of the online discussion for both groups of women. When Jess self-silenced, she seemed to withdraw from sharing ideas and feedback that could have helped her peers in their learning process. Her voice, and the voices of other women with cyberbullying experiences, were significantly less present in the classes' collaborative knowledge building. While her peers may have lost the full benefits of learning from her, Jess also may not have gained all the benefits of fully participating and being fully socially present in an online academic discussion. Considering that importance of social presence as a predictor of students’ cognitive presence, collaborative learning, achievement, and satisfaction (Richardson et al., 2017), previously cyberbullied women may not gain the same benefits of online academic discussions as their peers.

Like social media, online discussion boards can serve as a virtual panopticon (Kitto, 2003): a space in which students are being watched and judged by their peers and their instructor. Discussion boards, as they appear to invoke self-censorship and defensive strategies among women with cyberbullying experiences, may not be scaffolding the honest dialogue and collaboration necessary for collaborative knowledge building (e.g., Stahl, 2005). Without a space to enact social presence, freely share ideas, and disagree with one another without fear, online discussion boards may not be an equitable learning environment for women who self-censor in response to cyberbullying experiences. Online educators’ reliance on discussion boards as the primary space for learner-learner communication has the potential to perpetuate an inequitable learning environment for previously victimized women.

These findings can inform new designs for online discussion environments that focus on scaffolding the practice of and communicating the instructor's role in supporting constructive disagreement between students without “drama” or backlash. Additionally, findings speak to the need for online educators to be aware of how digital pedagogies may be at odds with students' online engagement strategies and the role of the instructor in fostering an online learning community in which previously victimized women do not self-censor. For example, to support students in having more productive disagreements, online educators could leverage models of facilitation that stresses to students to collaborate on a set of ground rules for peer discussion, and to empathize with their peers and own the impact of their statements. Instructors may also clarify how they observe student interactions and the process by which they will intervene if a student-student interaction becomes unproductive or harmful, a desire of many online college students (Bauman & Baldasare, 2015).

5.2. Limitations
First, because of the small sample of this pilot study, only correlational relationships can be examined. While this study hypothesized a possible relationship between prior victimization status and enacted social presence, no causal inferences can be made. Additionally, as this study only intended to explore group differences by victimization experience, we cannot investigate the direction of the relationship. For example, it is possible that women with lower social presence are more likely to be victimized or to identify as a cyberbullying victim. Future longitudinal work is needed to explore possible causal relationship and their direction.

A second key limitation in this analysis is that not all previously victimized women self-reported on the survey that they purposefully enacted a chilled response in online engagement. Additionally, even among this small sample, women possibly differed in the emotional effect victimization had on them. Future qualitative work is needed to explore this phenomenon with a larger sample to differentiate between cyberbullied women and to clarify any similarities or differences in their coping strategies. Ongoing work is needed to address the validity and reliability of quantitative measures of victimization among a college student sample (i.e., Byrne, 2021). Finally, qualitative research with an intersectional lens could help us understand how cyberbullying impacts the online learning experiences of marginalized groups women such as LGBTQ + women and Women of Color.

6. Conclusion
This mixed-methods study explores how undergraduate women with cyberbullying experiences adopt defensive coping strategies that chilled their social presence in an online class. Specifically, this study looked at how women self-censored in an online academic discussion board thus limiting their enacted social presence. While these self-censorship strategies may protect women from online harassment, they inhibit their equitable participation in online collaborative learning. As cyberbullying and online learning become ubiquitous in the lives of undergraduate students, online educators and learning environment designs need to consider how cyberbullying experiences inform how undergraduate women interact in online learning settings.

