Teacher education often under-theorizes race. The field of teacher education and technology integration is also complicit in assuming a race-neutral space into which technologies are integrated. This paper explores what pre-service teachers’ (PSTs) technology integration

reveals about racialized assumptions. The research applies theoretical frameworks from teacher preparation, Whiteness and Critical Race studies, and technology integration. This study points toward a relationship between PST development, beliefs about technology, and an intersection with race awareness. The PSTs made assumptions about learning deficits, appropriate behaviors, and classroom environment, based on Whiteness, which impacted how they integrated technology. These findings complexify current educational technology narratives of technology integration which emphasize the relationship between teacher beliefs about knowledge acquisition and technology integration, but often divorce those beliefs from assumptions about race. Implications for practice include the need to confront white supremacy concealed within the technologies and pedagogies that teacher educators choose in the classroom.

Keywords
Educational technology
Critical race theory
Pre-service teacher
Technology
Integration
Whiteness studies

1. What pre-service teacher technology integration conceals and reveals: “Colorblind” technology in schools
Teacher education often “grossly under-theorizes” race (Milner, Pearman, & McGee, 2013, p. 339). The field of teacher education and technology integration is also complicit in generally assuming a race-neutral space into which technologies are integrated (Krutka, Heath, & Willet, 2019; Krutka, Heath, & Mason, 2020). A technology-as-progress narrative pervades much educational technology research and practice, presuming that technology will save education (Papert, 1988; Watters, 2019). However, educational technology choices often exacerbate educational inequalities and social injustices, not solve them (Benjamin, 2019; Krutka, 2020; Noble, 2018; Selwyn, 2017). For instance when integrating Class Dojo, a frequently used behavior tracking and communication application in education, teachers normalize dominant (White) cultural expectations of behavior. This leads Black and Indigenous Students of Color (BISOC) to understand themselves and their worth through the performative -- and rewarded -- behaviors of Whiteness (Manolev, Sullivan, & Slee, 2019). Teacher preparation programs (TPPs) often send pre-service teachers (PSTs), already unequipped to consider race, into field placements with high technology use which exacerbates systemic racism.

We are two White female-identifying teacher educators who actively teach about the racialization of our content areas (social studies and literacy), but we are both culpable of teaching about technology as a neutral and colorblind tool for education. Our harmful approach to technology integration became obvious to us as we observed our PSTs' attitudes toward educational technology. In their field observation notes, our PSTs frequently referenced the students' “mis”behavior and attitudes surrounding the technology and expressed concern about their own inability to implement lessons using the one-to-one technology in the classroom. At the same time, our PSTs rarely acknowledged the races of their students, nor commented on their own racial homogeneity. We also noticed that mentor teachers used technology as a reward for students who complied with normalized (White) standards of behavior, and our PSTs parroted back this approach when we invited them to integrate technology in their lesson plans. We wondered about the context of race and a high-technology school on the experiences of the PSTs. Broadly, we wondered what might be concealed and revealed by pre-service teacher technology integration? Specifically we asked What could PST choices about technology integration uncover about their development as teachers and their assumptions about race?

2. Theoretical framework
To address this question, we analyzed PSTs' development of their awareness of their privilege, power, and purpose as a teacher at the intersection of race and technology. We used theoretical frameworks from teacher preparation, Whiteness and Critical Race studies, and technology integration. To frame and analyze findings related to PST development, we applied Conway and Clark's (2003) revised version of Fuller and Brown's (1975) Teacher Development Model. Conway and Clark (2003) suggest that PSTs' concerns move through inward and outward stages. Outwardly, PSTs first demonstrated concern about themselves, then about tasks, and finally about impact on students. Inwardly, PSTs moved through a journey toward self-awareness, making attempts to better self-organize and self-develop.

We analyzed and discussed the PSTs perceptions about instructional technology by framing understandings using teacher beliefs and technology integration practices (Ertmer et al., 2012). Ertmer and colleagues (2012) suggested that teacher beliefs about technology aligned with teacher beliefs about student centered learning. As teachers committed to an epistemology of student constructed learning, they also believed that technology integration should center the student in learning. This aligns neatly with Conway and Clark’s (2003) framing of hopes and fears of PSTs and the relationship to teacher development. This lens allowed us to explore PST beliefs about technology; however, we found that both the teacher development model and the technology beliefs lens lacked a robust consideration of socially constructed factors which might influence technology integration. In particular, we needed a lens to scrutinize the racialization of P-12 students and the whiteness of education.

We laid the lenses of Whiteness studies and Critical Race Theory, as well as a beliefs based model of technology integration, over the teacher development framework. This allowed us to discuss the ways in which PSTs development as teachers intersected with their technology integration beliefs and practices, as well as their understandings and conceptualizations of race. In our analysis, we used critical theory to identify the systematic processes and individual practices that uphold domination and white supremacy in technology education. This is framed through lenses of Whiteness studies and Critical Race theory, particularly focusing on the ontologies and epistemologies of whiteness (Leonardo, 2009). We also worked to make visible the hidden practices of white supremacy, including Upholding White Interests (Bell, 1980; Milner IV, Pearman, & McGee, 2013, pp. 359–374), Claiming Neutrality/Colorblindness/Meritocracy (Bonilla-Silva, 2006; Solórzano & Delgado Bernal, 2001), and Prioritizing White Knowledge (Leonardo, 2013; Solórzano & Yosso, 2002).

3. Review of literature
Teacher development models presume a stage based advancement of teacher beliefs and practices throughout a teacher's career (eg. Conway & Clark, 2003; Fuller & Brown, 1975; Maskit, 2011). These models offer a way to frame teacher growth as well as suggest effective methods for building teachers' knowledge base through pre-service teacher education and professional development. Conceptions of teacher development models mirror understandings of learning more broadly, moving from individualized constructions of meaning to more socially constructed and contextualized understandings of knowledge (van Tartwijk, Zwart, & Wubbels, 2017).

Conway and Clark (2003) suggested that pre-service teachers journey through awareness both outwardly and inwardly. That is, pre-service teachers move through an awareness of their own influence and power in the classroom while simultaneously growing more reflective of their own internal knowledge and growth. According to this model, the pre-service teacher initially focuses on management, behavior, and order then moves toward the goal of developing the self as a professional educator. A PST's concerns (or fears) as well as the PST's hopes and aspirations, indicate both where the PST is in their development and suggest where they may be headed next on their journey of self-reflection, awareness, and professional growth.

Stage based models face criticism because of their emphasis on stages and not on what teachers develop (Dall’Alba & Sandberg, 2006). Further, these frameworks assume teaching is an individual act and fail to consider contextual and political influences on a teacher (Zeichner & Teitelbaum, 1982). In our study we were curious not only about the ways that pre-service teachers might be less experienced than their in-service counterparts, but we were also curious about whether and how PST technology integration changed over time, and if and how that intersected with awareness of race that changed over time. The what of their development was their awareness of race in education and their ability to integrate technology in order to teach literacy.

3.1. Critical race theory and whiteness studies
With the acknowledgement of the dominance of white supremacy, and mindful of Zeichner and Teitelbaum’s (1982) critique that teacher development frameworks presume teaching is an individual act and fail to consider contextual and political influences, we used critical race theory to interrogate the PSTs' awareness (or lack thereof) of biographical, political, and cultural influences on their own development. Critical race theory provides a lens through which to filter and analyze normative narratives in order to examine issues of race, class, and gender within historical context (Ladson-Billings & Tate, 2006; Taylor, Gillborn, & Ladson-Billings, 2009). The conceptual premises of colorblind racism (Bonilla-Silva, 2006) and prioritizing White ways of knowing and being (Leonardo, 2013), help frame and interrogate normative teaching narratives rooted in white supremacy.

Colorblind approaches to race reflect neoliberal assumptions of equality and merit. Choosing to engage with a student based on the individual and their “character” allows white people to appear reasonable and moral, while simultaneously erasing the systems of oppression, which operate daily on the lives and bodies of BIPOC (Bonilla-Silva, 2006). Colorblind racism in schools further marginalizes students of color while maintaining White privilege. It prioritizes White ways of existing in the world (Leonardo, 2013), normalizing the performance of White ways of knowing and acting. In education, White epistemology manifests as a colonizing of knowledge, a forced imposition of epistemology on BIPOC through curriculum, pedagogy, and policy (Leonardo, 2013). Teachers and schools reward students who perform expected behaviors of Whiteness (including compliance and silence), and punish students who refuse to subjugate themselves to White expectations of behavior.

Similarly, teacher education upholds White supremacy by prioritizing White knowledge and experience. While TPPs emphasize the need to develop race consciousness and orientations toward social justice in pre-service teachers, rarely do they overhaul their entire curricula to reflect this orientation (Sleeter, 2017). This is reflective of a tendency in teacher education to nod toward White privilege while failing to interrogate the relationship between White supremacy and the ways that it bestows White privilege (Leonardo, 2009). This glancing and incomplete attempt is unsurprising when viewed as part of the pervasive, damaging, and recursive loop necessary to sustain White supremacy, structured in dominance (Hall, 1996).

Whiteness studies contends that de-centering whiteness demands a confrontation and acknowledgement of the existence of Whiteness (Giroux, 1997). White ways of knowing and being exist to uphold White supremacy while simultaneously masking it from view (Leonardo, 2009). Individuals and systems work to uphold White interests and prioritize White feelings (Bell, 1987; Milner IV et al., 2013). At the same time, White individuals and institutions claim neutrality or colorblindness, insisting that success within school is based on effort and hard work (Solórzano & Delgado Bernal, 2001). Finally, White knowledge and experience dominate discourse and are presumed as universal norms. This extends to expected behaviors, as McLaren (1999) noted, “The codification of whiteness as a social hieroglyph associated with civility, rationality, and political advancement is part of inherited social and cultural formations” (p. 40). Uncovering, confronting, and then abolishing the codification of whiteness is central to the aim of whiteness studies.

4. Methodology and data sources
In our study we aim to uncover assumptions about race by investigating pre-service teacher technology integration. We used descriptive case study to engage in holistic and exploratory understandings of the phenomenon (Merriam, 2002) of PST experiences with technology, race, and teacher development in a high-technology field-based teacher preparation course. A case study encompasses the complexity of “specific, unique, bounded system (Stake, 2000, p. 426), and the insight to “understand its activity within important circumstances” (Stake, 1995, xi). The richness of the case study depends on the layered, nested, and multiple data sources within the case (Patton, 2002) and the multilayered, intersected, and overlapping units of analysis. We collected data from multiple sources, including videos, interviews, and lesson reflections, in order to create a comprehensive overview of the case (Patton, 2002). The participants in this case study were enrolled in a field-based literacy methods course taught in a suburban/urban middle school with majority-minoritized and majority FARMS students.

4.1. Participants
Seventeen PSTs were enrolled in the content-area based literacy course and all (four identifying as males, 13 identifying as women) agreed to participate in the study. The PSTs were diverse in their majors (English, Math, Social Studies, Spanish, Science) and marginally diverse in their racial demographics (two identifying as South Asian, one identifying as Latinx, 14 identifying as White). The PSTs were enrolled in their first semester in the TPP; however, all had taken the TPP's stand-alone technology course a semester or two prior to enrollment in the TPP. The teacher educator (White, female) taught this course in the field for five years. Prior to her appointment at the university, she taught middle and high school English in racially diverse districts in Florida and Ohio.

4.2. Setting
PSTs attended the content-area based literacy course at a middle school located in a large, racially and socio-economically diverse district in the Mid-Atlantic region. The course is the first of two required literacy courses for certification, and PSTs enroll in the spring of their junior year (the semester before their part-time internship). The course is unique because of its field-based nature in a racially diverse middle school classroom (Segal, 2018). The field-based course emphasizes praxis. Students participate in a lecture, during which they learn literacy theory and strategies. Then they apply that knowledge to the middle school classroom, where they teach two lessons throughout the semester.

The middle school building is 60 years old and only recently undergoing renovations, including central air. The student population mirrors the district population in that it is both racially and socioeconomically diverse. There are approximately 1000 students and over 55% of the students are on FARMS. The 2019 racial statistics of the school indicated that the student population self-identified along the following breakdown: 43% Black, 9% Hispanic, 2% Asian, 5% more than two races, 41% White. There are 53 teachers and 21% of them identify as minoritized races.

4.3. Researcher positionality
Both researchers are White women who taught in K-12 classrooms before their work in the academy. Marie taught high school social studies for 7 years at a majority White and rural school. For the past 10 years, she has taught and researched in higher education, working with PSTs and graduate students. Her research focuses on technology, teaching, and civic engagement. Pamela taught middle and high school English and Language Arts for four years in South Florida before entering graduate school and teaching in higher education. Pamela's experiences in the K-12 classroom influence her pedagogy which emphasizes theory to practice in teaching. Additionally, Pamela was the instructor of the literacy course explored in this case study.

4.4. Data collection
The data were collected over the sixteen week spring semester, culminating with a lesson taught by the PSTs. The lesson required a text,1 technology integration, and curricular alignment with district standards. PSTs video recorded their lessons and completed a reflection based on their experiences as well as upon professor and peer feedback. The data for the study included lesson plan artifacts, videos of the PSTs implementing lessons, PST reflections (written and annotated on the video), classmate and professor critiques, and individual interviews. The richness of this case study was supported by the multiple data sources (Patton, 2002) and the overlapping units of analysis.

4.5. Data analysis
We coded all data using the free software, atlas.ti. We first used emergent coding to identify themes (Patton, 2002). At that point, we moved from inductive to deductive coding, and applied our theoretical framework to the themes. We organized the themes within the stages of Conway and Clark’s (2003) model (see Table 1). The multiple data sources allowed us to triangulate the data by “offering opportunities for deeper insight into the relationship between the inquiry approach and the phenomenon of study” (Patton, 2002, p. 248).


Table 1. Stages of PST development aligned with example codes of PST beliefs about technology and race.

Stages of PST Development	PST Beliefs and Attitudes Toward Technology	PST Assumptions of Race/Culture/Society
Concern toward impact on self	Technology complicates implementation of the lesson.
Technology “winds” kids up.	No direct references to race, but instead references to expected behaviors of silence and compliance.
Concern toward tasks	Technology can make learning more “fun.”
Technology engages students and keeps them interested in the lesson and what they are learning.	Use coded language to discuss race and diversity in the classroom.
Concern toward impact on learning
(PSTs in this study rarely experienced this stage and then only during post-teaching reflection)	Technology can offer new ways to explore information.	The consideration of race and the impact of the PSTs teaching and technology integration is absent from the post-teaching reflections.
5. Findings
This study points toward a relationship between PST development, beliefs about technology, and an intersection with race awareness. These findings complexify current educational technology narratives of technology integration which emphasize the relationship between teacher beliefs about knowledge acquisition and technology integration, but often divorce those beliefs from assumptions about race. Further, our findings suggest that PST development includes reflections and considerations of race within larger considerations of how a PST views their own actions as a teacher, and points to possibilities for clear and direct reflection on racialization of students and of PSTs.

PSTs who were most concerned with their own selves (Stage One) tended to demonstrate negative beliefs about technology while taking an almost completely colorblind approach to race. These beliefs intersected in PSTs, as they believed that students least likely to perform Whiteness were also the least deserving of potentially “disruptive” technology integrations. PSTs who were most concerned with the tasks of teaching (Stage Two) tended to emphasize the role of technology to make learning “fun” for students. In this stage, PSTs used coded language to discuss race (eg. “many cultures” instead of naming their own or a student's race). The PSTs who began to consider student learning (Stage 3), or who were particularly reflective about their own self-development, discussed the ways that technology might facilitate learning. Rarely were the PSTs in the latter group, but this is not necessarily surprising as this was their very first semester in their TPP. Despite a deeper emphasis on learning and technology, PSTs in stage three never acknowledged nor discussed race. This may be because so few PSTs ever worked within this stage, or it may be because we failed to directly teach racialization through technology. We explicate this below and have also summarized the relationship in Table 1, Stages of PST Development Aligned with PST Beliefs about Technology.

6.1. Stage 1 - Concern toward self
In stage one of the model, Conway and Clark (2003) propose that PSTs focus on their own selves (e.g. What actions am I doing as a teacher to run this lesson? as opposed to, What tasks are my students doing? (Stage 2), Or Are my students learning during this lesson?(Stage 3)). We found that PSTs in the first stage of the Teacher Development Model presumed that they were successful as teachers if students remained quiet and did not interrupt the planned lesson. Quiet students allowed the PSTs to, in their way of thinking, tick off the items on their lesson plan, without disruption. This translated into concerns that too much technology could upset the balance of a controlled classroom environment. The PSTs concern over quiet and order also hints at unspoken (and unexamined, by the PSTs) assumptions about schooling. That is to say, the PSTs’ imagined perfect classroom reflected order and compliance which allowed the teacher to “teach” (impart knowledge). This conception of what good teaching is connects to normative, White, understandings of what school “should be” (Gillborn, 2005; McLaren, 1999). A space where students are compliant and teachers can impart (or impose) knowledge (Leonardo, 2009).

The emphasis on White ways of being is evident in the ways PSTs conflate compliance with learning, and their concern that technology prevents compliance. For instance, PST Maddie contended that technology “winds the kids up,” so she found it difficult to integrate in her lessons. Maddie2 stated, “Using Kahoot, the students did get a little loud and excited because everyone was participating and having fun, so keeping the students focused was key during this time.” Sam worried that broken links and technology that failed to work properly made him “look disorganized” and created opportunities for students to move off task. Cara felt frustrated by the ways that technology complicated transitions in her lesson, “Moving forward, I feel areas that need improvement include transitions, additional supports, utilizing technology, and closing. The first area is transitions. I felt that there were a lot of moving parts and with technology transitions were often more difficult.”

In addition, Maria worried about technology as a distraction. She shared, “I was concerned about the PollEverywhere distracting the students from the learning process by having students focused on how to use the technology. Some students finished way before the other students who had trouble even logging into their computers.” Similarly, Amy stated:

I would work on making sure to explain that inappropriate words should not be submitted as an answer for the poll activity, even if the answers make sense. During our lesson, a student submitted the word “poop,” which was true because it made sense, but it led to the class getting a little off task so I would definitely go back and instruct students with appropriate examples and inappropriate examples for the poll during instruction.

The PST's perceived technology as one more thing that had to be managed, controlled, and constantly monitored. That is, they already perceived the students themselves as something to be managed, controlled, and monitored, and technology just added to their list of things needing to be policed. These PSTs comments reflected the overall trend of PSTs in this stage by defining a good lesson as one in which students performed quietness and stillness (Leonardo, 2013) and prioritized the feelings of the PSTs (who represent the “authority” in the room) (Milner IV et al., 2013).

The need to perform Whiteness through control is also evident in Don's approach to classroom management and technology integration. Don, a White male, elaborated his feelings, “I felt awkward when having to tell the students to settle down and listen up. I feel I need to practice speaking louder and more authoritative.” Don, like his classmates, aligned the idea of the students being quiet, sitting still, and appearing to listen as the “correct” or “productive” type of classroom.

5.2. Stage 2 - Concern towards tasks
PSTs in this stage focused on technology as a tool to make learning “fun” and used coded language (eg. “diversity” when they meant “race”) when reflecting on their lessons. As PSTs practice teaching in Stage Two, they are more aware of the tasks that their students perform. Our findings suggest that an orientation toward the students also brings an awareness of the race of the students. While PSTs in this stage of development referred to race in their lesson reflections, it remained rare that they explicitly considered race in their lesson planning or teaching. Of the seventeen students that participated in the study, only one group of three PSTs addressed race in their lesson plan, and even then it was indirect. This group integrated video technology in their lesson, specifically looking for videos that were representative of many races. Ally explained,

We tried to connect to many cultures and backgrounds by picking a video that the students could relate to. The video contained a rap song that the students seemed to like and the characters that sang the song were from diverse backgrounds.

This quote reflects the PSTs' tendency to equate technology to “fun” and also reflects how the PST evades a discussion of race (here they are referring to Black students who, the PSTs’ assumed, would identify with rap music in the video) and instead refers more broadly to “diverse backgrounds.” Despite having talked about race and diversity throughout the literacy course (e.g., all classrooms at the school include students from different racial, cultural, and religious backgrounds; no two students are alike) the students neither recognized nor discussed these issues as the basis of their decision.

PSTs also approached technology as something that could trick students into thinking learning could be fun, pointing to an underlying deficit approach to their thinking. The need to fool students into engagement uncovers an assumption that the PSTs hold about their students - that they would not find learning compelling or appealing for its own sake. For instance, Sarah noted, “I think since the students didn't know us or what the lesson was about, it was effective to use technology as the engagement because it made them interested and think the lesson was going to be exciting.” Ella used PollEverywhere to generate student responses and noted, “The students seemed very excited to come up with examples and see their responses posted on the board. This activity helped us to develop a fun atmosphere.” Many equated engagement and participation with student enjoyment, not with student learning.

PSTs in this stage also acknowledged race while still upholding their own Whiteness. For example, Don, a White male and a member of the video group from the above example about rap music, asserted, “It was hard for me to pronounce some students' names, and I realized I asked for their names but didn't call them by their names.” Instead of asking the student again, or asking if he was pronouncing a student's name correctly, Don chose to not to call his students by their names. He acknowledges that he wanted to call students by their names-- a recognition of the importance of student names and the connections that can be made. But he defaulted to the power inherent to his position as a (White, Male) teacher, and decided not to be uncomfortable in order to make his students more comfortable.

Several students in Stage Two acknowledged the need for more technology for emergent bi-lingual students and struggling learners, but this centered on differentiation through technology and not an acknowledgement of the racism that many emergent bi-lingual students experience. Brie shared, “I think guided notes would have been helpful because there would have been more key term clues to look for whenever going over the material. That way it is represented visually (UDL) and not just verbally said.” Brie is thinking of diversity as differing cognitive needs, despite the fact that she refers here to emergent bi-lingual students. Similarly, Maggie stated:

For the students with different needs, we could have had separate activities ready for them. Even though we did not know who these students were going into the lesson, we could have had a challenge problem ready for when we saw a student doing well. Or we could have had a worksheet with a prompt for students who needed extra help during the scavenger hunt … If we would have known the students who had IEP's or were gifted, then we could have given them modified work.

Maggie makes the point about her group's lack of knowledge of the need for differentiation, but again like her classmate above, she only addresses a small portion of diversity in the classroom and leaves out the racial diversity.

Jenny felt that students turned to technology, labeling it a distraction, when the students did not comprehend the directions or the learning activity. In this particular case, Jenny worried that she could not effectively support emergent bi-lingual students and include them in the work of the larger class. Instead, the students clustered in the back of the classroom and talked amongst themselves and on their phones. Jenny explains:

I think that the students who experience frustration, whether it be because they don't understand the information or language, have a tendency to completely shut down and distract themselves with other things like phones. If I were better prepared to handle this I think bringing students back to the lesson in a way that would help them to better understand what they are learning and why they are learning it would have kept them engaged and interested.

Jenny recognizes that she was unable to support her Latinx students and directly confronts her inability and her lack of knowledge about the class. She engages in thoughtful reflection about her role in supporting students, especially students with a different racial-linguistic background from herself.

On the other hand, Jenny's approach reflects deficit thinking, particularly in the way she focused on the phones as a distraction to the students. She later elaborated that her mentor teacher hesitated to allow a lesson with technology to be used in that particular class, “The biggest concern was that Ms. Nelson suggested we do not use technology with this particular class. She said it is often a cause of distraction for this group of students.” Although Jenny ended up using technology with that class, this leads us to wonder about the ways in which a mentor influences a PST's attitudes, beliefs, and development.

5.3. Stage 3 - Concern toward learning
The PSTs never entered this stage of development while teaching, but some floated into this stage during lesson reflections. The PSTs received feedback from the professor, their peers, and the students, and then wrote a reflection paper. In reflections, PSTs demonstrated genuine consideration of their successes and failures to integrate technology, pedagogy, and content. They were able to assess their own practice and make recommendations to themselves for improved pedagogy and technology integration for the future. However, students who engaged in this sort of reflection on practice never engaged in reflection on race and its potential impact on practice. For example, Sarah noted in her reflection that her group could have used technology more effectively in their lesson:

I think there might have been a better use of technology either in modifying the questions we used in our poll or using a new technology all together. If we had asked questions about the price of natural or artificial sugar or the amount of each produced, there would have been a stronger connection to the lab and we could've had a deeper discussion about why one costs more than the other based on how much energy they produced and similar connection questions. I also think that we missed an important practice of analyzing graphs/data, which could've been aided by technology. We didn't have enough time for students to construct a graph of the class data, so we skipped it, but we could have used a technology that would make the graph quickly for us.

Upon reflection, Sarah realized that technology would have been beneficial to her students and their knowledge of the content. Her statement that “modifying the questions… would have been a stronger connection to the lab,” shows that she is aware of the impact of her teaching on the students. In addition, post lesson, she was able to consider the implication of not analyzing graph data and the impact that doing so had on the students and the lesson as a whole.

Sarah's response typifies other PST reflections. They make thoughtful observations about their practice and recommend other strategies to themselves that they might use in the future. However, these strategies exist in a race vacuum. The consideration of race, and the impact that it might have on their teaching and their technology integration, remains absent from their reflections.

6. Discussion
Our broad research question asked what might be concealed and revealed by pre-service teacher technology integration? We found that PST technology integration reflected assumptions about race, in particular, assumptions about performative Whiteness (their own, and their students’). As PSTs develop a more outward facing consideration of learning (What are the students doing? And are the students learning?), they may indirectly attend to the race of the students; however, their overall failure to acknowledge race impacted their pedagogical and technological choices in ways that could harm students, particularly students of color. The PSTs made assumptions about learning deficits, appropriate behaviors, and classroom environment, based on Whiteness, which impacted both the way they integrated technology in the classroom and their reflection of how technology played a role in the lesson.

6.1. Technology integration as a tool of white supremacy
Failing to acknowledge or discuss race allowed PSTs to claim neutrality (Solorzano & Bernal, 2001) or “color blindness” when integrating technology into the classroom. For example, a majority of the PSTs’ omitted race from their lesson reflections. If PSTs did discuss race, they used coded language to blur and deflect from directly confronting race (e.g. using words like “many cultures” instead of “Black”). The PSTs failure to address or consider race led to intentional pedagogical choices about technology integration that reinforced White expectations of “good” behavior, upholding White knowledge and ways of knowing (Leonardo, 2009). PSTs defined “good” behaviors as quiet and compliant, both characteristics of White behavior expectations (Leonardo, 2013).

The prioritization of White ways of being also reinforced teaching and technology integration as policing. In this case, the PSTs wielded technology as a reward for performative White behaviors and a punishment for students not worthy of the “reward” and of technology. They also perceived technology as a distraction which could increase “bad” or “off-task” behaviors, and as one more thing to be controlled in the classroom. For example, some PSTs discussed how technology “wound up” students or distracted them from the work at hand. In one case, at the urging of the mentor, the PST chose not to include technology in a class because the mentor deemed the class more at risk for off task behaviors. The PST did use technology, because it was required of the lesson plan; however, this commentary makes us question the current and future impact that a mentor teacher has on a PSTs perception and pedagogy of technology use in the classroom.

The PSTs in this study were all in the first semester of their TPP, and perhaps unsurprisingly, tended to indicate attitudes toward teaching that centered around their own development and performance in the classroom. They worried about themselves and their teaching performance more than they demonstrated concern about students, student learning, or their race and their students' races. Additionally, PSTs who focused on their own performance were most concerned about the ways that first-order barriers to integration complicated their lessons. In other words, instead of noting the ways that first order barriers might impact student learning (Ertmer, 1999), or instead of brainstorming and problem solving to overcome first-order barriers to technology, the PSTs worried about how the technology complicated or infringed on the implementation of their lesson. On the other hand, when PSTs believed technology was useful, it tended to be because the PSTs perceived that technology enhanced student engagement and enjoyment of the lesson (often referred to by the PSTs as “making learning fun”). Yet, none of the PSTs troubled the notion of technology making learning “fun”-- assuming instead that learning is inherently not enjoyable, and that students can be tricked into enjoying it through technology.

This has implications for how PSTs integrate technology, especially when they are in early stages of teacher development. If early career PSTs conflate being quiet with learning, this means they are unlikely to use technology that might challenge learners, start difficult discussions, and risk “winding them up.” Teachers more often penalize students of color for perceived loud and restless behavior (Zimmerman et al., 1995). This could mean that PSTs are even less likely to implement technology in classrooms with BIPOC, and we suggest a line of future research centering these concerns.

We found that PSTs rarely considered the ways in which technology might support (and PSTs never considered the ways that technology might further marginalize) already marginalized groups. Additionally, none of the students discussed how technology integration could support a diverse population of students or the impact (or lack of impact) that a device can have on students in a one-to-one school. Interestingly, the teacher educator noted that she discussed “the diversity of the school and the impact that using various technology tools can support all students in the classroom but specifically those who struggle in the content area literacy classroom,” throughout the course; yet, the students did not address this as part of their reflections on the lesson they taught.

6.2. Reflection to interrupt white supremacy
One way to address the colorblind racism (Bonilla-Silva, 2006) of schools is through direct reflection on race and technology. Conway and Clark (2003) suggested that inward facing concerns are not inherently problematic for novice teachers, because facing inward allows for self-reflection and reflection on practice. While the PSTs in the study did acknowledge some of the ways that their teaching practice might improve, none of the PSTs reflected on the role of their race (or their students’ races) and its impact on their teaching. None of the PSTs wondered why they assumed that a quiet classroom was an effective classroom. None of the PSTs interrogated why kids who are “wound up” are considered class behavior problems, nor did they interrogate their own biases surrounding the behaviors of Black and Brown children. Performative Whiteness and the many structures that uphold Whiteness are suffused throughout education (Leonardo, 2013), but unless they are explicitly discussed and examined, they often remain invisible, especially to those who wield the power.

Although the literacy course specifically addressed reflection of racialization through texts, it did not address, nor ask students to reflect on, racialization of students through technology. This is a deficit on our part as teacher educators, and represents our own complicity in upholding the structures of Whiteness from which we, ourselves, benefit. This suggests that a failure to explicitly discuss the implications of technology within the context of race upholds white supremacy, particularly by claiming neutrality and colorblindness. We suggest that teacher educators incorporating technology in field-based courses address the non-neutrality of technology and its implications for justice in the classroom (Heath, 2018; Selwyn, 2017).

7. Conclusion
Technology is more than just a tool to be wielded, or “integrated,” in the classroom. Rather, interrogating practices around technology helps illuminate the network of relationships and power structures in which technology, and the users, are interwoven (Pink, 2016). In this study, we explored the ways that pre-service teacher technology integration uncovered assumptions about race. We found that as PSTs develop a more student focused orientation, they develop more positive perspectives on the possibilities of technology. However, the PSTs remained (unwittingly) committed to using technology as a tool to uphold whiteness. They policed student behavior and technology use; used technology to reward performative whiteness; and affirmed deficit stereotypes by believing technology could trick students of color into thinking learning could be “fun.” In 2020, during a global pandemic which disproportionately sickens and kills BIPOC; during unprecedented protests of police murders of Black people; and rising domestic terrorism rooted in white supremacy, we feel special urgency to acknowledge and engage in anti-racist work in educational technology and teacher preparation. We aim for our own practice and research to reflect the urgency of this moment, and we hope that these findings further critical race theory and discourse in educational technology.
