In the paper, we investigated if women's student profile, persistence and grades differ from those of men, using log data from 4.452 students (women = 30%) enrolled in four MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) with technological themes from a Brazilian platform. The student profile, which included survey data on intention to finish the MOOC, liking the subject matter, time spent on the course, educational level and age group, indicated no significant difference. Additionally, a cluster analysis identified similar groups for men and women: each gender had a group with “high performance students”, with high grades and persistence, plus groups with low grades and persistence, but with varied compositions regarding age and educational level. Persistence and grade were significantly different in favour of men in the Sentiment Analysis MOOC, and persistence in the Arduino MOOC was also significant, in favour of men. However, considering the four courses, the distribution of persistence and grade is the same for men and women. We consider these positive results, as it points to an equal profile of participation and performance of both genders in courses where women are underrepresented, what might indicate a change in the trend of participation of women in IT courses. However, it is important to highlight that women's enrollment were much lower, and that enrollees of both genders represents a privileged Brazilian sub population - students who have at least a bachelor's degree - what defies the view that MOOCs are a democratizing educational technology.

Keywords
MOOC
Information technology
Distance education
Gender differences

1. Introduction
In Brazil - as well as all over the world - the need for gender studies, aiming at understanding the reasons for inequality and reversing this scenario is increasing. Considering formal and informal education, this trend is yet more prevailing, because this is where we form and reinforce our identities. This was the motivation for Beltrão and Alves (2009) to investigate the gender gap in education in Brazil, using demographic census data from 1960 to the year 2000. They report that concerning higher education, the number of women's enrollments only started to increase after 1960. For those who were born after 1946, the amount of men and women who completed high school education is similar. For those who were born after 1956, more women had completed high school than men. Considering university degrees, after 1960 more men had completed. The 2020 GGI1 report confirms that women's access to education in Brazil has expanded. The GGI measures gender-based gaps among four key dimensions: economic, educational, health, and political. In 2020, Brazil's GGI was 0.69 (92nd in 153 countries), however, at the educational attainment sub-index it was 1.0 (35th country) which means Brazil “closed” this gap. Our most important challenge is to reduce the economic gap, which is challenged by “the low rate of female participation in the labour force, combined with persisting wage and income inequalities” (Forum, 2020). IT2is an ever growing professional area, with several specializations. As its pervasiveness grows, so do the professional opportunities, whether in areas requiring higher education, or in areas requiring less advanced knowledge. According to the Forum (2020), in Brazil, women's proportion in professions demanding very specialized training and knowledge - which they called “frontier skills”, such as Data AI and Cloud Computing - is very small. This is consistent with data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 2019) on the distribution of graduates and entrants by field. When considering Education, Arts and Humanities, Social Sciences, Journalism and information, Business, Administration, Law and Health and Welfare, from 2015 to 2017, women represented almost 50% of the 7 million students. However, if we consider STEM3 programs, the picture is quite different: out of the approximately 69.000 graduates/entrants from 2015 to 2017, 24% were women. If considering only IT, in the years 2016 and 2017, this percentage drops to 9% out of 15.000 students. The access to college education is expanding in Brazil, as we have seen an increase in the amount of registrations, both in face-to-face and distance education.

Considering this scenario, Lee, Starr-Mitchell, Nunes, Black, and Schmidt (2017) believe that MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) can be a way to promote women's professional qualification by allowing them to study whenever and wherever they choose, therefore contributing to reducing gender inequality and creating communication channels for women to be heard. In contrast with this optimism, Christensen et al. (2014), who surveyed more than 34.000 students from 32 MOOCs on diverse subjects, described this population as “young, well educated, and employed, with a majority from developed countries [with] significantly more males than females taking MOOCs, especially in developing countries”. This means that, at least in 2014, the majority of the MOOC students were members of a privileged elite. Luik et al. (2020) investigated the motivations for registering in a MOOC about introduction to programming, and found that for women, interest and expectations of the course, suitability for family and work and usefulness related to their children are significantly more important than for men. Priyadarshini (2016) highlights the need for a strategy for welcoming and enabling women who seek higher education, especially in contexts where “roadblocks generated by the system itself”, i.e. where gender inequality is prevalent. MOOCs cannot remove obstacles associated with gender inequality per se, but can prevent women from experiencing situations of prejudice related to stereotype, demands and comparisons confronted in face-to-face classes, because manifestations of prejudices related to gender are reduced (Lee et al., 2017). It is worth noting that this characteristic might have the downside of hindering representation, as one of Lee et al. (2017)'s interviewees reported: “Taking an online class has not been particularly my favorite thing to do not only because it was not fitting to my learning style, but also because it restricted me from strengthening my own voice … (and having) others hear it.”

In this context, one of the missions of our university of affiliation, UFRGS (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul), is to broaden free access to quality education for Brazilians, and the Lúmina platform is an important part of the institutional response to this challenge. Before we started this research study, we observed that women are the minority in the two IT Majors at UFRGS (Computational Science and Software Engineering) and at all Exact Science and Engineering Majors, except Chemistry. OECD (2019) confirms this unbalance, and for this reason, we chose to look at the differences between men and women enrolled in the four platform's ICT MOOCs.

1.1. Research questions
1.
Are there differences in student profiles by gender?

2.
Are there differences in grade and persistence by gender?

1.2. Description of the MOOCs
We carried out an analysis of female participation in four MOOCs on Information and Communication Technologies: Usability Evaluation (the only one taught by a woman), Sentiment Analysis, Introduction to Linux and Introduction to Arduino. The MOOCs are available in Portuguese on the Lúmina platform. Table 1 shows MOOC's summary.


Table 1. MOOCs’ summary.

Usability Evaluation	Sentiment Analysis	Introduction to Linux	Introduction to Arduino
Workload (hour)	30	20	20	30
Discussion forums	0	0	0	02
Video lectures	12	17	12	09
Text material	11	02	06	02
Assignments (quizzes)	07	08	05	30
Opening date	July 2018	October 2018	July 2019	October 2018
All of the Lúmina platform MOOCs share the following characteristics: a free certificate of completion for students who obtain a minimum grade; are not accompanied by tutors; allow free access to the material; demand the completion of a survey (with general profile and motivational questions) which is presented at the beginning of all courses on the platform, and is mandatory for accessing the content; present a video and an introduction text, accessible even for those who are not registered; registration can be done at any time; no start and end date (therefore it is not possible to compute dropouts); are in Portuguese; are designed and presented by UFRGS' professors and lecturers.

2. Gender issues in online courses
Studies using “gender” as a control variable have attracted the attention of researchers in the field of Distance Education, driving new perspectives and research. In part, this might be due because it is relatively easy to obtain and analyze this data. To illustrate our point, we ran a web search in the Scopus and Web of Science databases, using the strings (Mooc* or Massive Open Online Course*) and ((gender or women) and (IT or information technolog* OR comput* OR informatic*))” as “topic”, “title” and “author keyword”, limiting the results to articles or conference papers, and written in English, Portuguese or Spanish. 242 papers were retrieved from the Web of Science and 308 from the Scopus database. After reading the abstracts and removing repetitions, 26 papers remained. These papers were published from 2015 to 2020, with a steep increase in the amount of publications from 2018: 6 papers in 2018, 5 in 2019 and 9 in 2020.

However, many times “gender” had secondary importance, and even when significant differences were found, no further explanation was given. For example, Crues et al. (2018) focus on “gender” and “IT”, but the main focus was forum participation (they analyzed the relation of gender with persistence and reasons for enrolling in a Computer Science MOOC). There were 5807 students, of which 1344 were women (23%). The authors observed that women posted significantly more to the forums than men and that men have significantly higher persistence. According to the authors, this was an unexpected observation, because “posting to the forums is related to persevering”, so it would be expected that women would post proportionately less frequently than men. The authors did not had enough data to provide insights on why this is so, but pointed to the need to investigate the reasons it happened. Grella and Meinel (2016) presented an overview of 20 MOOCs in the field of Computer Science, offered between 2012 and 2014 on the open HPI platform, and albeit 16% of the participants were women, a similar percentage of men (26%) and women (25%) obtained a course certificate of completion. An in-depth exploration of one beginner level MOOC on Computer Science, revealed that forum participation was a strong predictor of persistence for both genders and that socio-demographic indicators are a much more powerful predictor of persistence for women than for men.

Ihsen, Jeanrenaud, Vries, and Hennis (2015) analyzed the participation of women in 5 MOOCs about Engineering, using behavioral data collected in the learning environment, survey data and interviews. The courses had bachelor level, and almost 140.000 enrollments - about 19% were women. The authors concluded the dropout rate by women was higher, and that they had lower grades than male students. The authors concluded their dropout rate was higher by analysing the numbers on a table, stating that “[the numbers] clearly show a higher ‘dropout’ of female students across all courses.“, but did not run any statistical test on the data. Analysing the numbers (parameters such as mean and standard deviation were not given), it seemed to us that the percentage of women who enrolled is similar to the percentage of women who concluded, except in the “NGI” course, in which 21% of registered and 13% of the completing students were women. Likewise, the authors found “significant difference in average grade between male and female students: 0.36 vs 0.42” but the maximum grade is unknown (is it 0.50 or possibly 1.0?). Chen, Sonnert, Sadler, and Malan (2020) analyzed data from more than 18.000 students (12.8% female) enrolled in a MOOC about Introduction to Programming, and observed a significant relation between precomputational thinking skills and persistence. But the result which drew our attention is that the effects of these two variables are attenuated for both men and women as they get closer to finishing the MOOC.

Some studies inspired us and were the source of valuable data to the present research because they also addressed the issue of gender inequality in STEM (and IT) MOOCs, while also looking for the effects of region (the country/continent a student lives).

Kizilcec and Halawa (2015) investigated attrition and performance (as grades in assignments) in 20 MOOCs (3 on Computer Science, 3 on Engineering, 2 on Mathematics, 1 on Physics and 2 on Statistics), with data from more than 67.000 students from several regions. In these 11 MOOCs, women were a minority of the enrollments. Compared to an “average-aged male learner in Northern America without a bachelor's degree, without prior experience with the topic or other MOOCs, prepared to spend up to 2 h/weeks on the course, and not intending to complete it”, women were somewhat less likely to persist (12%–20%) and achieve higher grades (10%). Students from Africa and Latin America were less likely to achieve higher grades (50% and 30%, respectively), as well as persist in the course (with a similar probability). The authors hypothesize these achievement gaps could result from differences in Internet access, language barriers, or from feelings of psychological threat, such as fears of confirming a negative stereotype or a feeling of not belonging on the course, but assume they cannot explain why they occur. In a similar investigation Gameel and Wilkins (2019) surveyed 2882 students registered in 5 MOOCs taught in English (1 on Computer Science) and Arabic (4 on Arts, Education and Humanities), in search of differences in engagement with ICT, self-efficacy, and locus of control relative to gender and region. In the Computer Science MOOC (in English), only 14% of students were female, while in the Arabic MOOC, they were 40%, and most of the students had at least a bachelor's degree and were full-time working professionals. They concluded the effect of gender in ICT engagement and self-efficacy is significantly in favour of men. Further investigation on the effects of region showed that students who live in Latin America and the Caribbean have the lowest ICT engagement, but had higher means than Asia and Europe in self-efficacy and locus of control. They also examined the interaction between gender and region regarding ICT engagement and found that women in Latin America and the Caribbean have significantly higher means than men. Duran, Haaranen, and Hellas (2020) analyzed persistence, confidence, interest in Computer Science, prior experience, and performance between male and female. The dataset had 4728 Finnish students, enrolled in 3 MOOCs and 4 local face-to-face courses on Introductory Programming. In the year 2019, Finland's HDI was 12, while Brazil's was 79 .4 The MOOC had 35.7% of women enrolled, and a similar amount of women and men in the local course. The authors observed a significant difference in prior-experience (r = 0.34), self-efficacy (r = 0.31) and performance (r = 0.14) between men and women both in the MOOC, but the effect was moderate to weak (regarding performance). These three papers are relevant to us because they indicate that perhaps “gender” is a proxy for predicting performance and persistence because of lack of proper conditions and incentive.

Jiang, Schenke, Eccles, Xu, and Warschauer (2018) analyzed data from more than 269.000 students (24% were women), from 25 countries, enrolled in 13 STEM MOOCs offered in 2012-13, to explore gender differences in enrollment and completion in a cross-national comparison. To classify countries they used CGI and GPD.5 From their data on enrollments, it is possible to note that women from developing countries were more interested in this subject, for example: 82% (n = 723) of Indonesian and 83% (n = 1.300) of Filipino women enrolled in at least one STEM MOOC. Also, Indonesia and the Philippines had the highest rate of females completing at least one STEM MOOC, with 52.78% and 31.03%, respectively. Their descriptive analysis shows that a country's GGI and GDP are negatively and significantly correlated with female enrollment and completion in STEM MOOCs (the effect is strongest for enrollments). However, considering the amount of male and female completers, the authors found no significant differences (both are close to 3% enrollments).

The aforementioned papers not only point to the importance of studying gender in online courses in IT and related areas, they also indicate that gender might not be an important predictor of persistence or performance, as probably social and cultural factors influence the decision to enroll, study and persist. However, even if most of the papers that used gender as a factor could not explain the causes of the observed significant differences, these studies are a fundamental step, because they will enlighten future research designs.

3. Method
3.1. Participants and procedures
This study sampled n = 4452 students (1345 women; 30%), enrolled in the four MOOCs. The data source was navigational data collected in the learning environment (also known as “log data”) and a survey with questions about the student profile and motivation. The procedure for data collection, identity protection and data storage are described in the Terms of Use and in the Privacy Policy - documents that were analyzed and approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the University XXXX. We emphasize that to enroll in the MOOC the students have to agree with these documents. Although the platform registers the name of the students, in this research we used the MD5 hash function 6 to anonymize the students, while preserving the capacity of joining tables. Although we have access to student's email, we decided not to reach out to them because it was not stated in the Terms of Use nor in the Privacy Policy, with which students agreed. The variables under analysis are described in Table 2. Pre-processing and analysis were performed using the R language.


Table 2. Variables under analysis.

Variable name	Description or factor levels	Type
Schooling level	HS - High School | HE - Higher education | GS - Graduate studies | PS - Post graduation	Categorical
Intention to complete	I have |I do not know |I do not have	Categorical
Liking the subject	I love it |I like it | Indifferent |I do not like it |I hate it	Categorical
Grade	From 0 to 10	Numeric
Time on course	Difference, in minutes, from first to last login	Numeric
Persistence	From 0 to 1. Ratio between the sum of accessed course materials and completed activities, and the sum of materials and activities in the course	Numeric
Because of the configuration of the courses at the XXX platform, we do not have a start-date nor an end-date, therefore students can log in at anytime. There is another drawback in using the time on course variable: the platform does not record when a student logged off, so the calculations of time spent in the platform are not precise. So, for this variable, we calculated the difference from the first to the last login, for each student. For example, if a student logged in at 00:00 a.m. 1st January, and then logged in again at 00:00 a.m. 31st January, they would have spent 43.200 min on the course. Regarding localization, we used the free R package “geolocate” to find the countries based on IP. We were able to identify the country of 4032 students – 98% accessed the MOOCs from Brazil. The distribution of men and women by MOOC and by schooling level is shown in Fig. 2 - a visual representation of the contingency table. We grouped schooling levels to test the hypothesis of the association between schooling level and gender (because higher schooling levels might influence grades and persistence) with the Chi Square Independence Test with Yate's correction for 2 × 2 tables (Daniel, 1990). The result was not statistically significant, indicating no relationship between gender and schooling level χ2 (1) = 3.2, p = 0.07. Fig. 2 also shows that the MOOC Introduction to Arduino had the highest enrollment, as well as the higher proportion of enrolled men. In the four MOOC, proportionally few students declared to be in “under graduation” levels - which was expected, due to the nature of the subjects. The profile of age groups is very similar to schooling's profile (because student in each schooling level have similar ages), so we decided not to use this variable in our analysis. From Fig. 2 we observe a similar number of enrollments by women and men in the MOOC about Sentiment Analysis (41 % × 59 %) and Usability Evaluation (48 % × 52 %). The course Introduction to Linux was slightly more imbalanced (36 % × 64 %), and the course about Arduino had 3 times more men enrolled (21 % × 79 %).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (303KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Representation of the amount of students per schooling level, per MOOC and per gender.

4. Results
4.1. Differences in student profile, by gender
The description of the results begins with the data collected by the student profile survey. The questions in that survey were chosen by the teachers, so they vary considerably, but there were questions about age, education and intention to complete in the 4 MOOCs. The question about liking the course subject was absent in the Usability Evaluation course. In the 4 MOOCs, both men and women stated that they intended to complete the course, but this intention was not reflected in persistence, as shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (263KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Do you intend to complete the course? Intention versus Persistence. Sum of the four MOOCs.

Fig. 3 uses alpha transparency and dot size to represent frequency, for example: large red dots indicate many women. This figure shows that most students said they intended to complete the courses, even if their persistence was low. This indicates that there is no correlation between the variables “intention” and “persistence” or that our measuring strategy is inadequate. In the MOOCs Introduction to Arduino, Introduction to Linux and Sentiment Analysis, it was asked how much the student liked the content. The pattern of declaring to like the subject matter is similar to the intention to complete the MOOC: the majority claims to love or like the subject, two positive associations. However, this is not reflected in persistence, as shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (318KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Do you like the subject matter? Liking the subject versus Persistence. Sum of three MOOCs.

Fig. 4 shows that there is no correlation between liking the subject matter and persistence, for neither gender - the same as the intention to complete the MOOC. Contrary to what we thought, these two variables were not helpful in predicting persistence. The lack of relation between intention and persistence was probably due to the timing of the measurement: intention was measured very early in the MOOCs, and persistence is a measurement of the end of the MOOC, thus, it is likely that in the meantime, students changed their mind for several reasons. Zheng, Rosson, Shih, and Carroll (2015) and Eriksson, Adawi, and Stöhr (2017) asked MOOC students about their reasons to dropout, and they reported several circumstances which they could not foresee when they enrolled, such as: difficulty of the subject matter, lack of time, need for friend-and-family time and lack of sense of community. Our conclusion is that asking these questions at the beginning of the MOOC is not useful, because how the student feels about his/her participation changes overtime. This pattern of answers also might be due to what Gobo and Mauceri (2014) calls “acquiescence to the questions”, a tendency to agree, with the intention to adhere to social conventions, which only could be avoided with a redesign of the survey.

Another characteristic we deemed useful to differentiate student profiles is the time spent on the course. The density plot in Fig. 5 shows a peak from 0 to 500 min, which indicates most of the students spent approximately 0–20 days in activity. After the 500 min mark, the amount of students greatly decreases. A visual inspection of men's and women's curves shows they overlap, which indicates similarity. To test this hypothesis, we used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-fit test (Daniel, 1990), confirmed this observation with 95% confidence (D = 0.06, p > 0.05).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (250KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Time spent on the course, probability distribution for men and women.

Proceeding with the description of the students’ profile, we used Cluster Analysis, an exploratory technique that seeks to group similar items, according to a given variable set (Parack, Zahid, & Merchant, 2012). Clusters are formed in order to maximize the similarity between the elements of a cluster (intra-cluster similarity) and to minimize the similarity between elements of different clusters (inter-cluster similarity) (Grace & Desikan, 2014; Soler, Gaubert, Tencé, & Buche, 2013). The chosen algorithm was Hierarchical Clustering Analysis (HCA) with the following inpút variables: educational level, persistence, grade and age. We did not use the variable “time on course” because it was pointless to normalize it, because the course has different workloads. The profile variables “Liking the subject matter” and “Intention to complete” were not inserted because they are unbalanced: the number of occurrences of “I like” and “I love” and “I intend to complete” is disproportionately large, so it would hardly be useful to the clustering algorithm.

Due to some of the variables being categorical, we used Gower distance to calculate the dissimilarity matrix, using R's “Cluster” package. Cluster analysis is an exploratory technique, where the analyst's knowledge of the problem is fundamental in choosing the algorithm and its parameters – in case of HCA, divisive or agglomerative, and how many clusters should be created. As a criterion for deciding the number of groups, we considered a measure of variability inside clusters (within a cluster sum of squares) and a measure of how well the observations fit into its assigned cluster (silhouette width). The sum of the squares should be as small as possible, and “stabilize” after a given number of iterations. The silhouette width should be as close to 1.00 as possible. We decided on a solution with 4 clusters for women: the within cluster sum of squares was 0.24 and the silhouette width was 0.37. The elbow and silhouette graphics were inconclusive about how many clusters to choose, so we decided to choose a solution that identified at least one group with high performance students (persistence and grades). The algorithm found the following groups: Disengaged higher education (514); Disengaged post graduates (293); High performance (324); Disengaged high school (214). The students at the “High performance” group have ages between 20 and 39 years old (70%); 88% are at least at higher education level; the median persistence was 90% and the median grade was 8.0. The other clusters had very low grades and persistence, but it is possible to profile them. “Disengaged higher education” and “Disengaged postgraduates” have similar medians for persistence (median near 25%) and grade (median 0.0). Maybe these students were inspecting the courses, or looking for some specific information. “Disengaged high school” have 214 students who completed 10% of the courses and also have grades with the median 0.0. Men's clustering solution had 5 clusters, and a within cluster sum of squares of 0.23, and a lower silhouette width of 0.31. The elbow and silhouette graphics were also inconclusive, so we employed the same decision criterion. The algorithm found similar groups: Disengaged higher education (1351); Disengaged post graduates (567); High performance (332); Disengaged high school (628); and a group we called Miscellaneous, with all elementary school students, some higher education students and post graduates (229). Students of the “High performance” group have ages between 20 and 39 years old (81%); 100% are at least at higher education level; the median persistence was 90% and the median grade was 9.0. “Disengaged higher education”, “Disengaged high school”, “Disengaged post graduates” and “Miscellaneous” have low persistence and grades. Cluster analysis confirmed that the students who persist and have high grades are at least bachelor level.

Thus, in relation to the first research question, we found no profile differences when analyzing by gender.

4.2. Differences in grade and persistence, according to gender
In order to test the hypothesis of the differences in relation to grades and persistence, the first step was to compute descriptive statistics. The data is summarized in Table 3.


Table 3. Summary of MOOC variables. Grades equal to zero were excluded – one should have completed at least one course assessment. Grades range from 0 to 10. * Indicates statistically significant difference, with 95% confidence.

Usability Evaluation	Sentiment Analysis	Introduction to Linux	Introduction to Arduino
W	M	W	M	W	M	W	M
Completed at least 80% of the MOOC	91 (40%)	93 (40%)	82 (33%)	129 (36%)	161 (53%)	297 (55%)	84 (18%)	352 (20%)
Median grade	8,55	8,55	5,0	10,0 ∗	7,2	8,2	5,3	6,0 ∗
Median persistence	37%	35%	37%	39% ∗	77%	92%	23%	23%
As can be seen from Table 3, although there are differences between the four MOOCs, the values within the courses seem to be similar – performance and grades were more or less the same, with the exception of men's grades in the Sentiment Analysis course, which reached the maximum value. Analyzing the median can induce mistaken conclusions, and therefore, we ran a series of eight Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon location tests (Daniel, 1990) (four tests for persistence and four for grades), comparing men's and women's medians. Three of the tests were significant at the 95% level. In the Introduction to Arduino, men's median grades (median = 6.0) are significantly different from women's (median = 5.3), with W = 66687 and p = 0.038. In the Sentiment Analysis MOOC, men's median grades (median = 10) is significantly different from women's (median = 5.0), with W = 16390 and p = 0.03. This median is not usual, as it means every student which took the exams got maximum grade, but we do not know the reason for it (perhaps the students are overqualified, perhaps it was a database bug). In the same MOOC, the median percentage of completed activities for men (39%) is also significantly different from women (37%), with W = 16552 and p = 0.047 - but both values are very low.

The other tests were not significant. In the Introduction to Arduino MOOC, the percentage of completed activities for men (39%) was not significantly different from women (40%), with W = 71662, p = 0.54. In the Introduction to Linux MOOC, women's median grade (7,6) was not so different from men's (8,2), W = 39964, p = 0.053. Women's persistence median was 77%, while men's was 92%, W = 41737, p = 0.2. In the Usability Evaluation course, men's median grades (median = 8.55) were not significantly different from women's (median = 8.55) with W = 6081, p = 0.3. Likewise, the percentage of completed activities for men (56%) was not significantly different from women (54%), with W = 7377, p = 0.07. This MOOC is the less technical of the four (it does not requires programming or hardware configuration/assembly) and was the most well-balanced course - men and women had about the same median and persistence. According to Adams and Morgan (2021), women's positive self-concept in mathematics, their high verbal ability, and personal constraints contribute their decision to enrol in CS degrees, and this might explain why women's enrollments in Usability Evaluation were higher than in the other MOOCs. Finally, we highlight the high persistence of both women and men at the Introduction to Linux - 77% and 92%, respectively. The persistence of the other MOOCs was not so big, but was not as low as usually reported, floating from 23% to 39%.

These numbers reflect a somewhat one dimensional picture, because it only accounts for those who finished the course and received the certificate. To inspect the distribution of men's and women's persistence and grades, we used a density plot (Fig. 6). For both men's and women's persistence, we see a lot of students accessing few course materials, with a peak near 25%, and then a depression near 75% - indicating very few students got this far and gave up - and a narrow but tall peak at 100%. The grades' graph shows an almost opposite distribution, with a tall and narrow peak at the smallest grades, and a wide and short peak at the highest (7.5–10.0). Men and women's distributions are very similar, with the same peaks and lows area and location, which corroborates our previous analyses that men and women have a similar performance.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (307KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Persistence density plot (left) and grade density plot (right).

Considering the grade's axis, we see at the top-left, the students whose grades are equal to zero, but accessed course materials - the dots are small because this behaviour was not frequent. At the bottom-right, the opposite behaviour: students with maximum grades, but who accessed few materials - also an infrequent behaviour. These groups were not spotted by the clustering algorithm, who grouped only students with high grades and persistence. Using the size of the dots as a proxy to the frequency of the observations, we see two relevant associations: low persistence and low grades and the opposite high persistence and high grades. We used the “stats” R package to compute the linear model for the hypothesis of correlation of grades and persistence, and the model not only had an extremely good fit, but are very similar (the regression lines are overlapping). For men, we report a R2 = 0.78, p < 0.01 and for women, we report a higher R2 = 0.82, p < 0.01. The equation modeling the relationship between these variables was nearly the same for both genders: Persistence = 0.18 ∗ Grade +0.08. Thus, the answer to the second research question “Are there differences in grade and persistence by gender?” is affirmative in relation to the variable persistence and grade in favour of men, in the Sentiment Analysis course and in relation to persistence (also in favour of men), in the Introduction to the Arduino course. But when it comes to the overall distribution of grades and persistence, the pattern is similar for both genders.

5. Discussion
The smaller number of enrollments of women in ICT and STEM courses urges us to develop strategies that encourage them to register and persist, and MOOCs could provide educational structures to welcome them and enable their professional qualification. In Brazil, the expansion of women's access to college education and the virtual close of the gender gap regarding educational attainment represents a relevant advance. However, women are still underrepresented in professions which demand frontier skills, and still receive lower wages. In order to identify differences in student profile and performance (as grades and persistence), by gender, we looked at data from four ICT MOOCs of a Brazilian platform. Regarding the first research question, about students' profile, we observed similar appreciation and intention to persist, but these variables are not related to persistence, therefore are not useful to our analysis. This might be due to survey design (specifically the “acquiescence” effect, described by Gobo and Mauceri (2014)) or unforeseen circumstances, such as the ones described by (Eriksson et al., 2017) and (Zheng et al., 2015). Crues et al. (2018) investigated the reasons for enrolling in MOOCs, asking students to write about their motivation, and used cluster analysis to identify groups of reasons for enrolling, but the most prevalent answer was “other” - this indicates that self report needs to be used with caution. Finally, a cluster analysis identified 4 clusters for women and 5 for men. Out of these, two clusters (one for each gender) have high persistence and grade - and these two clusters are composed of student at higher educational levels, which was not surprising, given the subject matter of the MOOCs is related to majors in Computer Science.

Regarding the second research question, about persistence and grades, we observed very low persistence for both genders, which echoes the well-known high dropout rates in MOOCs. A Mann-Whitney test pointed out that men's median grades are higher in two MOOCs: Introduction to Arduino and Sentiment Analysis (it was a surprise that the men's median grade was so high in this course). In the Sentiment Analysis MOOC, men's persistence was higher, but both genders had low persistence. In the other MOOCs, we did not observed significant differences in persistence and grades. When looking at the performance of all students using a density plot, we observed men and women have similar grades and persistence distributions. Our results are also similar to those of Jiang et al. (2018) - who analyzed female participation in STEM courses, considering the country GGI and GDP, and indicated the likelihood of men and women completing a MOOC is similar, and that enrollments of women tend to be higher in less gender-equal and wealthy countries. Ihsen et al. (2015) investigated female participation (in Engineering MOOCs), and reported that there is a difference in completion between men and women, but it seemed to us that the percentage of women who enrolled is similar to the percentage of women who concluded (the authors did not run statistical tests). Duran et al. (2020) also found significant differences between men and women's grades, but the effect was moderate.

Although the number of studies about MOOCs connecting gender differences, ICT and related areas and developing countries are increasing, it is difficult to compare the results, even if the variables are similar. For example, Kizilcec and Halawa (2015) discusses their findings taking as reference an average-aged male learner in Northern America without a bachelor's degree, which is not our student-model. Duran et al. (2020) had results similar to ours (proportion of men and women enrollments and men's grades being a little higher), but Finland's results might not be comparable to Brazil's.Crues et al. (2018) reported the percentage of men's and women's enrollments and persistence, using the categories “low, medium and high”. Their data seems to be similar to ours, but we cannot compare the data.

5.1. Limitations
Despite the increasing attention, studies on developing countries should not be generalized, as there are important differences amongst them (for example: GDP, GGI, HDI). Another barrier to the generalization of our conclusions is that, as Christensen et al. (2014) had observed in 2014, the sample of this research is made up of privileged people - with access to graduate and post graduate courses. Lastly, some limitations result from the course format, without start and end dates. This impedes estimation of dropouts, and discourages interaction, because everyone is at a different point in the course. For this reason, text mining in the forums are not informative, because the forums are seldom used.

6. Conclusion
Considering the main goal of Lúmina platform of expanding access to free quality education, we consider this research was an important first step. Observing small differences in grades and persistence and a lack of differences in the profile are very positive results, as it points to an equal participation of both genders, in courses where women are underrepresented. These observations might indicate a change in the trend of the participation of women in IT courses (at least in Brazil), because despite being the minority of enrollments, the proportion of completers was the same. This is the most relevant implication of this study: we should focus on increasing women's enrollments. It is also important to highlight the profile of completers - both men and women - as well as of the enrollments in general still represent a privileged sub population - students who have at least a bachelor's degree - what defies the view that MOOCs are a democratizing educational technology.

6.1. Recommendations for future studies
It seemed to us that the most important barrier to equality between men and women in the MOOCs we analyzed was the smaller number of enrollments of women - thus, the next step would be trying to increase it. As one of the most cited reasons for the absence of women in IT is related to “representation” (for example: harassment, stereotyping, being the only woman in the classroom), it seems to us that the recommendation for future studies is to design IT MOOC more attractive to women. We agree with Rowan and Lynch (2011) that teachers of IT courses need to reform preconceptions of gender norms, for example, affirming women's competence in technical tasks and men's competence in communication and design activities. Having women teaching IT MOOCs, students could see themselves represented in that leading role.

Besides, given the demographic and socio-economic characteristics of the Brazilian population, the issue of access to education of the less privileged - namely black and poor women - should be addressed. In 2012, president Dilma Rousseff sanctioned act 12.711/12, or “Racial Quota Law”, stating that at least 50% of federal universities’ available spots should be reserved for students of public secondary education, non-white and/or low-income. This was one of the most important affirmative action policies taken in the direction of favoring and encouraging the economically less privileged regarding access to quality education. As members of the academic community of one of the best federal universities in Brazil, the authors feel this is also part of our mission.
