A fire can have serious economic and human consequences. However, in many cases, rapid intervention and appropriate behavior can significantly reduce this threat. For this it is important that people are properly trained. Faced with the economic, ecological and organizational requirements and constraints linked to fire safety training, virtual training environments appear to be a judicious alternative to traditional training. However, before committing companies to invest in expensive devices, it is necessary to ensure the effectiveness of such devices. The literature is rich and divided on this subject, and it appears that certain characteristics of the system and of the learners are decisive. In this context, the objective of our work was to study the effects of immersion, the feeling of presence as well as the interaction between these 2 factors on the performance of conceptual and procedural learning. Certain variables were also controlled such as gender, tendency to immersion, previous experience in computers and video games. Our work shows that immersion promotes procedural but not conceptual learning, and that neither the sense of presence, nor the interaction between immersion and the sense of presence affect these two types of learning in our training task. Apart from the knowledge of fire which potentiates the effect of immersion on procedural learning, the variables considered in our study (computer experience, video game experience and genre) had no impact on performance. Understanding the impact of the technical device or the characteristics of users on conceptual and procedural learning is a major challenge in helping trainers to develop pedagogical devices in order to better exploit the opportunities offered by new technological approaches.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Augmented and virtual reality

Human-computer interface

Media in education

Pedagogical issues

1. Introduction
In the field of fire safety, Virtual Reality (VR) simulations have been developed for various purposes. For example, in ergonomics to analyze actual practice (as opposed to prescribed practice) during an emergency response (Carvalho et al., 2018), or to help design the layout of a response vehicle (Nowicki et al., 2018). Simulations are also used in engineering for user testing of specialized equipment (Bailie et al., 2016) or to improve safety in building design (Bukowski & Séquin, 1997). Finally, they are used by rescue teams to prepare interventions and optimize the deployment of equipment in the field (Chen et al., 2014).

However, it is in the field of training that most of the research has been concentrated. Thus, in a review of the existing, Williams-Bell et al. (2015) found 26 games, serious games or simulations related to fire safety and fire fighting. Their study shows that more than half of them are dedicated to training and coaching. This observation can be generalized to other fields. As underlined in their literature review, Suh and Prophet list 54 articles dealing with immersive technologies published between 2010 and 2017 (Suh & Prophet, 2018). Their analysis reveals that although research on immersive environments is developing in many fields, education is still by far the most fertile. However, it is essential to ensure that these new pedagogical methods are effective for the intended learning domain. The literature on the subject is abundant but the conclusions are not unanimous. Many studies have focused on finding factors that can improve the effectiveness of educational arrangements using VR. It has emerged that immersion and sense of presence are two factors that can influence the quality of learning in a virtual environment (VE). But, again, the conclusions regarding the effect of these factors on learning are not unanimous. In addition, certain individual characteristics have been shown to influence the outcomes of VR-assisted learning such as gender, game experience, etc. In this context, the objective of our work will be to determine the effect of immersion, the effect of the sense of presence and more specifically the interaction of these two factors on the learning of theoretical (conceptual) knowledge and the acquisition of procedural skills. To this end, we will also monitor the effects of individual factors that can influence learning effectiveness.

2. Background
2.1. Virtual reality research
Virtual Environments (VEs) developed for teaching purposes are called Virtual Learning Environments (VLE) or Virtual Training Environment (VTE) depending on their approach. They are interactive environments, more or less immersive, and designed with learning purposes. The first approach, consists in supporting knowledge acquisition, facilitating the learning of concepts. The second approach prioritizes the learning of know-hows and skill building. This learning framework seems to be favorably viewed by learners as by teachers. Indeed, considering VLEs whose user experience has been assessed, most studies concur in the positive feedback and engagement they generate (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011; Suh & Prophet, 2018). Beyond their innovative hedonic aspect, the expected advantages of such setups are varied and differ depending on approach and the type of learning required.

Learning Concepts is the predominant type of learning in research on VR for teaching (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011). Mathematics and sciences are particularly well represented (Merchant et al., 2014). Indeed, VLEs can provide multiple representations of the world's natural complexity through representing it at a perceptible scale or symbolizing it (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011). Many applications have thus been created in domains such as astronomy, physics, biology, chemistry or economics (Minogue et al., 2006; Salzman et al., 1999), and models were proposed for VR to facilitate the handling of complex and abstract concepts (Minogue et al., 2006). VLEs have also been developed in other fields such as languages and academics skills for which they enhance situated learning and the transferability of knowledge.

Practical learning and skill acquisition in VTEs are mostly developed by the professional community or for vocational education (for example, military training (Champney et al., 2017), engineering training (Kavanagh et al., 2017), fire-fighting (Williams-Bell et al., 2015), etc.). In their review of the literature on Immersive Virtual Reality Serious Games (VR-SGs), Checa and Bustillo (2019) indicates that only medicine presents a significant quantity of articles in both categories (learning Concepts and Practical learning). For these authors, medicine seems to be a more mature field, as a wide range of applications has been developed, generally showing greater user satisfaction with the VR-SG experience than with other learning methodologies.

For practical learning, two principles underlie the use of VTEs.

The first is to offer a realistic space for sensorimotor experimentation in order to acquire procedural knowledge, i.e. embedded Weill-Fassina and Pastré (2004) and automated. For example, Rochlen et al. (2017) have developed a training device for central venous catheter insertion using augmented reality. This device makes it possible to project an anatomical image on a dummy in order to use both tactile and visual anatomical landmarks to enrich and guide the procedural learning of the gesture. A real-time feedback is given to the learner on the accuracy of the gesture and its consequences (good or bad) in order to refine it. This type of VTE is traditionally found in the field of health care for learning medical gestures (Legendre et al., 2015; Torkington et al., 2001) but also in the field of sport (Gray, 2017; Verlinden et al., 2013).

The second principle is to promote the acquisition of competences. Competence is characterized by "knowing how to act" in order to be effective and to be able to solve problems in a range of situations, within a field of reference (Buche et al., 2006). It refers to the mobilization of a set of resources (knowledge, know-how, interpersonal skills) in order to solve a complex situation belonging to a family of "problem-situations" (Roegiers, 2010). It is therefore a system of conceptual and procedural knowledge organized in operational schemes and which makes it possible, for a family of situations, to identify a "task-problem" and to solve it through effective action (Gillet & CEPEC Lyon, 1991). Immersion of learners in VTEs allows them to experiment independently, to fail and start over (Buche et al., 2006) by adjusting their responses and to become actors in their learning (Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2017). In his study on virtual reality and training, Lourdeaux (2001) identifies the advantages of this technology compared to training in real environments, including: secure execution of actions, cost reduction (access to the site, size of the premises, pooling of equipment), great adaptability of scenes and scenarios enabling the teaching proposal to be personalized according to the training objectives and the learners, and great flexibility according to the learning experience.

The benefits of such setups have been widely discussed (Williams-Bell et al., 2015) and one of the main research axes on immersive technologies is the way in which they can improve user performance, especially in the field of teaching (Suh & Prophet, 2018). Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011) explain that on 51 studies assessing learning, 49 obtain positive results on indicators such as understanding, knowledge acquisition, application or analysis (Merchant et al., 2014). This trend is confirmed by Suh and Prophet who indicate that in the field of education, researchers mention benefits such as improved performance and learning processes, engagement of learners or creativity (Suh & Prophet, 2018). However, VE and traditional learning are not systematically compared (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011), and studies that compare them do not reach unanimous conclusions (Dubovi et al., 2017; Elangovan & Ismail, 2014; Grassini et al., 2020; Jung & Ahn, 2018; Logishetty et al., 2019; Merchant et al., 2014; Parong & Mayer, 2018). For example, a study by Bliss et al. (1997) on the preparation of entry in a smoke filled building to operate a rescue showed that participants having followed a VR training on the rescue site did not perform significantly better than those who had used actual building plans. On the other hand, Tate et al. (1997) observed better results with immersive VR than with traditional methods on similar task.

In some cases, the use of Virtual Reality is the most relevant solution because of the difficulties or the impossibility of carrying out the training in real situations. In some cases, the use of virtual reality is the most relevant solution due to the difficulties or the impossibility of carrying out the training in a real situation. Many trainings, such as firefighting, can be dangerous for trainers and trainees. In fact, 8380 wounded and 10 firefighters died while participating in training activities in 2017 in the United States (Evarts & Molis, 2008; Fathy et al., 2018). Although VTE does not completely replace traditional training, it allows trainees to undergo training for high risk scenarios without encountering any associated risk. The same goes for other areas where real-world training presents risks. For example, in medicine, the complexity and lack of expertise of trainee surgeons can lead to operating room errors in real-life situations, which can compromise patient care (Elsey et al., 2017). In fact, in real situations, overcrowded operating rooms, a restricted operating field and the hands of the surgeon can cause a lack of visibility for the trainee. As a result, essential information may be missing and the trainee may not fully master the surgical procedure (Pulijala et al., 2018). New technologies allow a 360° experience of the operating room, a close and continuous visualization of the procedure and interactions in a virtual environment, allowing efficient and risk-free training.

As well, in the context of fire safety, training in a real situation is considered to be the most effective condition. However, its implementation is costly (Buttussi & Chittaro, 2017). In most cases, it is not possible to carry out the simulation in the trainees' daily work environment because the activity cannot be interrupted and no risky situation can be created. It is therefore necessary to move the personnel to be trained in dedicated and equipped premises. Another limit is the potential dangerousness of such training, which implies that the fire must always be contained and controlled. The possibilities of fire scenarios are then limited. For safety reasons, these are always fire in oil or gas tanks, which do not consider the characteristics (temperature, flames, smoke, dynamics) specific to each context (fuel, source of oxygen, etc.). In addition, the extinguishing agents used during these simulations are polluting and environmental regulations limit their use. VR represent a means of overcoming these constraints. In this regard, Tokey (2018) indicates that several studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of immersive EVs in terms of risk reduction, time savings and facilitation of the presentation of learning situations compared to learning in real conditions. It should still be noted that Virtual Reality requires the development of digital environments which can be time consuming and costly. Bolkas et al. (2020) precise that 360-videos are easier and cheaper to produce, and could be preferred when learning does not require interaction with the environment. 360-Videos have found application in many domains such as organic chemistry laboratories (Ardisara & Fung, 2018), nursing care for trauma treatment education (Herault et al., 2018), foreign language learning (Berns et al., 2018), etc.

Nevertheless, as we have seen, learning in a virtual environment can be relevant in many situations, the question then becomes to identify the factors specifically associated to this type of learning which can improve knowledge or procedure acquisition.

2.2. Sense of presence and immersion
Winn et al., 2002 quoted in Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011 think that the sense of presence experienced by learners in the virtual environment is essential in the learning process. Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011) agree that presence plays a predominant part in the learning process as at least 12 of the studies they analyzed positively connect presence and learning. Moreover, they define immersion as another key characteristic of VEs and specify that the 16 analyzed immersive VEs scored positively in terms of learning and attitude from the learners. Finally, they also report that several studies have established that learners’ characteristics such as gender and experience with technology play an important part in the outcome of VEs and precise that these parameters have not been sufficiently documented.

The terms of immersion and presence have become essential in the literature on VEs, but what they mean may vary between authors with some overlaps (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011).

For Slater and Wilbur (1997) “immersion is a description of a technology, and describes the extent to which the computer displays are capable of delivering an inclusive, extensive, surrounding and vivid illusion of reality to the senses of a human participant”. Bouvier (2009) derives from this a series of characteristics which have the common trait of approaching quality, natural, and cohesive “perception-cognition-action” loops. Repeatedly in different authors, elements such as isolation from the physical environment, first-person point of view, multisensory channels (Dede, 2009; Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011) and interfaces also appear as key to immersion.

For Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011), immersion as well as realistic multi-sensory channels are positive factors on the learning outcome. Regarding the impact of immersion on Practical learning, Checa and Bustillo (2019) pointed out that: 1) Immersive Serious Games solutions have a very interesting cost-effective relation (highly accurate learning, low learning times, high visualization and understanding, etc.); 2) good transfer of virtual acquisitions to the real world; and 3) improved learning in a safe environment.

However, not all studies verify these points. For example, for biology, Elangovan and Ismail (2014) compared the performance of conceptual learning of cell division by using two VEs providing different immersion experiences. One low-immersive VE with a desktop computer and the other high-immersive VE with head-mounted displays (HMD). Students with the “realistic” high-immersive VE performed better than those using the classic desktop-based VE. In contrast Parong and Mayer (2018) achieve lower conceptual learning outcomes in cell biology in immersive VE. It is common to find such studies where several characteristics of immersion are manipulated simultaneously (field of vision, auditory dimensions and motor interface). In this case, it is difficult to discern which characteristic produces the effect or whether the effects of two of them cancel each other out. Other studies have focused on a single characteristic, but again the results differ. This is the case for more immersive interfaces, whether supported by tangible or realistic interface. For example, VirtualTouch is a tool to develop applications based on the mixed-reality paradigm. The virtual world is augmented with tangible and gestural interfaces for shape and gesture recognition (Mateu et al., 2014). The tool has yielded positive results in conceptual learning such as languages and culture.

Nevertheless, Minogue et al. (2006) tested a haptic interface enabling students a tactile discovery of cell structure, membranes and of the passive transport of substances through membranes. They did not observe significant differences between the test group and the control group. Conclusions are equally indecisive concerning procedural learning. Schroeder et al. compared the recall performance of a procedural task (replacement of an alternator) for three configurations offering three immersion levels. One desktop computer and the others HMD with two interaction modes (vocal or gestural). They did not achieve a significant difference in learning performance between the three immersion levels (Schroeder et al., 2017). Similar results are obtained in other studies (Buttussi & Chittaro, 2017; Youngblut & Huie, 2003).

If the level of immersion depends on the technology used, the sense of presence is a subjective characteristic linked to the perceptive and cognitive experience of the user (Bystrom et al., 1999; Slater & Wilbur, 1997; Witmer & Singer, 1998).

Several authors have proposed models to define presence and have identified different components. Schubert et al. (2001) proposed a model of presence in the context of embodied cognition and detailed three components: spatial presence (that is to say a feeling of acting in virtual space instead of operating something from the outside); the participation; and reality judgments. The presence factors defined by Lessiter et al. (2001) are similar, but their terminology differs slightly and they include the negative effects generated by the system. Witmer and Singer (1998) also identified involvement, associated with four factors influencing presence: control, sensory, distraction and realism. Finally, Bouvier (2009) uses the components proposed by Lee (2004). Physical presence is linked to the perception of objects in the environment as real, existing and with which one can interact; social presence concerns access to other forms of intelligence in the virtual environment and the perception of other virtual subjects or agents as real and effectively present; the presence of oneself refers to the representation of oneself in the virtual environment and is related to the realism of the movements, that is to say the adequacy and the adjustment of the image and the sound to the movements of the body in space. It proposes a fourth component. Presence of action which refers to the subject's awareness of his or her actions and their impact on the environment.

Studies aiming to verify the hypothesis that sense of presence influences learning have not led to unanimous conclusions either. In his paper on language learning, Roy (2014) has shown a positive relationship between presence and learning performance, more particularly on oral comprehension. This result is coherent with the work of Dubovi et al. (2017) that highlights positive correlation between the sense of presence, particularly the sense of control, and conceptual-procedural learning of medication administration. However, Schroeder et al. (2017) on the learning of a mechanical task does not identify a significant difference in learning performance depending on the sense of presence, neither (Buttussi and Chittaro, 2017) on the learning of commercial plane evacuation procedures by means of VR. Makransky et al., (2019) notes a negative correlation between presence and learning outcomes in a VR biology lesson. Youngblut and Huie (2003) results perhaps illustrate that discrepancy best. In their study of a Virtual Emergency Response Training System (VERTS), they investigated the relationship between the presence and intervention procedure learning performance. The authors submitted two questionnaires to participants to subjectively measure the sense of presence: the Witmer-Singer Presence Questionnaire (PQ) and the Slater-Usoh-Steed (SUS). They obtained a positive correlation between learning performance and the first presence test score, but not with the second presence test score.

Most models take immersion into account as an element or factor of sense of presence, and various studies show an effective link between these two factors (Alshaer et al., 2017; Buttussi & Chittaro, 2017; Makransky et al., 2019; Verlinden et al., 2013). Cummings and Bailenson (2015) found a link between immersion and sense of presence. These authors have shown that improved levels of user tracking, the use of stereoscopic visuals, and larger fields of view from visual screens have a significant impact on the sense of presence. More recently, research has shown that high immersion also results in higher reported presence levels than low immersion (Parong et al., 2020). However, other studies were inconclusive in this regard (Barbosa et al., 2017; Roy, 2014).

2.3. Others factors affecting VR performance
While immersion and the sense of presence are likely to play an important role in RV learning performance, other factors have been examined by different authors. Some studies noting significant differences between men and women whereas others do not (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011). It was shown (Lachlan & Krcmar, 2011) that the sense of presence was related to gender, to the immersive tendency and experience in video games. More precisely, Rosa et al. (2016) have studied individual factors that can be related to the quality of the experience in a VE such as age, gender, video game experience, and immersive predisposition. They have shown that PC gamers (as opposed to console gamers or non-gamers) have better immersive predispositions and are less likely to experience motion sickness. They conclude that the user's prior experience with the controller (interface) of the VE can influence the quality of their experience in this environment and consequently their performance and the effects of using the VE. Moreover, for Waller (2000), prior experience with computers is a powerful predictor of performance in new tasks as some automated mechanisms are transferable from one task to another thus minimizing the cognitive load necessary for using the VE. In these conditions it seems necessary to control the influence of these factors in studies on VE.

3. Purpose
The increasing digital and technological evolution imposes significant and rapid changes in the practices and operating methods of operators in a large number of industrial sectors. In this socio-economic context of competitiveness, vocational training has received particular attention in recent years. As a result, training is a rapidly expanding sector, with major challenges in the search for innovative and efficient solutions. In this context, Virtual Reality is considered as a major advance, in that it makes it possible to reduce training costs and to offer realistic and secure learning situations. Our study concerns the training of professionals in all sectors, who in France according to article L4141-2, have the obligation to have practical and appropriate training in the use of extinguishers and fire. Fire prevention training are particularly relevant sectors for the development of digital applications given the difficulties and potential dangers of training in real situations. The IGNYS application has been developed and commercialized by the IFOPSE company. She is commonly used as part of these fire awareness training courses. The object of this study is to evaluate this digital solution, but above all to identify the factors favoring learning, as well as the factors allowing the training to be better adapted to the characteristics of the trainees. Recommendations will then be formulated to improve the existing environment.

Studies have already shown the importance of immersion and the sense of presence on learning, even if the results are sometimes contradictory. Other studies have focused on the link between immersion and the feeling of presence, often showing that an immersive digital device can lead to a greater feeling of presence and vice versa. But no studies have specifically investigated the combined effects (i.e. the interactions) of immersion and the sense of presence on learning performance (e.g. the effects on learning, of high immersion and high sense of presence, compared to high immersion and low sense of presence or low immersion and high sense of presence). This study of the combined effect (of immersion and presence) on learning raises the question of whether both immersion and the sense of presence should be high to improve learning, or whether high immersion or a high sense of presence is enough. Such a study is essential to better understand the respective effects of these 2 parameters (immersion and sense of presence) on learning performance in Virtual Reality. In addition, 2 forms of learning (procedural and conceptual) are commonly investigated in VR studies, but usually in different tasks, either conceptual (learning a course or a lesson) or procedural (learning gesture skills), which makes comparison difficult.

However, a large number of professional activities simultaneously bring these 2 learning modes into play. In our study, the interest of VR for these 2 forms of learning will therefore be questioned through the same fire safety task. In addition, if, as we have seen, immersion and the sense of presence have given rise to numerous studies, the comparative effect of these 2 parameters according to the type of learning (procedural or conceptual) has not been directly investigated, which is another goal of our study.

Finally, some studies have shown the influence of certain individual characteristics on VR performance, such as gender, tendency to immersion, computer experience, video game experience and experience in the field targeted by the training. But again, the comparative effect of these variables according to the type of learning (procedural or conceptual) has not been clearly identified, which constitutes the last objective of our study.

4. Method
4.1. Design and procedure
As a first step (Fig. 1), the participant completes the questionnaires for the assessment of individual factors including a questionnaire on demographic data (sex, age, profession, level and field of study) as well as questionnaires for the assessment of skills and experience in fire safety, computer experience, tendency to immersion and finally, a questionnaire on the practice of video games.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (150KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The different stages of the experimental procedure.

Then, the participant has 40 min to complete the knowledge pre-test (conceptual knowledge) and the situational scenario pre-test (procedural knowledge).

The participant carries out the training session composed of a conceptual training (with course documents) and a procedural training (with VTE).

Each participant then has an additional 40 min to complete the knowledge post-test and the situational scenario post-test.

Finally, the questionnaires on the feeling of presence are completed by the participants.

4.2. Individual factor assessment
Participants were subjected to a questionnaire on demographic data (gender, age, profession, level and field of study) and questionnaires assessing their skills and experience in fire safety and computers, video games (cf. appendix).

-
Computer experience and skills: a questionnaire was developed based on recommendations from previous studies on the evaluation of computer experience (Smith et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2009).

-
Immersive tendency: measured using the Immersive Tendency Questionnaire (ITQ) mentioned above (Witmer & Singer, 1998).

-
Experience and skills in fire safety: a questionnaire relating to the level of experience and skills in practical and theoretical fields has been developed. The subjective questionnaire was constructed on the basis of the pedagogical objectives of the training studied as well as with the help of the fire trainers. It uses Yes-No questions as well as scale questions (1–5).

4.3. Pre-test
Two types of learning were assessed in our study: conceptual/knowledge and procedural/skills. Before the training session, a conceptual pre-test and a procedural pre-test were carried out in order to assess the initial levels of knowledge and skills of the participants in the field of fire safety.

-
Conceptual Pre-test: Before the training session, trainees had to fill in a questionnaire in order to assess the initial state of their knowledge in the field. The pre-test consisted of 20 items scored on 40 points. The questions relate to the theoretical knowledge necessary for handling fire extinguishers. The different items of the questionnaire address the educational objectives of the training in order to validate their acquisition: knowing the fire risk, knowing how to deal with a fire alarm, knowing the extinguishing means available and their operation (extinguishers, armed fire valve, etc.), know your establishment's fire safety system, know how to alert the emergency services, etc. This questionnaire was carried out on the basis of interviews with trainers and trainees, observations of the fire safety training session and all the educational documents at our disposal. The questionnaire was then validated by the trainers.

-
Procedural Pre-test: Before the training session, a pre-test was proposed to the participants (in the form of role-playing), based on a situational scenario of extinction of a fire, in order to assess the initial state of their procedural skills in the field. Scenarios was designed with the help of the trainers so that it is relevant to the targeted practices. The sessions were scored using an observation grid covering 10 tasks and subtasks and 3 critical choices. The grid criteria used were the items to be performed, the order in which they were performed and the manner in which they were performed. The evaluation elements identified are the actions necessary for the proper use of an extinguisher during a fire: the relevance and coherence of the information gathered in the situation by the learner and the associated decisions (risk, origin of the fire, choice of extinguisher, etc.); the tasks and sub-tasks related to the intervention procedure; and the quality of the achievement, i.e. the errors, delays, actions and efficiency of the activity. After conducting interviews and training observations, a first observation grid was drawn up. This grid was then presented to the trainers who brought new elements and then validated this new observation grid.

4.4. Training with the educational document and the VTE
The training was based on a course document (for conceptual learning) and a VTE (for procedural learning).

As part of this study, we proposed training on fire safety. The learning was based on a course document (for conceptual learning) and a VTE (for procedural application). This VTE has been used for several years for fire safety to train professionals.1 In order to design the content of our course and our evaluation material, we relied on the analysis of the trainers' activity (Film and analysis of a training course on the use of fire extinguishers, interviews with trainers fire safety, etc.) as well as the training materials they usually use. This allowed us to determine the explicit and implicit knowledge, skills and competences (Roegiers, 2010).

Covered by the training and to determine the key elements of the assessment. All the documents that we have developed to assess the apprenticeship (pre and post trailing assessment) have then been validated by fire training professionals.

4.4.1. Course document
In order to design the course content, we relied on the analysis of the trainers' activity (Film and analysis of training courses on the use of fire extinguishers, interviews with fire safety trainers, etc.) as well as on the supports which are generally used by training professionals. This allowed us to determine the knowledge, skills and competences (Roegiers, 2010) needed for the training and to determine the key elements of the assessment. The documents developed (Fig. 2) were then validated by fire training professionals.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (820KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Example of slides of educational document (Basis of the fire phenomenon: fire triangle; fire classes; modes of propagation; extinguishers).

4.4.2. VTE
The VTE is a 4 × 4 square meter training space bounded by a wall on two sides (front and right) and tables on the left and rear sides. The Ignys software we used is a virtual reality learning environment that simulates a fire scenario. Fire and smoke, integrated into the image, are dynamic and evolve over time according to the actions of the user. The EV offers the use of three different types of extinguishers, including adjustable nozzles and specific effects of simulated extinguishing agents on the display. The image is projected on a wall using an overhead projector and the sound of fire extinguishers (pressurization, use, etc.) is broadcast through loudspeakers.

Four different teaching scenarios are offered: a hospital bed fire, a vehicle engine fire, an electric fire and a lab bench light. The scenarios made it possible to apply and explain the knowledge contained in the course material. For each scenario, the learner would put out the fire, then explanations and reminders were given in exactly the same way to all participants.

Two immersion conditions (immersive environment and non-immersive environment conditions) were proposed for training with the VTE.

-
Immersive environment interaction is achieved with a realistic interface. This consists of three connected fire extinguishers, full-size (and weight) replicas and a connected console that simulates a gas outlet, an electrical emergency stop button, a fire alarm box and a telephone (cf. Fig. 3). Two sensors detect the position of the extinguishers and the orientation of their nozzles. The position of the fire extinguisher is tracked in order to adapt the image presented on the large 2D screen. The fire extinguishers only work if they have been properly used by the learner. At the beginning of each scenario, the learner is 2 m from the screen and can then move around the simulation area.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (514KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. VTE with immersive environment conditions.

-
Non-immersive environment interaction is desktop-based. The keyboard and mouse are used to manipulate the fire extinguishers. The participant was seated behind a Table 2 m from the screen. The learner moves the extinguisher nozzle with the mouse and can click the left mouse button to spray. The extinguishers and console elements are operated by keys. Replicas of fire extinguishers have been left nearby and visible so that learners can benefit from the same visual information as in an immersion situation. Each interactive command was clearly indicated on the corresponding key. Learners had to verbally describe the actions to be taken to use the extinguisher safely in order to extinguish the fire.

4.5. Post-test
After the training session, a conceptual post-test and a procedural post-test were carried out in order to assess the development of the knowledge and skills of the participants within the framework of the training.

-
Conceptual Post-test: After the training session, trainees had to fill in a questionnaire in order to assess the development of their knowledge. This questionnaire is almost similar to the questionnaire before the training session. Namely, it consisted of 20 items scored on 40 points. As we indicated, these assessments were carried out on the basis of interviews with trainers and learners and videotaped observations of the fire safety training session and were then validated by the trainers.

-
Procedural Post-test: After the training session, a post-test was proposed (similar to the pre-test in the form of role-playing), based on a situational scenario of extinction of a safe fire. These sessions were scored using the same observation grid than that used for the pre-test.

In order to assess the effectiveness of each type of learning, we calculated the progression (ScorePost-test - ScorePre-test) which we compared to the margin of progression (ScoreMax - ScorePre-test). We thus obtained an indicator of learning outcomes which is the rate of progression compared to the best possible progression.

4.6. Sense of presence
Many questionnaires aim to assess the feeling of presence (cf. Table 1). The Slater-Usoh and Steed (SUS) questionnaire is the most frequently used with the Presence (PQ) questionnaire (Grassini & Laumann, 2020). Other questionnaires are also used, such as the Temple Presence Inventory (TPI), the ITC-Sense of Presence Inventory (ITC-SOPI), or the Igroup presence questionnaire (IPQ) (cf. Table 1). These different questionnaires have been developed over the years and the evolution of definitions of the meaning of presence. Some assess the feeling of presence in general and others are interested in different dimensions of the feeling of presence.


Table 1. Different questionnaires to measure feeling of presence.

Questionnaire	Number of items	Auteurs & Years
Temple Presence Inventory	42	Lombard et al. (2009)
ITC-Sense of Presence Inventory (ITC-SOPI)	44	Lessiter et al., (2001)
Igroup presence questionnaire (IPQ)	14	Schubert et al., (2001)
Slater-Usoh and Steed questionnaire (SUS)	6	Slater & Steed (2000)
Presence questionnaire (PQ)	32	Witmer and Singer (1998)
We chose the SUS because it is widely used in similar studies and above all it contains very few items to inform. Indeed, given the length of our protocol, it seemed relevant to us to use a short questionnaire. The SUS questionnaire is based on three themes: the feeling of being in the VE, the extent to which the VE becomes the dominant reality and the extent to which the VE is identified as a “place”.

4.7. Participants
43 people (28 men and 15 women), aged 17 to 29 (A = 20, SD = 3.1) participated in the study. Their training ranged from the end of high school to masters. Most of them were students, the majority of whom had obtained a university degree in health and safety.

The participants were divided into two immersion groups, those who were subjected to the condition of immersive environment and those subjected to the condition of non-immersive environment. Due to incomplete data, we have two groups of 19 people (immersive environment) and 24 people (non-immersive environment) for the immersion level. We have incomplete data because one of the questionnaires was sent by e-mail and some participants did not return it. Despite numerous reminders, the data relating to these participants had to be deleted.

From the results of the feeling of presence, we divided the participants into 2 groups according to the median scores obtained on the 43 subjects. Therefore, for the immersive environment group, there were 8 people below the median and 11 people above the median. For the non-immersive environment group, there were 14 people below the median and 10 people above the median.

A one-factor analysis of variance shows that there is no significant difference between the 4 groups with regard to age (F (3.39) = 0.53, p > 0.5), computer experience (F (3.39) = 0.56, p > 0.5), gaming experience (F (3.39) = 0.19, p > 0.5), expertise in fire safety (F (3.39) = 0.34, p > 0.5) and tendency to immersion (F (3.39) = 2.7, p > .5). For the gender factor, there is between 20 à 42% of women in each group.

4.8. Analysis
The results were then processed using the R statistical program. A two-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to assess the effects of immersion, feeling of presence and their interaction on both types learning outcomes (procedural or conceptual). The ANCOVAs were then carried out to control the effect of sex, immersive tendencies, computer experience, experience in video games and experience in fire safety.

5. Results
We will first present here the results on procedural acquisition and then on conceptual acquisition.

5.1. Procedural acquisition
Analysis of variance shows a significant effect of immersion [F (1.39) = 4.21; p = 0.04], but no effect of the feeling of presence [F (1.39) = 0.25; p = 0.62], nor an interaction effect between these two factors [F (1.39) = 0.43; p = 0.52] (cf. Table 2). The immersion effect is due to the fact that the performance in the procedural acquisition test is higher in the immersive situation.


Table 2. Effects of sense of presence and immersion on procedural acquisition.

Dependent variable	Independent variable	M	S
High Sense of Presence	Immersive environment	51.4	27.7
Non-Immersive environment	41.8	24.1
Total	46.8	25.9
Low Sense of Presence	Immersive environment	59.3	20.5
Non-Immersive environment	40.7	15.3
Total	47.5	19.2
Total	Immersive environment	54.7	24.7
Non-Immersive environment	41.2	18.9
Total	47.1	22.4
5.2. Conceptual learning
The analysis of variance shows no immersion effect [F(1.39) = 0.51; p = 0.48], no sense of presence effect [F(1.39) = 0.95; p = 0.34], and no interaction between the two factors [F(1.39) = 0.20; p = 0.66] (cf. Table 3).


Table 3. Effects of sense of presence and immersion on conceptual acquisition.

Dependent variable	Independent variable	M	S
High Sense of Presence	Immersive environment	14.8	8.8
Non-Immersive environment	14.1	7.9
Total	14.5	8.1
Low Sense of Presence	Immersive environment	18.6	8.6
Non-Immersive environment	15.5	8.6
Total	16.6	8.5
Total	Immersive environment	16.4	8.7
Non-Immersive environment	14.9	8.1
Total	15.6	8.3
5.3. Control of variables
The covariance analyzes did not reveal any significant difference when the controls focused on the effects of computer experience, video game experience, gender and fire knowledge for knowledge tests.

Similarly, covariance analyzes did not reveal any significant difference when the controls focused on the effects of computer experience, experience in video games and gender for procedural tests.

On the other hand, the effect of knowledge of fire is significant in procedural tests [F (1.38) = 14.37; p = 0.001] and this variable increases the effect of the immersion [F (1.38) = 7.38; p = 0.01].

6. Discussion
One of the results of our study is that immersion improves procedural learning but not conceptual learning.

These results are consistent with those of the study by Jung and Ahn (2018) who compared the learning of conceptual and practical knowledge of a complex procedure according to the degree of immersion of the VTE. Three interfaces were chosen by the authors as follows: a conventional interface used in desktop environments (i.e., a monitor and keyboard/mouse), an immersive game environment (i.e., a head-mounted display [HMD] and joypad), and a gesture-controlled environment (i.e., an HMD and wearable sensors). The procedural task was a lifeboat launch operation which involved transferring a lifeboat from its storage position safely to the water. The task is complex because it requires the crew to memorize the exact order of handling more than 36 elements of a lifeboat and the device that secures the boat on board. The procedural assessment focused on technical (sensorimotor) skills (i.e., motor activities for the manipulation of equipment) and the conceptual assessment focused on knowledge of the steps required for a particular task.

The results showed significantly better performance for the group with the immersive environment for practical skills, while there were no significant differences according to the level of immersion for conceptual knowledge (Jung & Ahn, 2018).

It's important to note that, as in Jung and Ahn's study, the interactivity between the learner and the system is one of the elements favoring immersion in a virtual environment. As pointed out by (Bailey et al., 2017) gesture-based commands may be better for learning a procedure because the participant physically performs the task. Indeed, the “activation effect” refers to the fact that the physical execution of an action improves the recall of this action (Engelkamp & Jahn, 2003). Nilsson et al. (1989) showed the enacting gives better results than does hear the action or see someone else perform the action, even weeks later.

All these elements can explain why, in our study, as in other studies, the manipulation of immersion by the level of interaction with the virtual system made it possible to improve procedural learning. But our results allow us to go further since they specify that experience in fire safety improves the effect of immersion on procedural learning. This result is interesting because it seems to indicate that, in a virtual environment, gesture-based commands are better for learning a procedure, and that this phenomenon is amplified by the level of expertise of the user.

As indicated above, in our study, the manipulation of the immersion level had no effect on conceptual learning. Parong and Mayer (2018) suggest that the absence of a positive effect of immersion in the case of scientific learning, found by several authors, could be explained by the cognitive theory of multimedia learning (Mayer, 2010, 2014, pp. 43–71) and the cognitive load theory (Sweller et al., 2011).

These theories make it possible to postulate that adding material and features can create cognitive processing that is not relevant to the learning objective. Since cognitive processing capacities are limited, the fact of allocating part of this capacity to extraneous processing means that there may not be enough remaining capacity to engage in sufficient levels of cognitive processing aimed at make sense of essential material.

In fact, an immersion system has positive effects only if the elements added to the situation are related to the nature of the learning task to be performed. This position is in agreement with the point of view of Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011). In their ten-year review of empirical research, they identify 3 studies which compare different level of immersion (Adamo-Villani & Wilbur, 2008; Mikropoulos, 2006; Winn et al., 2002) and conclude that immersion compared to a desktop system has a great advantage only when the content to be learned is complex, 3D and dynamic.

Another result of our study is that we did not find any effect of the feeling of presence on conceptual learning and on procedural learning. As already seen, studies aiming to verify the hypothesis that sense of presence influences learning have not led to unanimous conclusions. In a series of studies, Snow (1996) attempted to create a regression model for determining covariates of presence and performance. Results showed a positive relationship between presence and performance, but this relation was weak and 90% of the performance variance was explained by other factors than presence. In their model, Bystrom et al. (1999) related performance to attentional resources, a minimum amount of presence, and the task requirements. They hypothesized that “presence itself does not necessarily facilitate or hinder performance, but that having some sense of presence in an environment is a necessary condition for performance to occur” (se also Nash et al. (2000) for a review). Dinh et al. (1999, pp. 222–228) found no correlation between presence and memory performance in virtual tasks, even if these authors have shown that both presence and performance was increased when tactile and auditory information was added to the virtual environment. In the same way, Slater and Wilbur (1997) concluded that there is no evidence for a positive correlation between presence and task performance, and for Van Baren and IJsselsteijn (2004) the relationship between these two variables is strongly mediated by other factors, such as experimental instructions or individual motivation.

Indeed, in their literature review, Stanney and Salvendy (1998) mentioned positive correlations between presence and performance on tasks such as tracking, searching, and training of time-constrained sensorimotor tasks. However, this review did not find relationships between presence and performance for psychomotor and spatial-knowledge tasks. Moreover, even if Witmer and Singer (1998) argue that immersion is prerequisites for experiencing presence in a virtual environment, studies show that a high level of presence can be associated with reliable levels of immersion and vice versa (Mikropoulos & Strouboulis, 2004; Villani et al., 2012).

All these results are in accordance with our study showing both no link between sense of presence and performance but also no interaction between sense of presence and level of immersion.

It is important to note that many questionnaires exist to assess the feeling of presence. Even though they aim to measure the same concept, they include many different elements and assess different dimensions of the sense of presence. Although the SUS questionnaire is widely used in studies to measure sense of presence, at least one study has questioned the ability of this questionnaire to provide information on a link with performance (Youngblut & Huie, 2003). The ability to appropriately assess the feeling of presence in virtual environments remains a major challenge (Grassini & Laumann, 2020). In our future work, it would be interesting to correlate our results with other measures of the sense of presence and in particular physiological measures (Arndt et al., 2016; Meehan et al., 2002).

Finally, we did not observe a gender effect whatever the type of learning (procedural or conceptual). In their ten-year revue of empirical research, Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011) indicate that on the 53 articles reviewed, only 6 studied the genre. Three studies show no gender effect (Ketelhut, 2007; Nelson, 2007; Roussou et al., 2006), two reported a superiority for men (Adamo-Villani & Wilbur, 2008; Hokanson et al., 2008, pp. 788–792). Crosier et al. (2000) and one reported that girls have better computer attitudes.

They conclude that characteristics such as learning styles, gender and age play an important role in learning with EVEs, and that this topic, insufficiently studied in the last 10 years, should be the subject of future investigations.

In recent years, the use of virtual reality technologies for academic learning or professional training has grown considerably. Current work also shows the extremely rich potential of this approach and, in certain fields, its added value compared to traditional approaches. It should still be noted, as noted in the introduction part, that 360-videos are easier and cheaper to produce, have given rise to many applications in education, and could be preferred when learning does not require interaction with the environment.

In the same way, Additive Manufacturing commonly known as « 3D printing (3DP) », provides a cost-effective and time-efficient way to produce low-volume, customized products with complicated geometries and advanced material properties and functionality (Violante & Vezzetti, 2017). In a very comprehensive paper on the subject, these authors show the interest of this approach in the field of education, such as for medical training purposes, or to better understand chemical and biological phenomena, etc.

However, the design or use of a 3D environment requires to define the conditions of the environment which are the most suitable both for the characteristics of the training areas and for the profiles of the trainees. Our work shows that immersion promotes procedural but not conceptual learning, and that neither the sense of presence nor the interaction between immersion and the sense of presence affect both types of learning in our training task. Except the knowledge of fire never of the variables taken in account in our study (computer experience, video game experience and gender) have an impact on training performances.

