Self-directed learning (SDL) ability, its usefulness in higher education, and life-long learning have been highlighted in previous literature. However, understanding the effects of SDL ability in the school settings, specifically how it affects learners' affective and behavioral outcomes, remains missing and calls for further investigation. Given this research gap, this study developed a goal-oriented active learning system, GOAL, to support students' SDL and investigated how students' perceptions of SDL ability affect their reading engagement, SDL behavior, and motivation for extensive reading. The results showed that the high SDL ability students demonstrated significantly more reading engagement, SDL behaviors, motivation and autonomy for extensive reading than those with low SDL ability. These findings suggested that an SDL support environment could be exploited as a useful tool to support foreign language learning in the schools; however, the affective and behavioral outcomes created by the environment were affected to varying degrees by the levels of students’ SDL ability. The study provided implications for researchers studying extensive reading and SDL environments, as well as for educators seeking to improve extensive reading with SDL strategy usage.

Previous
Keywords
21st century abilities

Teaching/learning strategies

Data science applications in education

Applications in subject areas

Secondary education

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of information and automation technologies not only changes how learners select knowledge resources but also increases their opportunities for learning in both formal and informal education (Fahnoe & Mishra, 2013). In such a rapidly changing landscape of learning technologies, self-directed learning (SDL) is becoming increasingly important in the 21st century and necessitates a shift in the educational models from a teacher-directed to a more student-centered pedagogy (Toh & Kirschner, 2020). SDL (Brockett & Hiemstra, 2018; Knowles, 1975) is defined as a learning process including planning, setting goals, selecting and seeking information or resources, and evaluating the learning process. Barnes, Marateo, and Ferris (2007) emphasized “Net Geners need self-directed learning opportunities, interactive environments, multiple forms of feedback, and assignment choices that use different resources to create personally meaningful learning experiences” (p. 2). There is a greater need for learners to learn how to develop SDL ability without being passively taught by others.

In the field of EFL (English as a foreign language) and L2 (second language) research, extensive reading (ER) has been recognized as an effective way to promote learners' language development by facilitating a great amount of reading of learners’ own choice and pace. ER encourages language growth and acquisition, in particular, improves reading comprehension and vocabulary growth (Schmitt, 2008; Urquhart & Weir, 2014).

While there are potential positive effects of ER, individual differences of learners in SDL abilities in goal-setting and monitoring may affect learning engagement and further impact learning achievement (Terras & Ramsay, 2015; Suk, 2017). Terras and Ramsay (2015) examined the psychological determinants of learner behaviors relevant to SDL and claimed that efficient goal-setting has positive influence on learning behavior and engagement. Suk (2017) investigated the impact of an ER approach over a 15-week semester on students’ language proficiency and stated that goal-setting and monitoring strategy usage can lead to better reading outcomes. SDL ability is particularly important among various psycho-social factors, especially following the shift from teacher-centered traditional classrooms to learner-centered approaches with advanced technologies (Toh & Kirschner, 2020; Wong et al., 2019). Learners with different levels of SDL ability benefit differently from their intrinsic motivation and learning achievements (Skinner, Furrer, Marchand, & Kindermann, 2008). Previous studies have investigated the influence of SDL ability in different educational settings such as adult education (Garrison, 1997), undergraduate education (El-Gilany & Abusaad, 2013; Sumuer, 2018), and MOOCs (Zhu, Bonk, & Doo, 2020).

Compared to the domain of higher and adult education, few studies have examined the effects of SDL ability in the schools (Jeon & Day, 2016). Moreover, there has been a lack of attention paid to understanding the effects of SDL ability on ER activity, which is potentially influenced by students’ motivation and autonomy (Wijnia, Loyens, Derous, & Schmidt, 2015). Therefore, the present study investigates the effects of SDL ability on a large scale online ER program in a school setting.

Given that the large scale online ER program is considerably different from traditional classrooms in terms of roles and responsibilities of teachers and students, it's necessary to provide scaffolding to assist students in self-directed ER. This study proposed a goal-oriented active learning system, GOAL, for ER learners by integrating key elements in both ER and SDL. The GOAL system not only leverages students' fine-grained data in reading activities but also provides computer-based scaffolds to promote students' SDL in five key phases. The collected fine-grained data on ER activity gives students critical indicators in learning activity contexts such as time spent on ER activities and thereby initiate the self-directed cycle. The computer-based scaffolds then provide further support to pursue their own reading goals.

This study investigates whether students’ SDL ability impacts their reading engagement, SDL behaviors, and motivation for ER in a self-directed online reading environment. Accordingly, the following research questions were examined:

1.
How do learners' perceptions of self-directed learning ability affect their reading engagement in a self-directed online reading environment?

2.
How do learners' perceptions of self-directed learning ability affect their self-directed learning behaviors in a self-directed online reading environment?

3.
How do learners' perceptions of self-directed learning ability affect their motivation for extensive reading?

2. Literature review
2.1. Extensive reading
Grabe and Stoller (2011) defined ER as an “approach to the teaching and learning of reading in which learners read large amounts of material that are within their linguistic competence” (p. 286). Renandya (2007) referred to Carrell and Carson's (1997) definition of ER as “extensive reading … generally involves rapid reading of large quantities of material or longer readings (e.g., whole books) for general understanding, with the focus generally on the meaning of what is being read than on the language” (pp. 49–50). The Top Ten Principles for Teaching ER, outlined in Day and Bamford (1998), are often cited to define ER (e.g., Hitosugi & Day, 2004; Soliman, 2012). These principles state the reading should be easy, fast, silent, pleasurable, individual, and self-selected, and involve reading as much as possible while guided by a teacher as a role model.

From above definitions and principles, the following four elements of ER are commonly presented: a large amount of reading, easy materials, faster reading rate, and reading pleasure (Yamashita, 2015). Among them, most ER procedures take “a large amount of reading” as in Day and Bamford (1998) as essential for ER, and consider the other three elements as a set of interacting factors that contribute to this essence.

Previous research inspected the effect of ER from different perspectives, including learners’ motivation (Day & Bamford, 1998; Tanaka, 2017), reading comprehension and reading speed (Beglar & Hunt, 2014; Chang, 2010), sight vocabulary (Brown, Waring, & Donkaewbua, 2008; Pigada & Schmitt, 2006; Webb & Chang, 2015), and grammatical knowledge (Song & Sardegna, 2014). ER has also been recognized by EFL and L2 researchers as an effective way of encouraging language growth and acquisition, in particular improving reading comprehension and vocabulary growth (Hafiz & Tudor, 1989; Schmitt, 2008; Urquhart & Weir, 2014).

However, as Brown (2009) notes, “The main practical concerns regarding extensive reading are to do with cost, lack of time, monitoring students’ reading, managing the library of books, guiding students to choose appropriate books, and getting students engaged in reading” (p. 240). Although the benefits of extensive exposure to meaningful language have received strong empirical support, ER has not always received the kind of support that it deserves. Many ER practitioners are constrained by practical concerns that prevent them from achieving successful large scale ER projects.

The first key concern is that teachers lack time to launch the ER program and guide students' reading activities (Waring, 2011; Brown, 2009). ER is often implemented as an out-of-class or extracurricular activity where it's difficult to provide sufficient on-going support to each student from teachers. Teachers need to be clear whether students are reading and what they are reading. However, after the initial enthusiasm, teachers may begin to feel overwhelmed by the amount of work related to the running of the program without sufficient support. The second key concern is how to promote students' autonomy for independent reading, especially in a large-scale ER program (Blachowicz & Fisher, 2014). Students are expected to self-select their reading materials, read at their own pace, and have sufficient time to read in the ER program. However, students usually lose their direction before forming a good reading habit if they do not have their own goals in the ER program (Day & Bamford, 1998). Therefore, both teachers and students need to be supported to achieve the expected outcomes in an ER program.

Recent studies on ER (e.g., McLean & Poulshock, 2018; Suk, 2017) have implied that setting a reading goal facilitated more reading. According to Locke and Latham's (2002) goal-setting theory, setting appropriate goals can enhance students' motivation. Mikami (2020) suggested that goal setting can exert a powerful influence on students' motivation for ER. Setting appropriate goals may be crucial in increasing students' motivation and reading amounts. The virtuous cycle through the effective use of goal-setting may be a key factor in ensuring the success of ER programs.

Moreover, one potential influence on ER motivation and engagement is the ability of autonomy. Jones (1998) emphasized the advantages of autonomy, such as strengthening intrinsic motivation and enabling personalized reading. Autonomy relates to the need for freedom or choice of one's behavior. Learners' autonomy provides a motivational basis for their behavioral engagement because of the choice of making decisions for participating in an activity (Skinner et al., 2008).

Despite goal-setting and autonomy playing an influential role in different educational settings, there has been little investigation on the effects of goal-setting and autonomy for ER. Additionally, most participants have been university students, whereas few studies have been conducted with high school and junior high school learners (Jeon & Day, 2016). Therefore, there is a need to examine how goal-setting and autonomy affect learners’ motivation and reading engagement while executing an ER in the context of K-12 schools.

2.2. Self-directed learning
Self-Directed Learning (SDL) is broadly defined as the process wherein individuals take the initiative, with or without others' support, to diagnose their learning needs, formulate their learning goals, identify human and material resources for learning, choose and implement appropriate learning strategies, and evaluate their learning outcomes (Knowles, 1975). The concept of SDL has been recognized and researched for decades (Brockett & Hiemstra, 2018; Candy, 1991; Gibbons, 2002). Sze-Yeng and Hussain (2010) emphasized learner autonomy from the personal attribute perspective. Brookfield (2013) also emphasizes learners’ decisions on what to learn, when to learn it, how much to learn, and whether something has been learned well enough.

The digital revolution has brought SDL to the forefront, and its context has changed with the presence of technology in current learning avenues. A well-designed online learning environment can provide a conducive context to execute SDL effectively. The flexible structure of the learning environment enables learners to accommodate their own needs in their own time, place, and pace. Consequently, this makes it possible for them to have more control over their own learning (Beach, 2017). Rashid and Asghar (2016) found that the use of technology has a direct positive relationship with students’ engagement and levels of SDL, which both are related to academic success. Aldowah, Al-Samarraie, and Fauzy (2019) found that learning analytics can provide computational support for SDL and 21st-century education by allowing learners to track their behavior, choices, and learning progress through visualizing patterns and providing rapid feedback using a computerized or mobile platform.

The effectiveness of SDL in both formal and informal learning environments has been examined. El-Gilany and Abusaad (2013) examined the SDL capability of undergraduate nursing students and found that their SDL abilities were positively related to their learning achievements. Terras and Ramsay (2015) identified a range of psycho-social and cognitive factors such as SDL as significant determinants of successful e-learning. Zhu et al. (2020) investigated the relationship among motivation, self-monitoring, and self-management of SDL elements in MOOCs and found that motivation directly affected self-monitoring and indirectly influenced self-management through self-monitoring. However, compared to SDL studies in higher and adult education, few studies have investigated the effects of SDL ability in the schools.

Furthermore, most studies on SDL made use of questionnaires to examine the effects of self-reported SDL activity (El-Gilany & Abusaad, 2013; Rashid & Asghar, 2016; Zhu et al., 2020). These self-reported instruments are often limited to capturing subjective SDL perceptions of the learners and lack objective measurements of their learning behaviors. However, SDL behaviors can be identified from trace data. Trace data consist of information that is automatically stored as learners interacts with the online resources, for instance, when they navigate to a page, click a button, or submit their self-rating scores. The trace data makes it possible to explore the relationship between SDL perceptions and behaviors.

Therefore, a goal-oriented active learning system is developed in this study to facilitate SDL, aiming at investigating how students’ perceptions of SDL ability affect their reading engagement, SDL behavior, and motivation for ER in a self-directed online reading environment.

3. Promoting self-directed extensive reading in a self-directed online reading environment
A self-directed online reading environment is adopted in this study to promote self-directed ER, as shown in Fig. 1. It contains an e-book reader named BookRoll and the GOAL system linked to a learning management system. BookRoll is used to execute ER activities by learners and the GOAL system supports their SDL for ER, such as planning for ER.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (372KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The GOAL system and e-book reader in learning management system.

The BookRoll e-book reader is designed to access e-books or lecture slides inside or outside of the classroom (Ogata et al., 2015, 2017; Flanagan & Ogata, 2018). Fig. 2 shows a screenshot of the BookRoll e-book reader. The user interface supports a variety of operations, such as: moving to the next or previous page, jumping to a specific page, adding an electronic bookmark, making markers in yellow or red, creating memos at the page level, or searching keywords in the e-book. All operations of the readers are recorded and stored in the forms of Experience API (or xAPI) statements. With the help of BookRoll, students’ reading behaviors are collected, including the reading pages and time. Besides, more than 400 e-books are provided for students to execute extensive reading in BookRoll.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (560KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. A screenshot of the BookRoll e-book reader.

The GOAL system is a platform to support students' development of data-informed SDL ability. It can be linked and launched from any typical LMS such as Moodle through the Learning Tool Interoperability (LTI) protocol. Learning activity data from the Learning Record Store (LRS), such as learners’ reading logs from BookRoll, are automatically synchronized in the GOAL system. An activity aggregator module in GOAL aggregates activity indicators from the learning activity data at different time scales. The activity indicators in ER context refer to the total amount or time spent on reading activities in hours, days, or weeks. For instance, to compute daily pages read for each learner, GOAL aggregates from the BookRoll interaction logs how many pages of any extensive reading material they browsed daily. Then SDL scaffoldings are implemented and provided to students using the DAPER (Data collection – Analysis – Planning - Execution monitoring - Reflection) model. The scaffolding includes self-direction tasks, interaction tracking, skill diagnosis, and skill-based adaptive feedback in phases. Self-direction tasks are contextual operations in phases, such as creating personal plans for extensive reading in planning; The interactions with the GOAL system are automatically tracked as eXperience API (xAPI) statements; The skills are diagnosed using the activity indicator and interaction data; Adaptive feedback is generated based on the diagnosed skill level. The algorithm in diagnosing learners' skills refers to a scoring rubric with five skill levels from novice learner (level 0) to skilled learner (level 4). For instance, if the student set a specific but too difficult plan for ER activity in the GOAL system, the planning skill of the individual would be scored as level 3. An example of feedback for students with level 3 in planning skills is “you have partly mastered the planning skill, please decrease the difficulty level of the plan to achieve timely”. Furthermore, a cross-platform GUI is provided for students to interact with the self-direction tasks and receive the skill-based adaptive feedback.

The DAPER model is the underlying process model of execution and acquisition of data-informed self-direction ability that is operationalized in the GOAL system (Majumdar et al., 2018). It has five phases, the initial phase of data collection, which initiates the learner with the data collected in their own activity context, followed by the other four phases: data analysis, planning, execution monitoring, and reflection. Fig. 3 provides an overview of the DAPER model with examples.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (573KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. DAPER model of self-direction ability execution and acquisition (Majumdar et al., 2018).

Table 1 presents the five phases of the DAPER model, their objectives, and the corresponding functions that were implemented in the GOAL system. These DAPER model-based implementations aim to systematically assist learners in taking initiatives to identify their status in their self-directed activity context, set SMART goals, monitor their progress, and reflect on their strategies. The self-directed activity context can be a set of learning activities where learner's learning trace data can be synchronized through learning behavior sensors. In this study it is the ER activity. The SMART goals mean Speciﬁc, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Time-related goals. The DAPER phases are independent of each other, and therefore learners can openly navigate in the GOAL system and access functions of any phase.


Table 1. Phase, objective, function based on the DAPER model in the GOAL system.

Phase	Objective	Function
Data collection	Data sufficiency	Learners take the initiative to collect available behavioral data of their self-directed activities of interest in. Data from most of the activity context can be automatically recorded in GOAL through behavioral sensors, like e-book readers. For example, the time spent and pages read in extensive reading can be logged by BookRoll. Learners can also add their own activity data manually. Those manual inputs can supplement the automatic logging.
Analysis	Status identification	Learners can conduct an analysis of visualized data to identify current status in any context. The analysis tasks are given by checking their own daily value in the previous week and comparing their value with the average value of the group in that context. For example, the learners can analyze their extensive reading status with respect to the average value of their cohort.
Planning	SMART planning	Learners set SMART (Specific, Measurable, Appropriate, Relevant, and Timely) goals in the analyzed context. They choose a specific context to prepare their own goals and create their own plans using a plan template. For example, learners can create a daily plan for time spent in extensive reading.
Execution monitoring	Regular tracking	Learners can execute the plan and track the progress regularly. The progress of the plan is visualized by comparing the actual value of the selected context with the target value of the plan. This phase often includes multiple cycles of re-planning, execution monitoring and ongoing reflection.
Reflection	Strategic evaluation	Learners review the outcomes of the plan and the whole planning-monitoring-reflection process. The detail of the plan and achievements during the plan are shown to learners. Supported by these representative reference data, learners reflect on their strategies by rating key indicators in the planning-monitoring-reflection process, including the degree of plan difficulty, the target achievement rate, and the effort to achieve the plan. Furthermore, Learners can input unstructured thoughts in an additional comment area, such as the current problems, specific strategies, or further actions in extensive reading.
Fig. 4 presents the GOAL system interfaces for planning, monitoring, and reflection to support self-directed ER activity. The planning template (Fig. 4a.), includes the activity type, plan name, start date, end date, frequency, value for each day, and notes. The monitoring panel (Fig. 4b.), contains the activity graph and self-report form. Learners can track their own daily progress and compare them with the average of the group, the recommended value, or their own planned target value. They can further report their progress status through self-rating and unstructured note-taking. Fig. 4c shows the reflection panel, which contains plan details, achievements, and self-reflection form. Learners can reflect on their strategies by rating the degree of plan difficulty, the target achievement rate, and the effort to achieve the plan and noting the thoughts, such as the current problems, specific strategies, or further actions.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (579KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. GOAL system interfaces for (a) planning, (b) monitoring and (c) reflection.

Thus, GOAL system not only provides critical indicators in a learning activity context such as extensive reading for engaging learners in SDL but also provides computer-based scaffolds that aims to improve learners’ SDL abilities in each DAPER phases.

4. Method
4.1. Research design
To examine the research questions regarding the impacts of perceived self-directed learning ability, a six-week experiment was designed and conducted in a junior high school in Japan. Students were required to select picture books by themselves from more than 400 e-books in BookRoll and engaged in extensive reading outside the English course using BookRoll. The levels of e-books were from level pre-A1 for beginners to level B2 for upper intermediates of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) (Council of Europe, 2001). During this activity students also used the GOAL system and created their weekly plans for extensive reading, monitored the progress of their plans, and reflected on their strategies at their own pace.

4.2. Participants
A total of 117 seven-graders (45 boys and 72 girls, with average age of 13 years old) from a junior high school in Japan participated in the study. The students were from 3 classes and instructed by the same English teacher. They were divided into the high self-directed learning ability and low self-directed learning ability groups based on their perception of self-directed learning ability collected as a pre-questionnaire response (details in instrument and data collected section). Those who scored higher than the median represented the high self-directed group (N = 56), while those who scored lower than the median represented the low self-directed group (N = 61).

4.3. Procedure
Fig. 5 shows the experimental procedure of this study. In the beginning, all e-books were provided for the students in BookRoll. In the first week, the students took the pre-questionnaire for 15 min. Then they were guided for 35 min to ensure that they understand the essence of the extensive reading activity. In the second week, the students were given instruction on how to select e-books by themselves in BookRoll and orientation of the GOAL system. In the following four weeks, the students are asked to engage in extensive reading and interact with the GOAL system at their own pace. They could set plans, monitor progresses, and reflect strategies in the GOAL system. After the six-week experiment period, the students took a post-questionnaire for 30 min.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (243KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Experimental procedure of the study.

4.4. Instruments and data collected
The pre-questionnaire regarding self-directed learning ability was developed based on the scale proposed by Cheng, Kuo, Lin, and Lee-Hsieh (2010). Two dimensions of the questionnaire are used in this study with a total of 10 items, including 6 items for “planning and implementing” and 4 items for “self-monitoring.” Two examples of these items are “I can proactively establish my learning goals” and “I can monitor my learning progress.” Each item was scored on a Likert-type 5-point scale, where 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 represented “strongly agree,” “agree,” “neutral,” “disagree,” and “strongly disagree,” respectively. The Cronbach's alpha values of the two dimensions were 0.68 and 0.67, implying reasonable reliability of the questionnaire.

In the post-questionnaire 5 items related to the motivation and autonomy in extensive reading were adopted from Tanaka (2017). They were measured with a 5-point Likert-type scale from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree”. An example of motivation item is “[I participate in extensive reading activity] Because reading English books is enjoyable” and an example of autonomy item is “I am reading at my own pace.” The Cronbach's alpha values of the two subscales were 0.73 and 0.74, revealing relatively high reliability of the scales.

During the experiment, the reading engagement was calculated in terms of total time read and total pages read directly from the learning record store. Similarly, the SDL behavior was tracked by the interactions between the students and the GOAL system while they planned, monitored, and reflected. The total number of interactions by a student in the planning and monitoring pages of the GOAL system that is logged in the learning record store is considered as a proxy indicator of that student's SDL behavior.

4.5. Data analysis
Descriptive statistics were calculated for all behavioral variables, including total time read, total pages read, the count of planning interactions, the count of monitoring interactions, the count of reflection interactions (see Table 2). To assess the effects of the high and low SDL ability on students' reading engagement, a one-way ANCOVA was conducted. The independent variable was the self-directed ability with students grouped as high and low SDL ability, while dependent variables and covariates were their reading engagement in week 5–6 and reading engagement in week 1–2, respectively. Furthermore, independent sample t-tests were applied to investigate the effects of high and low SDL ability on students’ SDL behaviors and motivation as well as autonomy in extensive reading.


Table 2. Descriptive statistics of the behavioral variables (n = 117).

Variables	Mean	SD	Min.-max.
Total time read (minutes)	200.1	181.5	7.1–936.7
Total pages read	409.7	389.1	16–2359
Count of planning interactions	14.0	13.0	1–75
Count of monitoring interactions	17.1	26.7	0–133
Count of reflection interactions	7.9	15.3	0–100
5. Results
5.1. Analysis of reading engagement
A one-way ANCOVA was employed to examine the effects of SDL ability on the students’ reading engagement as indicated by the total time and pages read. The self-directed ability group (high and low self-directed) is considered as independent variable, while the reading engagement in week 5–6 and the ones in week 1–2 were the dependent variables and covariates, respectively. The assumption of homogeneity of regression coefficients for the total time read (F = 0.23, p = .63 > 0.05) and pages read (F = 0.20, p = .66 > 0.05) were confirmed. Table 3 shows the ANCOVA result.


Table 3. Different self-directed learning abilities on reading engagement.

Variance	SDL ability	N	Mean	SD	Adjusted Mean	SE	F	η2
Total time read	High	56	91.92	115.67	92.41	12.53	5.94*	0.05
Low	61	50.56	73.53	50.11	12.00
Page read	High	56	202.59	247.70	200.28	26.14	5.02*	0.04
Low	61	116.96	134.83	119.08	25.05
*p < .05.

Regarding the total time read, the adjusted means of the high self-directed and the low self-directed are 92.41 and 50.11, respectively; moreover, the post total time read between the high self-directed and the low self-directed reached a significant level with F = 5.94 (p < .05) with η2 = 0.05, showing a medium effect size (Cohen, 1988).

Regarding the pages read, the adjusted means of the high self-directed and the low self-directed are 200.28 and 119.08, respectively; moreover, the post pages read between the high self-directed and the low self-directed reached a significant level with F = 5.02 (p < .05) with η2 = 0.04, showing a medium effect size (Cohen, 1988).

Consequently, it is concluded that the students with high SDL abilities increased reading engagement significantly more than those with low SDL abilities.

5.2. Analysis of self-directed learning behaviors
An independent sample t-test was employed to examine whether students’ SDL abilities would affect their SDL behaviors. The results showed that the difference between the high and low SDL ability students on SDL behaviors was significant (t = 2.00, p < .05) (see Table 4) with high SDL ability students engaged significantly more planning and monitoring interactions in the GOAL system than the low SDL ability students.


Table 4. Different self-directed learning abilities on self-directed learning behaviors.

SDL ability	N	Mean	SD	t	Cohen D
Self-planning and self-monitoring behaviors	High	56	37.68	39.99	2.00*	0.37
Low	61	25.20	26.55
*p < .05.

5.3. Analysis of motivation and autonomy in extensive reading
An independent sample t-test was employed to examine the effects of SDL ability on the students' motivation and autonomy in extensive reading. The results showed that there were significant differences between the high and low SDL ability students’ motivation and autonomy in extensive reading with t = 3.27 (p < .01) and t = 4.41 (p < .001), respectively (see Table 5). More specifically, the high SDL ability students perceived higher motivation and autonomy in extensive reading than those with low SDL ability.


Table 5. Different self-directed learning abilities on motivation and autonomy in extensive reading.

SDL ability	N	Mean	SD	t	Cohen D
Motivation	High	56	4.29	0.45	3.27**	0.62
Low	61	4.01	0.46
Autonomy	High	56	4.43	0.48	4.41***	0.81
Low	61	4.04	0.48
**p < .01, ***p < .001.

6. Conclusions and suggestions
This study investigated how the perception of SDL ability affects students’ reading engagement, SDL behavior, and motivation for ER using the proposed goal-oriented active learning system, GOAL. The findings of this study reveal that the perception of SDL ability plays influential roles in the context of ER. There are three main findings of the study: (a) the high SDL ability students demonstrated significantly more reading engagement, including total time read and pages read, than the low SDL ability students; (b) the high SDL ability students engaged significantly more in SDL behaviors than the low SDL ability students specifically observed in planning and monitoring interactions in the GOAL system; (c) the high SDL ability students demonstrated significantly higher motivation and autonomy for ER than the low SDL ability students. These findings suggest that the perception of SDL ability is a critical factor in the self-directed online reading environment, affecting reading engagement, motivation for ER, and SDL behaviors, but the degrees of the effects vary.

Learners who had high SDL ability tended to engage in ER, which could be explained by the previous studies on online learning contexts (Arnold, 2009; Zhu et al., 2020). The online learning environment made it appropriate for self-directed reading by breaking through the limitations of time and space, providing learners with abundant reading resources, and allowing learners to read at their own time and pace. Selecting own reading content and goal-setting allowed learners to take ownership and responsibility for their own learning. When students were unable to use goal-setting and monitoring skills effectively, they repeatedly failed to achieve goals and could not maintain the pleasures of reading (McLean & Poulshock, 2018). This could be a reason why the students with low SDL abilities had less reading engagement.

The experimental results also revealed that high SDL ability learners engaged in more planning and monitoring interactions in the GOAL system. The previous study has shown that there are positive associations between students' perception of mastery goals and learning behavior (Elliot & Hulleman, 2017). Goal orientation in self-directed learning influences students' effort and willingness to apply different learning strategies, which subsequently affect students’ self-directed learning behaviors. In addition, recent literature has examined the perception of planning, monitoring, and reflection in SDL activities. For the undergraduate students self-reflection was identified to be corelated with their planning and monitoring (Hill, Peters, Salvaggio, Vinnedge, & Darden, 2020). However, for MOOCs learners (Agonács, Matos, Bartalesi-Graf, & O’Steen, 2020) there was no correlation between SDL readiness and self-reflection needs and engagement. In this study, we investigated specifically in the context of ER activities in school setting. The finding related to the effect of SDL ability on learning behaviors were identified and it provides insights regarding planning and monitoring behaviors, especially for young students.

Learners with high SDL ability perceived higher motivation and autonomy for ER, which partially supports previous research on the importance of perceiving autonomy for ER in enhancing motivation for short in-class ER (Tanaka, 2017). Although it is reported that perceived autonomy had a positive impact on perceived motivation, leading to higher intrinsic motivation and identified regulation, no study has investigated the relationship between the perception of SDL ability and perceived motivation as well as autonomy for ER. Findings from the current study extends the previous result (Tanaka, 2017) to infer that learners’ perception of SDL ability influences both perceived motivation and autonomy for ER while ER motivation and ER autonomy remain positively corelated to each other (Tanaka, 2017).

The findings of this study have implications for researchers studying ER environments. Compared with conventional extensive reading by paper books, reading extensive e-books in the self-directed online reading environment has potential benefits. It can provide learners with abundant reading resources to select and read large amounts of books in their own time and at their own pace. Consequently, it makes it possible for them to have more control over their own learning. In addition, the learning logs generated from e-book readers provide a quantitative measurement of ER engagement and a snapshot of learning status. The quantitative measurement can be an objective metric for ER outcome which can be automatically computed from the learning logs. A snapshot of such outcome can be analyzed any time and further provided as feedback to learners using the learning analytics approach.

In particular, this study highlights the contribution of the proposed GOAL system for SDL environments. First, the system synchronizes learning activity data from learners and aggregates them into activity indicators directly in the learner's dashboard. Thus it creates a data-rich environment for learners to select self-interested activity and take initiatives in SDL. It can motivate young learners in the beginning of SDL. Second, the interaction tracking of the system provides a better understanding of SDL behaviors in a variety of contexts. The interaction data can be indicators to quantitatively measure learners' SDL ability in different phases, such as planning or monitoring. The interaction tracking and measurement make it possible to investigate the individual differences in SDL behaviors in detail. Finally, the system provides an exploratory environment to examine the design of technology support for SDL development. Executing SDL is a cognitively, affectively and behaviorally complex task and hence the design of SDL support needs better empirical evidence. In this study, the GOAL system used learning analytics approaches to explore a paradigm to support the execution and acquisition of data-informed SDL ability.

The finding of this study has implications for educators who seek to improve ER by using SDL strategy. First, instructors should consider learners' different levels of SDL ability, including self-planning and self-monitoring in the design and development of ER programs. It's necessary to encourage low SDL ability learners to make their own plans and monitor their progress toward their plans during the ER activity, such as creating a daily plan for reading time or pages. Second, since ER is a way of learning a language through a great amount of reading on learners' own choices and paces, more technology support should be provided for learners. The more technological support of SDL and autonomy learners received, the more engagement of reading highly self-directed learners showed as seen in the analysis of reading engagement. Accordingly, the support also reduces the instructors' workload in ER programs. Finally, ER support should consider learners' initial perceptions of SDL ability. If the scaffolding of SDL and autonomy can be adapted to different levels of learners, they could perform better in such personalized ER support environments.

While the importance of investigating the effects of SDL ability on ER activity is demonstrated, current limitations are also noted. First, the relationships among the factors and their effects may be altered in different learning environments, such as MOOCs or other forms of open and distance learning. Second, the participants of this study have a specific cultural background; therefore, it is suggested that future studies explore whether both the cognitive and affective outcomes from different cultural backgrounds reveal different levels of SDL ability. Finally, since the perception of SDL ability was one of the individual difference factors, there is a need to further consider other individual differences, such as age differences, gender differences, and information literacy skills. Such evidence would not only be helpful in promoting ER outcomes, but would also be useful for developing personalized ER support systems.

Finally, we highlight three avenues for future research in the area of learning analytics of ER activities. First, future studies could create a structural model by examining the effects of different factors influencing the ER activity, especially self-directed learning ability and behaviors. It would then provide a better understanding of the influencing factors and moderating effects in ER activity process. A second direction is identifying SDL strategies by mining behavioral patterns of students while they participate in ER activities in an online environment and further validating it using self-reported instruments. A third research direction is the development of feedback systems that facilitate SDL strategies for learners, especially those with weak SDL ability. This will require efficient and reliable measurements of SDL strategies and skill-based adaptive feedback. Research to address these three challenges will serve to advance our current understanding and designing of technology-enhanced ER activities that better support learner's self-directed language learning.

