College and university instructors are increasingly incorporating online tools into face-to-face teaching approaches, such that blended instruction is forecasted to become “the new traditional model” (Ross & Gage, 2006, p. 168; Norberg et al., 2011, Watson, 2008). Yet, less than 5% of the scholarship on blending in higher education explores academic practice (e.g. teaching, curriculum design, professional development and training for instruction; Torrisi-Steele & Drew, 2013). This discussion reports the results of a systematic review of the literature on faculty member's adoption and use of online tools for face-to-face instruction. Six influences that cut across the literature are identified: faculty member's interactions with technology, academic workload, institutional environment, interactions with students, the instructor's attitudes and beliefs about teaching, and opportunities for professional development. Strengths and limitations of the literature and future directions for research on socio-technical systems of instruction are identified.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Faculty

Instructional decision-making

Blended instruction

Literature review

1. The new instructional blend
The use of the Internet and information communication technology (ICT) has become a widespread practice in all aspects of higher education over the last two decades (Chen, Lambert, & Guidry, 2010). Institutions of higher education increasingly rely on ICT and Internet media to support their management and administrative functions (Dutton & Loader, 2002). Digital technologies like online tools complicate organizational activities like instructional work in higher education (Selwyn, 2014, p. 54).

Instructors are increasingly incorporating online tools into face-to-face teaching approaches, such that these sorts of instructional blends are forecasted to become “the new traditional model” (Ross & Gage, 2006, p. 168; Norberg et al., 2011, Watson, 2008). As of 2010, 2/3 of students enrolled in degree seeking programs in higher education had received instruction with online tools (Radford, 2011). Results of a recent survey by the Higher Education Research Institute report that nearly half of the instructors surveyed were using online tools to supplement face-to-face instruction of undergraduates (Eagan et al., 2014).

The mixture of face-to-face methods and the use of online tools for instruction are referred to in the higher education literature as blending (Bonk and Graham, 2012, Drysdale et al., 2013, Graham, 2012). Blending incorporates traditional face-to-face instruction with the affordances of online tools. Blended teaching draws upon face-to-face instructional practices and distributed learning systems like distance and correspondence education (Graham, 2012, p. 5).

While a great deal of research has been undertaken that explores blending in higher education, the overwhelming majority of studies focus on students' experiences, perspectives, and outcomes. According to one literature review, less than 5% of the scholarship on blending in higher education explores academic practice (e.g. teaching, curriculum design, professional development and training for instruction; Torrisi-Steele & Drew, 2013). Faculty perspectives on blending are simply not well documented (Stacey & Gerbic, 2008). While blended courses have become commonplace (Allen & Seaman, 2012) little conceptual insight has been offered by the empirical literature in terms of how blended instruction comes together as a practice.

As faculty members continue to blend their instructional practice, institutions will need to rethink and reorganize the systems that support instruction (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004). Blending, on the course, program, and institutional levels, is a dynamic process, which includes potential changes to curricular content, pedagogy, ICT infrastructure, student behavior, faculty attitudes, and organizational conditions (Duderstadt et al., 2002, Mishra et al., 2007, Ocak, 2011). A better understanding of how and why teachers blend face-to-face and online components could contribute to the scholarship of teaching and learning in higher education (Torrisi-Steele & Drew, 2013, p. 380). In this discussion, I review the empirical literature on blended instruction to identify influences that are significant across studies, provide some insight into how faculty develop their instruction practices, and that offer future directions for research.

1.1. A definition for instructional practice
Instructional practice is the performance and enactment of curriculum (Edwards, 2011, Fountain, 1999). Instructors make a series of decisions bound by the context of their organizational realities that inform instruction in their classrooms (Lattuca & Stark, 2011). Decisions are then translated into performances that respond to the specific resources and constraints of the course (Edwards, 2011). Instructor's knowledge of practice, their knowledge for practice, and their knowledge in practice are formed through direct experience (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 1999). Teachers in higher education often have an ideal conception of how they would like to teach and a working conception of what constitutes college and university instruction (Norton, Richardson, Hartley, Newstead, & Mayes, 2005). These protean definitions of how to do one's work are called practice logics (Nespor, 2006, p. 67). Instructional practice is informed by “knowledge of how instruction works with specific kinds of topics, students, resources, and constraints” (p. 67). The decisions and performances that constitute instructional practice are important, but are too often neglected by scholars who focus on the impact of blending practices on student outcomes (Torrisi-Steele & Drew, 2013).

2. Goals and scope
Given the need for a conceptualization of blended instructional practice, in this review I attempt to synthesize insights about instructional practice from the current empirical literature. I do this by focusing on research where instructors are the unit of analysis (either as individuals or a collective) and instructional practice is the outcome. Through a review of themes that emerge across the literature I identify influences that shape practice. To that end, I propose the following questions to guide this review:

Guiding question: What factors shape faculty members' adoption and use of online tools in face-to-face teaching?

•
What is blended instructional practice?

•
How has it been researched in the higher education literature?

•
What are the strengths and limitations of this literature?

•
What future directions for research are indicated by the identified emerging factors shaping blended instructional practice in higher education?

3. Method
3.1. Procedure
A large body of literature on blended instructional practice in undergraduate education was collected from the following online databases: ERIC, PsychInfo, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, and Engineering Village. Search terms included blended learning (or blended instruction, hybrid learning, hybrid instruction) and undergraduate education (or undergraduate, higher education, tertiary education) and instructor (or faculty or lecturer). The initial search returned 758 documents. After applying the inclusion criteria through a review of abstracts, 58 articles were identified. The search was conducted in August 2015.

3.2. Inclusion criteria
The purpose of this review was to identify peer reviewed research that examined the factors shaping blended instructional practice in undergraduate education. The following inclusion criteria were used to determine the relevance of a publication:

1.
The study focused on instructional decision-making or practice intended for undergraduate students in a residential/on-campus course or academic program.

2.
The article was written in English.

3.
The article was published as part of a peer reviewed academic journal or peer reviewed conference proceedings.

4.
The article provides a full accounting of the research process, as well as information about the reliability and validity of the data presented. No summary research reports or research in brief articles were included.

I employ these criteria because my goal is to identify significant results across scholarly research. Restricting my review to peer reviewed studies ensures some initial level of scrutiny in the quality of the results. Additionally, narrowing this review to studies that account for methods allows for the identification of methodological trends across research studies as well as the identification of limitations that stem from research design. This approach excludes theses and dissertations, in part, because those results (hopefully) will appear in peer-reviewed publications. Other scholars have also reviewed these documents and found few that focus on teaching (Drysdale et al., 2013).

3.2.1. Blended instructional practice
Despite a great deal of research on the efficacy of blended learning (Bernard, Borokhovski, Schmid, Tamim, & Abrami, 2014), blending is ill defined in research studies (Oliver & Trigwell, 2005). Scholars have attempted to synthesize the literature on blending to identify a broadly used definition (e.g. Graham, 2012, Mayadas and Picciano, 2007, Oliver and Trigwell, 2005, Picciano and Seaman, 2009, Vaughan, 2007). The primary point of disagreement between scholars who use different approaches is a question of what is being blended (Bonk & Graham, 2012). Conceptualizations differ among whether blended instruction involves mixing instructional media, incorporating online tools, or combining delivery methods between distance learning and face-to-face approaches (Bonk & Graham, 2012).

For the purposes of this review, I define blending as the “integration of face-to-face and online instruction” (Drysdale et al., 2013, p. 90) through purposeful design. A faculty member who simply posts their syllabus to the learning management system (LMS) would not be engaging in blended instruction. A faculty member who uses social media to create a synchronous discussion space for before, during, and after their lecture (e.g. Junco, Heiberger, & Loken, 2011) would be engaging in blended instruction.

My primary interest is in undergraduate courses and programs where online tools are a complement to face-to-face teaching (F2F). This scope includes two and four year degree granting not-for-profit institutions. I do not include for-profit institutions because these organizations have different practices of blending distance and F2F teaching (Tierney & Hentschke, 2007). Instructional roles (and autonomy for curriculum making) are also substantially different in for-profit organizations (Lechuga & Altbach, 2006). I include studies of tenure and non-tenure track instructors, although the majority of research focuses on traditional tenure-track faculty members.

3.2.2. Dimensions of blended instruction
Beyond that concise definition there are some core elements of what constitutes blended instruction that help to frame the subsequent discussion. After all, any instructional design involves a blend of different elements (Mishra et al., 2007). A teacher might use a variety of technologies from chalk to overhead projectors, as well as a broad cross-section of instructional media like textbooks, original source material, and educational videos (Koehler, Mishra, Kereluik, Shin, & Graham, 2014) without their teaching meeting the definition of blended instruction I have offered. To understand what constitutes blended instruction in residential colleges and universities, I offer some clarifying dimensions that will provide context to the definition.

First, blending incorporates aspects of synchronous and asynchronous instruction (Welker & Berardino, 2005). While most face-to-face (F2F) courses are considered synchronous in that instruction is bound to a specific time and place, all courses inevitably include asynchronous elements like reading from texts and out of class research and assignments (Norberg et al., 2011). The F2F course, however, is tied to a specific timeline where recurrent tasks like lecture or seminar discussion happen at regularly scheduled intervals. This is different from asynchronous courses (like those common in distance education) where the learner works with material at an independent pace (Welker & Berardino, 2005).

Blending changes the nature of instruction, incorporating elements of face-to-face (F2F) and online teaching. Instructional designers view online learning environments as fundamentally different from F2F classes (Bates, 2007). Instructors who use online tools are required to make decisions about where (in addition to when) to deploy different elements of the curriculum (Bates, 2007). This requires a rethinking of the curriculum and how it can be delivered to students (Oh & Park, 2009). What results are blended instructional strategies, where decisions about teaching are made to maximize student engagement as opposed to maximizing the delimited time and space of F2F classrooms (Francis, 2012).

Second, blending focuses on the incorporation of online tools as instructional technologies. Pedagogical technologies exist on a continuum of specificity and transparency of function (Koehler & Mishra, 2009). Technologies with high levels of specificity and transparency of function like pencils, microscopes, and chalkboards quickly become commonplace (Koehler & Mishra, 2009). Instructors need to do less work to configure these technologies for use in the classroom. Conversely, digital technologies like social media platforms (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) or learning management systems are usable in a variety of ways, change rapidly through system updates, and are opaque to the user (Koehler & Mishra, 2009). Online tools are, then, qualitatively different from other forms of instructional technologies. The diverse potential applications of online tools require configuration to be useful in the classroom.

4. Blended instructional practice (BIP): a review of the literature
In this discussion I review influential factors that were identified across the literature. Influential factors were grouped into two broad categories; either external or internal influences in the individual faculty member's development of practice. The boundary between internal and external influence is ambiguous as external factors like interactions with technological systems are translated into internal factors like beliefs about technology. I rely on whether the catalyzing influence was external or internal for characterization.

The catalysts among internal influences begin with the individual cognition of instructors. For example, faculty members' instructional philosophies were salient in a number of studies. The models of instruction that instructors employ are mental models (Hora, 2012). Through experience and reflection faculty develop mental models of practice that guide instruction (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 1999). In contrast, external influences might be termed structural, institutional, or cultural factors depending upon the analytical perspective of the observer.

4.1. External influences: technology
Interactions with technology shaped BIP. Faculty members had difficulties using new technologies in the classroom, and these difficulties were compounded by a lack of technological literacy (Davis & Fill, 2007). Access to technology, reliability of technology, and the complexity of technology were all identified as potential barriers (Reid, 2014). Lack of access to appropriate hardware and software can undermine even the strongest motivations (Surry, Ensminger, & Jones, 2002). Unreliable technological infrastructure can also negatively influence the decision to blend, resulting in negative perceptions of educational technology (Derntl & Motschnig-Pitrik, 2005).

Beliefs about the usefulness and effectiveness of a technology were salient in the BIP development process (Dagada, 2005). Concerns about the quality of online tools as well as the quality of teaching that can be accomplished with online tools drove blending decisions in a handful of studies (Humbert, 2007, Jarrahi, 2010, Salinas, 2008). For example, Bates and Poole (2003) identified ease of use and reliability of technology as a crucial decision point. The authors suggest that technology, as a means to an end, should not absorb much of an instructor's time. Online tools need to be reliable and easy to use to merit their inclusion in a course (Bates & Poole, 2003). Unreliable technology could disrupt the flow of instruction or the delivery of curricular materials.

Technology with a steep learning curve adds to the complexity of a course. Students spend time and energy on tasks not related to the curriculum. Online tools, for example, may need primers that orient students to a technology's design features as well as instructions about how the technology will be used in the course (Jeffrey, Milne, Suddaby, & Higgins, 2014). Online tools that need constant updating can deter blending (Davis & Fill, 2007). Constant maintenance undermines ease of use. Similarly, the affordances of a technology—or what a technology can actually do—play an important role (Ahmad et al., 2010, Cheung and Vogel, 2013, Jan and Contreras, 2011, Lee, 2006, Park et al., 2007, Schoonenboom, 2014). Instructors will be quick to dismiss technologies with few utilities (Ajjan & Hartshorne, 2008).

Instructor's attitudes and intentions tended to deviate from their actual usage (Ajjan and Hartshorne, 2008, Ocak, 2011, Oh and Park, 2009). In a study of collaborative e-learning technology, Cheung and Vogel (2013) investigated the importance of a web technology's compatibility with other classroom technologies. Compatibility was determined to positively influence attitudes towards the technology, but not necessarily system usage. Additionally, Schoonenboom (2014) determined no relationship between the tools and tasks an instructor uses in an LMS and their intention to use the system.

4.2. External influences: academic workload
Blending requires time and potentially places faculty in a position to weigh opportunity costs. For many faculty members the time spent on blended instruction came at the cost of research activities (Meyer & Xu, 2009). Faculty members report that they fail to adopt instructional technology because of concerns about the time commitment (Drent and Meelissen, 2008, Simpson, 2010, Zhou and Xu, 2007). This is equally true for faculty members' decision to blend (Humbert, 2007, Lewis and Abdul-Hamid, 2006, Meyer and Xu, 2009, Napier et al., 2011).

Blending requires more planning on the front end to determine how technology will be integrated into (or used to replace) other instructional activities (Davis and Fill, 2007, Dutton et al., 2004, Yudko et al., 2008). Time committed to instructional design has a potential negative impact on academic workload (Birch & Burnett, 2009), as once an instructional activity is designed for one system it may need to be redesigned to accommodate system updates or changes in software. In contrast, the size of a course enrollment can influence the decision to blend (Welker & Berardino, 2005) as faculty use technology to scale their interactions with large numbers of students.

Instructional workload was of primary concern to faculty as they considered adopting online tools. In a Bayseian analysis of the 2004 National Study of Postsecondary Faculty (NSOP) Meyer and Xu (Meyer & Xu, 2007) determined that instructional workload was the only individual characteristic that significantly influenced blending. A later study by Meyer and Xu (2009) using a causal design found similar results, and the authors hypothesized an inverse relationship between workload and blending. As workload increases, the likelihood of blending decreases. Faculty members' perception of the limited benefits of blending may inform their analysis of opportunity cost (Napier et al., 2011). Given the upfront cost to redesign instruction, faculty did not view blending as a time saving approach (Simpson, 2010).

4.3. External influences: institutional environment
Organizational concerns informed the blending decisions of instructors (Humbert, 2007). As such, the shaping influence of organizational context may produce distinct and specific outcomes. For example, institutional type can inform the decisions that an instructor makes during the adoption process (Meyer & Xu, 2009). Faculty at Research I institutions were much more likely than faculty at community colleges to use online tools in their teaching (Xu & Meyer, 2007).

Institutional administration- either through policy, strategic planning, or changes to incentive structures- can also encourage blending (Reid, 2014, Stacey and Gerbic, 2008). Sharpe, Benfield, Roberts, and Francis (2006) determined that models of blended instruction were more likely to diffuse successfully when they reflected local organizational needs. Organizational readiness to support blended instruction (Buchanan, Sainter, & Saunders, 2013), and systems of communication between students, faculty, and administrators (Tabor, 2007) were also deemed essential to facilitating blending. Faculty expressed concerns about the administrative control of systems (Johnson, 2012) and the availability of institutional support (Buchanan et al., 2013, Calderon et al., 2012, Reid, 2014). Lack of clear institutional policy on a host of factors related to blended instruction also dampened faculty's enthusiasm for adopting or continuing blended instruction (Keengwe et al., 2009, Ocak, 2011). Ambiguity over policies on copyright of instructional materials, for example, could discourage faculty from adopting blended instructional practice (Jarrahi, 2010, Porter et al., 2014).

Faculty members need guidelines and frameworks from the institution to make sense of blending (Keengwe et al., 2009). Strong administrative leadership helped promote successful blending (Keengwe et al., 2009). Incentive systems that incorporated rewards for successful blended instruction resulted in wider adoption among faculty (Keengwe et al., 2009, Oh and Park, 2009). Faculty who experience dissatisfaction, either originating in lack of clear policy, failure to provide appropriate incentives, or a lack of institutional support reported diminished intentions to blend (Stacey & Gerbic, 2008). For example, lack of access to reliable Internet connections in the classroom could discourage blending (Dutton et al., 2004). This represents both a problem of technology and a problem of institutional resources.

Through a series of case studies, Graham, Woodfield, and Harrison (2013) identified a cycle of blended adoption (referred to as the Blended Learning Adoption Framework). Institutions move from awareness to adoption and early implementation to growth and mature implementation (Graham et al., 2013). Organizational strategy, structure, and support influenced this process and the individual decision-making of faculty members. In subsequent research, Porter and Graham (2015) identified how institutional decision making about strategy, structure, and support facilitate or deter blended learning adoption. Decisions about infrastructure and support were the most significant influences among faculty. This represents a discontinuity between how institutions plan (with a focus on strategy) and what instructors want (a focus on infrastructure and support; Porter & Graham, 2015). Further research is needed to understand how the factors identified in this model impacts a specific instance of instructional practice.

4.4. External influences: students
Interactions with students also informed instructors' decisions to adopt and use online tools. Student feedback about teaching was a formative influence in faculty's use of blended instructional approaches (Calderon et al., 2012, Jarrahi, 2010). Students generally report positive experiences with blended instruction (Dahlstrom, Walker, & Dziuban, 2012). In light of positive feedback faculty continued to implement the use of online tools in their courses (Calderon et al., 2012, Holley and Oliver, 2010).

Employing blended instructional practices results in changes to instructional dynamics. Students need to be oriented to new technologies and new forms of instruction (Judge & O'Bannon, 2008). Instructors' relationships with students may shift in the transition to blended learning. Students relied on instructors less as the source of knowledge than facilitators of learning (Cheung and Vogel, 2013, Holley and Oliver, 2010).

Students need to be prepared to use online tools (Stacey & Gerbic, 2008). In one study of blended instruction at an African university where students had limited access to technology before enrolling, students' lack of computer skills deterred instructors from blending (Tshabala, Ndeya-Ndereya, & van der Merwe, 2014). Wach, Broughton, and Powers (2011) in a case study of blending course development at a community college in the Bronx identified a similar concern among faculty. Developing students' technological literacy became part of blending a course (Stacey and Gerbic, 2008, Wach et al., 2011; see Table A1 in Appendix A for a summary of external influences).

4.5. Internal influences: instructor attitudes and beliefs
Faculty members come to blended instruction with their own ideas and judgments regarding the use of technology in teaching (Cope & Ward, 2002). Two sets of beliefs and attitudes were prevalent in the literature on blending. First, beliefs and attitudes about technology informed the decisions that instructors made. Second, beliefs and attitudes about teaching were salient. The influence of beliefs and attitudes conforms with other research on academic planning in higher education (Lattuca & Stark, 2011).

A number of studies identified faculty's attitudes towards technology as significant influences on adoption and use (Buchanan et al., 2013, Johnson et al., 2012; Thornton, 2010). Technological anxiety plagued faculty throughout the blending process (Johnson et al., 2012). Blending may, in fact, require a change in instructor's beliefs about online tools. Faculty members that are generally technology averse will be slow to blend, if at all (Thornton, 2010). For the technology averse, blending is far more likely to be driven by external forces rather than intrinsic motivation (Thornton, 2010). Faculty were far more likely to blend if they also reported high levels of Internet self-efficacy (Buchanan et al., 2013).

Attitudes and beliefs about teaching were also important. Ellis, Steed, and Applebee (2006) identified a relationship between how faculty conceived of the purposes of teaching and how they adopted blended instruction. Faculty who were student centered in their teaching were also much more likely to adopt blended instructional practices that were cohesive and supported student learning. Faculty who were teacher centered tended to adopt in fragmented ways that reproduced the function of other media.

Instructional approach played a role in online tools usage. Faculty members that rely extensively on non-verbal cues like body language might experience frustration in mediated teaching approaches like blending (Rovai & Jordan, 2004). Faculty who prefer improvisational forms of teaching may also have difficulty with blended instruction. In a study of Computer Science instructors in Greece, researchers observed a relationship between pedagogical beliefs and approaches to blended instruction (Lameras, Levy, Paraskakis, & Webber, 2012). Beliefs about teaching were the most salient influence in the study, which is surprising given the faculty members' discipline (Lameras et al., 2012).

4.6. Internal influences: instructor learning
Faculty learned how to use online tools. They relied upon institutional support to help them navigate the learning process (Porter et al., 2014). Training and development was the primary form of support that faculty accessed (Baltaci-Goktalay and Ocak, 2006, Burton and Bessette, 2013, Chalmers, 1999, Fetters and Duby, 2011, Johnson et al., 2012, Keengwe et al., 2009, Myers et al., 2011, Rienties et al., 2013, Salter, 2006, Surry and Ensminger, 2006, Surry et al., 2002). When using online tools, faculty required “guided practice, examples, and remedial support” (Keengwe, 2009, p. 24). Professional development programs focused on technological skills and pedagogical skills and strategies (Wach et al., 2011). Common approaches to training include guided instruction, group workshops, and instructional seminars (Salter, 2006).

Rienties et al. (2013) determined that training programs that provide faculty experience with technology (like online tutorials) expanded faculty members' technological literacy. Expanded technological literacy was subsequently linked to an increased intention to use online tools in the classroom. Participation in training seminars with hands on exposure to online tools helped faculty overcome technological anxiety (Johnson et al., 2012). Hands on training also helped faculty members overcome concerns about the quality of teaching that can be accomplished with online tools (Johnson et al., 2012; see Table A2 in Appendix A for a summary of internal influences).

5. Synthesis of the empirical literature
Based on the internal and external influences identified in the above review the research on BIP presents an informative portrait of individual influences that inform instructional practice. Each of these domains is informed by social interactions between individuals (like interactions with students) and between individuals and tools. The individual influences on the instructional decision-making phase of instructional practice are well specified through repeated factor studies (Ocak, 2011). The major strength of the current literature base is the clear identification of influences on individual choices.

There are three major limitations to the current literature that suggest future directions for current research. First, a lack of methodological diversity among research studies produce results that lack generalizability. Second, the material aspects of technology are largely ignored in research studies. Online tools are collapsed into blanket categories without unpacking what a technology does and how individuals interact with the technology to produce practice. Third, a methodological focus on individuals as the unit of analysis marginalizes the important influence of organizational level interactions and institutional context on blended instructional practice.

5.1. Directions for research design
There is a not a great deal of variation in the study designs of blended instructional practice research. The lack of methodological diversity results in a lack of generalizable findings, in part, because of the focus on single institution-single discipline case studies (e.g. Donoghue, 2006, Dutton et al., 2004, King and Arnold, 2012, Lin et al., 2010; Zelick, 2013). There were also few comparative studies in the review (e.g. Ocak, 2011, Porter et al., 2014), which means the findings presented in the review are difficult to translate between institutional contexts. Only three studies collected data over time (e.g. Meyer and Xu, 2009, Ocak, 2011, Soffer et al., 2010), resulting in a number of cross-sectional studies that present a limited snapshot that relies on retrospective reporting by respondents. Research that views practice as it is assembled over time is needed.

5.2. Technology in BIP
The innovations that individuals and organizations wrestle with as part of BIP are catalyzed by the affordances of technology. Among studies reviewed above factors that related to interactions with technology emerged as consistently influential. For example, ease of use and usability were two constructs that a number of researchers, applying the Technology Acceptance Model (Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989) found to be uniformly significant. Both of these factors suggest that the material aspects of a technology are important in the development of blended instructional practice. Specifically, ease of use and usability identify constraints on action that stem from material properties of the technology.

Despite the importance of material affordances and constraints of online tools, little research sufficiently characterizes the online tools under study. Technology is frequently described in broad strokes as an ‘online tool’ or a ‘learning management system’ (LMS). However, all tools have specific design features that make them distinctive (Engeström, 1990).

The common approach to examining artifacts in educational practice is to conceptualize tools as instruments in service of advancing performance (Fenwick, Edwards, & Sawchuck, 2011). This implies directionality: that human agents do work through materials to achieve educational outcomes (Daniels, 2009). However, the reverse relationship, that tools might exert an influence on the practices of human agents, is rarely addressed in studies of college and university teaching (Jarrahi, 2010). In education research there exists “a blindness towards the question of how educational practice is affected by materials” (Sorenson, 2009, p. 2). This blindness is too common in the literature on blended instruction.

To approach BIP from a standpoint of socio-materiality requires a shift from research that focuses on knowing and representation of BIP to investigations into a practical ontology of BIP. The shift in knowledge production through research is from.

a representational idiom, mapping and understanding a world that is out there, to a view that the world is doing things, full of agency. Not only humans act, because non-humans act on and with humans (Fenwick et al., 2011, p. 3).

Research on BIP is needed that describes how mental and material practice is assembled through different systems of activity within higher education institutions (HEIs). This approach would require an examination of how short-range goal-oriented activities like instruction are carried out in durable object oriented activity systems (Ludvigsen, Havnes, & Lahn, 2003).

5.3. Individuals and organizations in BIP
Future researchers should consider the organizational level of activity related to BIP as this is currently underrepresented in the empirical literature. Researchers too often focus nearly exclusively on individual faculty as the unit of analysis. This type of methodological individualism is a common problem in social science research (Arrow, 1994). Researchers assume that an accounting of individual decisions constitutes a complete set of explanatory variables (Arrow, 1994). One advantage of the focus on individuals is the identification of certain cognitive factors that appear influential to BIP development. Attitudes and beliefs about technology were identified in a number of studies, as was the important role of instructional philosophy and faculty learning.

Yet, much of the research on BIP provides disconfirming evidence for existing conceptual frameworks or results in the proposed extension of frameworks. In these studies, the individual as a unit of analysis, isolated from their social interactions might not present a full portrait of the phenomenon. That so many institutional factors are identified by researchers as significant suggests that more organizational level studies like the Porter et al. (2014) study are needed using the Blended Learning Adoption framework in diverse contexts.

The current literature on BIP provides an empirical portrait of individual action, but it is time to turn attention to system level activity. Individual's practices are enacted in relation to their organizational unit, formal and informal communities of practice, and attendant systems of activity (Ludvigsen et al., 2003, p. 296). The work of individuals is situated in a social world and the social orders that emerge (like BIP) are constructed and coordinated (Ludvigsen et al., 2003). Examining situated action provides insight into how individuals and organizations wrestle with innovations as they evolve in dynamic and complex settings (Engeström et al., 1995).

5.4. The socio-technical system of blended instructional practice
A consideration of the technological and organizational implications of BIP is required. One of the challenges of studying teaching in HEIs is the variation in local practices that are part of instruction and curriculum making (Edwards, 2011). Current research on BIP seeks out factors that explain differences between instructors and their choices. A more holistic approach would be to examine how individuals make choices that reflect their organizational and disciplinary contexts; an accounting of how “things come to be the case” (Edwards, 2011, p. 24). Research examining the assemblage of BIP as local teaching would account for the multiple translations of instructional practice from the prescribed institutional curriculum to the enacted classroom performance (Edwards, 2011) as well as the organizational work involved in producing those translations, what I term the socio-technical system of instruction. Accounting for differences in instructional practices between individuals requires a closer examination of all the actors involved in curriculum making as well as the actors in concert as they produce local and organizational practices, which inevitably inform each other (Fountain, 1999).

As instructors move between instructional and technological systems their coordinating work results in new organizational routines. On an organizational level, the socio-technical system of blended instructional practice refers to the organic communicative infrastructure of interlocking routines that facilitate instructional activities that use online tools. On the individual level, blended instructional practice refers to the individual translations within the system where instructors assemble a prescribed curriculum and configure online instructional tools into an enacted teaching performance. In this way, BIP exists at the intersections of multiple communities of practice, what has been termed in the literature a boundary object (Norberg et al., 2011).

Boundary objects are “a sort of arrangement that allow different groups to work together without consensus” (Star, 2010, p. 602). Boundary objects offer interpretive flexibility and exist to address the information needs of multiple groups of stakeholders (Star & Griesemer, 1989). The classic example of a boundary object is a map. Identical maps may serve as a road map to one group, providing directions to a campground (Star, 2010). For another set of users, the same map identifies geological sites for data collection (Star, 2010). The map is, in effect, an infrastructure in which information with a variety of applications is encoded. The utility of the map to the user is in its interpretive flexibility (Star, 2010).

To move between viewpoints, organizations need boundary objects (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011). Boundary objects are broadly constructed in general use, but strongly constructed in individual site use (Star & Griesemer, 1989). The boundary in BIP is the shared problem space that results in coordinating online tools for instruction (Star, 2010). This problem space is shared by: instructors, curriculum developers, software developers, instructional technologists, information technology professionals, students, and a host of other stakeholders. BIP is a prototypical boundary object because it creates an organic infrastructure between multiple communities of practice to facilitate organizational work (Norberg et al., 2011; for an example of a boundary object in BIP see Laumakis, Graham, & Dziuban, 2009).

One of the primary ways that coordination of boundary crossing occurs is through the creation of infrastructure to support practice (Star & Ruhleder, 1996). When individuals use a technology in different ways to support different kinds of work, they are negotiating boundaries (Bowker & Star, 2000). BIP works in a similar way. Each instructor, based on their disciplinary and organizational affiliations, might bring a different set of meanings and uses to BIP. They meet at the boundary of activity systems, draw resources from the coordinative work that contributes to technology configuration and instructional practice, and then use those materials to produce their own local practices.

Instructional practices that are shaped in a shared problem space between systems of activity results in practices they are broadly structured in their general form (Star, 2010). For example, institutions might adopt and configure a video lecture capture system for cross-institutional use. The tool becomes well-structured and enfolded into instructional activities through local translation. Boundary objects allow individuals to work on shared tasks without developing consensus on what that set of work arrangements should resemble (Star & Griesemer, 1989), which means the general education curriculum can be loosely coupled from what happens in the instructional environment of the classroom (Weick, 1976). Given the historical latitude provided to instructors in American colleges and universities to determine their instruction, broadly constructed tools are needed.

On a local individual level, the material activities of teaching (like classroom use of technology) are entangled with the social organization of teaching (like organizational configuration of technology through standardization) producing diverse instructional approaches (Fenwick & Edwards, 2013). Local tailoring is a process that is invisible to the organization as a whole, presenting a vague shared representation of the task (Star, 2010) something Porter et al. (2014) and Soffer et al. (2010) both observed in their research on blended adoption by organizations. Instructors' work resembles the broad organizational construction of BIP, but it is also composed of the strongly constructed local practice that reflects the topics, students, resources, disciplinary norms and constraints that are relevant to an individual course (Nespor, 2006, p. 67). The interpretive flexibility of a boundary object allows the organization to create routines that promote organizational stability while faculty engage in idiosyncratic local translations.

Boundary objects support the open systems of HEIs because they help organizations maintain boundaries around work tasks. Open systems require boundary maintenance (Scott & Davis, 2007, p. 95), something that boundary objects afford through organizational routines that divide up work tasks. Boundary objects facilitate activities that span and redistrict the boundaries of work in organizations. In BIP, organizations subscribe to a general idea of blended instruction enshrined in policy and support systems, while instructors produce translations that are “temporal, based in action, subject to reflection, and local tailoring” (Star, 2010, p. 613).

The variations in socio-technical systems among organizations that support local blended instructional practice can account for the varying manifestations of blended instructional practice in the research literature. Blended instructional practice within higher education organizations serves as a coordinating communicative infrastructure between activities and among actors. The Blended Learning Adoption Framework (Porter et al., 2014) presents some sources of organizational variation that produce local translations of practice. Now, researchers need to turn their attention to the ways that digital tools and social organization shape and are shaped by instructional practices.

6. Implications for higher education research
One of the challenges of theorizing about technology and the impact of technological change involves connecting the mental work of individuals and the material influence of objects (Fenwick et al., 2011). Future research should conceptualize the mutually constitutive relationship between human agents and non-human technological objects (the socio-technical system), and offer an account of dynamic organizational responses to the advent of online tools for instruction. Mechanisms for how organizational level forces are translated as local idiosyncratic instructional practice need to be identified. Such an approach would reflect the organizational reality of socio-technical instructional work in higher education institutions (HEIs).

Future research should accounts for the organizational and the individual; for the material and the mental by outlining process(es) where individual practice is rationalized within organizational arrangements. BIP is individually rationalized through a process of translation and in the context of salient individual internal and external influences, but those local translations from a bird's eye view look organizationally anarchic. This is also true in the scholarship on BIP. No practice matches. All practices diverge from the general organizational infrastructure of BIP. Future research that examines BIP as a network of socio-technical interactions in higher education organizations would get us closer to unpacking the black box of situated faculty decision-making by investigating the connections between the organizational and the individual that are identified in this review of the literature.

This might include research on artifact biographies (e.g. Sawyer & Jarrahi, 2014), multi-sited ethnographies of course level instruction, and longitudinal studies of changes in instructional practices with digital tools over time. Researchers might also consider data-mining online tools for insight about instructional practice. Digital trace data, which is available in almost every online tool, represents an interaction between individual and a technology (Pardo, 2014). Digital trace studies can examine collective actions and social ties between users, discriminate between users by behaviors and outcomes, and potentially allow for data mining that would highlight relationships for theory development (Pardo, 2014).

6.1. Assembling instructional practice
BIP relies upon infrastructural networks connecting organizational and individual work. However, empirical research is needed to understand how that infrastructure emerges. This is one of the primary challenges ahead of scholars interested in online tools as instructional technologies in higher education institutions. Every institution where BIP technologies are adopted by multiple users will encounter standardization challenges. Problems of standardization in instruction include how to measure quality, how to articulate and identify practices, and how to create tools that are flexible and compatible with other systems (Fenwick & Edwards, 2010). Research that identifies how these standards emerge, are contested, and become part of the sediment of organizational academic work over time will contribute to conceptualizations of BIP.

Researchers that can trace these entanglements will provide important insight for a variety of stakeholders. Policy makers and administrators interested in the economies of scale potentially afforded by blended instructional practice would benefit from an understanding of the infrastructural costs that come with implementation and maintenance. Does BIP actually produce savings for the institution or does it rearrange existing infrastructures without efficiencies? Institutional planners would similarly be interested in the infrastructure that supports BIP as a long-term investment. Instructional developers and instructors would most likely appreciate an understanding of how instructional practice is assembled in order to identify potential sites for improvement to the process.

6.2. The new instructional practice
It would necessarily follow that the new culture of learning described by scholars like Thomas and Brown (2011) and the Digital Media and Learning Research Hub (Ito et al., 2013) might necessitate a new practice of instruction. In that spirit, future research on BIP should connect the individual work of instructors with the coordinating work of institutions to understand how a new instructional practice is assembled in the local socio-technical system of instruction. To capture that complexity, scholars need to name the relevant systems of activity, identify their elements, the attendant levels of interaction and some sequential ordering for how the system unfolds (Larsen-Freeman and Cameron, 2008, Lamont and Molnár, 2002). This review attempts to sketch the links, information flows, and relationships (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008) currently identified in the literature on BIP and points to some future direction for empirical investigations.

