Web-based simulations (WBS) are increasingly used by educators to deliver higher education curricula. Given the growing number and diversity of students undertaking study in higher education institutions worldwide, it is critical that WBS are situated within a wider social-constructivist approach that facilitates community-based learning. To this end, we argue that the community of inquiry (CoI) framework offers a suitable solution. Based on a series of interviews with university educators and emergency management practitioners this paper investigates how the CoI framework can support the effective use of WBS to deliver disaster studies curricula in the higher education context. The findings indicate that purposefully addressing cognitive, social and teaching presence within a CoI is valuable when WBS are used in higher education and emphasise a range of issues that are particular to the use of WBS and the disaster studies context.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Community of inquiry

Web-based simulation

Disaster studies

1. Introduction
This research argues that to maximise the benefits of technology in supporting higher education and reduce the limitations, it is important to embed technology within a wider social-constructivist educational approach that supports community-based learning such as the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 1999). The potential for technology to support higher education has been widely recognised. Technology can provide personal learning environments (Kompen, Edirisingha, Canaleta, Alsina, & Monguet, 2019) and promote independent learning (Horvat, Dobrota, Krsmanovic, & Cudanov, 2015). Technology supports novel approaches to learning and teaching such as ‘gamification’ (Chung, Shen, & Qiu, 2019; Hanus & Fox, 2015) and the flipped classroom (Goedhart, Blignaut-van Westrhenen, Moser, & Zweekhorst, 2019; Landers & Landers, 2014) and can improve the accessibility of education for students with disabilities (Varonis, 2015). Technology supports group work through facilitating collaboration (Fu & Hwang, 2018; Gikas & Grant, 2013) and offers flexibility in terms of when and where students learn thus enabling them to accommodate work and family commitments (Henderson, Selwyn, & Aston, 2017). Technology enables learning analytics through the collection, measurement, analysis and reporting of information that can help students to reflect on their own learning processes and achievements, as well as enable educators to support students through identification of those requiring extra assistance (El Alfy, Marx Gómez, & Dani, 2019; Schumacher & Ifenthaler, 2018). Nevertheless, there are a number of limitations associated with the use of technology in higher education. These include the potential for cheating (Stöckelová & Virtová, 2015), distraction (Purvis, Rodger, & Beckingham, 2016) and cyber-bullying (Kamali, 2015). Minority groups can be disadvantaged in online learning contexts. Design decisions in the context of gamification, for example, can reinforce harmful cultural narratives (Richard, 2017) and discourage women and ethnic minorities from pursuing different competencies and careers (Ganley, George, Cimpian, & Makowski, 2018; Richard, 2017). Students from low socio-economic backgrounds may be disadvantaged relative to their peers due to their inability to access technology and related resources (Khalid & Pedersen, 2016). Furthermore, technology is being developed more rapidly than pedagogy, andragogy and heutagogy, and thus while technology offers ample opportunities to enhance educational outcomes, attempts to exploit technology for learning will likely fail if they are not based on the science of learning (Cannon-Bowers & Bowers, 2009).

The technology applications investigated in this paper are Web-based simulations (WBS). Simulations encompass a set of techniques used to imitate ‘real’ situations (Douma, van Hillegersberg, & Schuur, 2012; Sarfati et al., 2019) and WBS centres on “the use of resources and technologies offered by the World-Wide-Web (WWW) for interaction with client and server modelling and simulation tools” (Byrne, Heavey, & Byrne, 2010, p. 253). Higher education institutions across the world have been steadily increasing their investment in WBS. One reason for this is that providing students access to workplace settings can be challenging and simulation offers a potential substitute for work placements (Hopwood, Rooney, Boud, & Kelly, 2016) and helps address perceptions that university-based learning lacks authenticity (Gonczi, 2013). As such, research focused on maximising the effectiveness of WBS in higher education is important. Specifically, this study investigates the application of WBS in disaster studies. According to UN ISDR (2009, p. 9), a disaster is “a serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources”. Disaster studies was considered an ideal context for this study as there is an expanding market for higher education courses that address concerns relating to disasters, from various disciplinary perspectives (Keen-Dyer, Bridges, Ferguson, Reynolds, & Paterson, 2015). Further, provision of authentic learning experiences in relation to disasters is often impeded by safety concerns and WBS therefore offer an attractive solution for higher education institutions. The paper investigates the following research question:

“How can the community of inquiry framework be used to support Web-based simulations in disaster studies?”

Although much has been written on WBS and their increasing use in higher education settings (Vlachopoulos & Makri, 2017), few studies have focused on the role of social-constructivist frameworks, such as the CoI framework, in maximising the educational outcomes realised from WBS in higher education classrooms (Burgess, Slate, Rojas-LeBouef, & LaPrairie, 2010; McKerlich & Anderson, 2007).1 Although a number of CoI studies have investigated the use of technology (e.g. McKerlich and Anderson (2007), Rubin, Fernandes, and Avgerinou (2013); Rubin, Fernandes, Avgerinou, and Moore (2010)), none have focused on WBS and disaster studies specifically. Further, although a recent study by Öberg, Nyström, Littlejohn, and Vrieling-Teunter (2019) adopted the CoI framework in the crisis management context, rather than investigating whether the CoI framework could support effective learning in crisis management, the study focused on whether crisis management exercises in the workplace could result in the development of a CoI. Thus, this research is timely and warranted.

The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. First, the CoI framework is described, with reference to its application in disaster studies. This is followed by an examination of the benefits and limitations of WBS for disaster studies. Second, the research method is described. Third, the results of the study are reported and discussed. Finally, conclusions are drawn, limitations acknowledged and avenues for future research identified.

2. Supporting disaster studies in higher education using the community of inquiry framework
The CoI framework is designed to facilitate higher-order learning in a blended learning environment (Garrison, 2016; Garrison et al., 1999). Grounded in the notion of practical inquiry (Dewey, 1938), the framework supports critical and creative thinking, and an educational environment to enable students to learn how to learn (Garrison, 2016). The CoI framework has been successfully employed in a range of adult and higher education settings (Garrison & Archer, 2000, Cooper, 2014) and was deemed appropriate for this research as learning communities can potentially support trust and knowledge sharing, which are essential for learning in disaster scenarios (Öberg et al., 2019). Central to the CoI are three presences, each of which overlaps and informs the others to support the overall educational experience, namely, cognitive, social and teaching presence (Garrison, 2016; Hilliard & Stewart, 2019).2 These are introduced and discussed below with reference the disaster studies context.

2.1. Cognitive presence in disaster studies
Cognitive presence is “the extent to which learners are able to construct and confirm meaning through sustained reflection and discourse” (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001, p. 11). Cognitive presence captures the intellectual environment that supports knowledge acquisition and application within a student community and is founded on critical thinking and intuition to ensure a process of higher-order reflection and discourse (Garrison, 2016; Garrison & Archer, 2000). Practical inquiry is central to cognitive presence and facilitating sustained discourse (de Leng, Dolmans, Jöbsis, Muijtjens, & van der Vleuten, 2009) and consists of four phases (Garrison, 2016). First, during the triggering event, the teacher introduces the core concept or issue, in the form of a learning activity, such as a problem or dilemma, to attract student engagement. In disaster studies, this might involve providing a description of the disaster including the type (e.g. natural hazard induced, health epidemic, terrorism) and phase of the incident (e.g. initial, escalating, post-incident clean-up) (Hayes, 2015). Second, students undertake exploration to understand the nature of the problem and seek relevant information and explanations through collective brainstorming or private research. For example, students might research different disaster management approaches adopted internationally. Third, students enter a reflective phase to integrate their learning and the teacher probes for understanding and misconceptions. For this purpose, debriefs play an important role in disaster studies (Greco, Lewis, Sanford, Sawin, & Ames, 2019). Fourth, a resolution to the problem or dilemma is achieved by reducing complexity or constructing a meaningful framework or context specific solution. This might involve, for example, development of a set of recommendations to guide responses to future disasters. If full resolution is not achieved another cycle of inquiry is triggered (Garrison, 2016).

In the disaster studies context, a fundamentally interdisciplinary field, cognitive presence needs to enable students to focus their learning on acquiring specialist knowledge in their respective disciplines. For engineering students, the focus may be on the attainment and application of knowledge and skills in relation to designing or constructing the built environment in the context of disaster (Thayaparan et al., 2015). In contrast, information systems students may acquire and apply knowledge and skills in relation to systems risk and recovery (Mendonca, Andrade, Endo, & Lima, 2019). Nursing students might undertake simulation of triage within an emergency department (Dubovsky et al., 2017). As disasters present ‘wicked’ problems that cannot be resolved from a single perspective, cognitive presence will need to support students to learn how to work in cross-disciplinary teams and to understand how their specialist discipline knowledge contributes to solving transdisciplinary problems (Godemann, 2008; Madrigano, Chandra, Costigan, & Acosta, 2017). In such contexts the CoI must also address students' need to attain “soft skills” and provide opportunities to reflect and discuss theory and practice in communication, situational awareness, coordination, decision making, negotiation, leadership, team building and stress management (Brooks, Curnin, Bearman, & Owen, 2018; Densten & Gray, 2001; Gaba, 2004; Hayes, 2015; Tena-Chollet, Tixier, Dandrieux, & Slangen, 2017).

2.2. Social presence in disaster studies
Social presence is “the ability of participants in a community of inquiry to project themselves socially and emotionally, as ‘real’ people (i.e. their full personality), through the medium of communication being used” (Garrison et al., 1999, p. 94). Social presence is important whether learning takes place in face-to-face, online, or blended contexts (Garrison, 2016). Three categories of social presence are identified: affective, open communication and cohesiveness (Garrison, 2016). The affective category provides for engagement in meaningful dialogue, for example, through expression of emotions, use of humour and self-disclosure. Open communication requires a culture of trust and acceptance that is reflected in constructive responses to the questions and contributions of others. Group cohesiveness sustains a commitment to the purpose of the CoI because when students feel that they are a part of the CoI, the discourse, sharing of meaning and the quality of learning outcomes is optimised (Garrison, 2016).

Social presence is increasingly important where learning activities involve collaborative tasks and students can benefit from the perspectives of others. In transdisciplinary contexts like disasters, this is particularly relevant. During disasters, lives often depend on team cohesion, communication, coordination and cooperation (Hayes, 2015; Salas, Wilson, Murphy, King, & Salisbury, 2008) and social presence underpins cohesive and collaborative interactions (Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 1999). Whereas cognitive presence addresses student acquisition of hard and soft skills, social presence provides an open, trusting and lively environment to support students to develop the self-confidence to acquire them (Li, 2015). Social presence provides cohesion through establishment of not only socio-emotional presence and personal relationships but through intellectual focus, open and purposeful communication and respect. Students should feel safe to express their perspectives and views, to agree and disagree with others and yet still focus on a common goal (Bakhtiar, Webster, & Hadwin, 2018; Bloom & Johnston, 2010). These aspects are compatible with concepts of psychological safety in work teams (Edmondson, 1999) and techniques commonly employed in the emergency management sector, such as after action reviews and debriefs, as these too, require an open and trusting climate that is free from blame (Ioannou, Kouta, & Andreou, 2015). Furthermore, disaster studies graduates will need to contend with complex diversity issues and tensions, such as gender inequality (Parkinson, Duncan, & Archer, 2019) and cultural and linguistic diversity (Meyer et al., 2016). Disaster studies students must contend with these same issues in the classroom and social presence should be developed to ensure that the potential of every student is met. Disasters are inherently political, so collective learning often brings up stark differences in ideology, and must be handled with sensitivity. To this end, explicit training for students on the importance of social presence (Swan & Shih, 2005) and diversity and inclusion (Killpack & Melón, 2016) can be helpful.

2.3. Teaching presence in disaster studies
Teaching presence encompasses the design, facilitation and direction of cognitive and social processes for the purpose of realising personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile learning outcomes (Garrison, 2016). Teaching presence is an important determinant of student satisfaction, perceived learning and sense of community and causally influences social and cognitive presence (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007). The teacher's role is encompassed in design and organisation, facilitating discourse and direct instruction (Garrison, 2016). Design and organisation focuses on structures and processes and requires building curricula, utilising mediums (e.g. online and/or face-to-face), designing methods (e.g. group work), establishing time parameters for activities, ensuring etiquette (e.g. in online messages), and making macro-level comments on content (Garrison, 2016). Problem-based learning (as commonly used in disaster studies), requires greater attention to instructional design when new learning activities, processes and cases are introduced, particularly when technology is used (So & Kim, 2009). Thus, in disaster studies, it is important that the teacher ensures students know what is expected (Hayes, 2015), as some cohorts (e.g. international students) may not be familiar with problem-based learning (Gram, Jæger, Liu, Qing, & Wu, 2013).

Facilitating discourse recognises the role of the teacher in supporting students to construct personal meaning and to shape mutual understanding (Garrison, 2016). The teacher might achieve this via identifying areas of agreement/disagreement; seeking to reach consensus/understanding; encouraging, acknowledging or reinforcing student contributions; setting a culture for learning; prompting student engagement and discussion; and assessing the effectiveness of learning processes (Garrison, 2016). Facilitating discourse is particularly important when students are working in cross-disciplinary teams in transdisciplinary disaster contexts where converging disciplinary traditions are diverse and can invariably present tensions in both theory and practice. Consequently, when students are approaching solutions to disasters from different disciplinary perspectives, the teacher will need to pay attention to identifying where students agree or disagree, and facilitate discussion when there is a need for cooperation or consensus (Park & Mills, 2014; Park & Son, 2010). Teachers also have a role to play in ensuring students of different cultural backgrounds (Glass, Kociolek, Wongtrirat, Lynch, & Cong, 2015), gender (Sadker & Zittleman, 2007) and those identifying as having disabilities (Matthews, 2009; Moriña, 2017) feel they are able to participate (Thomas, 2016).

Direct instruction includes actions by the teacher that go beyond facilitation. The teacher needs to identify relevant content/questions; focus discussion on specific issues; summarise discussion; confirm understanding (e.g. via assessment); diagnose and address misconceptions; provide knowledge from diverse sources; and respond to technical concerns (Garrison, 2016). In disaster studies, the teacher may have to pay particular attention to ensure that students focus on acquiring disciplinary specific knowledge and skills as well as develop their soft skills to ensure students are in a position to help solve transdisciplinary problems (von Meding et al., 2016, Brundiers, 2018). There may be technical issues that need attending to. For example, while some research suggests that students with disabilities often prefer and excel in online environments (Verdinelli & Kutner, 2016), students with disabilities may require support to ensure they can access assistive technologies (e.g. visualisation tools) to remove barriers to engagement in e-Learning (Seale, 2014). International students, on the other hand, may require assistance with language and cultural interpretations of disaster events (Alexander, 2006; Ekström & Kverndokk, 2015). More generally, the teacher's approach to direct instruction may benefit from a consideration of the continuum of educational approaches utilised in emergency management such as coaching, mentoring, counselling and other developmental activities (Australasian Fire and Emergency Service Authorities, 2018; Lancer, Clutterbuck, & Megginson, 2016).

Much research has been undertaken on the CoI framework in different disciplines (Arbaugh, Bangert, & Cleveland-Innes, 2010; Hilliard & Stewart, 2019), course orientations and levels (Akyol, Ice, Garrison, & Mitchell, 2010; Cooper, 2014), with different class sizes (Chen, Denoyelles, Patton, & Zydney, 2017; Kovanović et al., 2019; Nagel & Kotzé, 2010) using a range of technologies (McKerlich & Anderson, 2007; Rubin et al., 2010; Rubin et al., 2013) and considering both student (Cho, Kim, & Choi, 2017) and teacher (Richardson, Besser, Koehler, Lim, & Strait, 2016) perspectives. There have also been a number of studies that have endeavoured to refine and strengthen the measurement of the CoI framework (Kozan & Richardson, 2014; Lowenthal & Dunlap, 2014; Shea & Bidjerano, 2010; Stenbom, 2018).

Next the benefits and limitations of WBS to deliver disaster studies in a higher education context are explored.

3. Web-based simulation in disaster studies and higher education
In this study the focus is on high-fidelity fully-immersive and interactive WBS which incorporate elements of virtual of reality. This is because in a disaster context, responder reactions are driven not only by pre-existing knowledge but also their psychological state of mind and this type of WBS, which is able to replicate disaster scenarios with more accuracy than many of the alternatives, provides higher education students, as future responders, greater familiarity with disaster scenarios (Hsu et al., 2013). Nonetheless many of the issues addressed in the study are equally relevant to other types of WBS.3

There has been sustained interest and research on simulation (including WBS) as educational tools in higher education (Vlachopoulos & Makri, 2017) and disaster studies (Hayes, 2015; Opsahl et al., 2019; Solinska et al., 2018). However, there has been less research investigating the use of WBS at the intersection of disaster studies and higher education. Yet with advances in technology, the availability of easy-to-use virtual reality platforms and downward pricing trends; high-fidelity, fully immersive and interactive WBS are becoming increasingly accessible to higher education institutions across the world (Cybulski, 2012). Numerous examples of these WBS being used for disaster studies in higher education settings now exist. For example, the Center for Advancement of Distance Education at the University of Illinois has established a disaster preparedness planning simulation within Second Life which is combined with a facilitated discussion. As another example, The University of Florida collaborated with 360ed to develop a WBS of a burns centre to train students how to manage mass casualties (Hsu et al., 2013).

WBS offers a range of benefits over simulations that do not exploit the Web but are not without their limitations. In terms of advantages, WBS can compress space and time and serve as personal theatres where virtual realities can be played out, enabling students to safely explore and find solutions to complex problems in disaster studies (von Meding et al., 2016; Solinska et al., 2018). WBS can expose higher education students to technologies and processes that are comparable to those they will experience in the field, thereby enabling the acquisition, refinement, and practice of relevant knowledge and skills (Miller & France, 2013; Solinska et al., 2018). That is, WBS draws on the principle of identical elements (Woodworth & Thorndike, 1901) and the transfer of learning between contexts (Perkins & Salomon, 1992). The potential of Web technology, virtual reality (VR) and high-fidelity simulation has been recognised as a means to improve student learning in higher education. For example, in the context of medical emergencies, “across specialties, patient simulation, VR, and the World Wide Web will soon enable medical students and residents to see one, simulate many, do one competently, and teach everyone” (Vozenilek, Huff, Reznek, & Gordon, 2004, p. 1153). Importantly, WBS can support communication, interaction and teamwork among students, which are essential to successful simulations (Byrne et al., 2010; Cooper et al., 2015; Vlachopoulos & Makri, 2017). During disasters, responders can be geographically dispersed and a benefit of WBS is that they enable higher education students to practice their skills and to interact and communicate from remote locations (Cooper et al., 2015, von Meding et al., 2016). Like other forms of computer assisted learning, WBS can provide structured learning and support training in evidence-based decision-making (Tena-Chollet et al., 2017; Welk, Splieth, Wierinck, Gilpatrick, & Meyer, 2006), allow the acquisition of technical and non-technical skills (Rogers, Miller, & Firmin, 2012) and enable students to focus on the application and externalisation of knowledge (Cybulski & Nguyen, 2012; Liaw et al., 2016). WBS can be less resource intensive than other forms of simulation (e.g. role plays, patient mannequins) (Granlund, Berglund, & Eriksson, 2000; Liaw et al., 2016). Features of WBS such as cross-platform capability, integration, interoperability, ease of use and the relatively low-levels of on-going support and maintenance are valuable (Byrne et al., 2010) and can translate into improved accessibility for students (Cooper et al., 2015).

Nonetheless, there are variations in the extent to which different universities, faculties and students can access the required resources to implement and use WBS. This may partly explain why some disciplines rarely implement technology-supported simulation systems (Barteit et al., 2019; Welk et al., 2006). WBS may widen the ‘digital divide’ for students from low socio-economic backgrounds where a lack of technology resources may limit their access to education; and even if they have access, their social, cultural, educational and linguistic contexts may affect their ability to utilise technology effectively (Barteit et al., 2019; Mingers & Walsham, 2010). There may be issues of slow network performance (Granlund et al., 2000) as well as other factors that interfere with the performance of WBS. Not all students may be able to participate in a team-based synchronous WBS (e.g. due to being located in a different time zone, family/work commitments). While WBS can be designed to enable students to work alone, they may impede the acquisition of interpersonal skills (Asal & Blake, 2006) and distributed learners can feel isolated when interaction with team members is not sufficiently visible (Granlund et al., 2000). These issues can be problematic in disaster studies as team-based approaches are important (Hayes, 2015). WBS have been criticised for encouraging “random guessing” and not being reliable predictors of student performance (Teach & Patel, 2014). Further, issues surrounding the fidelity of simulations are complex and it is important to ensure the level of fidelity provided by a WBS considers the characteristics of the students, teachers, task complexity and the type of skills being developed (Andrews, Carroll, & Bell, 1995; Heldal, 2017; Straus et al., 2019). Some learners may experience anxiety when using WBS, requiring teachers to learn as much as possible about the WBS so they can readily answer student questions (Pina & Bordonaba-Juste, 2018). Teachers must be provided with sufficient training to enhance their willingness and ability to adopt WBS (Kim, Park, & O'Rourke, 2017).

Having examined literature on the CoI framework and WBS in the context of disaster studies and higher education, the next section describes the methods employed to answer the research question.

4. Method
This paper seeks to provide understanding of how the CoI framework can support the use of WBS to deliver disaster studies in a higher education context. The paper reports qualitative semi-structured interviews which were undertaken as part of a larger study (von Meding et al., 2016) with expert educators in higher education (hereon educators) and emergency management practitioners (hereon practitioners). This was deemed a suitable method to answer the research question as it could provide a view of the problem domain through the detailed experiences of participants in a range of organisational contexts (Bell, Bryman, & Harley, 2018).

4.1. Data collection
4.1.1. Interviewee selection
Purposive sampling was used in this study. Potential interviewees were identified through the researchers' professional networks and contacted via telephone or email, and provided an overview of the project and examples of the interview questions. Sixteen semi-structured interviews were conducted on the basis of theoretical saturation (Parker & Northcott, 2016). Eight educators with an average of 20 years of experience each in CoI, WBS and disciplines relevant to disaster studies (e.g. construction, disaster management, engineering, information systems, management, project management and psychology and strategic planning), were interviewed. Educators included four Senior Lecturers, one Associate Professor and three Professors. Eight practitioners with an average of 15 years of experience each in disaster management and simulation-based training were interviewed. The roles of practitioners addressed the preparedness, response and recovery phases of disasters, and emphasised knowledge and skills in communication, community engagement, decision-making, emergency management, leadership, project management, team-building and training (including simulation-based training via WBS).

To ensure the findings of the study would be applicable to a wide range of higher education settings, the participants selected in our study had experience with a variety of different WBS. Predominantly the participants concentrated on high-fidelity fully immersive virtual reality-based WBS (e.g. disaster simulations embedded in Second Life). However, they also had extensive experience with alternative types of WBS, including those which are interactive and employ elements of virtual reality but are not fully immersive (e.g. graphics and video used to depict characters which act, communicate and interact with students in disaster scenarios). In some cases the disaster scenarios were pre-configured in the WBS by developers and specialised education designers, while in other cases the educators developed the disaster scenarios and WBS themselves. There were also examples where disaster management professionals worked with educators and developers to build the disaster scenarios for WBS. The participants used different approaches when integrating WBS in the classroom. While some had experience where the WBS is fully online and students work remotely, most use a blended approach whereby students undertake the WBS in the face-to-face classroom and the teacher facilitated related tasks, such as debriefs following the simulation. Appendix A provides further detail on the participants including a summary of their professional expertise, the types of simulations they use, the educational contexts in which they use simulations and the types of learners they teach.

4.1.2. Interview protocol
An interview guide provided a framework to focus the semi-structured interviews (Patton, 2015). The interviews were divided among the research team members, each possessing a knowledge base in the field of disaster management, simulation and higher education within their respective disciplines of architecture, engineering and information systems. The research team's familiarity with the topic, combined with their extensive experience in designing and conducting qualitative interviews in accordance with best practice guidelines (Turner III, 2010), enabled them to elicit in-depth information from participants to answer the research question. Interviews averaged just under one hour each and were based in Australia (NSW, Tasmania, Victoria) as well as New Zealand, UK and USA. Interviews were conducted face-to-face or via Skype, audio recorded and transcribed verbatim. Interviewees were not prompted directly on issues regarding CoI, but rather, questions were asked to enable themes to emerge inductively from the data. Educator interviews explored topics around simulation-based education, curriculum design, assessment and student engagement, with particular reference to the role of WBS and disaster studies. Practitioner interviews explored topics around the key elements of disasters, emergency management and their interactions, the skills required in disaster scenarios, current approaches to emergency management training, and issues related to simulation-based education (e.g. table-top, role plays, WBS). Attention was given to the characteristics of WBS that would benefit new employees (including university graduates) entering the emergency management sector. Table 1 provides examples of the types of questions posed to participants during the semi-structured interviews.


Table 1. Example interview questions.

Participant group	Example questions
All	How are simulations valuable for learning in a disaster context?
What is the value of WBS when compared to more traditional approaches such as role plays or table-top exercises?
Educators	How can simulations best engage higher education students in critical and evaluative thinking? What type of features are needed in a simulation to support this?
What are the common challenges that arise for instructors and higher education students when using simulation in disaster studies? And with WBS in particular?
In your experience what is the most effective way to assess student learning through WBS? What types of assessment have been least effective and why?
Practitioners	Could you please elaborate on the types of disaster management training undertaken in your organisation?
What skills do learners need to be able to act in each phase of a disaster event? How can these skills be best represented in a simulation?
What lessons have you learned in relation to the design and use of simulation for learning in the disaster context? And for WBS in particular?
4.2. Data analysis
A process of deductive qualitative content analysis was followed (Elo & Kyngäs, 2008). To ensure a systematic and reliable coding process, the following steps were undertaken. Each transcript was analysed by two researchers, whereby the lead researcher analysed the complete set of sixteen transcripts and the remaining team members were allocated a sub-set of transcripts to analyse. First, the research team listened to their allocated interview recordings in their entirety to make sense of, and become immersed in the data. Second, guided by extant literature in the CoI framework (Garrison, 2016) a categorisation matrix consisting of the three presences in the CoI framework was constructed for each interview transcript (Elo & Kyngäs, 2008). Based on discussion and comparison between the researchers, new sub-themes were created when new concepts emerged inductively from the data and as such the categorisation matrices were unconstrained (Elo & Kyngäs, 2008). Saturation point was reached when no new themes emerged from the data. Third, following the extraction of themes from each interview, the analysis was rearranged to create three categorisation matrices— one for each CoI presence. Appendix B contains an extract of the analysis process to highlight the themes and sub-themes which emerged. In the presentation of our findings we provide interview quotes and examples as interpretative evidence; building an analytical and explanatory narrative account.

4.3. Trustworthiness
To ensure the trustworthiness of a qualitative study such as this, matters pertaining to credibility, dependability, transferability and confirmability need to be addressed (Lincoln & Denzin, 2005). Credibility is concerned with the level of confidence in the ‘truth’ that the findings of a research project have for the subject and in the context in which the project is conducted (Erlandson, Harris, Skipper, & Allen, 1993). Credibility was established through member checks, referential adequacy, peer debriefing and triangulation. Dependability captures the extent to which a research project, if it were replicated with the same or similar participants, in the same or similar contexts, that the findings would be repeated (Erlandson et al., 1993). Dependability was established by documenting all procedures and problems in the research project, thereby providing an audit trail. Transferability examines the extent to which the findings of a research project can be applied in other contexts, or with other participants (Erlandson et al., 1993). The thick descriptions of the purposive sampling and reporting of the results provide sufficient detail to allow judgments by the reader about transferability. Finally, confirmability is the degree to which the findings of a research project are the result of the focus of its inquiry and not of the biases of the researcher (Erlandson et al., 1993). To ensure the results of the present research project could be confirmed, all care was taken to record all of the processes followed during the research, so that constructions, assertions and facts can be tracked to their original sources.

5. Findings
This section presents the key findings pertaining to how each presence of a CoI can support WBS to deliver disaster studies curricula in the higher education context.

5.1. Cognitive presence and WBS in disaster studies
Cognitive presence, as evidenced in the design of curricula that encourages students to practice critical thinking and intuition, was found central to support problem-based learning in WBS. Purposefully addressing cognitive presence in WBS was seen to enable students from a variety of backgrounds to collaborate and partake in meaningful discourse in disaster studies and thus undertake higher-order learning. For example, interviewees reported that WBS provide students opportunities not only to acquire and apply knowledge in their own discipline but to also understand how this contributed to cross-disciplinary teams. Thus the overlap between cognitive presence and social presence was seen as central in “supporting discourse”:

“If you're talking about a medical team there is an understanding of what the anaesthetist is doing versus what the surgeon is doing, versus what the technicians are doing. So, part of it is creating visibility. The advantage of that is that it helps this idea of implicit coordination... that you have a better understanding of the processes and the information required and you know that this piece of information may be valuable to someone else in the team.”

(Independent Consultant, Disaster Management Simulation)
Also paramount to cognitive presence was the need to design curricula and WBS to cater to diverse student cohorts where there may be students with differing learning styles (e.g. preference for text or graphics), needs for flexibility (e.g. catering to those needing to work off-campus) and cultural backgrounds (e.g. internationalising curricula to ensure relevance). Addressing cognitive presence by considering whether students are novice, skilled or advanced, was seen to support higher education students using WBS in disaster studies. The Senior Lecturer in IS identified that building learning analytics capability into the WBS could help identify and address the experience levels and learning requirements of students. It was noted that the less experienced students are with the simulation context the more realistic graphics needed to be (i.e. fully immersive virtual reality-based WBS are ideal) whereas more experienced students required less physical fidelity (i.e. partially immersive WBS with lower-level graphics may suffice). Overall, however, participants recognised that students increasingly expect the graphics of WBS to be comparable to the modern recreational computer games that they play. Further, the ability of WBS to provide a high level of realism was seen as particularly powerful in enabling cognitive presence as students need to understand disaster-related concepts from other people's perspectives:

“...being able to understand that from the people's perspective of not just the responders, the SES [State Emergency Service] or whoever it might be, but those people that are affected. There's also incredible value in that. Now, I guess the benefits of having more immersive approaches is it's a little bit more realistic, a little bit more believable, it gets people into that heightened emotional state, more so than... if a scenario was just written on a piece of paper. People, I think, tend to elicit more realistic responses the more immersive the simulation is.”

(Manager Community Engagement, Emergency Volunteer Organisation)
Cognitive presence was achieved via practical inquiry with both educators and practitioners explaining their use of WBS in terms of introducing triggering events followed by processes of exploration, integration and resolution. One educator described their use of a slum-upgrading project in a course taken by students from the property and construction management, architecture and international development disciplines. In introducing the disaster simulation (triggering event), the interviewee explained the context of the problem and showed photographs of the slums:

“[With the] slum-upgrading project, also what they're trying to do is figure out all the hazards that are faced there. I give them documentation on some of the community consultation... because I was fortunate enough to work on the project I could actually show them photos of the site, of the place, of the people who lived there, what the problems are. So, they could really engage with it directly.”

(Senior Lecturer, Architecture and Disaster Resilience)
Exploration was undertaken by the students so they can better understand the nature of the problem and seek relevant information and explanations. This involved a combination of private research and collective group work. As the simulation was based on a real-life community project students conducted research online to supplement information embedded in the simulation. This approach was common to other interviewees. For example, one practitioner highlighted the value of social media in complementing classroom-based WBS:

“You kind of create a range of different communications. We've started now bringing in business social media as well, Twitter and Facebook, as a way for the participants to start receiving information.”

(Architect, Environmental and Humanitarian Projects)
Integration occurred in the slum-upgrading project through developing more focused and structured approaches to construct meaning. Students undertook reflective processes and the teacher probed for understanding and misconceptions. Practitioners confirmed that they undertook similar integration processes with debriefing and after-action reviews being commonplace:

“Within simulations, make sure instructors, the software, or the role play itself creates some demands which test people's thinking. Then I think a good debrief, after-action review, or reflective piece actually should probe, ‘So, Lisa, can you tell me a bit about why you made the decision that you did?’ or, ‘can you tell me a bit about why this event occurred?’ Getting people to try and reflect…”

(Independent Consultant, Disaster Management Simulation)
Resolution of the problem or dilemma was achieved through a process of reducing complexity and/or identifying a context specific solution. Formal assessment was often part of the resolution stage. In the case of the slum-upgrading project, students would be assessed on presentation of a group plan:

“They would have to come up with some upgrading plan which has to be their original thing and also they have to work in a group and negotiate, mediate, communicate with others and build up the consensus. These allow them to do a level of analysis which they won't be able to do if it's not solution driven and if it's not work in a peer group.”

(Senior Lecturer, Architecture and Disaster Resilience)
More generally, within a CoI, critical reflection and intuition regarding the theory and practice of communication, leadership and team building following the WBS, was seen as central to cognitive presence in disaster studies.

5.2. Social presence and WBS in disaster studies
Interviewees highlighted the importance of social presence to underpin an open, trusting and lively learning environment. They advocated a number of strategies to cultivate social presence to ensure WBS supports the delivery of effective disaster studies curricula in higher education. These strategies focus on fostering interaction between students and between students and the teacher. Expression of affective aspects such as moods, feelings and attitudes, was seen to help students feel that they are part of the CoI and support engagement with complex disaster scenarios and the WBS. The Senior Lecturer in IS who has experience in the design and use of a variety of WBS but prefers those that are fully immersive and employ high-quality graphics to provide a ‘realistic’ experience, provided the example of students' self-disclose of their lack of confidence and fear of ‘breaking things’. In so doing he emphasised how WBS which reflect the ‘real world’ are valuable in supporting students to experiment in groups and build self-confidence and self-efficacy. Open communication was seen as particularly relevant for developing trust and acceptance and can be achieved through, for example, students' relevant and constructive responses to the questions and contributions of others before, during and after the WBS. Interviewees reported that it is important that students are exposed to open communication to support learning not only in the classroom but to ensure they are able to take these practices to the field. Creating an environment where expression of affective aspects is facilitated and where open communication processes are supported is important to ensure disaster responders operating in uncomfortable situations, feel secure. This finding is aligned with the concept of psychological safety:

“We're trying to take people into this area [disaster management] and into the space that they don't feel comfortable and they won't feel comfortable. But they still need to feel secure [because] within the field the sort of consequences of what you can do can weigh heavy on you... So, you've got to be able to come back and sit down, have a cup of tea and analyse what's happened. Otherwise, people just completely screw up and mess up and they don't understand what they've been through.”

(Professor, Architecture and Engineering)
Attending to group cohesiveness is important as this can contribute to the extent to which students feel that they are a part of the CoI and in turn influence the effectiveness of WBS. Addressing various aspects of diversity, including educational (e.g. students' different levels of life and work experience), cultural (e.g. language, social background), circumstantial (e.g. age, location) and dispositional dimensions (e.g. levels of self-confidence) was deemed important for facilitating social presence and effective use of WBS. In particular, interviewees emphasised the need to consider issues such as gender equality and language barriers that preclude students feeling that they are part of the CoI:

“There are students who have weaker languages not only because they're from another country and they don’t speak English as their native language but also people from here so you have to look out for that disadvantage.”

(Senior Lecturer, Architecture and Disaster Resilience)
5.3. Teaching presence and WBS in disaster studies
The role of the teacher in the design and organisation of curricula, assessment and learning resources was considered key for successful WBS in the context of disaster studies in higher education. Yet while WBS were seen to offer significant advantages for student learning, there were also a number of issues that teachers need to attend to in order to realise these advantages. In particular, the teacher needs to ensure that students do not neglect the important foundational knowledge and concepts by being distracted by the WBS itself:

“Often student learners are quite keen to get to the simulation, because they see that as the exciting bit. They are not often aware of some of the foundational knowledge that's important. Instructors, I think, sometimes need to push really hard to say, ‘Look, these are some key concepts you're going to need to know...’ Also, that deliberate practice or enough practice of the fundamentals, so they've got at least a kind of working knowledge of them before they get to the using the simulation.”

(Independent Consultant, Disaster Management Simulation)
Interviewees highlighted the overlap between cognitive and teaching presence via the selection of content. For example, in selecting content the teacher should consider how to “internationalise the curricula”. The Associate Professor in Information Systems noted that hazards (and disasters) manifest in specific geographies and that some hazards may be seen as particularly relevant in different cultures (e.g. bushfires may be considered important in Australia but not in Japan). The teacher also has a role in deciding the timing of activities in the classroom and this is critical for disaster simulations. Practitioners highlighted that the debriefing session is often where most of the learning takes place and sufficient time needs to be put aside for this. While some participants noted the debrief could be built into the WBS itself, for most of the participants in this study, the debriefs took place outside of the simulation in the face-to-face classroom. A range of approaches to assessment were noted with key decision points being around whether this would be the simulation itself or whether this would take place after the simulation was completed (e.g. in the form of a reflective piece), or both.

In terms of facilitation of discourse, it is important to discuss issues, before, during and after the simulation to confirm understanding and diagnose misconceptions. It was highlighted that teachers should ensure students understand the perspectives of people with cultural backgrounds different from their own and that all students are given the opportunity to contribute in the CoI and WBS. The teacher's role in creating a safe environment was noted:

“If you're trying to develop really complex skills, then ideally what you want is actually people to have some safety so people won't feel judged.... ‘Meet me after the simulation has stopped,’ and just have that 20-minute chat with the person to talk about what's going on. Try to consolidate and identify what went well, where some of the issues were, and trying to actually make those links between the events and their own sense of control, stress, or otherwise that's going on.”

(Independent Consultant, Disaster Management Simulation)
Yet in terms of direct instruction, as future disaster responders, students will face challenges that push their boundaries and they need to be prepared for “command and control” as a mode of operation, and be ready for complex environments involving “difficult stakeholders”:

“In our simulations, the government partner has to be quite strong and quite forceful and talk in very strong verbs. Not sort of ‘what do you think? More ‘this is what you do, we are the government’ and then stand deliberately, not to upset people but to just sort of generate inside of them the sort of feeling of what's it going to be like.”

(Professor, Architecture and Engineering)
Thus, in setting the climate the teacher has to balance the need for the WBS to reflect the reality of the complex and stressful environments students will face in the workplace with the safe and trusting learning environment in the CoI.

The next section discusses the findings in light of extant research.

6. Discussion
The importance of situating WBS within a wider instructional strategy has been recognised (Granlund et al., 2000). However the importance of community-based learning approaches, such as the CoI framework, to support WBS for disaster studies in a higher education context has received little attention. To contribute to understanding in this area, a review of extant literature and interviews with educators and practitioners with extensive expertise in simulation and disaster studies were undertaken. Our findings showed that each of the three CoI presences were found to support WBS deliver effective disaster studies in higher education, and highlighted a range of elements that require particular attention from a disaster studies and WBS perspective. These findings are summarised in Table 2 and discussed in light of extant research below.


Table 2. Using the CoI framework to support WBS in disaster studies.

CoI elements	Example in current study	Disaster studies elements	WBS elements
Cognitive presence
Triggering event	Introduction of the disaster-related scenario such as a slum upgrading project	Ensure:
-
Focus on “hard” and “soft” skills

-
Acquisition and application of discipline specific knowledge

-
Understanding how discipline specific knowledge contributes to resolving trans-disciplinary disaster problems (i.e. visibility and implicit coordination)

-
Critical reflection on theory and practice of communication, leadership and team building

Ensure:
-
Realistic experience

-
Design curricula for diverse cohorts with varying needs and experience

-
Leverage learning analytics to support learning

-
Authentic assessment

Exploration	Research details on disaster via online news articles and social media
Integration	Probe for understanding and misconceptions using face-to-face debriefs after the WBS
Resolution	Submission of assessment task comprising recommendations for future disaster response

Social presence
Affective	Expressing moods, feelings, attitudes towards complex disaster events	Ensure:
-
Build psychological safety when operating in uncomfortable disaster situations

-
Address student diversity to support cohesiveness and engagement in disaster scenarios

Support:
-
Experimentation and learning from mistakes in a safe environment

Open communication	Class reflection to provide relevant and constructive responses to a small groups' outcomes from a WBS
Cohesiveness	Establish commitment to purpose of CoI by ensuring students familiar with their roles and responsibilities in the disaster simulation

Teacher presence
Design and organisation	Designing learning activities that provide sufficient time for both WBS and debriefing session as the latter is often where most learning occurs	Focus on:
-
How students approach disasters from their different disciplinary perspectives and where they agree or disagree

-
Balance need for safe and trusting classroom with need to reflect harsh reality of complex disaster environments

-
Internationalising curricula to ensure relevance of disaster scenarios to all learners

Focus on:
-
Addressing foundational knowledge and concepts prior to WBS

-
Responding to technical concerns

Facilitating discourse	Facilitate discussion before, during and after WBS to confirm understanding and diagnose misconceptions paying particular attention to contextual issues in disaster
Direct instruction	Management of feedback and assessment including if this is undertaken within or outside the WBS
First, critical thinking and practical inquiry (i.e. cognitive presence) was important in enabling students to acquire and apply specialist discipline knowledge (e.g. Dubovsky et al., 2017; Mendonca et al., 2019; Thayaparan et al., 2015) and to experience what it is like to participate in cross-disciplinary teams to resolve ‘wicked’ problems in disaster studies (Godemann, 2008; Madrigano et al., 2017). Second, the value of supporting an open, lively and trusting environment that encourages students to engage with the curricula, their peers and the teacher (i.e. social presence), was observed (Garrison, 2016; Li, 2015). Encouraging affective expression, open communication and group cohesiveness was considered critical to engender trust and ultimately maximise student learning when tackling problem-based disaster studies curricula (Garrison, 2016; Hayes, 2015; Ioannou et al., 2015; Salas et al., 2008). Third, teachers can ensure that the benefits of WBS are optimised while the limitations are minimised through the design and organisation of disaster studies curricula, facilitation of discourse and direct instruction (i.e. teaching presence) (Garrison, 2016). In particular, it was found that it is important that teachers ensure higher education students focus on the acquisition of foundational knowledge and are not distracted by WBS technology (Purvis et al., 2016).

Many of the findings of this study in relation to the three presences of the CoI are likely to apply to educational contexts beyond WBS and disaster studies. There were, however, a number of issues identified that are particularly important in WBS and disaster studies. For example, in terms of cognitive presence, interviewees emphasised that visibility and implicit coordination are critical for cross-disciplinary teamwork in disaster (Godemann, 2008; Hayes, 2015); as is a focus on soft skills such as communication, leadership and team building (Densten & Gray, 2001; Hayes, 2015; Tena-Chollet et al., 2017). Further, it is important that WBS experiences are realistic (Andrews et al., 1995; Straus et al., 2019), cater to diverse cohorts (Richard, 2017; Thomas & May, 2010) and provide for authentic assessment (Gulikers, Bastiaens, & Kirschner, 2004). For social presence, affective expression, open communication and group cohesiveness are arguably of greater significance in disasters where lives are at risk (Edmondson, 1999; Salas et al., 2008). Ensuring sufficient psychological safety is paramount in disasters (Edmondson, 1999) and social presence should support students to have the self-confidence to experiment within WBS and learn from their mistakes in a safe environment (Rudolph, Raemer, & Simon, 2014). In terms of teaching presence in disaster studies, embedding WBS in the CoI framework was considered valuable as it can support teachers balance a safe environment with the harsh environments where students will eventually operate (Australasian Fire and Emergency Service Authorities, 2018; Lancer et al., 2016). Early research in CoI recognised the need to provide technical support, however, this was treated as a relatively minor consideration within teaching presence— possibly because technology at the time was less complex and technical support was provided by support staff (McKerlich & Anderson, 2007). The availability of more sophisticated technology and the expectation that teachers take on more of the responsibility for the technology used in their classrooms today, may explain participants' emphasis on the need for teachers to respond to technical issues.

7. Conclusions and future research
Given the growing number of students undertaking higher education and the increased reliance on technology to deliver curricula, embedding technology within wider educational approaches is critical to maximise learning outcomes (Cannon-Bowers & Bowers, 2009). Motivated by the increasing demand for WBS and disaster studies curricula worldwide, this study undertook a review of extant literature and an analysis of expert interviews with educators and practitioners to identify how the CoI framework can be used to support effective use of WBS in disaster studies.

This is the first study undertaken at the intersection of CoI, WBS and disaster studies in higher education. While previous studies have investigated CoI and WBS in higher education they typically have not focused on the disaster context (e.g. Burgess et al., 2010; McKerlich & Anderson, 2007). Similarly, research investigating WBS in disaster studies typically have not focused on CoI concepts and are often undertaken in contexts outside of higher education (Hayes, 2015). The paper therefore offers an original contribution to research by demonstrating how cognitive, social and teaching presence as originally described in the CoI framework (Garrison et al., 1999) apply to the WBS and disaster context; and through highlighting elements of WBS and disaster studies that require particular attention within a CoI. For practice, the paper offers guidance for those considering using the CoI to support WBS in disaster studies.

The research has a number of limitations. The empirical analysis was based on a small number of interviews and future research might employ both quantitative and qualitative methods to capture a wider set of perspectives. The paper has not elicited the student perspective and it would be valuable to investigate students' experiences of CoIs when using WBS in disaster studies to better understand the challenges and opportunities involved. Our study was designed to capture the perspective of educators and practitioners using a variety of different WBS. While this offered the advantage of demonstrating how the CoI framework can support different approaches to WBS in a range of higher education settings, we have not undertaken an in-depth case study of a specific WBS in disaster studies. Such a study has the potential to advance understandings on this topic and offers a useful avenue for future research. Future research should continue to explore the intersection of CoI, WBS and disaster studies, in both theoretical and empirical ways.


Appendix A. Summary of participant experience, types of simulation, educational context and types of learners


Table A1. Summary of educator expertise, types of simulation, educational context and types of learners.

Title	Expertise	Types of simulation	Education context	Type of learners
Associate professor, information systems	Over 25 years of experience in information systems. Has undertaken numerous projects which integrate simulation into higher education courses. Has also provided professional development in simulation for colleagues.	Uses simulations for education, training and assessment in the context of health and wellbeing and crime. Simulation used to promote technical and procedural skills, with learners considering the preparation and response phases of disaster. Simulations involve verbal role play, virtual reality, full computer, blended, and fully immersive WBS. Simulation exercises involve observation through to full participation by each learner.	Simulation usually takes place in a classroom. Simulation is undertaken by individuals and in teams. Learners receive feedback in real time from the instructor and simulation systems.	Crime assessment professionals and psychology students. Learners range from novice undergraduate students through to expert practitioners with years of experience acquired from the field.
Professor, architecture and engineering	Over 15 years of experience in humanitarian aid and post disaster reconstruction. Focuses on the role of technology and innovation in complex situations. Extensive experience in using simulation in teaching practice and has worked across Asia and Africa.	Simulation used for training on the impact of natural hazards on infrastructure and the built environment in an international development context. Simulations are used to promote decision making and technical skills. Simulation focuses on the phases leading up to and following a disaster event. WBS are fully immersive and conducted online.	Simulations take place in a classroom and an incident control centre. Simulation is undertaken by individuals and in teams. Learners are assessed on the submission of a post-simulation debrief.	Students undertaking architecture degrees and practitioners working in post-conflict and post-disaster organisations. Learners have diverse levels of knowledge and skills.
Professor, construction engineering	Over 25 years of experience in construction engineering and management. Main focus is on disaster risk reduction, project management and strategic planning.	Simulations used to develop learners' critical thinking and conceptual understanding of construction management, as well as to teach technical skills (how to follow correct procedures and use equipment) and behaviours (safety measures). Simulations primarily focus on the preparedness phase of disaster. Simulation technologies range from verbal role play through to fully computer-based and immersive WBS environments. Sometimes all learners participate and other times small groups participate while others observe.	Simulation primarily occurs in a classroom environment. Learners usually work in groups. Learners receive feedback from the instructor but also receive and provide peer feedback.	Higher education students from different disciplines including construction management, engineering, business and international development. The experience level of learners is diverse ranging from novice to experienced.
Professor, resilience psychology	Over 30 years of experience in higher education. Expert in disaster preparedness, response and recovery. Simulation central to teaching practice.	Simulation used for education and training in the context of natural hazards occurring on infrastructure, networks and the built environment. Simulations aim to promote critical thinking around the complexity of disaster and to teach decision-making skills. Simulations focus on the response and recovery phases of disaster. Simulation is usually WBS, fully online and involves a mix of observation and full participation.	Simulation takes place remotely and in classroom environments. Learners work individually and in groups. Learners submit post-simulation debrief reports.	Undergraduate psychology students and emergency services employees. The former typically have few skills/little experience in disaster. The latter come from diverse disciplines, are of diverse ages and usually highly skilled.
Senior lecturer, architecture and disaster resilience	Over 25 years of experience in disaster risk reduction, housing hazards and post-disaster reconstruction. Extensive fieldwork experience in Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Philippines, Bangladesh, Indonesia and Pacific Islands.	Simulation used for training learners on the impact of natural hazards on infrastructure and the built environment in an international development context. Simulations used to develop decision making skills as well as technical skills and focus on the preparation and response phases of disaster. Simulation technologies vary from face-to-face through to WBS but usually involve role play and comprise a mix of learning by participation and observation.	Simulation occurs in the classroom. Learners work both individually and in groups. Learners receive and provide peer feedback	Master and undergraduate students in property construction management, architecture and international development. Undergraduate students typically have limited skills while master students have more skills gained from working in the field.
Senior lecturer, decision making and disaster risk reduction	Over 15 years of experience in disaster risk reduction in the built environment. Primarily focuses on hazard mitigation strategies and multidisciplinary integration of decision-making processes in the built environment.	Simulations used for training learners in the context of natural hazards and the built environment. Simulations used to teach decision making and technical skills. Simulation focuses on preparation and response phases of disaster. Various simulation technologies used and range from face-to-face through to WBS technologies. Simulation exercises typically involve role play and comprise a mix of observation and full participation.	Simulation takes place in the classroom. Learners work both individually and in groups. Learners receive and provide peer feedback.	Learners are final year undergraduate students in civil engineering. Some students have developed skills based on work experience on construction sites but many have no previous construction experience.
Senior lecturer, electrical engineering and computing	Over 10 years of experience in communication and information technology. Focuses on the application of information technology on security with simulation being integral to teaching practice.	Simulation used for education and training primarily in the context of infrastructure, business and networks. Simulation targets the development of hard and soft skills. Simulation usually focuses on preparation for disaster events. Simulation technologies primarily involve virtual reality where all learners fully participate online via WBS.	Simulation takes place in the classroom within a dedicated simulation suite. Learners work individually and feedback is provided via a post-simulation debrief.	Students from information technology or business degrees with diverse levels of knowledge and skills.
Senior lecturer, information systems	Over 10 years of experience in the design and development of information systems in business. Has developed and used a range of innovative simulation technologies for teaching.	Simulation is used for education, training, and experimentation. Simulation mainly occurs in the context of logistics for industrial, transportation, infrastructure and network environments, as well as for cyber hazards. Simulations aim to promote decision making skills, with learners managing the disaster event both prior to and after its occurrence. Simulations are fully computer-based with full participation required from each learner via a WBS system.	Simulation takes place in classroom. Learners complete the simulations individually and in teams and are provided feedback from the instructor and simulation system.	Students in logistics who are usually novices.

Table A2. Summary of practitioner expertise, types of simulation, educational context and types of learners.

Title	Expertise	Types of simulation	Education context	Type of learners
Architect, environmental and humanitarian projects	10 years of experience as an architect in UK and Africa, with a focus on disaster simulation (including WBS), sustainable housing and community-based housing projects to support low carbon design.	Simulation training used to promote effective decision-making by those working on humanitarian projects across all phases of natural and man-made disasters. Simulation is immersive where all learners participate fully.	Simulation occurs individually and in groups. Simulation takes place in a dedicated control suite. Verbal feedback provided by the instructor via a debrief following the simulation.	Learners are people who serve in the military and work in government offices and come to the simulation with a primarily theoretical understanding of disaster.
Independent consultant, disaster management simulation	Over 10 years of experience working as a training and development consultant to emergency management organisations with a particular focus on organisational team building and decision making with simulation being a key approach.	Simulation training on decision-making across all phases of disaster. Simulation involves role play and sand table techniques with an increasing focus on online simulation, including WBS. Simulation designed to enable different levels of participation whereby sometimes all learners participate but other times a small group participates with those remaining learning via observation.	Simulations take place in work place training rooms of disaster agencies and typically conducted in small teams within and across agencies. Feedback is primarily provided by the instructor to learners but also relies on automatic feedback built into the online simulations.	Learners are employees in disaster agencies who have various levels of experience from recent graduates through to highly experienced senior managers.
Manager community engagement, emergency volunteer organisation	Over 10 years of experience across Australia as an emergency response official. Expertise in natural hazards, disaster risk reduction, animal management during disaster events, risk communication and community engagement.	Simulation used for training on decision-making across all phases of disasters. The focus is primarily on natural hazards. Approaches used vary and include WBS but emphasise role play and require full participation from each learner.	Simulation takes place in workplace training rooms where learners work in teams. Verbal feedback provided by the instructor as part of the training.	Learners are emergency service workers and primarily volunteers.
Manager, disaster prone community health organisation	Over 30 years of experience dealing with flood and fire hazards in the Australian context. Significant expertise in community health in areas affected by bushfire with an emphasis on provision of disaster welfare for vulnerable people, particularly children.	Simulation, including WBS, used to train learners in the context of terrorism and natural hazards with an emphasis on the development of technical skills and decision-making skills. The primary focus of the simulation is on rescue and recovery. All learners participate in a fully immersive simulation.	Simulation takes place in a classroom as well as a dedicated control suite. Learners usually work on the simulation individually with verbal feedback provided by the instructor as part of the training.	Learners comprise employees of family and community services organisations and emergency-services agencies who have some experience in disaster from the field.
Manager disaster recovery programmes, international NGO	10 years of experience working at an international NGO as a member of the national emergency services team with responsibility for supporting disaster recovery programmes across Australia and migration resettlements in Southern East Asia.	Simulations used to promote technical and decision-making skills in the context of natural hazards, infrastructure and networks with an emphasis on the recovery phase of disaster. Fully immersive simulations (including WBS) are undertaken with full participation from each learner.	Simulation undertaken by learners individually in both a classroom environment and dedicated control room. Informal feedback provided by the instructor during the simulation.	Learners are students undertaking a range of university degree programs (e.g. medicine, engineering, public administration) and NGO employees and who are skilled and have some field experience.
Manager, emergency management software provider	Over 10 years of experience as municipal emergency manager in Australia. Founded a software firm that has developed a platform to support local government and businesses maintain their operations across all phases of disaster.	Simulations are used to deliver training that promotes critical understanding, decision-making skills and soft skills across all phases of disaster. Approaches used include verbal role play, table top, fully computerised WBS utilising virtual reality technology. Simulation exercises require full participation by each individual learner.	Simulation takes place in a dedicated control suite. Verbal feedback provided by the instructor as part of the training.	Learners are from various public and private emergency-based organisations and have experience in disaster from the field.
Manager recovery and reconstruction, humanitarian organisation	Over 15 years of experience in international development and humanitarian work with NGOs in Asia, Africa and the Middle East. Significant expertise in shelter and settlement for refugees, along with recovery and reconstruction activities in post-disaster and post-conflict emergencies.	Simulation used for training learners in the context of natural hazards and post-conflict environments with a particular focus on child protection and operations management. Simulations used to promote technical and decision making skills in learners in the preparation through to recovery phases of disaster. Simulation technologies include WBS, are fully immersive and require full participation from each learner.	Simulation takes place in both a traditional classroom and dedicated control suite. Learners typically work individually on the simulation task. Verbal feedback is provided by the instructor as part of the training.	Learners primarily people who serve in the military and work in government offices and come to the simulation with a primarily theoretical understanding of disaster.
Manager, sustainable communities	Over 20 years of experience as a social worker with communities and vulnerable groups. Currently manager of a community based organisation that aims to strengthen community resilience in Australia by increasing disaster preparedness and supporting disaster recovery following a disaster.	Simulations used for training on decision making and operational procedures across all phases of disaster, for example, in the context of coordinating evacuations and recovery centres. Simulations also used for developing soft skills such as managing stakeholder relationships. Approaches include verbal role play, fully computer-based WBS with a focus on virtual reality and involve full participation from each learner.	Simulation occurs individually and in groups. Simulation takes place in a dedicated control suite. Verbal feedback provided by the instructor as part of the training session.	Learners are skilled community services and emergency management employees.
Appendix B. Themes and sub-themes (categorisation matrices extracts)


Table B1. Extracts from categorisation matrices.

Theme	Sub-theme	Example quote
Cognitive presence	Critical thinking and intuition	“We also want the simulator to generate quite a few unintended consequences because that's the exactly the problem that we've got with these sorts of [disaster] situations…” (Professor, Architecture and Engineering).
Practical inquiry	“…The other way [to introduce the triggering event] is just taking people into a real life situation. And showing them and pointing out to them, how this related to people's health, to sorts of family structures, to poverty, to their nutrition, to education within the community” (Professor, Architecture and Engineering).
Social presence	Affective	“You have to get things wrong before you get it right and a simulator provides a nice, safe environment for you to do that. One of the reasons students ask me about programming is they're very apprehensive, they're afraid of breaking something. But with a simulator that's not going to happen… Students ask, ‘what happens if I put this here instead of what I've got now?’ My answer is, ‘try and see what happens, that's how you learn for yourself.’” (Senior Lecturer, Information Systems)
Open	“You could be having individual students' work on this simulation system or small groups and then have some feature that might support sharing of what everyone else did what was the outcome.” (Senior Lecturer, Information Systems)
Cohesion	“In simple terms, it's knowing who knows what. In a team, the argument is that, one of the things is familiarity but also knowledge of actually important processes, particularly in a more functional team, is knowing who knows what can be really valuable for making decisions.” (Independent Disaster Management Simulation Consultant)
Teaching presence	Design and organisation	“I usually go backwards, so work out learning outcomes, build an assessment around that and from the assessment work out what the students need to know to be able to carry out the assessment and start looking at some ways at including that as features into the simulator and developing tutorials, which I guess you would consider as training or user manuals.” (Senior Lecturer, Information Systems)
Facilitating Discourse	“It's important for an educator, that you try and involve everybody within a group. One of the things that would be quite hard to do, doing it by distance, is, Bob or Beatrice who is not really saying much or participating, how you pick up on that and encourage them to get a little bit more involved or give them the feeling that their view is relevant and worth chipping into the discussions.” (Senior Lecturer, Decision Making and Disaster-risk Reduction)
Direct Instruction	“What we typically do with the simulation that we run is that we'll have interventions, quite a lot of them, that we can do at certain points depending on how the simulation is going…. If we think they [learners] are getting ahead of the others or getting issues in the team or if there are a whole bunch of things… We have certain set ups through it to actually highlight some of the sorts of issues in the field that we know of.” (Professor, Architecture and Engineering)
