Further conceptualisations are needed that consider students' actual engagement with and perceptions of Twitter for learning. To address this gap, an optional Twitter learning activity was created for a UK-based cohort of Year 1 Physiotherapy students. However, students did not contribute in this medium. Forty-three participating students were surveyed, and two focus groups held. These methods explored: 1) the frequency of student self-initiated use of social media, focusing on Twitter, 2) students' perceptions of Twitter, and 3) factors that would discourage or facilitate students' use of Twitter for learning. Results suggest students perceive Twitter as a platform where student knowledge and power is subordinated to leading Twitter users from relevant disciplines or professions, but also as a platform for enhancing career/business. To this end, a ‘digital information activation’ (Dig-Info-Act) pedagogy for social media is suggested: that is, a pedagogical orientation towards a critical analysis of and acting upon social media information.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Twitter

Social media

Students' perceptions

Higher Education (HE)

Learning

1. Introduction
1.1. Twitter as a social media feature: general impact and tertiary education potential
The proposition that social media have penetrated deeply into our lives is no longer hype, nor does it identify a fad. Social media engagement statistics for 2016 show a staggering 1.71 billion monthly active users of Facebook and 313 million Twitter accounts worldwide (Statista, 2016). However, it is also fair to say that these figures are unevenly spread across the world. The global social network penetration rate, as of January 2016, was 31%, with 11% for Africa and 6% for Central Asia. A significant number of users are located in the United States (U.S.). The Pew Research Centre reports that Facebook is the largest social networking site in the U.S., reaching 67% of U.S. adults. Two-thirds of Facebook users seek news on the site, amounting to 44% of the general population (Gottfried & Shearer, 2016). A much smaller percentage of the U.S. population uses Twitter (16%), but, relative to the number of registered users, more turn to Twitter for news than to Facebook – 9% of the general U.S. population. These statistics illustrate that Twitter is a resource not yet as firmly embraced as its older relative, Facebook (Facebook was founded in 2002 and Twitter in 2006). The present article will not provide fuller historical and statistical data on social media and Twitter, since others have reported this elsewhere (e.g. Roblyer, McDaniel, Webb, Herman, & Witty, 2010). Rather, what the present article emphasises is that users have extended social media activity beyond original purposes quickly (e.g. status updates revealing what users are doing at some given moment), and appropriated social media to serve many other purposes: for example, activism (Earl, McKee Hurwitz, Mejia Mesinas, Tolan, & Arlotti, 2013) and education.

Many studies have considered the potential of social media in Higher Education (HE), as part of the students' educational experience (e.g. Ebner et al., 2010, Kanjanapongpaisal et al., 2012, Fox and Varadarajan, 2011). However, there remain uncertainties in terms of exactly what kind of contribution to learning social media can claim to make. For example, it is argued that students rarely use social media to support their studies (Forkosh-Baruch & Hershkovitz, 2012). Furthermore, students are reported to resist the idea of “mixing” social media with learning, wanting to preserve boundaries between the “academic” and the “social” (Rinaldo, Tapp, & Laverie, 2011). Nonetheless, it is claimed that while Facebook may enhance better psychosocial outcomes (Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2011), Twitter may support better academic outcomes (Junco, Heiberger, & Loken, 2011).

In sum, there is no consensus on the impact of social media in education. Such “impact” is approached from various vantage points in HE, spanning across disciplines, methods and aims. Some commentators have argued that the “great” potential of social media in education might fail in its adoption “to have any real impact” in HE (Roblyer et al., 2010, p. 138; Forkosh-Baruch & Hershkovitz, 2012). In addition, Greenhow and Lewin, (2016), p.7, quoting Eynon and Malmberg, 2011, Ito et al., 2008 state that “only a small proportion of young people are actually using social media in sophisticated ways that educators might value (Eynon and Malmberg, 2011, Ito et al., 2008”. Although there are useful publications that offer advice on what works and what steps to undertake for successful social media and technology integration in HE (e.g., dating back to Chickering and Ehrmann (1996)), related pedagogies have not become as widely spread as might have been expected. This means that social media applications and interventions are still happening mostly as individual projects rather than at the level of adopted institutional or departmental learning and teaching strategies. However, research on the educational potential and practices of social media has been thriving. As Selwyn and Stirling (2016, p.3) emphasise, “(f)rom the establishment of Facebook groups in university math courses to the use of Twitter as an in-class ‘back-channel’, any academic journal interested in educational technology and educational media is now replete with discussions of the educational potential of social media”. These authors also contend (p. 3) that “there continues to be a tendency amongst education studies of social media to look primarily for good news, ‘best practice’ and examples of ‘what works’ (see Piotrowski, 2015)”. More studies are therefore needed to further understand and critically conceptualise the actual use of social media in HE pedagogy (Selwyn & Stirling, 2016), considering its properties and how students perceive it (Henderson, Selwyn, Finger, & Aston, 2015). This would be beneficial for creating a better-rounded picture of social media-for-learning in HE, adding to the existing body of knowledge. Far less research has been carried out on Twitter for HE learning than on Facebook. The present article mainly explores this medium.

1.2. Twitter in HE learning: a brief landscape
There has been no wide adoption of Twitter to support learning among students (Evans, 2013, Rinaldo et al., 2011). However, where it has been adopted, mixed findings exist regarding the effect Twitter may have on student learning (Knowlton & Nygard, 2016), depending on the approach taken to that learning. Some suggest that using Twitter can increase overall student engagement with regard to both extracurricular and curricular activities (Evans, 2013, Junco et al., 2011). In addition, it has been highlighted that Twitter can be an innovative pedagogical tool in HE (Blessing et al., 2012, Rinaldo et al., 2011). To illustrate such pedagogical use, the tutor in one study, a Twitter novice, created a subject-related Twitter account and advised students to follow that account (Rinaldo et al., 2011). In responding to this opportunity, those students emphasised the value of Twitter as a “career preparation” tool. The authors also noted some ‘negative’ student attitudes, such as: resistance to use Twitter due to issues of personal credibility (students risk seeming incompetent); privacy (no mixing of “social” and “academic” life, no mixing with the tutor in social media); a lack of knowledge on what the tool is and why it should be used; a struggle with demystifying Twitter symbols; and understanding what Twitter has that Facebook does not (Rinaldo et al., 2011). Henderson et al. (2015) problematise the use of Twitter for learning further, reporting that although nearly half of their student sample (n = 1658) do use Twitter for academic study, only 14.5% find it “useful” or “very useful”. In a similarly critical manner, results show that Twitter can bring no substantial difference in levels of student-reported learning engagement (Welch & Bonnan-White, 2012). On the other hand, positive outcomes of Twitter use in HE learning are shown in relation to more particular learning contexts and goals. Examples would be: the collaboration, information sharing and community building of distance learners who might follow a particular hashtag (#) (Ricoy & Feliz, 2016); an improved student sense of community (Ross, Banow, & Yu, 2015); and augmenting content, such as linking course topics with current news and activities for use both outside and inside large classes, albeit not for active student discussion and feedback (Jacquemin, Smelser, & Bernot, 2014). In all the above cases that report positive Twitter influences on student learning, the tutor/instructor's role is stressed. This signals the necessity of highly supportive, interventionist roles for a tutor (e.g., the tutor will react when there is little or no tweeting, or when there are problems - technical or otherwise).

Having considered the current landscape of Twitter studies in HE, the leading question for the present study was: What happens if students are given enough information and support at the outset, but still need to decide for themselves whether they will contribute or not with tweets to their module hashtag (#) thread, as an additional learning activity? To be clear: in order to view a hashtag thread, users combine a # symbol with a particular theme/topic name in the Twitter search tab to see a thread of tweets that have embedded that # and theme/topic. Here this topic was the module's acronym and module-related content. The main difference between this intervention and other Twitter interventions reported in the literature is the focus on maximum initial instruction but minimal tutor interference or instruction during the study – unless students asked specific questions. Furthermore, the tutor-hashtag (#) creator in the present case has many followers belonging to physiotherapy discipline and profession which could provide the students with access to an extended pool of knowledge and experiences. So, when students have an opportunity to contribute to a dedicated, extra-curricular module hashtag under the above-mentioned conditions, what do they report as motivating or demotivating in relation to their contributions? These questions determined the study design, alongside the need to further conceptualise Twitter as an educational opportunity. That is, to develop an understanding of what counts as ‘useful’ to students, to explore how they perceive the Twitter resource and what that might mean for a pedagogy with Twitter and social media in HE. These considerations defined the overarching aims of this study. The authors were also concerned to explore whether students expressed any requirements for tutor intervention and the “embedding” of Twitter activity into the course. In this study, students were encouraged to contribute to Twitter outside the lecture theatre after an initial introduction and available support, with the possibility to discuss tweets at the beginning of lectures. Any decision to contribute was entirely in the hands of the students, with minimal tutor/teacher interference.

1.3. The study aims
Accordingly, this research was focused on four inter-related research questions (RQs):

•
RQ1. What is the frequency of student-reported use of the internet and related social media, both in general and in relation to learning?

•
RQ2. How do students perceive Twitter as a general social media platform and, more particularly, as a platform for learning?

•
RQ3. What are student-reported obstacles and enablers with regard to Twitter for learning?

•
RQ4. What implications can be detected for the practical and critical use of social media and Twitter in HE pedagogy?

2. Methodology
2.1. Study context
The study setting was a Year 1 compulsory module forming part of an undergraduate degree programme (BSc in Physiotherapy) at a UK HE institution. The module was entitled ‘Evidence Based Practice (EBP) 2’. A module-specific hashtag (#EBP2) was created. In addition to the regular lectures and seminars, discussions under the hashtag were encouraged (questions/comments/sharing of information and links) for a period of eight weeks. The project was introduced to a Year One physiotherapy cohort of 43 students by two researchers, one of whom was a part of the teaching team on the module. To avoid any conflict of interest and participation pressure, it was particularly stressed that levels of engagement would not affect students' final module grades.

2.2. Twitter activity
Following each weekly lecture, a #EBP2-tagged question relating to that lecture was tweeted for students to respond to. This question was tweeted by the contributing teacher-researcher. A few times at the end of the lecture, the tutor/teacher encouraged students to tweet. He observed any subsequent Twitter activity and would contribute to conversations linked to #EBP2. The students were advised to ‘follow’ the tutor who tweeted questions, and to ‘follow’ each other. There was no further specific modelling of Twitter use by the teaching staff, which was in line with departmental culture and policy and was standard pedagogical practice for modules that are taught by a number of tutors. Beside initial in-lecture instruction and examples of how Twitter can benefit student learning, a detailed document on how to use Twitter was emailed to students and comprehensive support offered, including face-to-face meetings, although no student requested these. To reiterate, bound by the rules of standard instruction, the study relied solely on:

•
Students' engagement of their own accord.

•
Lecturers encouraging students to tweet or reminding students about it from time to time.

The module hashtag could be accessed by a wide range of physiotherapy practitioners and academics, namely, the many followers of the tutor-researcher. Those practitioners were actively contributing to the hashtag, reacting to the module questions the tutor tweeted. It was supposed by the authors that this big pool of experts would inspire students to join, ask questions or comment. On the contrary, the results reported here suggest that this became a factor that stifled contribution.

2.3. Participants
The study received research ethics approval from the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Ethics Committee at the university where the study took place. In the Year One cohort, there were 43 students. The average age of the cohort was 21 years with 34 of them aged between 18 and 20 years, and nine over 21 years. There were 30 female and 13 male students. Twenty-seven students did not own a tablet device, and six did not own a smartphone.

2.4. Questionnaire
Before the creation of the hashtag and its implementation, the teacher-researcher asked all the Year 1 students taking the module (n = 43) to fill in a questionnaire related to their use of social media and portable devices, distinguishing between use for personal reasons (e.g. entertainment) and for academic learning purposes (e.g., learning something related to their module, course or general interest within the profession). The questionnaire gathered evidence to address RQ1 and consisted of three parts: Part 1: Demographic information (2 items on gender and age); Part 2: Technology use, with six items; Part 3: academic engagement, with three items. The results of Part 2 are reported here. An example of a Part 2 item is: “Please indicate how often you use the following Web 2.0 platforms for personal purposes (i.e., chatting and communicating with friends/family, organizing social events, posting updates about your day-to-day life, following friends/family, reading updates about favorite celebrities/writers/businesses/sports teams, etc.)”, followed by a table with a list of platforms such as Facebook and Twitter with six-scale frequency response options from “Daily” to “Never” (the results we report in Table 2, Table 3 in Section 3.1 are linked to Part 2 questions). Quantitative data from students' questionnaires were generated and tables created based on the survey responses.

2.5. Focus group
Following the end of the eight-week study period, two focus groups were conducted with 12 student volunteers (six male, six female), all in their early twenties. These participants were recruited through an email sent to students' university email addresses. This was in addition to information about the project given out at the end of the project implementation period, during breaks. The targeted students attended the EBP module. All volunteers were active users of smartphone technology. The purpose of the focus groups was to explore students' perceptions of Twitter for learning and their reactions to the Twitter intervention hashtag that was intended for their active engagement (relating to RQ2). In particular, the authors were interested to uncover the reasons behind contribution or non-contribution: that is, student-reported obstacles and enablers for the use of Twitter for learning (relating to RQ3). The questioning of focus groups adopted the following format:

Engagement questions (10 min)

“Can you give us a brief account of how you use social media, generally?”

“Do you use social media and Twitter to support learning related to your University course?”

Exploration questions (30 min)

(If they do not use Twitter in learning): “can you comment on why not?”

“What do you think would motivate you to engage in using Twitter for learning?”

“So, in relation to the EBP Twitter stream, why did you not feel motivated to engage?”

Exit question

“Is there anything else you would like to comment on about either Twitter in learning in general, or about the #EBP?”

Conversations were audio recorded. Each student was given a pseudonym to protect their identity. Audio recordings were transcribed verbatim.

2.6. Focus group content analysis
A thematic analysis approach (Vaismoradi, Turunen, & Bondas, 2013) was adopted. The following coding procedure in line with this approach (Vaismoradi et al., 2013, p. 402) was applied:

•
Familiarising with the data:

Transcribing data, reading and rereading the data, noting down initial ideas.

•
Generating initial codes:

Coding interesting features of the data systematically across the entire data set, collating data relevant to each code.

•
Searching for themes:

Collating codes into potential themes, gathering all data relevant to each potential theme.

•
Reviewing themes:

Checking if the themes worked in relation to the coded extracts and the entire data set, generating a thematic map.

•
Defining and naming themes:

Ongoing analysis for refining the specifics of each theme and the overall story that the analysis told, generating clear definitions and names for each theme.

•
Producing the report:

The final opportunity for analysis. Selection of vivid, compelling extract examples, final analysis of selected extracts, relating back to the research questions and literature, producing a report of the analysis.

2.7. Study limitations
The project is inevitably limited in scope: it builds on the data from a case study, provided by a small group of students from a single module at one university. However, the sample is representative of Year 1 students on one entire programme. Furthermore, the students were encouraged to speak on behalf of the group and friends, i.e., the “student population”, not just to report their personal opinions. The students were frequently asked during the focus group: “Do you think that this is a general feeling or attitude among students and your peers?” The aim was to uncover students' perceptions of their peers' general use of technology, not any particular observation of it. Therefore, students were asked about the nature of their peers' uses of technology (particularly Twitter) as derived from their own experiences and from peer interaction.

3. Results and discussion
At the end of the eight weeks of hashtag intervention, there was only one student tweet. This lack of contribution might have been for a variety of reasons. For example, other class requirements may have been more pressing or students may have participated as observers of the hashtag and thereby gained useful insights. However, in this article, our focus is on understanding why they did not actively contribute with their own tweets and what would motivate them to do so. As it happens, the hashtag developed a life of its own and many physiotherapy professionals, and even a few students from other universities, were actively tweeting, possibly due to the tutor-researcher's considerable Twitter networks. The content of tweets contained a large number of critical questions and commentaries.

Two major themes relating to our research questions were identified in the analysis of student questionnaires and focus group transcripts. The analysis characterised Twitter obstacles to student contribution as “technology use obstacles” and “obstacles related to the perception of Twitter”, the latter theme gathered around the concepts of “career/profession” and “celebrification”. A list of “enablers” was also identified, that is, what most students thought and/or agreed would encourage them to use Twitter for learning.

3.1. Obstacles relating to technology, social media use and Twitter as ‘not for learning’
Questionnaire data showed that six students out of 43 did not own a smartphone. This result reminds us that it still cannot be presumed that all students would own such a commonplace digital device, even if this seems to be a socio-cultural imperative for younger generations in most western societies. Furthermore, the majority of our respondents (27 out of 43) did not own a tablet device. All these factors are important when considering the implementation of microblogging (Twitter), and perhaps any social media, for learning, since Twitter is a particularly smartphone/tablet-friendly platform. Social media require constant smartphone connectivity (e.g., 3G or 4G). When planning and making broad claims on technology use and benefits for students' learning, one cannot overlook the question: “Benefits for whom?” The study took place in the UK, a country with 26.4 million reported smartphone users (not even a half of the UK population of approximately 64 million) in 2014 according to the Statista portal. The distribution of smartphone and tablet owners in other parts of the world may differ dramatically. Therefore, it must be acknowledged that this study concerns Twitter and social media for learning in a particular Western context.

Table 1, Table 2 below shows that Facebook is still by far the most popular social media: almost all students (95%) use it daily for personal interest and often for learning purposes, albeit 35% never do so (Table 2).


Table 1. Frequency of selected SM use for personal interest and networking purposes (N = 43).

Daily	Once a week	2–3/week	Every few weeks	Monthly or less	Never
Twitter	12	3	4	0	1	23
Facebook	41	0	1	0	0	1
LinkedIn	0	0	0	1	0	42

Table 2. Frequency of selected SM use for learning purposes (e.g., subject/profession related; accessing academic resources and information) (N = 43).

Daily	Once a Week	2–3 /week	Every few weeks	Monthly or less	Never
Twitter	0	3	1	1	7	31
Facebook	5	5	6	6	6	15
LinkedIn	0	0	0	1	1	41
Twitter, on the other hand, was never used for personal interest and networking by 53% of the students (Table 1), and the majority of students (72%) never used it for learning purposes (Table 2), in line with studies reported earlier (Evans, 2013, Rinaldo et al., 2011).

In terms of the type of activities that students do with their mobile devices (Table 3), approximately half of the participants (51%) reported never using their mobile phones for study-related tasks. However, the majority did the internet browsing and used e-mail, text and social media on a daily basis (Table 3). These findings support the “big data” findings by Henderson et al. (2015) on student (non-)use of technology for learning. The question of where and how students make this studying/non- studying use and content demarcation remains. In spite of the growing research and arguments in favour of the application of mobile phones for learning in HE (Gikas & Grant, 2013), such applications may still be rare. This may be so, since those devices and social media have not become a significant part of teaching-learning methods. Therefore, first obstacles for using Twitter for learning are the ones related to established patterns of pedagogy and learning habits related to social media and mobile device use, as well as to students' typical learning environment.


Table 3. Frequency of using mobile devices (phones/smartphones/tablets) for different purposes (N = 43).

Daily	Once a week	2–3/week	Every few weeks	Monthly or less	Never
Texting	43	0	0	0	0	0
E-mailing	29	0	3	2	2	7
Social media	33	0	3	0	0	7
access/interaction						
Internet browsing	31	0	6	0	0	6
Study-related reading, browsing, performing	5	4	4	3	5	22
The most puzzling result to the authors was that 12 out of 43 students used Twitter for personal reasons on a daily basis (and three used it once a week for learning purposes) but they still chose not to contribute in this project. Possible reasons behind this non-contribution, reported by 12 students in two focus groups, are discussed below.

3.2. Obstacles relating to the perception of Twitter
3.2.1. The “business” of Twitter: Twitter as a career vehicle
In line with Rinaldo et al. (2011), students predominantly saw Twitter as a social media platform for boosting employability and career. The following extracts illustrate this view:

Tiffany: I found Twitter very useful for business because it's so simple to tweet stuff. I know people who use Twitter extensively for their business and they get loads of work out of it.

Olivia: And when you've got a specialism as well then you've got more of an interest, yeah.

Oscar: It's also about employability as well. I′m aware of some students who have their own personal account and they look almost professional….

Feeling the need to “economise” and “prioritise” which learning resources to use, students told us that Twitter had the status of “just one more social medium” juxtaposed with Facebook. Students thought that Facebook had already gained widespread use among student population as a platform that can support their learning in some way and viewed Twitter as a career vehicle. Such a view was an obstacle to their engagement in Year 1, since they thought it was too early to think about their career.

If Twitter is viewed as an employability tool, this may mean that it is less likely to be viewed as related to the “curriculum” and, hence, it is not understood as a learning tool. Such a view that separates employability from curriculum has been noted elsewhere (Speight, Lackovic, & Cooker, 2013), as reported bystudents and tutors. Students may prioritise those tools and resources that help them to get a degree in line with perceived institutional learning requirements (Molesworth, Nixon, & Scullion, 2009). Perceiving Twitter as a “business tool” is not a new or a bad idea. For example, Comm (2010) advises businesses “how to dominate your market one tweet at a time”, Bulearca and Bulearca (2010) clearly call it a “business tool” and Loudon and Hall (2010) discuss how the use of Twitter moves from trivial to business. The problem is that if some educators do see value in using Twitter for learning, then they may need to have strong and compelling arguments for doing so and support in practical ways their students' understanding of such learning potential. Otherwise, Twitter only adds to the graduate “employability” – “curriculum” division, where enhancing one's employability is positioned outside the curriculum, (yet another debate that will not be opened further here).

Instead, a question is raised in this article as to whether students need to recognise another role for Twitter that they did not mention: namely, the one of “new (digital) social movements” (Bennett, 2012), where people of common interests gather to engage in Twitter discussion and activism around multiple causes, a Twitter role mentioned at the beginning of this paper. Not all “activist” uses can lead to envisaged and desirable changes but some might have a solid potential for ameliorating issues of social and economic injustice (Bennett, 2012). It is not clear to what extent this understanding of social media is seen as being needed in HE pedagogy. Most studies focus on classical learning outcomes and the various factors that support learning, as presented in the first part of our paper. Studies that look at students' engagement with Twitter in relation to social/community actions and pressure for change are scarce. Related publications concerning Twitter activism (such as by Hands (2011)) target students of politics and media. However, these social issues concern all students as conscientious citizens and members of their communities and societies, not just a particular student group. Why is this understanding important?

There is much uncertainty surrounding the understanding of student engagement and participation in general (Ashwin & McVitty, 2015). This study considers one (commonly overlooked) aspect of engagement with Twitter: namely, its potential as a social media resource supporting learning and critical evaluation of social media content - as contrasted to its “business” function. In addition, the study stresses the limited perception of the “activist”, “change indicting” (Hands, 2011) and inequalities-perpetuating (Selwyn & Stirling, 2016) characteristics of Twitter as compared to its “business” character. Students saw Twitter as an “entertainment, news, business and career” tool, not as a tool for the public and curriculum communication that can be critically analysed and related to social change. The main message that students carried forward from their social media training sessions was the cautionary tale of social media disasters and dangers. This is, of course, a proper matter for students to be fully aware of, but it is of some concern if this is the dominant approach to social media that students adopt. So there is a need to explore, conceptualise and theorise this issue further. Indeed, one is right to be cautious of ideological and other “dangers” of social media engagement that, according to Schneider and Goto-Jones (2014), can reinforce “cyber utopia” visions and serve as surveillance and control mechanisms. However, the present article argues that social media issues such as social justice, socio-cultural networks and capitals, change, evidence, ideology, information access and visibility, power and discourse need to be a part of student learning with social media, either as a part of extra-curricular (or preferably curricular) social media information and sessions. Power relations are ingrained in societies and education is no exception to this. Students' resistance to participation arising from “power” issues is tackled in the next section.

3.2.2. The “Celebritification” of Twitter: A tension of knowledge and power
The major obstacles to engagement and contribution that were expressed by all were around students' perceptions of Twitter as a platform for the more knowledgeable, experienced and powerful users of this tool: the group here called ‘Academic and Professional Twitterati’ (APT). The term “Twitterati” refers to keen and frequent users of the service. Students mentioned several times people who they saw as leading Twitter figures - in relation to their discipline - using such constructs as “top physios” or “crème de la crème”. Indeed, Twitter communication seems to be strongly led by the apt, established practitioners, leading individuals or organisations, and avid social media users in various professions and academic fields. They often have a large pool of ‘followers’, or those users who track their profiles and react to their tweets. The number of novices actively tweeting (such as Year 1 undergraduates) is questionable; those that do engage are probably technology savvy and are social media enthusiasts. Such professional-novice positioning on Twitter that privileges someone's knowledge and status and hence power (Apple, 2013, Giroux, 1988) are embodied in the following students' statements:

John: It is also about the credibility of the person who is tweeting as well? Because you've got to be careful because you might have a person whose level of knowledge you don't know.

Tiffany: I might want to follow top physios….

Oscar: I only write something if I genuinely feel that I′ve got a valid argument about it because you wouldn't want a wishy-washy argument. So, it's important who tweets, you want to learn from crème de la crème.

Students were ‘bothered’ by the issue of credibility and status. They positioned themselves as “less competent” against the APT in the medium of Twitter/the Twittosphere (Rinaldo et al., 2011). Such “subordinate” positioning evokes concern about how hierarchical status and power are reproduced in society, education being yet another site of that struggle (Apple, 2013). Indeed, HE is just one more stage of tutor-student positioning, where issues of “resistance and power” surface even in initiatives that aim to “empower” students and give them “voice” (Seale, Gibson, Haynes, & Potter, 2015). The resistance that Seale and colleagues discuss is the same kind of resistance noted in this study: students' reluctance to participate actively, in spite of the “planned” learning benefits. It may be that the tutor-researcher's large pool of followers and their contributions to the hashtag conversation outside the student group discouraged students from participating, rather than providing more opportunities for reaching out and engaging with practitioners and experts around the world - as it was envisaged. What the authors thought was a unique opportunity to engage with international experts via the module hashtag, the students may have experienced as overwhelming and intrusive, which may have added even more to their feeling of subordination. In a similar vein, Seale et al. (2015, p. 547) link this power issue to a lack of “ownership” and “expertise” from the students' side. Indeed, ownership is hard to achieve if students perceive Twitter as a space for experts that they do not belong to. First year undergraduate students are experiencing a challenging educational transition into the world of Higher Education, where they are positioned at the periphery of disciplinary and practical expertise, which may be yet another reason why they chose not to contribute. Indeed, results might be different if the students were in their final year of university. As signaled by Knight and Kaye (2014), when it comes to HE, Twitter might be more suitable for academics and final year students. In terms of academic staff, it can mean academic professional power that enhances individual research profile and visibility. Academics are under pressure to increase the public “impact” of their research and it is steadily becoming clear that Twitter can help (Knight & Kaye, 2014). With an increase of such “APT” individuals dominating Twitter, Year 1 students may remain resistant to contribute to and follow up on Twitter communication, unless they become “owners” of learning initiatives, as it will be presented in the following section.

3.3. Enablers: what may help students use Twitter for learning
In terms of what would encourage novice students to use Twitter for learning, a list of the factors most prominently mentioned by our focus group students was compiled. Their strong feeling was that they needed their tutor's help to create a ‘Twitter learning habit’. Students talked about the need for a tutor's ongoing instruction: thus answering our question as to whether Year 1 students desired tutor intervention for recruiting social media into learning: yes, they did. The need for a tutor's instructional support in modelling the activity has been confirmed here, in line with Ross et al. (2015). Another central theme for enabling student contribution was around their sense of “ownership”, just as Seale et al. (2015, p. 547) reflect. The following are the “enablers” that students identified:

Student ownership

•
Students create a twitter hashtag/profile, manage and develop it themselves; the tutor adds personal and networked expertise later in the process.

•
Students lead and manage peer-to-peer engagement, having designated hashtag or profile “moderators”.

Tutor instructional lead

•
Encourage # or profile content that is relevant to students' levels of understanding and prior knowledge.

•
Discuss course papers with a twist: i.e. tweet a related challenge.

•
Provide clear and regular in-classroom encouragement and announcements: e.g., announcing post-session tweeting at the end of each session.

•
Provide examples of more ‘learning-friendly’ types of tweet. For example explaining the difference between: 1) a tweet that expresses some critical commentary in 140 characters and a 2) re-tweet of a link to a resource.

•
Suggest interesting and relevant profiles to ‘follow’; invite students to identify some themselves and discuss it.

•
Use Twitter as an embedded lecture method – Twitter streams/tweets/profiles are streamed and referred to by the lecturer during a lecture.

The suggestions here relate to and add to other existing principles of what works with Twitter and social media (e.g., Chickering & Ehrmann, 1996), cautious of any attempts to make “one size fits all” lists. Applications and effects of the reported suggestions will depend on many contextual factors, such as subject/discipline, students' year of study, and institutional micro-culture. Furthermore, there may be obstructing factors such as standardised practice requirements, as in our case, and/or limited lecturer's time. All the enablers above are student-perceived triggers for engagement that might lead to learning. Whether they can be pursued or not depends on the micro-level of student-tutor relationship, subject field culture and practice, individual beliefs, the meso-level of departmental pedagogical culture and policy, as well as the macro-level of institutional and government policy. If we add to this that the use of social media by young people is “complex, convoluted and contradictory” (Selwyn and Stirling (2016) quoting Boyd, 2014, p.4), neat suggestions on what works in learning with social media become more complicated. What is stressed here is that tweet information needs to be critically activated in order to lead to learning. This is discussed in the next section.

4. Implications for the use of Twitter (and social media) in HE learning: Digital Information Activation (Dig-Info-Act) towards action and change
Dealing with the obstacles and enablers above is not where this learning story ends, it is where it begins. An approach, that is here termed “Digital Information Activation” (Dig-Info-Act) Pedagogy, is introduced to challenge the perceived dominant business and power roles of Twitter. This approach stresses the need to “own and act upon” any online information, so that it could be transformed into learning and/or change. The “acting” in question needs to be framed within a critical attitude and an orientation, not only towards action upon information in the learning context, but also towards a possibility for action in real life. The approach is sketched and described in this section as an initial outline, needing further development and conceptualisation.

Why is the word “activation” used? In many cases the information on social media, including Twitter, is simply not “activated” to be transformed into learning. What the claimed social media contribution to students' learning might actually resemble more the use of social media in the form of ‘updates’, ‘trends in the field’, electronic “word of mouth” (Jansen, Zhang, Sobel, & Chowdury, 2009), or ‘providing and sharing information’ in a “talk” form. Karlin (2007, p.7) claims that nearly ‘60% of high school students who use social networking talk about education online, and more than 50% talk about specific school work and information location’. Such student “talk” might serve to ‘lubricate’ the sense of belonging to a group of learners and lead to learning. Yet, an important question is whether such talk counts as learning. It depends on how learning with social media is defined.

Just accessing information on Twitter (on social media and online) might not lead to any significant learning or transformative effect. In terms of academic development (e.g. at a basic level evident in formative or summative assessment), this development can be activated if the student acts upon information (i.e. provided in a tweet or tweet thread) in some way, supported by the tutor, via an expressive mode. Just scrolling down and passing on information can be a form of learning experience, but its depth is questionable. This concern with “using” something in the manner of information passing reflects Shepherd's (2010) worry that “we're all becoming very good at passing interesting information on from one to another, but not actually reading and reflecting on any of it.” It has been noted that people increasingly re-tweet comments with links without looking into the link content (Carrigan, 2015). This signals “social media fatigue” (Shepherd, 2010). What matters in social media for learning is how the social media “access” to information is applied further, that is, how tutors and students do “information activation” to lead towards learning and hopefully towards learning for critical and informed action. Indeed, learning manifests itself beyond the achievement of grades via students' socio-cultural and community presence, relations and identity; it entails creative practices, socially just engagement with the world, curriculum, future prospects, visions and an open horizon of possibilities and capabilities.

A Digital Information Activation Pedagogy requires discussing with students what online (here tweet/microblogging) contribution means in practical, learning and critical terms and where it can lead to, but it cannot be too rigid or prescriptive either. Twitter hashtag (#) search can provide different information sources and experiences from a wide range of users and contexts which represents different information contextualisation. In that respect, students' understanding is enriched once they engage with just a couple of different contextual contents (expressed in tweets) on the same topic/concept (searched by hash tag #). This is in line with Ross's (2011) idea on concept learning as an understanding of the contextual variations and particularities where a concept is realised. Such contextual exploration can be a starting point for critical digital information activation pedagogy. This critical “Dig-Info-Act” pedagogy combines critical media literacy (Kellner & Share, 2007) with the idea of students as active producers of content, research and artefacts (Neary & Winn, 2009) in relation to teaching-learning practices. It intends to support students to “dig out” relevant digital “information”, explore and evaluate that information critically, and finally “act” to activate the found information via creative and productive practices. This acting evokes Chickering and Ehrmann's (1996, p.3) “active learning techniques”, as they argue that “Learning is not a spectator sport”, but means talking, writing reflectively, relating to past experiences, applying in daily lives. To elaborate: student creative practice could involve creating an “outlet” for the reflection on information and further exploration, such as reflecting on a tweet thread in a blog commentary, in a multimedia format (e.g. a video, combining pictures and language commentary), in a formal assignment or any other student-preferred medium or artefact of expression.

To open possibilities for critical pedagogy and to challenge students' positioning of “subordinates” of Twitter, a tutor can encourage student joint ownership of hashtags or profiles and discussions on the social effect of a Twitter thread or news in relation to knowledge, power, race, region, religion, nationality, equality, community and society needs and actions. This critical pedagogy involving Twitter resembles the idea of “technoliteracy from below”, that is, a pedagogical initiative to look out for and legitimise “…counter-hegemonic needs, values and understanding (…) as opposed to the largely functional, economistic, and technocratic technoliteracy “from above” that is favoured by many industries and states (Suoranta & Vadén, 2007, p.159, quoting Kahn & Kellner (2006)”. However, if it persists at the individual rather than collective organisational level, this pedagogy will not turn into a culture that leads to noticeable learning or social change.

Above all, students need to feel free not to engage with Twitter for learning or any other purposes. Whatever they decide, there will be some sort of exclusion though: by participating and contributing, they will exclude the ones who do not want to and/or cannot do so; on the other hand, the non-contributors are excluded from a possibly potent well of information and learning opportunities.

5. Conclusion
This article provides some insights into how a group of Year 1 undergraduate physiotherapy students perceive Twitter and its role in their learning. Our findings show that few students use Twitter for social purposes and a vast majority never use it for perceived ‘learning’ purposes. In addition, mobile devices are rarely used for academic study. With regard to the module hashtag created for their course, the students chose not to contribute to it. The dominant student reflection on the possible reasons behind this outcome was the distinction of ‘Twitter’ as an artefact for the celebrity-like, knowledgeable (and intimidating) Twitter users (Academic and Professional Twitterati (APT)) as well as an artefact for developing careers, which they can focus on later. Such perception demarcated students as less knowledgeable, powerful and capable, the “subordinate” positioning which is here problematised. It is argued that it would be beneficial if students were informed on various possible uses of social media and Twitter, either as a part of their social media training or within courses, such as examining Twitter discourse and information critically and in relation to social justice. With regard to formal learning, Year 1 students wanted a tutor's help to create the tweeting habit and to provide examples of what counts as learning with Twitter. They also shared insights on the “Twitter for learning” enablers that are proposed to be embedded within a critical “digital information activation” (Dig-Info-Act) pedagogy with Twitter and social media in HE, an approach introduced here. Further studies, nationally and internationally, are needed to explore, develop, conceptualise, confirm or critique the perspectives developed here, especially in relation to different disciplines and student year of studying, “APT”, student “subordination” and “Dig-Info-Act” pedagogy approach.
