On-campus students are requesting online course options, and campuses are increasingly providing online sections of core courses, with a common offering involving online science lectures accompanied by on-campus lab courses. However, low course completion rates by on-campus students in online courses have become an area of concern. This study seeks to identify factors associated with unsuccessful online course completion and withdrawal by investigating course completion rates in an online physics lecture course. The authors use eight years of data (N = 3032) to establish lecture course completion patterns then compare these patterns with three semesters (N = 940) of a hybrid course combining online lecture with face-to-face laboratories. Deviations from established patterns are identified and student characteristics which are uniquely associated with unsuccessful course completion and withdrawal in online sections are isoloated. Differences in rates of students repeating the class, lower rates of repeating student completion in online sections, and early disengagement by repeating students are found to be important. Results imply the need for early course interventions and/or potential policies regarding repeating students.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
On-campus

Online

Course

Completion

Repeating

Policies

1. Introduction
The demand for online course offerings has steadily increased with almost 5.3 million university students taking at least one online course in 2013–14. In conjunction with increased enrollment, over 70% of academic leaders indicate online learning is critical to their institution (Allen & Seaman, 2015), and view online course offerings as a potential solution to issues associated with a lack of classroom space, increased educational costs, and student demand for flexible learning options (Hart, Friedman, & Hill, 2015).

Increases in online activity are not without challenges and controversy. Xu and Jaggars (2011a) reference the ongoing debate between researchers, practitioners, and policymakers concerning the effectiveness and promise of online learning. This debate has traditionally focused on higher withdrawal rates and lower successful completion rates by off-campus students in online programs (Carr, 2000), and much of the research has focused on non-traditional and/or graduate level students (Rovai, 2003). However, as larger universities increase online core course offerings to on-campus students, the online attrition problem has come to the forefront as a potential on-campus issue. Administrators recognize that as more students in traditional undergraduate academic programs choose to enroll in a mix of face-to-face (f2f) and online courses, higher withdrawal and non-completion rates in online courses could have the potential to negatively impact retention and graduation rates for on-campus students (Jenkins, 2012).

To support this concern, recent research with undergraduate students demonstrates that successful course completion is lower in online class sections than in traditional f2f courses (Hart et al., 2015, Xu and Jaggars, 2011a). Similarly, subject-specific undergraduate course research indicates withdrawal and completion rate differences between f2f and online course sections are even more pronounced in lower-level Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses (Wladis, Hachey, & Conway, 2013). Findings such as these have led some to suggest freshmen are ill-prepared for online courses (Urtel, 2008), gated advisement is necessary in undergraduate online courses (Clay, Rowland & Packard, 2008), and undergraduate students should avoid lower-level online science and math courses (Smith, Heindel, & Torres-Ayala, 2008).

While these studies are important and can inform policies and practices, much of the research to date concerning undergraduate online courses has not involved lower-level STEM courses, and those that have focused in this area have primarily occurred at small institutions (Atchley, Wingenbach, & Ackers, 2013), within the community college setting (Wladis et al., 2015a, Xu and Jaggars, 2011b), or with students who are primarily at a distance as opposed to on-campus (Boston et al., 2011, Finnegan et al., 2008). Additional research is needed to fully understand the withdrawal and completion patterns of the growing number of on-campus undergraduate students at larger universities who elect to take lower-level STEM courses online as part of their overall academic program.

This study seeks to fill this gap by using ten years of data to establish lecture course completion and withdrawal patterns within a lower-level science lecture course at a large research university. These data are then compared to data from recent online sections of the same science lecture course in an attempt to identify deviations from expected patterns, and to isolate on-campus student characteristics uniquely associated with course completion and withdrawal in the online sections.

2. Literature review
Researchers have demonstrated that the consequences of course withdrawals or failures are costly to both the student and the institution (Simpson, 2005, Wischusen et al., 2011). Hart et al. (2015) have extended this understanding to assert that the benefits derived from the offering of online courses may not be enough to offset the costs associated with course non-completion or failure. As large institutions increase offerings of online core undergraduate courses to on-campus students, it is important to consider the potential costs of such actions by revisiting research findings related to online course completion patterns, particularly in lower-level STEM courses which have been shown to have the highest levels of non-completion and withdrawal rates (Atchley et al., 2013, Wladis et al., 2013). Similarly, it is important to reexamine existing research concerning student characteristics traditionally associated with non-completion and withdrawal of distance students within online courses, as these characteristics may prove relevant to understanding completion and withdrawal rates of on-campus students who choose to mix online and f2f courses as part of their academic programs.

2.1. Online completion and withdrawal rates
Although meta-analyses have indicated online environments are as instructionally effective as the traditional classroom (Means et al., 2009, Wu, 2015), if students are not completing online courses, instructional effectiveness cannot be adequately determined and any positive benefit of instruction is overcome by the negative impact of non-completion. There is a general consensus that withdrawal rates in online courses are higher than in f2f courses (Atchley et al., 2013, Boston et al., 2011, Diaz and Cartnal, 2006, Hart et al., 2015, Levy, 2007, Murphy and Kenner, 2016, Newbury, 2013, Rovai, 2003, Tello, 2007), with researchers reporting 10–40% higher dropout rates in online courses than in f2f classrooms (Borcoman, 2004, Carr, 2000, Dziuban et al., 2004, McLaren, 2004, Paden, 2006, Patterson and McFadden, 2009).

These dramatic findings have brought withdrawal rates to the forefront of the conversation concerning online course effectiveness, and have led scholars such Lee and Choi (2011) to assert that withdrawal rates in online courses must be scrutinized and addressed. To further emphasize this point Jenkins (2012) states, “Unfortunately, we seem to have forgotten that access and completion are not the same thing. Simply getting more students to enroll isn't going to help much if too few of them ever finish” (para. 9).

Coinciding with the need to reduce withdrawal rates is the desire to increase the rate of successful (grade = A, B, C) versus unsuccessful (grade = D/F) online course completion. Similar to withdrawal rates, researchers report that successful course completion is lower in online class sections than in traditional f2f courses (Hart et al., 2015, Urtel, 2008, Wladis et al., 2014a), with some researchers simultaneously investigating both completion and withdrawal rates. As an example, in two extensive studies, Xu & Jaggars concurrently examined course completion and withdrawal rates of nearly 24,000 Virginia and over 50,000 Washington state community-college students. Both studies reported significantly higher instances of course withdrawal for students in online courses, with course completion rates in online course sections 8–14% lower than in face-to-face counterparts (Xu and Jaggars, 2011a, Xu and Jaggars, 2011b). As the aforementioned studies indicate, withdrawal and completion rates are historically lower in online versus f2f courses overall.

2.2. Completion and withdrawal rates in online STEM courses
In addition to lower overall withdrawal and completion rates, Patterson and McFadden (2009) suggest that these rates may also be disproportionately impacted based upon discipline. Researchers investigating specific subject areas have found that academic field of study does play a role in online completion and withdrawal rates, with science and math courses more negatively impacted than other disciplines (Atchley et al., 2013, Carnevale, 2003, Paden, 2006, Smith et al., 2008, Wladis et al., 2014a, Wladis et al., 2013). More specifically, subject-specific results indicate that both withdrawal and completion rate differences are more pronounced in lower level STEM courses (Hachey, Wladis, & Conway, 2015), which has led some scholars to suggest that lower-level STEM courses such as lab science and math courses may not be appropriate for online delivery (Carnevale, 2003, Nelson, 2006, Paden, 2006, Smith et al., 2008). Other researchers disagree that lower-level STEM courses are inappropriate online course subjects. Rather, they assert that these courses are less successful because of characteristics associated with the students who take these courses, not because of the course subject matter (Wladis et al., 2015a, Wladis et al., 2015b, Wladis et al., 2014a).

2.3. Student characteristics associated with completion and withdrawal
Meyer, Bruwelheide and Poulin (2009) have suggested that, “Given such variation in experience with retention rates, it remains important to ask what keeps online students enrolled” (pg. 130). Researchers have answered this call to action by exploring a variety of student characteristics potentially associated with online completion and withdrawal. Findings suggest that various student demographics such as age, gender, rank, and academic readiness impact online course completion (Aragon and Johnson, 2008, Hare, 2013, Hart et al., 2015, McLaren, 2004, Twigg, 2009, Urtel, 2008). As a specific example, Wladis et al., (2015a) found that women had higher rates of completion in f2f as compared to online STEM courses, and within the online STEM courses older students had significantly higher completion rates than younger counterparts.

Contrary to the aforementioned studies, Lee and Choi (2011) performed a thorough review of empirical studies related to student withdrawal in online courses from 1999 to 2009, and they report that demographic characteristics such as age and gender do not significantly contribute to low course completion rates. Rather, they suggest that student factors such as academic background, skills, and relevant online experiences are strongly related to the successful completion of online courses. More specifically, they assert that students with a history of poor academic performance, low technology skills, and no online course experience are more likely to enroll in online courses, but are much less likely to successfully complete them.

Supporting the assertion that prior experiences are important, Hachey, Wladis, and Conway (2015) demonstrate that students who have successfully completed a previous online course have a significantly higher chance of successfully completing an online STEM course than those who have either withdrawn from or unsuccessfully completed a prior online course. Similarly, research from Poellhuber, Chomienne and Karsenti (2008) finds that students with a history of poor academic performance choose to enroll in online courses over f2f courses, but have significantly higher rates of withdrawal than those of similar academic history who choose to enroll in the f2f courses.

2.4. Differences in student demographics
Previous research indicates that student demographics play a role in influencing completion and withdrawal rates. However, much of what we know about the relationships between student demographics and success in online courses may not apply to lower-level online STEM courses taken by traditional on-campus students. Early research on retention has focused on online programs, as opposed to courses, and has been primarily performed on graduate level students who are at a distance (Meyer et al., 2009, Patterson and McFadden, 2009, Rovai, 2003, Willging and Johnson, 2009). In contrast, lower-level online STEM courses are taken by undergraduate on-campus students who are choosing to take a course or two online to complement the majority of their academic courses which are taken in an on-campus f2f classroom environment.

Descriptions within the research of distance students indicate they differ demographically from traditional on-campus students in that they are typically 25 years of age or older, female, employed full-time, in school part-time, and often have excessive commitments outside of school that make it impossible for them to come to campus and utilize campus resources (Boston et al., 2011, Diaz, 2002, Rovai, 2003). On the contrary, national statistics indicate the majority of traditional on-campus students are between the ages of 18–24, full-time students, employed 10 h or less per week, and come to campus multiple times per week (Kena et al., 2015). The demographic differences between distance and on-campus students are substantial and have the potential to limit generalizability of previous findings to this new group of online students.

More recent student demographic research related to online completion and withdrawals has occurred within the community college setting. Although community college students come closer to resembling on-campus four-year student demographics in that very few (3%) are enrolled in an online degree program and most community college students maintain a mix of online and f2f enrollments (Jaggars, 2014), they tend to be non-traditional in demographic makeup. They are more likely than four-year college students to be 25 or older, to attend school part time, and to be employed fulltime (Kena et al., 2015). This has led researchers such as Hachey et al., (2015) to assert that differences in student demographics within the community college and four-year institutions make it difficult to generalize findings related to online learning across these settings.

2.5. Summary and need for study
Previous research indicates that unsuccessful completion and withdrawal rates in online courses are higher than in traditional f2f counterparts, and that this difference is exacerbated in lower-level STEM courses. Findings also demonstrate that specific student characteristics such as rank and prior online success impact completion and withdrawal rates for students who are at a distance and/or community college students. However, little is known about completion and withdrawal rates in lower level online STEM courses that are targeted toward an on-campus student audience. Additional research is needed to better understand undergraduate online STEM course completion rates, and to determine if previous findings regarding the impact of student characteristics on completion and withdrawal rates in online courses for distant students are applicable to the growing population of on-campus students who are choosing to take a mix of online and f2f courses. Further, this study provides additional insight into the effects of online education by making a very controlled modification to a well-understood course with an academically successful on-campus student population; thus minimizing the influence of course implementation while accessing a population of students often underrepresented in studies of online education.

3. Research questions
To investigate factors associated with course completion and withdrawal rates of on-campus students in an online physics lecture course two research questions were pursued. First, the authors sought to establish historical course completion patterns within a Physics 2 lecture course; then identify deviations from this pattern within multiple concurrent online and f2f sections of the course. Second, the authors sought to identify which, if any, student characteristics influenced completion and withdrawal rates within the online sections of the Physics 2 lecture course.

4. Methodology
This study used multiple sources of data from students enrolled in an undergraduate physics course at a large public land-grant university serving approximately 25,000 students in the southern United States. The course studied was the second-semester, calculus-based physics course taken by physical scientists and engineers. All students taking the course had already demonstrated academic capability by successfully matriculating through the required pre-requisite courses Calculus 1 and Physics 1; therefore, any differences between f2f and online course outcomes could not be the result of students without the requisite academic capability or ability to function in the college environment.

The course was offered on a semester schedule common in the US with three semesters each year: fall, spring, and summer. Only spring and fall semesters were included in the study. Both spring and fall semesters included approximately 15 weeks of instruction followed by a final exam period. Fall semesters began in late August and ended in mid-December; spring semesters began in early January and ended in early May. Students were required to elect both the lecture and laboratory segments of the course.

The class was offered in the same format for the eight-year period from fall 2004 to spring 2012. During this time, the same lead instructor taught the course and managed all assignments associated with the course including laboratory activities. This eight-year period, during which N = 3032 students were enrolled, will be used to provide the historical rate at which students succeed in the class. Students taking the class for honors credit were not included in the study. During this period, the same lead instructor gave two 50-minute lectures each week in a large lecture theater. Class sizes varied from 90 students to 350 students. Lecture attendance was managed with a “Lecture Quiz” that featured one to two questions. Students were required to submit two homework sets each week; one at the beginning of each lecture. Because of the restricted amount of lecture time (most physics classes are presented with three 50-minute lectures per week), the lecture was very traditional with little enrichment in the form of demonstrations or active engagement activities. All students were required to attend two two-hour laboratory sessions each week. These sessions featured a rich mixture of activities including hands-on conceptual inquiry, small group problem solving, interactive teaching assistant (TA)-led demonstrations, and traditional physics experiments. The lead instructor managed TA training for these laboratories and the course maintained close coordination between laboratory and lecture. Lecture and laboratory were tightly integrated with the lecture (and the video lecture) often introducing upcoming laboratory exercises or discussing the outcomes of previous experiments. While some non-traditional students were enrolled in the class, the student population for the class was predominately 18–22 year old traditional on-campus students. Most students were enrolled in multiple on-campus courses concurrently with the class studied, and therefore issues of distance or disconnection from the campus community could not account for the results of the study. The student population was representative of that found in large research-focused universities in the US.

The university under study had identified online education as a core strategic priority which facilitated the introduction of online lecture sections of the course studied. In the fall 2012 semester, in preparation for the offering of online sections of the lecture in the spring 2013 semester, video of the lecture was recorded and made available to students. Students were allowed either to attend the f2f lecture and complete the lecture quiz or to watch the lecture on video, fill out an online form stating that the lecture had been watched, and complete the lecture quiz online. Students elected to watch different levels of the video lectures and analysis of course outcome data showed that while weaker students elected higher levels of video use, the change in student performance between when no video was available to when the video option was available was not significantly affected by the amount of video use (Murphy & Stewart, 2015). As such, the recorded video provided an educationally equivalent experience to the f2f lecture.

Beginning in spring 2013, students could elect online sections of the lecture component of the course which required them to watch the lecture as a recorded video instead of attending the lecture f2f. This study will compare student outcomes for the three semesters spring 2013-spring 2014 when the online lecture sections were available to the outcomes previous to the introduction of the video option from fall 2004 to spring 2012. Great care was taken to provide the online lecture students with an equivalent experience to the f2f students. The lecturer for the course had instructed the course for over a decade before the lecture videos were recorded and, therefore, his lecture presentation was well rehearsed. Videos of the lecture were recorded in an empty classroom to eliminate distractions sometimes present in lecture capture. The lecturer brought any manipulatives used to illustrate concepts to the filming sessions and those viewing the recorded lectures had, in general, a better view of these illustrations than most students watching the f2f lecture in the large lecture theater. The lecturer included the questions he would ask the class in the videos along with answers to questions his long experience anticipated would be asked. In all ways, this experienced educator believed the video experience was an equivalent or superior experience to the f2f experience.

The only additional modification of the course after fall 2012, beyond having some students watching the lecture on video, was a small change in the homework policy. The due date of open-response homework which was submitted on paper was changed from the beginning of the f2f lecture to the end of the last f2f laboratory section for each week of the class. This change was implemented so that online lecture students were not required to come to the lecture room to submit their homework. All students were required to attend two two-hour laboratory sessions each week, a policy that was unchanged by the introduction of the online lecture sessions. As such, the introduction of the online video lecture option converted a fully f2f class to a class that students could either elect as a completely f2f class or as a blended option when the online lecture class was paired with the f2f laboratory session. Because the class had been presented by the same instructor in the same format for so long, the change to the class is exceptionally well-controlled with online students receiving educationally equivalent instruction; therefore, the differences in the classes observed could not be attributed to the quality of the educational offering.

The course presented was, then, a hybrid course where the students spent the majority of their contact time in the f2f laboratory setting. This segment of the class was considered the most important for student learning and engagement because of its smaller class size, inquiry-based experiences, and opportunity to interact with teaching assistants and other students in an informal setting. The online lecture experience mimicked as much as possible a traditional lecture experience. The online experience was, therefore, a fairly un-enriched online experience and could possibly have been improved by a number of technical elements such as discussion boards or the use of collaborative tools to allow students to ask questions in real time. The results of this study may have been modified if a richer online experience was provided.

Online and f2f lecture students completed the same homework assignments, laboratory assignments, and completed common examinations. The only difference in assignment structure was that the online students completed slightly more lecture quiz questions because one question was associated with each segment of lecture video. Online and f2f students were also completely integrated in laboratory sessions.

This study will examine course outcomes measured by the final grade earned in the course, “A”, “B”, “C”, “D”, or “F” and whether the student withdrew from the course earning a “W”. Student engagement of withdrawing students will also be explored by examining how many of the four in-semester examinations were completed and what fraction of the non-examination assignments were submitted for grading. Non-examination assignments include lecture quizzes, homework, and laboratory assignments.

Most students taking the class were engineering students (81%) who required at least a grade of “C” in the class to matriculate in their major. Therefore, successful students were defined as those who received an “A”, “B”, or “C” in the class. The successful completion rate for the class was defined as the ratio of the number of successful students to the number of all students enrolled in the class including students who withdrew from the class receiving a “W” on their transcript and is reported as a percentage.

The online lecture section was primarily developed to conform to the university's commitment to extend its online offerings. However, because of the hybrid nature of the course requiring two f2f laboratory meetings each week, the developers expected that most students taking the course would be traditional on-campus students who either could not get into full f2f sections or who wanted to take a course that conflicted with lecture. To investigate student motivation for selecting the online option, a survey was given mid-semester in spring 2014 to determine why students elected the course. For students enrolled in the online lecture section who completed the course, 80% (N = 43) of the students completed the survey. Unfortunately, due to the short persistence of withdrawing students, no student who withdrew from the course completed the survey. Of the responding students, 41% indicated they took the online section because the f2f section was full, 36% because the f2f lecture conflicted with another course, 16% because they liked the flexibility of the online lecture, 5% because work or personal commitments conflicted, and 2% because they believed they learned better online. Students were also asked if they would switch to the sections if it was possible; 61% of online students would switch to f2f while only 17% of f2f students would switch to online. These results seem to indicate that the students taking the online class did so for reasons consistent with a traditional on-campus student population (classes full or class conflicts) not because of the flexibility or need to balance work commitments that would be consistent with a largely commuter or non-traditional population.

5. Analyses and results
To analyze the successful completion (A/B/C), unsuccessful completion (D/F) and withdrawal (W) rates multiple analyses were performed. These rates are plotted for the fall 2004 to spring 2014 semester with online and f2f lecture sections identified in Fig. 1. Online lecture section students were less successful, received grades of D or F at a higher rate, and withdrew at a substantially higher rate than f2f lecture students.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (214KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Successful completion, D/F, and W rates plotted against fall 2004 to spring 2014 semesters for online and face-to-face course sections.

Fig. 2 demonstrates the effect of overall course grade average on student success. The grade average was calculated in the normal manner by assigning a final grade of A = 4, B = 3, C = 2, D = 1, and F = 0 and then averaging over all students for the semester. Students who withdrew were not included in the calculation. For semesters with online lecture sections, the grade average was calculated separately for the online and f2f students. Results indicated the online lecture students performed more weakly overall in the class; however, they were also less successful than the trends established before the online option would predict. The lines plotted in Fig. 2 represent the linear regressions for the f2f sections for all semesters. The online student data points were well below the regression line for successful completion and well above the regression line for withdrawal. Also noted is the difference of the dependence on class grade average between the D/F plot and the W plot suggesting that these outcomes should be treated separately in future analyses of course completion.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (236KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Successful completion, D/F rates, and W rates for the fall 2004 semester to the spring 2014 semester plotted against average grade earned by the class.

The differences between the online and f2f student performance were explored with three separate analyses. First, the online and f2f sections from the spring 2013 to spring 2014 semesters were compared directly with a t-test; this showed the successful completion rate was significantly different for the online and f2f lecture sections, t(3.86) = 6.23, p = 0.004. However, the D/F rate was not significantly different for the f2f and online sections, but the W rate was significantly higher for the online sections, t(2.01) = 8.08, p = 0.015.

One can also compare the online sections with the complete ten year measurement of f2f sections. The online lecture sections had a significantly lower successful completion rate than the f2f sections, t(2.99) = 7.28, p = 0.005. The D/F rate was also not significantly different for f2f and online pooling of all f2f sections; however, the W rate was significantly higher for the online sections, t(2.33) = 6.83, p = 0.014.

The plots in Fig. 2 show a temporal effect with the success rate trending somewhat upward with time and the D/F and W rates somewhat downward. The origin of this effect is unknown; the lead instructor could identify no changes in the class or the student population which would explain the trend. Because there was a trend in the data, pooling all semesters may overstate or understate the effect of the online experience. To correct for the trend while still pooling all semesters of f2f data, the residuals for each semester in reference to the plotted regression line were calculated, then a two tailed t-test was performed to determine if the online students' outcomes were different than the f2f students. t-tests indicated that the residuals for the successful completion rate were significantly different, t(2.65) = 6.32, p = 0.011, as was the D/F rate, t(3.37) = 3.68, p = 0.028, and the W rate, t(2.32) = 6.78, p = 0.014.

To further explore these effects, linear regression was performed with the class grade average and the online status coded with zero for f2f and one for online as independent variables. For successful completion rate, the regression yielded a statistically significant model, R2 = 0.86, F(2,20) = 63.02, p < 0.001, and the online status was a significant regression coefficient, B = − 11.2, t(17) = − 5.16, p < 0.001, indicating the online students were successful 11% less often than f2f students correcting for class grade average. A similar analysis yielded R2 = 0.85, F(2,20) = 54.58, p < 0.001, for the D/F rate and a significant online status regression coefficient, B = − 3.0, t(17) = − 2.44, p = 0.024, signifying that online lecture students received Ds or Fs at a slightly lower rate than f2f students. This positive effect was offset by the W rate, R2 = 0.78, F(2,20) = 36.09, p < 0.001, and online status regression coefficient, B = 14.2, t(17) = 7.20, p < 0.001, showing that online lecture students withdrew 14% more frequently than f2f students correcting for class grade average.

Many aspects of the class were explored to understand the lower success rate of the online lecture students. Class standing was investigated to determine if online lecture students were on average earlier in their career than f2f students, but no significant differences were identified. However, a significant difference in the rate at which students who were repeating the class were electing online lecture sections was identified, t(2.23) = 4.50, p = 0.038. The percentage of repeating students is plotted in Fig. 3. Comparison of grade distributions for repeating students (Table 1) shows that repeating students electing online lecture sections had a much lower success rate than f2f students (online success rate = 35%, f2f success rate = 69%), χ2(1, N = 130) = 9.19, p = 0.002 (Fisher's Exact Test p = 0.002).

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (106KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Repeat percentage rates plotted against semester for online and face-to-face students.


Table 1. Final grade distribution of repeating students fall 2004 to spring 2014.

Face-to-face	Online
Grade	N	%	N	%
A	5	4.8	2	7.7
B	35	33.7	4	15.4
C	32	30.8	3	11.5
D	11	10.6	2	7.7
F	7	6.7	6	23.1
W	14	13.5	9	34.6
To further understand the differences in the successful completion rate between repeating online and f2f lecture students, two similar academic years were compared as shown in Table 2. The fall 2011 to spring 2012 academic year was the last before the introduction of video in any form into the course and the fall 2013 to spring 2014 semester was the last video semester instructed by the long-term lead instructor. A total of N = 390 students enrolled in the class in fall 11/spring 12 and N = 526 in fall 13/spring 14. Chi-squared tests comparing the overall repeat rate (merging f2f and online) and the overall successful completion rates were not significantly different; however, the differences between the online and f2f student success rates in fall 2013/spring 2014 were significantly different, χ2(1, N = 21) = 6.86, p = 0.009, showing repeating students successfully completed the course at a significantly lower rate in the online environment. The successful completion rates for repeating students in the f2f sections were very similar for the two academic years. Fig. 1, Fig. 2 suggest that the differential success rates were substantially influenced by students who ultimately withdrew from the class, and Table 2 suggests that students repeating the class were not doing so successfully in the online lecture environment. Table 2 shows a lower successful completion rate than Table 1 because it does not include the spring 2013 semester, the first semester an online section was offered. In this semester, only four repeating students elected the online section (two successfully). No effort was made to advertize the online option in spring 2013 and the low subscription rate may have resulted from students avoiding the option until it was better known and more broadly understood.


Table 2. Comparison of students repeating the class in fall 11-spring 12 and fall 13-spring 14.

Fall 11-Spring 12	Fall 13-Spring 14
Total	Non-online	Total	Non-online	Online
Total enrollment	390	390	526	395	131
Students repeating	10	10	21	7	14
Repeat rate	2.6%	2.6%	4.0%	1.8%	10.7%
Repeat withdrawals	1	1	8	1	7
Re-withdrawal rate	10%	10%	38%	14%	50%
Repeat successes	7	7	7	5	2
Repeat success rate	70%	70%	33%	71%	14%
To explore the possible causes of the eventual decision to withdraw, student engagement was investigated. Student engagement was measured by the rate at which students completed the required assignments in the class. The most important assignments for the final grade were the four in-semester examinations. Table 3 presents the percentage of students completing each examination who later withdrew from the class. The drop deadline was after the third examination and therefore no student who withdrew took the fourth test. The differences in the last test taken for online and f2f students who eventually withdrew in fall 2013/spring 2014 were statistically significant at the 0.1 level, χ2(3, N = 49) = 6.92, p = 0.074 (Fisher's Exact Test, p = 0.064); therefore, while persistence differences existed, they were not large. However, when repeating students were disaggregated from students taking the class for the first time, larger differences were observed. None of the repeating online students persisted even to the second test while the first-time online students had similar persistence patterns to f2f students. The differences between first-time and repeating online students were statistically significant, χ2(3, N = 29) = 8.72, p = 0.033 (Fisher's Exact Test, p = 0.023). While now considering only a few students (only seven online students repeated the class and later withdrew), four of these students did not persist even to the first test and none of these students persisted to the second test.


Table 3. Persistence of students who eventually withdrew from the class measured by the percentage of students taking each of the four in-semester examinations.

N	Tests taken (%)
1	2	3	4
Fall 2011-Spring 2012
Total	34	88.2 (30)	61.8 (21)	35.3 (12)	0
F2F	First-time	33	87.9 (29)	60.6 (20)	36.4 (12)	0
F2F	Repeat	1	100 (1)	100 (1)	0	0

Fall 2013-Spring 2014
F2F	Total	20	100 (20)	75 (15)	20 (4)	0
F2F	First-time	19	100 (19)	78.9 (15)	21.1 (4)	0
F2F	Repeat	1	100 (1)	0	0	0
Online	Total	29	75.9 (22)	44.8 (13)	13.8 (4)	0
Online	First-time	22	86.4 (19)	59.1 (13)	18.2 (4)	0
Online	Repeat	7	42.9(3)	0	0	0
Note: Numbers in parenthesis are the number of students.

Engagement of students who failed to persist to the second test is explored in Table 4. Data were only available for the two spring semesters for this fine-grained analysis. Engagement was measured by the percentage of all class assignments that were submitted for grading. Class assignments included lecture quizzes (measuring lecture attendance), homework, and laboratory assignments. Students who submitted no assignments were classified as non-engaged, students submitting < 50% of the required assignments as low-engaged, and students submitting > 50% of the required assignments as high-engaged. For the students not taking the first examination, all f2f students showed some level of engagement, but not high-engagement; however, the majority of online students were non-engaged. At this point, only a very small number of students were being observed, so any generalization is speculative, but data suggests that a substantial subset of online students failed to engage with the class in any way even before the first exam. When the engagement patterns for students completing the first examination were considered, a large majority of both online and f2f students showed high levels of engagement.


Table 4. Engagement measured by homework, lecture quiz, and laboratory assignments submitted for grade by students who eventually withdrew from the course.

Count	Non-Engaged	Low Engaged	High Engaged
Spring 2012 - did not complete first test
F2F	4	0	4	0
F2F-first time	4	0	4	0
F2F-repeat	0	0	0	0

Spring 2012 - completed first test
F2F	17	0	1	16
F2F - first time	16	0	1	15
F2F - repeat	1	0	0	1

Spring 2014 - did not complete first test
Online	5	4	1	0
F2F	0	0	0	0
Online – repeat	4	3	1	0
Online -first time	1	1	0	0

Spring 2014 - completed first test
Online	13	0	3	10
F2F	11	0	1	10
Online-repeat	2	0	1	1
Online-first time	11	0	2	9
F2F-repeat	1	0	0	1
F2F-first time	10	0	1	9
The failure of repeating online lecture students to succeed explains only part of the lower success rates in the online lecture sections. If one assumes that repeating online students would succeed at the historical 70% rate, then the success rate for the online sections in fall 2013-spring 2014 climbs from 64% to 70%, so the effect of repeating students explains about half the 11% lower success of online lecture students. The origin of the other 5% is still being investigated.

6. Discussion
The purpose of this study was to identify student factors associated with low course completion rates by on-campus students in an online physics course. The motivation was not to demonstrate differences in delivery settings, as Dziuban and Moskal (2011) sufficiently established that delivery “…mode is not an effective predictor of success or withdrawal in courses” (p. 240). Rather, the goal was to use established completion patterns to investigate and isolate student variables that may uniquely contribute to unsuccessful course completion and withdrawals in online environments. As stated in the previous section, results of the current research demonstrated an 11% lower than expected successful completion rate (A/B/C) for students within online lecture sections. This finding was consistent with numerous prior research studies (Hachey, Wladis, & Conway, 2012, Hachey et al., 2014, Jaggars and Xu, 2010, Lee and Choi, 2011); however, it is still surprising when taking into consideration the limited nature of the online intervention (only two of the six f2f contact hours were modified), the fidelity of the online offering to the f2f offering, and the high demonstrated level of academic achievement of the participating students.

When the overall unsuccessful completion rate was segmented and analyzed, results demonstrated that D and F rates in online lecture sections were actually lower by 3% than in f2f sections when grade average corrections were applied; students in the online course sections received fewer D's and F′s than would be expected. Conversely, withdrawal rates in the online sections were 14% higher than expected. Thus, withdrawal rates were not only higher for online students, they were also responsible for inflating the overall unsuccessful completion rate for online students. This led to a deeper exploration of withdrawal rates, which uncovered significant differences between online and f2f withdrawal rates relative to repeat enrollment and early disengagement.

6.1. Repeat enrollment
Unexpected differences in representation of students repeating the class between online and f2f sections led to the discovery that significantly more repeating students re-enrolled in the online course sections. This confirmed findings of researchers who report that at-risk students and students with a history of poor academic performance show greater preferences for enrollment in online courses (Lee and Choi, 2011, Pontes et al., 2010). However, the intentionality of student re-enrollment patterns within this study could not be conclusively determined.

Ford, Stahl, Walker, and Ford (2008) cited a direct link between academic performance and course enrollment patterns. They reported that students who were conscientious and registered for courses early had a higher GPAs and received significantly higher course grades than those who registered later. In relation to the current study, as f2f lecture sections became fully subscribed during course registration, students who registered later may have had no choice but to enroll in online course sections. As such, the possibility exists that higher re-enrollment in the online sections could have been caused by virtue of late enrollment patterns of less conscientious students, and not because of a preference for online offerings by these students. A survey given to students in spring 2014 indicated that late enrollment when the f2f sections was fully subscribed was the most common reason for selecting the online option (41%); however, the second most common reason for selecting the online section was the flexibility it provided to take another class which conflicted with the f2f lecture (36%). Only 21% of the students responding indicated positive educational reasons for taking the lecture online (5% believed they learned better online and 16% liked the flexibility of online offerings). The timing of the administration of the survey and low persistence of repeating students did not allow the researchers to determine if these general findings were shared by the repeating students. Overwhelmingly, the students in both f2f and online lecture sections preferred the f2f option. At mid-semester, 61% of online students would switch to the f2f class and 83% of the f2f students wished to continue to be in the f2f lecture.

Another potential explanation that has been offered for enrollment in online courses is that students were intentional in choosing to re-enroll in online sections of the lecture course based on mistaken beliefs about online learning. A recent U.S. News and World Report article identified the number one myth concerning online education as the misperception that online courses are easier, take less time to complete, and are not as rigorous as brick and mortar courses (Williams, 2015). Students who were previously unsuccessful in the f2f course section may have intentionally registered for the online course section with the aforementioned misperceptions and expectations. While a possibility, this explanation seems unlikely because of the integration of the f2f and online experience where both sets of students performed common homework, attended common laboratory sessions, and took common tests. The overwhelming preference of both online and f2f students for the f2f environment also seems to indicate that students did not believe the online course was easier. It does seem possible that repeating students did not feel that sitting through the physical lecture for a second time was educationally valuable.

6.2. Early disengagement
The finding within the current study that students who withdrew were more disengaged was consistent with the findings of Morris, Finnegan, and Wu (2005) who reported that students who withdrew from online courses demonstrated significantly lower ongoing participation than completers. Similarly, the early onset of course disengagement within the current study coincided with Simpson's (2004) findings that distant students who withdraw frequently do so before submitting their first assignment. However, the disengagement found within the current study could not be explained by traditionally identified variables such as online isolation or disconnectedness (Willging & Johnson, 2009). Students within the current study were on-campus students who were simultaneously enrolled in the f2f lab; thus, these students were neither isolated nor disconnected from the campus or classmates. Instead, potential explanations offered by other researchers that may account for the early disengagement by these on-campus online students include a lack of preparedness for online learning and life disruptions (Hare, 2013, Parkes et al., 2015, Tyler-Smith, 2006).

Although the students within the current study had access to f2f and online support, no formal preparation or training in the successful completion of an online course was provided to students who enrolled in the online lecture sections. As stated within section 4 above, the fidelity of the online lectures to the f2f lectures was uncompromised; however, student's ability to effectively navigate the online course was not assessed and could have contributed to early student disengagement (Nora & Snyder, 2008). However, these students did not disengage from the online lecture alone. Rather, they stopped engaging in all activities associated with Physics 2, which included f2f lab activities. This indicated that other factors, beyond the online lecture experience, may have been involved. While reasons for student disengagement within the current study remain unknown, findings clearly support previous literature that calls for early instructional interventions to decrease withdrawal rates in online courses (Hart et al., 2015, McLaren, 2004, Simpson, 2004).

7. Limitations
This study was conducted at a single institution and, as such, the conclusions may not generalize to all student populations or instructional settings. The course studied was considered and designed to be a minor modification of a f2f offering producing a hybrid course. The course relied on traditional f2f mechanisms such as a twice-a-week laboratory and office hours to maintain engagement. It is not clear if using more interactive online content would have changed the result. The study would have also benefitted from more complete demographic information including student grade point average and standardized test scores to better understand differences in the online and f2f student composition. Further, a greater understanding of the student composition of the online sections could have allowed researchers to determine if the availability of the online option changed the population of students taking the class; for example, the possibility that more non-traditional or commuter students were drawn to the online sections could be explored.

8. Implications and conclusions
Researchers argue for a move beyond recognition of completion gaps between online and f2f courses to explorations of the reasons behind these differences so that institutions may incorporate appropriate interventions (Jaggars and Xu, 2010, Lee and Choi, 2011, Wladis et al., 2014b). That is precisely what the current research achieves. This study explores specific factors associated with lower than expected completion rates in an online science course. Results demonstrate that enrollment in an online versus f2f section of the class differentially impacts some student subgroups, in this case repeating students. Results provide insight into potential instructional and policy interventions related to early disengagement and re-enrollment practices, and offered direction for future research.

Findings of this study suggest the need for instructional interventions early within the semester to lower withdrawal rates and encourage successful course completion. While early online course interventions would serve to support all online students, data from this study indicate interventions within the first few weeks could be particularly critical for repeating students. Results indicate the majority of repeating students within the online sections completely disengage prior to taking the first examination, and ultimately withdraw from the course. This finding suggests these repeating students make the determination to disengage extremely early in the semester. Thus, initial experiences within the online course are potentially critical for this group, and instructional interventions specifically targeted toward supporting students during the first several weeks of class should be implemented in future semesters.

Policy implications regarding enrollment practices, including potential restrictions on repeat enrollment students, are supported by this study. Based on the findings, the current institution and others who uncover similar re-enrollment patterns should consider online enrollment restrictions for on-campus students who have previously withdrawn from a course. Although this could be a potentially unpopular policy because of the limitations it would pose on student course options, it should also be recognized that such a policy would serve to support overall student success. By forcing a previously unsuccessful on-campus student to re-enroll in a f2f section of the course, data suggests that the student will experience an 34% better chance of successfully completing the course the second time (Table 1).

Lastly, the finding that W rates within this study are singly responsible for the higher overall DFW rates has implications for future course completion studies. While some previous studies have made distinctions between D/F and W rates or have individually studied W rates (Xu and Jaggars, 2011a, Xu and Jaggars, 2011b), other studies have analyzed D/F and W rates together (Atchley et al., 2013, Urtel, 2008) when investigating course completion. Results of this study indicate the need for independent analyses of these rates in future research to allow investigators to discern specific areas of concern relative to low course completion rates.