The main purpose of this study was to examine various potential influences (including mass media reporting, instructors/teachers, and personal experience) of students' attitudes toward both social media and face-to-face (FtF) communication. Such questions emerged from recent debates over the role of technology in the college classroom that commonly center on the comparison of FtF and computer-mediated communication (CMC). Of the 545 college students surveyed online, mass media and instructors/teachers emerge as primary sources of information about negative elements of social media, while friends and personal experience are primary sources about the benefits of CMC. Most all sources examined provide positive information about FtF benefits, and none were sources of negative elements of FtF interaction. These findings are discussed in terms of how educators and others might recognize the impact of how they frame and discuss social media in and out of their classrooms.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Social media

Attitudes

Information sources

“How Much Time Have You Wasted on Facebook?”

“Estimate the total amount of time you've spent on the site with this tool.”

-Time Magazine “time wasted/spent” on Facebook tool, January 27th, 2014. Headline/first line.

1. Introduction
In January 2014, Time magazine posted an online tool in advance of Facebook's 10th anniversary (Wilson, 2014, see Fig. 1). It seems telling that the headline suggests “waste” while the first line suggests “time spent,” as such language equates time spent on Facebook with time wasted. Similar arguments and opinions can be found with respect to Twitter and other popular media technologies, in particular with popular opinions suggesting that these social media technologies detract from more authentic and meaningful face-to-face moments (Turkle, 2011). Indeed, the authors of the current article have been teaching classes about communication and technology for roughly a decade, and collectively (and anecdotally) we have noticed that students seem to have a very negative attitude toward social media–despite being heavy users of these same technologies (e.g., Bowman et al., 2012, Davies and Sant, 2014). Common quotes highlight a lament about the “fakeness” of social media and the distraction they cause from more important things, such as education (similar to the “waste of time” suggested in the Time magazine tool).

Fig. 1
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Screen shot of Time.com Facebook waste of time tool for one of the paper's authors.

Important to the current study, these debates have carried over to the college classroom. For example, noted technology scholar Clay Shirky (2014) made quite a stir by publishing an article detailing why he was banning technology in his classroom. The banning of technology by such a noted “proponent” of technology was noticed by many, scholars and laypeople alike—including press in The Washington Post, (Strauss, 2014)—and sparked several public debates among instructors and teachers in industry outlets such as the Chronicle of Higher Education. As outlined in Shirky's original editorial, much of the rationale for banning technology stems from the detrimental effects that media multitasking (attempting to pay attention to both social media content and class content) has on the educational process (Wang & Tchernev, 2012). As Shirky explains: “allowing laptop use in class is like allowing boombox use in class—it lets each person choose whether to degrade the experience of those around them” (2014, para. 1). On the flipside, some educators (e.g., Blankenship, 2011, Bowman and Akcaoglu, 2014, Greenhow et al., 2009, Junco et al., 2011) have suggested that social media technologies can help students better engage each other as well as course material, and help students develop social media literacies (which might further reduce resistance toward the technologies).

These potentially conflicting studies have led to similar conflicted classroom policies regarding social media, which might result in studies having somewhat “mixed” attitudes toward technology broadly, and social media specifically. To this end, the current study explores students' attitudes toward social media and FtF communication, with specific attention to the potential influence of instructors and teachers—along with other environmental and experience factors—on these attitudes. Notably, FtF communication is included in our analysis given that it is the de facto mode of communication that social media and CMC are often compared against, referred to as the “gold standard” approach in communication sciences (Hollan & Stornetta, 1992).

2. Literature review
2.1. Students and social media: use and attitudes
The oft-repeated stereotype of today's college student is that of a tech-savvy digital native (Prensky, 2001), seamlessly navigating multiple communication channels (especially their mobile or smartphones) to accomplish their goals, often in supplement or even in place of FtF interactions. Indeed, a Pew Report (Madden, 2013) found that 83% of 18–29 year olds in the US are on social media, and they often access these applications on their mobile phones. At the same time, research suggests that although students think they are ‘tech-savvy’, they are often very low in digital literacy, lacking knowledge on how to effectively use technology to accomplish myriad goals (Grant, Malloy, & Murphy, 2009). Such data is in line with O'Neil's (2014) suggestion that we often assume too much about our digital natives.

In regard to instructional purposes, Kuznekoff and Titsworth (2013) found that students that used mobile phones in class performed worse in that class than those who did not. A Kaiser report also supported this claim by showing that heavy users were more likely to earn poor grades than light users (Ridesout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010). Junco (2012) reported a negative correlation between broad Facebook usage and scholastic performance among college students. Both studies generally supported Shirky's suggestion that ancillary social media content distracts from students' in-class attention and presence, and eventual performance.

However, these studies also consider social media usage at a broad and non-directed level, and neither considered the specific manner in which students were using technology. In contrast, for example, Bowman and Akcaoglu (2014) found that engaging in an instructor-led course Facebook page was associated with a half letter grade increase in course performance, as well as increased student engaging each other to study for exams outside the confines of the mass lecture hall. Similar effects on cognitive learning and student engagement have been found using Twitter (Junco et al., 2011), with Dunlap and Lowenthal (2009) reporting using Twitter for class discussions increased students' feelings of social presence in the conversations. Honegger and Neff (2013) found that encouraging primary school students to use smartphones as personal learning environments helped keep students connected to course lessons outside of the classroom, as well as bring “real-world” lessons (such as taking photos at a local art gallery) back to the classroom, and Norris, Hossain, and Soloway (2011) found that mobile phones increase the “time-on-task” in K-12 classrooms (time devoted to lesson learning while in class).

Such paradoxical findings – broad usage studies showing that undirected technology and social media usage may be negative, but specific studies showing usage to be beneficial – are often reflected in the attitudes that students hold toward technology, both in general and with respect to its role in the classroom. Fewkes and McCabe (2012) found that while 73% of a population of Ontario high school students reported using Facebook for educational purposes, nearly three-fourths of survey respondents did not feel that their teacher would unblock Facebook and/or allow them to use the program in class. Malleus (2014) found that nearly half of students sampled expressed both positive and negative opinions about their reliance on smartphones in their daily lives, celebrating the technology's ability to keep them connected with friends while also lamenting the distraction that this connectedness caused, such as taking students away from their studies. Furthermore, a study of British students, mostly age 13–14, found that students thought that social media might be useful educationally, but worried about things like verifiability (being able to assess the accuracy of online information) and harmful addiction (becoming overly reliant on the technology; Davies & Sant, 2014). Teachers in this same study acknowledged the potential of social media in the classroom, but also reported using social media less overall. Although students reported being heavy users of social media, few thought social media as useful for educational goals, with only eight students (3.8%) reporting that they use social media to help achieve school goals (Davies & Sant, 2014). Instead, most students use social media for social (rather than broad task or specific educational) goals, although this effect might be partly the result of (a) classroom policies that restrict social media usage specifically (and technology usage, broadly) and (b) a lack of experience or guidance for using social media in an educational setting (cf. Bowman & Akcaoglu, 2014). These mixed-use differences lead to the first broad research question of this paper:

RQ1

What are students' overall attitudes toward social media and FtF communication?

2.2. Where do these attitudes come from? Information sources
Among several candidate explanations for how individuals acquire attitudes is the social cognitive theory approach (SCT, Bandura, 1986). According to SCT, learning—both of behaviors and of attitudes and opinions (Bandura, 2002)—occurs through a model of triadic reciprocal causation: a tripartite influence of environmental, behavioral, and personal factors. Work on implicit social cognition suggests that “implicit attitudes are introspectively unidentified (or inaccurately identified) traces of past experience that mediate favorable or favorable feeling, thought, or action toward social objects” (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995, p. 8). For example, one prominent example of the social learning of attitudes is proposed by both Baratz and Baratz (1970) and Feagin and Van Ausdale (2001), who argue that a dominant factor in children's learning of racist attitudes often comes from family and social models of racist behavior, which is the root of the term “institutional racism.” Notably, the current study is not a direct test of SCT, but instead uses SCT as a starting point for considering those forces that might impact students' attitudes toward social media. Among the candidate influences, the current study hones in on two that seem central to the debates surrounding social media and communication technology in the classroom: environmental influences and personal experience.

2.2.1. Environmental factors and social media
As this was an initial study in this area, five environmental factors were chosen (mass media, teachers/school, parents/family, friends, and religious leaders) simply because they were thought to be possible major sources of information about any number of broad social topics. Bandura, 1986, Bandura, 2002 suggests that candidate environmental factors are those that a target demographic is most likely to (a) observe frequently and (b) attempt to model due their prominence and attractiveness in their daily lives. Mass media reports commonly feature technology-related news and editorials, and the specific discussion of technology's role in education is central to many college and high schools (see for example the Shirky debates at the opening of this article). Finally, parents (e.g., Brown & Ogden, 2004), friends (e.g., Sieving, Eisenberg, Pettingell, & Skay, 2006), and religious leaders (Smith, 2003) are models that can impact the attitudes and behaviors among younger individuals.

2.2.2. Personal experience and social media
Core to SCT is the implicit learning of attitudes by observing others, and as such the above-mentioned environmental forces are known to operate as particularly salient models for replication. However, Bandura is also sensitive to the fact that one's own experience with a given target attitude is also core to learning — in this case, attitude acquisition. Simply put, not all learning is observational, and one's own experience with social media and related technologies contributes a great deal to their dispositions toward the technologies. We intuit that individuals who have had more experience using social media and are the most active users of the technology are likely to have more positive attitudes toward social media — similar to how learned expectations of other media usage patterns tends to predict both expected and observed positive outcomes of that use (e.g., Atkin, 1985). Even if individuals might have had a variety of negative and positive experiences with the technologies, their continued usage is likely the result of an overall positive disposition, as any negative opinions would likely result in cognitive dissonance between the opinion and the behavior in need of resolution (cf. Festinger, 1962), and the resolution of this dissonance would likely be either (a) an overall reduction in social media usage or (b) a shift in one's attitudes toward social media toward the positive.

Based upon these possibilities, the second research question asks:

RQ2

From which sources do students learn about the positive and negatives of social media and FtF communication?

3. Method
3.1. Overview
During the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters, an online survey relevant to the current research was distributed in several ways. It was first distributed to the organization-wide listserv at a mid-sized Midwestern university. Second, it was distributed to the introductory class research pool at this same university. It was also posted on the first author's Facebook page, and ended up on several Reddit forms linked to the institutions of all authors of the study. Finally, it may have been distributed in a snowball manner, as survey respondents were asked to share the survey with other students. The survey consisted of questions related to participants' social media usage and their opinions about various aspects of social media, and was designed to be completed in under 20 min.

3.2. Participants
As the research invitation was posted in various spots online, participants may have come from multiple places. Those who participated from the large lecture introductory course at the mid-sized Midwestern university were given minor incentives for participation (5 points extra credit for an assignment in a Public Speaking course). No other incentives were given to any other participants. Overall, 545 students participated in the survey, with 286 females (52.5%), 257 males (47.2%), one “other” and one person not reporting. The average age of the sample was 19.86 (SD = 3.32), with a range of 18–49. The self-reported ethnic breakdown of the sample was predominantly Caucasian (n = 473, 86.8%).

3.3. Measures
3.3.1. Attitudes
Attitudes toward social media and FtF communication were measured using a 4-item, 7-point semantic differential scale (e.g., “For the most part, I feel that social media technologies (face-to-face communication) are bad/good”), based upon Ajzen's (n.d.) recommendations for measuring attitudes. Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was performed on each scale, and both had unidimensional solutions, thus all four items were retained for both the social media and the FtF versions. Each scale had an acceptable reliability (for social media, α = 0.81; for FtF, α = 0.80). Higher scores equaled more positive attitudes.

3.3.2. Information sources
To measure how much students have learned about social media and FtF communication from various sources, we asked participants: “What have you learned [from this source] about the good (bad) aspects of social media technology (face-to-face communication)?” This question was asked four times: for positive and negative aspects of FtF, and for positive and negative aspects of social media. Six sources of information were examined (parent/family, school/teachers, friends, mass media, personal experience, religious leaders) using a five point response scale (1 = nothing; 5 = a lot).

4. Results
4.1. Attitudes
Students' attitudes toward social media are generally positive (M = 5.13, SD = 1.11) although they had even more positive attitudes toward FtF communication (M = 6.35, SD = 0.78), and the difference between these two was significant, t(540) = 25.54, p < 0.001, and substantial, Cohen's d = 2.20 (or 54% of variance explained). Interestingly, there was a small, positive correlation between these two attitudes (r = 0.16), suggesting that those who had more positive attitudes toward social media also had more positive attitudes toward FtF communication.

4.2. Information sources
Separate repeated-measures ANOVAs were conducted to examine potential variance in informativeness of the six identified information sources on the positive and negative aspects of both social media and FtF communication. Our data suggested that students' friends were the strongest source for the positive aspects of social media, while mass media, school/teachers, and parents/family were each noted as equally strong sources for negative aspects. Regarding face-to-face communication, parents/family and personal experience were named as the strongest source of positive information, where there was virtually no difference in the impact of any of these sources for the negatives of face-to-face interactions, as all were relatively low. Complete results of these analyses including means, standard deviations, and effect size metrics are included in Table 1.


Table 1. Summary results: ANOVA for positive and negative aspects of social media as a function of environmental factors.

Friends	Personal experience	Mass media	School/teachers	Parents/family	Religious leaders
Social media
Positive 1	4.22 (0.93)a	4.04 (0.98)b	3.56 (1.17)c	2.51 (1.17)d	2.45 (1.23)d	1.65 (0.95)e
Negative 2	2.86 (1.20)a	3.09 (1.25)b	3.41 (1.25)c	3.35 (1.26)c	3.25 (1.25)c	2.04 (1.28)d

Face-to-face
Positive 3	4.02 (0.98)a	4.38 (0.85)bd	2.64 (1.15)c	4.28 (0.89)d	4.48 (0.80)b	2.89 (1.46)e
Negative 4	2.70 (1.31)ab	2.87 (1.43)b	2.38 (1.24)c	2.47 (1.33)ac	2.51 (1.39)ac	1.75 (1.01)d
NOTE: Mean scores reported in table, with standard deviation in parenthesis. Different subscripts within each row represent statistically significant differences at the p < 0.05 level or greater. Bold score was/were the statistically highest in each row.

1: F(5, 530) = 419.45, p < 0.000, η2 = 0.798, Cohen's d = 3.98.

2: F(5, 521) = 105.44, p < 0.000, η2 = 0.503, Cohen's d = 2.01.

3: F(5, 527) = 291.55, p < 0.000, η2 = 0.734, Cohen's d = 3.32.

4: F(5, 525) = 77.38, p < 0.000, η2 = 0.424, Cohen's d = 1.72.

5. Discussion
This research was an exploratory study designed to examine students' attitudes toward social media/FtF communication and also to examine potential environmental and experiential sources that might inform those attitudes. This was an important question to consider given that (a) one's attitudes toward a given activity are an important predictor of engaging the same activity (cf. Ajzen, 1991) and (b) one is not always consciously aware of the multiple sources of influence on their attitudes (cf. Bandura, 2002). Specific to the current study, we argue that identifying the influences of students' negative and positive attitudes of social media (especially if those roots are external to the user's own experiences, such as classroom technology bans) might reveal unintended consequences on how those students approach the technologies broadly.

First, it is important to note that overall, students reported positive attitudes toward social media. They reported even more positive attitudes toward FtF communication, however. This is consistent with Morreale, Staley, Stavrositu, and Krakowiak's (2015) finding that students would prefer to use FtF in a variety of circumstances, even if they sometimes actually use technology in their communication practices. There was also a small positive correlation between attitudes toward social media and attitudes of FtF. This is consistent with other research suggesting that social media does not necessarily take away from FtF interactions (e.g., Rainie & Wellman, 2012). We might suggest that people who like to interact with others like to do so through various channels, and more channels likely result in more opportunities to communicate.

Core to the current study's main objective was understanding the environmental and experiential sources that may influence attitudes toward social media and FtF. Environmental factors are interesting in that they represent external influences that students might not be consciously aware of. Regarding social media, students reported that the strongest sources of information about the negative and “bad” of social media came from the mass media, teachers/school and parents/family. This seems in line with the popular press accounts of social media that began this paper (that served as the genesis of our interest in the topic). Yet, none of these three sources were cited by respondents as being particularly informative sources about the beneficial aspects of social media. Rather, friends and personal experience seem to be the biggest sources for this. This suggests that students hear one thing about social media (bad) but through actual use come into contact with the other side of social media instead (good). Such a finding also suggests that the social perceptions of a technology can bias one's attitudes toward their utility (Rogers, 1962), and it also highlights the possibility that a clear distinction between social and task goals via social media is not always so simple (Bowman et al., 2012). For example, Davies and Sant (2014) found that most students do not think about social media as an educational tool, even though many educators suggest that it can be if implemented purposefully (e.g., Blankenship, 2011, Bowman and Akcaoglu, 2014, Greenhow et al., 2009). This mismatch in perceptions might hinder any purposive attempts to use social media in the classroom, regardless of how well-designed such implementation might be, and is something that should be examined in future research.

The data present a different picture of results when it comes to FtF communication. Several sources were cited as informative about the positives and “good” aspects of FtF (with four of six sources having mean scores above 4.00 on a 5.00 scale), but no sources were particularly informative about the negatives (no scores of 3.00 or above). Some might argue that this is because FtF does not have downsides — it is often thought of as the gold standard of human communication as it is humanity's “natural” interface (Hollan and Stornetta, 1992, Lee, 2004). However, FtF does have limits and issues, like all channels do. For example, a very basic downside is that FtF requires communicators to be at the same place at the same time to happen. This is not always an easy, or even possible, thing to have occurred. The presence of nonverbal communication cues can also lead FtF communication astray, as communicators might provide extra information into their messages that confuses or even conflicts with the verbal content (Walther, 2009). Overall, this pattern of sources fits well with the attitudes evident in our data; it is not surprising that students would like FtF more than social media if they frequently hear about upsides of FtF and not about the downsides.

The absence of discussion of the negative consequences of FtF is also telling, as in observational learning the lack of punishment or denouncement of an activity is often seen as an implicit endorsement. Therefore, if it is the case that students' attitudes toward social media are influenced by their social environment, it might be possible that their opinions about social media as assessed in past research (Morreale et al., 2015) exist because students learn about the positives of FtF (and not the negatives) combined with hearing a great deal about the negatives of social media.

5.1. Practical implications
Overall, the data presented in this paper suggest is that students seem to be getting a consistent message that FtF is good, whereas the analogous message regarding social media is mixed to negative. As educators, we play some role in this pattern. Students reported school/teachers as an important source in their learning about the good of FtF, but also the bad of social media. Conversely, teachers were less informative about the good aspects of social media and the bad aspects of FtF. Although the study did not ask about primary versus secondary educators specifically (we might expect primary school teachers to have more influence on younger learners), this pattern is in line with much of the way social media seem to be discussed in popular outlets, as well as how students view the educational value of social media (Davies & Sant, 2014). Such a data pattern suggests that students might be socialized by their educators to be wary of social media broadly, but similar lessons about FtF interactions do not emerge.

Teachers and institutions seem to be a major source of influence on students' technology views, and we need to be cognizant of this influence. When we continue to circulate stories about the negative impact of tech, do students start absorbing this message without actually reflecting on it? This is especially interesting given that those influences might not be experienced with the technologies; Bolkan (2015) reports that nearly 90% of teachers surveyed do not use social media in their classroom instruction (and those apprehensive toward social media have increased since 2013, from 55 to 62%). We might speculate that the perceived uselessness of technology is ingrained during their education, in which many classrooms (particularly in higher education) have barred technology assess as inappropriate and conflicting with higher learning goals (these data coincide with calls by Shirky and others to remove assumed-distracting technologies from the classroom), and Bolkan (2015) states that only 44% of educators suggest that social media can add to education. Such approaches seem to mirror some of the same moral panics outlined by Bowman (2016) that foster misconceptions rather than understandings of emerging technologies.

There have been calls by some educators (e.g., Blankenship, 2011, Greenhow et al., 2009, Junco et al., 2011) to consider the positives that social media technologies can provide students in the classroom, such as engaging with other students as well as course material. Our concern with this pattern is that it suggests one should be wary of a communication channel rather than humans using those channels, which in turn reciprocates what Jurgenson (2012) has coined the “IRL fetish”; a romantic infatuation with ‘in real life’ communication that does not allow us to consider communication technology as legitimate and useful tools for honest human interaction. Avoiding the faux distinction between FtF and CMC is also in line with O'Sullivan (1999), who argues that communication technologies often transcend other widely accepted dichotomies, such as the distinction between interpersonal and mass communication. On this point, we encourage educators to reconsider potentially slanted assumptions about social media technologies (be it slanted to the negative or positive, although data here suggest a bias toward the negative), and consider discussing both the positives and negatives of social media and FtF in their classrooms. We suggest that there might be great benefits in thinking about how to best utilize and teach tech in the classroom; what we might call practicing “safe techs” rather than abstinence. We can start by incorporating a richer variety of anecdotes as to how social media can be both beneficial and detrimental to accomplishing one's personal and social goals, and data from the current study shows that teachers are among those key influencers in the unique position to start this conversation.