This study investigated the behavioral patterns of students' knowledge construction in online cooperative translation activities. Forty-eight college students participated in the study. Methods of lag sequential analysis and frequency analysis were adopted. Results showed that 1) all behavior stayed within the medium level of knowledge construction, and from which four significant behavioral sequences were identified; 2) distinctions existed between higher- and lower-engagement students with respect to behavioral patterns; and 3) the behaviors of negotiation and knowledge co-construction occurred more frequently and continually in the higher-engagement group. In addition, this study also revealed certain limitations of students' knowledge construction behavior in online cooperative translation environments without teacher guidance, specifically the exorbitant social-emotional interaction and the inactive engagement of some students.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Cooperative translation

Knowledge construction

Behavioral pattern

Engagement

1. Introduction
With the advancement of globalization, college graduates with specialized English competencies are in urgent need in China. To cultivate more talented individuals who can process and use information in English related to their major fields of study, universities in China have established a specialized English course as a basic required course for most majors (Ding, 2012, Zhang and Li, 2010). Specialized English translation instruction (SETI) occupies an important position in China's overall educational curriculum (Yang, Guo, & Yu, 2016). SETI aims to cultivate student competencies in translating content from particular professional fields, such as chemistry, biology, and business administration.

Currently in Chinese universities, SETI still follows the traditional ‘grammar-translation’ method, in which teachers play a central role while students receive knowledge passively. Instructors often spend much time teaching specialized English translation knowledge and skills (Ma, 2011). However, the effectiveness of SETI is now being questioned by increasing numbers of teachers and experts, because university students seem both less interested and less confident in their subject of specialization (Liang and Li, 2011, Sun and Bai, 2011).

In recent years, cooperative learning (Gillies and Ashman, 2013, Slavin, 1980) has become increasingly popular. Cooperative learning has been found to be beneficial for the improvement of learner achievements, attitudes, and motivation (Nam and Zellner, 2011, Aydin, 2011, Zraa et al., 2013). Therefore, many language-teaching researchers have begun to study how to use cooperative learning methods to improve second language learning outcomes (AbuSeileek, 2007, AbuSeileek, 2012, Chang and Hsu, 2011, Kargar et al., 2012, Pan and Wu, 2013, Zahedi, 2012). Furthermore, with the proliferation of information technology, computer-assisted cooperative language learning (CACLL) has also emerged as a new trend. Nevertheless, current CACLL research mainly focuses on reading (Lin et al., 2014, Yaghoobi and Razmjoo, 2016, Yang et al., 2013) and writing (Kessler et al., 2012, Li and Kim, 2016, Strobl, 2014). The topic of how to better use technologies to facilitate specialized English cooperative translation instruction deserves our attention.

Because studies related to specialized English cooperative translation instruction remain rare, this study aims to explore online cooperative translation activity based on the Learning Cell System (LCS) (Yu, Yang, Cheng, & Wang, 2015), an open learning platform. Cooperative translation is a process of social knowledge construction in which students construct specialized English knowledge through various types of interaction, including commenting, discussing, and information sharing. To some degree, interaction times represent the engagement levels of students. Currently, many studies have confirmed the positive impact of behavioral engagement on students' online learning performance (Arbaugh, 2000, Michinov et al., 2011, Zhao and Kuh, 2004). One efficient way to measure student engagement is counting the frequencies of behaviors (Yang et al., 2016). However, high frequencies of behaviors are not necessarily a reason to get good learning result. The behavior patterns hidden behind the behavior frequency might better explain the above argument. Thus, clarifying the distinctions among the behavioral patterns of students with different levels of participation should help explain why higher-engagement students often achieve better learning performance in online learning. Unfortunately, the relationship between students' behavior patterns and their learning engagement has not been identified yet, especially in the context of SETI.

To summarize, the objectives of this study are first, to investigate the behavioral patterns of students' knowledge construction in the course of online cooperative translation, and second, to analyze the distinctions of behavioral pattern among students with different levels of engagement. The two research questions are specified as follows:

1.
What kinds of sequential behavioral patterns of knowledge construction exist in the process of online cooperative translation?

2.
What are the distinctions between higher- and lower-engagement students with respect to behavioral patterns?

2. Literature
2.1. Cooperative learning in specialized English translation instruction
Increasing numbers of researchers in the fields of language learning have become interested in cooperative learning in specialized English teaching. Cooperative learning is the instructional use of small groups in which students work together to maximize their own and each other's learning (Johnson & Johnson, 1999). The essential feature of cooperative learning is that the success of one student helps other students to be successful (Slavin, 1987). The five basic elements of cooperation are positive interdependence, individual accountability, promotive interaction, social skills, and group processing (Johnson & Johnson, 1999).

Presently, research in cooperative learning methods in specialized English teaching is mostly concentrated in the areas of reading comprehension, writing, and oral skills. Through group discussion, classroom debate, and exercises, cooperative learning can create a dynamic classroom atmosphere and motivate students (Zhao, 2012). In specialized English writing instruction, Li (2010) developed an interactive method for teaching writing based on cooperative learning theory. After a year-long study, he found that the method could rapidly improve college students' writing skills. Some other studies have also found positive effects of cooperative learning on students' writing performance (Durukan, 2011, Kessler et al., 2012, Lan et al., 2015, Mahmoud, 2014, Stevens, 2003). With respect to relatively more studied area of cooperative reading, most studies have found that cooperative learning could enhance students' English reading comprehension (Asl et al., 2014, Liu, 2012, Yang et al., 2013). Pan and Wu's (2013) study revealed that a cooperative reading approach could play an important role in promoting the reading comprehension of medium- and lower-proficiency students. Additionally, cooperative learning has also been found to enhance students' oral skill performance (Zahedi, 2012). Moreover, cooperative learning has been found to create a significantly positive effect on student motivation toward foreign language learning (AbuSeileek, 2007, Law, 2011, Ning and Hornby, 2014, Zhao, 2015).

In addition to the abovementioned areas of reading comprehension, writing, oral skills, and motivation toward foreign language learning, cooperative learning has also been found to be helpful in improving students' specialized English translation performance. Thus far, only a few studies have been conducted on cooperative translation instruction. Kargar et al. (2012) studied the effects of cooperative translation tasks on the apology speech act production of Iranian EFL learners. They found that cooperative translation could result in deeper processing of both pragmalinguistic and sociopragmatic knowledge, leading to more appropriate pragmatic production. Chang and Hsu (2011) used instant multi-user shared translation annotation technology to promote cooperative learning among EFL learners. Their results showed that students in groups of five did not have significantly better learning outcomes compared with individual students. Therefore, in cooperative learning the number of members in a group should not exceed five; otherwise, it may be difficult to achieve effective results. Meng's (2010) study showed that cooperative learning could significantly improve college students' translation performance as well as their attitudes toward specialized English translation. Additionally, cooperative learning is helpful to enhance students' communication skills and improve classroom teaching atmosphere (Huan, 2015).

In sum, only a few studies on cooperative translation of specialized English have been conducted in online environments (Chang & Hsu, 2011), and most have stressed intra-group cooperation while neglecting inter-group cooperative learning and whole-class cooperation (Yang, Li, Guo, & Li, 2015). Online environments facilitate the sharing of rich resources and are highly interactive. Although studies have shown the positive effects of cooperative translation instruction on students' attitudes toward learning and translation performance (Chang and Hsu, 2011, Kargar et al., 2012, Meng, 2010), the actual behavioral patterns of student interaction as well as the differences of behavioral patterns among students with different engagement levels remains unclear. Further empirical research is needed to answer these questions.

2.2. Student engagement in online learning
Engagement refers to the quality of effort students make to perform well and achieve desired outcomes (Richardson & Newby, 2006). There are three types: behavioral engagement, emotional engagement and cognitive engagement (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004). Among these three types, behavioral engagement is explicit and easily measured. Most recent studies of online learning engagement have looked at behavioral engagement (Hwang et al., 2011, Sun and Rueda, 2012).

Because student engagement is important for achieving satisfactory online learning effects, many scholars have studied the influencing factors of online learning engagement. Researchers have found that the use of course tutors (Richardson, Long, & Foster, 2004), the quality of technology (Webster & Hackley, 1997), partner messages (Klautke, 2015), and learning motivation (Bates and Khasawneh, 2007, Dembo et al., 2006, Kanuka, 2005) are all positively related to student engagement levels. Sun and Rueda (2012) indicated that students' computer self-efficacy also had a positive impact on engagement in distance learning. In addition to computer self-efficacy, students' degree of self-efficacy with respect to learning tasks has also been found to facilitate behavioral, cognitive, and motivational engagement of learning (Linnenbrink & Pintrich, 2003). Moreover, some researchers have demonstrated that social media services such as Twitter and MSN Messenger could enhance student engagement and learning outcomes (Akbari et al., 2016, Hwang et al., 2011, Junco et al., 2011, Rutherford, 2010); the reason for this may be that social media has the core characteristics of sharing and interaction (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010), both of which are helpful for engaging students in online learning activities.

Regarding the effects of student engagement on learning performance, many studies have explored this issue. Researchers found a positive influence of student engagement on learning performance regardless of whether the learning took place in a classroom or an online learning environment (Arbaugh, 2000, Michinov et al., 2011, Wonglorsaichon et al., 2014, Zhao and Kuh, 2004). However, there are also some different voices in the literature. Davies and Graff's study (2005) revealed that greater online interaction did not lead to significantly higher student performance. In addition, other studies have focused on the pattern of engagement (Herrington, Oliver, & Reeves, 2003), the predictors of engagement (Miller, Ranier, & Corley, 2003), and the measurement of student engagement (Robinson & Hullinger, 2008) in online learning environments. In the area of computer-assisted language learning, only a few studies concerning student engagement in online reading and writing have been conducted. Johnson (2013) showed that using open access Internet tools could increase student engagement and writing performance. Active engagement in online communication was also found to promote students' intercultural competence in foreign language education (Ware, 2003).

To summarize, although recent studies have confirmed the positive impacts of engagement on students' online learning performance, the distinctions between the behavioral patterns of students with different levels of participation remains unclear. That is, the observed positive effects of engagement on learning performance represent results, but they do not indicate a reason. In this study, we therefore aimed to explore the distinctions in behavioral sequences among students with different levels of engagement in online cooperative translation activities, thus providing a new perspective for explaining why higher-engagement students often achieve better learning performance in online learning.

3. Method
We used lag sequential analysis (LSA) to probe the knowledge construction behavioral patterns during cooperative translation. Sackett (1978) developed LSA for estimating the probability of occurrence for any behavior of a repertoire against time. It is mainly used to examine whether certain human behaviors followed by another behavior occur with statistical significance (Hawks, 1987).

LSA can be used to study many kinds of human behaviors, such as therapy processes (Sexton, Littauer, Sexton, & Tømmerås, 2005), parent–child interactions (Solomon, Ono, Timmer, & Goodlin-Jones, 2008), and sports behaviors (Fernandez, Camerino, Anguera, & Jonsson, 2009). In recent years, scholars in the area of e-learning have begun using LSA to analyze online learning behaviors. Jeong (2003) studied the behavioral patterns of group interaction and critical thinking in online threaded discussions. Hou et al. (2009) and Hou and Wu (2011) explored teachers' and students' behavioral patterns in the contexts of online asynchronous discussions. Hwang and Chen (2016) investigated the students' behavioral sequences in an inquiry-based ubiquitous gaming. In addition, some studies have focused on learners' navigational behaviors (Graf & Liu, 2010), informal learning behaviors through mobile devices (Sung, Hou, Liu, & Chang, 2010), and knowledge construction behavior during online collaborative learning (Zhang et al., 2017).

To assist the data processing, Bakeman and Gottman (1997) developed the specialized software GSEQ. A number of recent online learning behavior studies have used GSEQ (Hou et al., 2009, Hou and Wu, 2011, Lai and Hwang, 2015). The main process of LSA using GSEQ can be summarized as follows: (1) define behavioral codes; (2) record observed behaviors; (3) code all behavioral records; (4) run kappa to test coding consistency; (5) put all codes into GSEQ and analyze behavioral sequences; (6) draw behavior transition diagrams; (7) develop explanations of the results.

3.1. Participants
The participants were 48 university students majoring in educational technology at Jiangsu Normal University (12 males and 36 females, with an average age of 20.6). All the students were randomly assigned to twelve groups of four students. Each group had a group leader, in charge of the organization and management of group learning, and three group members. Each student in each group had a laptop computer and was adequately familiar with information technologies; they had an average of 1.5 years of experience with online learning, and had experienced cooperative learning activities in other courses.

Before enrolling in the specialized English course for educational technology, all participants had completed a public English course offered to all students from various majors. The participants learned basic translation knowledge and skills from the public English course.

3.2. Procedure
The course, Specialized English for Educational Technology, lasted four months and was worth two credits. The development of specialized English translation competence was one of the main objectives of the course. The course combined classroom instruction with web-based learning.

The study lasted for three weeks, overlapping with part of the course duration. The entire cooperative process was carried out in a cooperative learning environment called the Learning Cell System (LCS*1) LCS is characterized by multiple interactions, personalization, and cooperation. In LCS, the teacher can divide students into small groups and assign articles to be translated; the students can then translate specialized English articles collaboratively through activities such as task division, discussion, checking, annotation, commenting, and other activities. All the data generated during these activities are stored automatically in the backend database for future statistical analysis.

Fig. 1 outlines the research procedure.

(1)
The course instructor selected 12 articles of medium difficulty highly related to educational technology. The article topics included mobile learning, game-based learning, cloud computing, e-school bag, online training, and digital learning content. Two experienced teachers helped choose the articles. The instructor then posted them on the LCS.

(2)
The articles were randomly allocated to the 12 four-person groups. Each group appointed a team leader to organize and coordinate the translation tasks. In order to promote the ongoing of this online cooperative translation activity smoothly, the teacher posted the basic requirements and some tips (e.g., weekly time consuming, agenda, and evaluation) for this activity on the course discussion forum. To ensure the positive interdependence and individual accountability, the quality of translation as the group score and the individual engagement as the individual score would both be integrated into the final grade of this course.

(3)
In the first week, each group carried out internal cooperation. The group leader was responsible for task allocation and supervision. After task allocation, members began to search for materials on the Internet, discuss issues related to the translation in the discussion zone, and translate paragraph-by-paragraph. While the group members completed their translation tasks, cross-checking of the translation was performed by the group, which resulted in the completion of the first draft of the translation.

(4)
In the second week, inter-group cooperation was conducted. Each group selected the completed translations of at least four other groups to provide comments. The group leaders received timely system notifications when their translations were commented on. To promote the inter-group interaction, students were told no competitive relationships existed among groups. All the high-quality translation works could get high group scores.

(5)
In the third week, each group once again carried out internal cooperation. The group leader collected all of the received comments and organized an online discussion to determine which comments and advice to accept. Each member was then assigned with some specific revision tasks. Through group discussion and collective revision, the final translation was made.

(6)
All interaction data created during the process of cooperative translation were exported to an EXCEL file from LCS.

(7)
Finally, analyses of interaction sequences and engagement were conducted.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (228KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Research procedure.

3.3. Data coding
Because of its authority and operability, the interaction analysis model (IAM) developed by Gunawardena, Lowe, and Anderson (1997) has been widely used in the study of computer mediated communication (Choo et al., 2014, Hou and Wu, 2011, Lucas et al., 2014, Siqin et al., 2015). In this study, we also adopted the IAM as the coding schema (as shown in Table 1). It divides the knowledge construction process into five phases: 1) Sharing and comparing information about discussion topics; 2) Discovery and exploration of dissonance or inconsistency; 3) Negotiation of meaning and co-construction of knowledge; 4) Testing and modification of proposed synthesis and co-construction; and 5) Agreement statement(s) and applications of newly constructed meanings.


Table 1. Coding scheme for knowledge construction behaviors.

Code	Behavior	Example
P1	Sharing/comparing information or proposing similar ideas
Simplified: Share info/ideas	I agree with you. I also think the phrase ‘context awareness’ should be translated as ‘情境感知.’
P2	Discovery and exploration of dissonance or inconsistency among participants
Simplified: Discovery Dissonance	The translation of the third sentence in this article is inaccurate and rough. I think the author's opinion is supporting the widespread use of e-school bag.
P3	Negotiation of meaning or co-
construction of knowledge
Simplified: Negotiate Meaning	Thank you for your discussion! I have accepted the final opinion and revised the translation of the last sentence.
P4	Testing and modification of proposed synthesis or co-construction
Simplified: Modify Synthesis	I'm sorry to tell you that ‘Edutainment Technology’ should not be translated as ‘寓教于乐的技术.’ After our discussion last week, I consulted a domain expert who said that ‘娱教技术’ was more concise and accurate. Therefore, I revised our translation according to the expert's suggestion.
P5	Agreement statement(s) or application of newly constructed meaning
Simplified: State Agreement	Through this activity, I know specialized English translations should fully consider culture, idiomatic expressions, subject knowledge, and context.
P6	Social-emotional interactions
Simplified: Communicate Emotion	I am coming. Welcome me boys and girls.
For encoding the interaction data, two researchers went through all the interaction texts carefully. We found that besides the above five phases there was another type of interaction named social-emotional interaction (SEI) by Bales (1950). In this study, SEI refers to the interactions of emotional communication (e.g., greeting, cheering, kidding, etc.) with no direct relations with the translation task. Therefore, we added a new phase P6 to represent those SEI messages. The final coding work showed that the six codes could cover all the interaction texts. That is to say the contents of discussion except those coded by the five codes in IAM were coded by P6.

Each article was treated as a unit, and the interaction messages attached to each article were coded based on their temporal order. It is important to note that one message may have more than one code. For example, the first part of a message is coded as P1, and the following parts are coded as P2; thus the message's code is P1 P2. In this way, the coding result depends on the meaning contained in each message, and the coded sequence is based on the posting time.

During the translation activity, a total of 667 valid discussion records were generated. According to the coding method described above, one researcher coded all the interaction messages with a result of 702 codes. Then, to guarantee coding reliability, another researcher, who had received the same coding training, randomly selected 350 messages (approximately half of all messages) to recode. The inter-rater kappa reliability was 0.774 (p < 0.01). Next, we used these codes to conduct sequential analyses.

4. Results and discussion
4.1. Distribution of knowledge construction behaviors
Through this cooperative translation activity, all kinds of knowledge construction behavior were recorded, as shown in Table 1. The distribution diagram of behavioral codes (see Fig. 2) shows that P1 (Share Info/Ideas) comprised the largest proportion (32.19%), followed by P2 (Discovery Dissonance) (31.34%), and P3 (Negotiate Meaning) (27.21%). The portions of P4 and P5 were < 1%. These results indicate that in the cooperative learning activities without teacher participation, higher-level knowledge construction behaviors were not very common. This finding is consistent with the research results of Hou, Chang, and Sung (2007) and Jeong (2003). Additionally, we found that P6 interactions occurred 60 times and represented 8.55% of all interactions. That means students would communicate emotionally, such as greeting and encouragement, during the process of cooperative translation. Other relevant studies (Chiang et al., 2014, Hou et al., 2007) also found the existence of P6 in cooperative learning activities. This indicates that emotional communication is the basic need no matter in face-to-face or online cooperative learning.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (52KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Percentages of knowledge construction behavioral codes.

In the first week, students carried out the first intra-group cooperation. During this time, behavioral code P1 held the dominant position, indicating that in this phase students mainly translated their own parts and carried out preliminary cooperation behaviors (sharing translation materials, offering suggestions, encouraging each other, etc.).

In the second week, students began to collaborate among groups. They presented many different translation viewpoints and carried out discussions and negotiations. In this phase, behavioral code P2 was the most dominant code. Students mainly discovered inappropriate translations (word meanings, sentence orders, segmentation, punctuation, etc.) and provided suggestions for optimization.

In the third week, the second intra-group cooperation took place. Group members began to modify their translations according to suggestions collected during the previous week. In this phase, behavioral code P3 increased, and eventually occupied the largest proportion of codes. Students compared different ideas, looked for and shared new information, accepted reasonable suggestions, and finally improved their translations.

4.2. Behavioral patterns of student knowledge construction
To explore the behavioral patterns of knowledge construction present in the process of online cooperative translation, we used GSEQ 5.1 to conduct lag sequential analysis.

Table 2 shows the frequency and probability of each behavioral category immediately following another behavioral category. The columns represent the starting behaviors, and the rows represent the behaviors that occurred after the starting behaviors had finished. The frequency (Freq) numbers represent the total number of times a column behavior occurred immediately after a row behavior ended (e.g., in Row 1, Column 2, number 61 means that the sequence of ‘P2 occurring immediately after P1’ happened 61 times). The probability (PR) numbers represent the occurrence probability a column behavior occurred immediately after a row behavior ended.


Table 2. Frequency and conditional probability transition table.

P1 (Share Info/Ideas)	P2 (Discovery Dissonance)	P3 (Negotiate Meaning)	P4 (Modify Synthesis)	P5 (State Agreement)	P6 (Communicate Emotion)
Freq	PR	Freq	PR	Freq	PR	Freq	PR	Freq	PR	Freq	PR
P1	98	0.45	61	0.28	32	0.15	1	0.00	1	0.00	25	0.11
P2	45	0.23	71	0.36	69	0.35	1	0.01	0	0.00	13	0.07
P3	50	0.29	45	0.26	65	0.38	2	0.01	0	0.00	8	0.05
P4	1	0.25	1	0.25	2	0.50	0	0.00	0	0.00	0	0.00
P5	0	0.00	0	0.00	0	0.00	0	0.00	0	0.00	0	0.00
P6	20	0.32	22	0.35	5	0.08	0	0.00	0	0.00	16	0.25
Table 3 shows the adjusted residual results. If the Z-value of a sequence was > 1.96, then the connectivity of the sequence reached statistical significance (p < 0.05) (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997). To observe the significant behavioral sequences more visually, we drew a behavior transition diagram; all sequences that reached statistical significance are illustrated in Fig. 4. The numerical values represent the Z-values for the sequences, while the arrowheads of different thickness represent different levels of significance and the transitional direction.


Table 3. Adjusted residuals table (Z-scores).

P1 (Share Info/Ideas)	P2 (Discovery Dissonance)	P3 (Negotiate Meaning)	P4 (Modify Synthesis)	P5 (State Agreement)	P6 (Communicate Emotion)
P1	4.71⁎	− 1.02	− 4.83	− 0.35	1.42	1.23
P2	− 3.64	1.87	3.15⁎	− 0.24	− 0.66	− 1.70
P3	− 1.07	− 1.35	4.05⁎	1.10	− 0.59	− 2.47
P4	− 0.33	− 0.24	1.07	− 0.16	− 0.08	− 0.65
P5	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00
P6	− 0.17	0.79	− 3.51	− 0.65	− 0.33	4.54⁎
⁎
p < 0.05.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (125KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Behavioral transition diagram.

From Fig. 4, we can identify four significant behavioral sequences: P1 → P1, P2 → P3, P3 → P3, and P6 → P6. Behaviors P4 and P5 had no significant correlations with the others, due to their rare occurrence. Behaviors P1 (Share Info/Ideas), P3 (Negotiate Meaning), and P6 (Communicate Emotion) showed a tendency of repeated occurrence.

Next we explain the behavioral sequences shown in Fig. 4. Behavior path P1 → P1 shows that when the students shared, compared, or proposed similar translation ideas, they tended to maintain a certain level of consistency in their translation behavior. By observing the interaction text, we also found that when one student shared his or her translation, the other members were more inclined to provide affirmation and encouragement. This was especially true in the first week. For example, student jsnu-jdf in Group1 first posted “I translate the term of context-awareness to ‘情境感知’ in the first paragraph. What about your translation in other paragraphs?”. Then both jsnu-lt and jsnu-cyy immediately expressed their agreement and suggested using “情境感知” in the whole article. That is to say during the first intra-group cooperation, group members preferred to share their initial translation and other useful reference materials rather than to review each other. This finding is in line with the characteristics of Chinese students, who are typically reluctant to publically express different views and need to strengthen the critical ability (Sun, 2012, Zhu, 2002). However, such reluctance can also prevent students' knowledge construction at more advanced levels, such as during P2 (Discovery Dissonance) and P3 (Negotiate Meaning) behavior. Therefore, teachers should take measures to enhance students' courage and confidence in expressing different viewpoints publically at the beginning of group translation.

Behavior path P2 → P3 (Z-score = 3.15) shows that when students proposed different opinions, they could go one step further to the negotiation and co-construction knowledge phase. Moreover, when behavior P3 took place, students tended to repeat negotiations and the co-construction of knowledge (P3 → P3, Z-score = 4.05). For example, when student jsnu-dyh in Group2 expressed a different translation result of one sentence in the inter-group cooperation phase, two students in Group1 and one student in Group3 joined the discussion together. This kind of continual negotiation finally helped students achieve a satisfying translation result. Certainly, both of these transitions (P2 → P3, P3 → P3) are rather helpful for building consensus and constructing collective knowledge. However, to achieve a higher level of knowledge construction and make the process more sustained, the transitions P3 → P4, P3 → P5, and P3 → P1 are all important. In the online translation activity, for example, the transition P3 → P4 occurred only two times, while the transition P3 → P5 never occurred. For enhancing the occurrence of P4 and P5, teachers can integrate the strategy of reflection in the future translation activity to guide students reflect and review their translation instantly. Meanwhile, students should be guided to generalize some methodology knowledge of translation based on the translation activity.

Behavior path P6 → P6 (16 times, Z-score = 4.54) shows that when one student posted a topic of emotional communication, other students would join in the chat and continue the conversation. Table 4 provides a short snippet of a student discussion from Group 6. P6 (social-emotional interaction) has both positive and negative effect on student engagement and knowledge construction. The positive effect is to strengthen the team cohesion and to attract students participating in the learning task (Lan, Tsai, Yang, & Hung, 2012). However, it may also distract the students' attention from the learning task and thereby harm the students' knowledge construction (Hou et al., 2007). During the online cooperative translation activity, behavior P6 happened 60 times (8.55%). We feel that this number is a little high, and should be a focus of future studies. Moreover, in addition to taking measures to reduce behavior P6, we should also try to increase the occurrences of transitions P6 → P1, P6 → P3, and P6 → P2 to help bring students back to the task at hand.


Table 4. Extraction of an actual discussion among the Group 6 students.

Message #	Author	Content	Time	Code
#284	jsnu-hxy	I am coming. Welcome me boys and girls.	2013-6-23 23:04:27	P6
#285	jsnu-yty	Yeah! Applaud!	2013-6-23 23:05:41	P6
#286	jsnu-pqq	Fighting, my friends!	2013-6-23 23:06:18	P6
#287	jsnu-yty	Our group is the best. Thanks everybody!	2013-6-23 23:06:26	P6
Through the above-mentioned behavioral sequence analysis, we can find that in this online cooperative translation activity, the entirety of the knowledge construction process stayed at the third level. The behavioral transitions P1 → P1, P2 → P3, and P3 → P3 create positive influences on knowledge construction, while P6 → P6 creates both positive and negative influences. From the perspective of behavioral transition, we provided some suggestions for conducting more effective online cooperative translation: 1) reduce occurrences of behavior P6 properly, and facilitate transitions from P6 to P1, P2, P3, P4, and P5; 2) enhance transitions P1 → P2 and P2 → P2; 3) increase occurrences of behaviors P4 and P5, and enhance transitions P3 → P4, P4 → P4, P4 → P5, P4 → P1, P5 → P5, and P5 → P1.

Overall, in this study each group progressed through parts of the social knowledge construction process (Gunawardena et al., 1997, Xu, 2008), which was iteratively supported by LCS. Specifically, two intra-group cooperation sessions and one inter-group collaboration session strongly motivated the students toward learning, and it helped them to complete the cooperative translation tasks successfully.

4.3. Comparisons of behavioral sequences between the higher- and lower-engagement students
In this study we represented behavioral engagement by measuring the number of student interaction (i.e., discussion records). For example, posting a comment and replying to a comment were both treated as one time of interaction. Thus, a higher number of interaction indicated a higher level of engagement, and vice versa. To analyzed the differences in student behaviors between the higher- and lower-engagement groups, we divided the students into a higher-engagement group (the top 27% of the students) and a lower-engagement group (the bottom 27% of the students) based on their interaction number (higher-engagement group: M = 23.69, STD = 3.47; lower-engagement group: M = 4.85, STD = 2.54); each group had 13 students.

Table 5 shows that the total times of knowledge construction behavior of the higher-engagement group was much higher than that of the lower-engagement group (nearly fivefold). The most significant difference here is the frequency of P3 (Negotiate Meaning). In the higher-engagement group, students published 102 posts, while there were just 12 posts in the lower-engagement group, indicating that the higher-engagement students negotiated and co-constructed the meanings of translation texts 9 times more frequently than the lower-engagement students did. In addition, higher-engagement group produced up to five times more P1 and P6 than low engagement group. The frequency of P2 in higher-engagement group is approximately 4 times of that in lower-engagement group. Whether P6 stimulating the substantial increase of P1, P2 and P3 in higher-engagement group is still unknown and deserves more attention in the future research.


Table 5. Frequencies of knowledge construction behavior of two groups.

P1	P2	P3	P4	P5	P6	Total
Higher-engagement group	101	90	102	3	0	25	321
Lower-engagement group	24	24	12	0	0	5	65
In addition to these differences in behavioral frequency, a clear distinction with respect to the behavioral sequences was also discovered. Table 6 shows the adjusted residuals of the higher- and lower-engagement groups, and Fig. 5 shows the behavior transition diagrams of the two groups.


Table 6. Adjusted residuals table (Z-scores) of the higher- and lower-engagement groups.

Higher-engagement group	Lower-engagement group
P1	P2	P3	P4	P5	P6	P1	P2	P3	P4	P5	P6
P1	2.01⁎	0.04	− 2.77	0.05	0.00	2.01⁎	1.98⁎	− 0.63	− 1.70	0.00	0.00	0.02
P2	− 1.16	0.93	1.33	− 1.10	0.00	− 1.16	− 1.72	1.28	0.23	0.00	0.00	0.30
P3	− 0.50	− 1.96	3.12⁎	1.32	0.00	− 0.50	0.60	− 0.95	1.46	0.00	0.00	− 1.13
P4	0.14	0.16	0.01	− 0.17	0.00	0.14	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00
P5	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00
P6	− 0.75	1.75	− 2.95	− 0.48	0.00	− 0.75	− 1.43	0.28	0.58	0.00	0.00	1.11
⁎
p < 0.05.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (222KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Behavioral transition diagrams of the higher- and lower-engagement groups.

Next, let us compare the above two behavioral transition diagrams. There were three significant behavioral sequences in the higher-engagement group (P1 → P1, P1 → P6, and P3 → P3), and just one in the lower-engagement group (P1 → P1). The similar feature of the two groups is that P1 → P1 occurred in both groups. The significant difference is that the higher-engagement students tended to repeat the negotiation and co-construction of knowledge (P3 → P3, Z-score = 3.12), which is consistent with the above results shown in Table 6. P3 is vital for achieving successful social knowledge construction, because it incorporates the role of a bridge connection between the lower and higher levels of knowledge construction.

In addition, the transition from P1 to P6 was also found in the higher-engagement group (P1 → P6, Z-score = 2.01). Regarding the role of P6 (Communicate Emotion), researchers have different viewpoints. Several studies have identified the negative effect of SEI on the performance of knowledge construction in students' self-regulated cooperative learning (Hou et al., 2007, Hou et al., 2009), while others have stated that the presence of P6 in appropriate contexts was beneficial to the knowledge construction process (Lan et al., 2012). In order to understand the role of P6 in this study, we conducted a group interview by randomly selecting five students from the higher-engagement group. The result showed that most students held positive attitude toward P6. They thought the emotional communication even some greetings could make them engage in the translation activity with more motivation and interest. Just as one student said, “Sometimes online chatting give me a feeling of presence and intimacy, and drive me to discuss with my team members”. Two students also mentioned that once they began chatting it was a little difficult for them to come back to the translation tasks. Thus, in this study we believed that P6 promoted student engagement in this activity. Meanwhile, the proper intervention was also needed to make the behavioral transitions, such as P6 → P1, P6 → P2, or P6 → P3, occurred to ensure better results of knowledge construction.

5. Conclusion
In this study, we investigated the behavioral sequences of college students' knowledge construction. Through analyzing students' knowledge construction behaviors, we found the following results. 1) The three major types of behavior were P1 (Share Info/Ideas), P2 (Discovery Dissonance), and P3 (Negotiate Meaning). 2) Four significant behavioral sequences were identified, including P1 → P1, P2 → P3, P3 → P3, and P6 → P6. 3) The most significant difference with respect to the behavioral sequences between the higher- and lower-engagement groups was P3 → P3; Higher-engagement students were more inclined to negotiate and co-construct knowledge repeatedly.

One of the problematic issues deserved our attention in the future is the role of SEI. In this study, we found that students tended to communicate emotionally into a repetitive cycle. With no doubt, social-emotional communication is essential in cooperative learning and has promotive impact on student engagement (Bales, 1950). Kwon, Liu, and Johnson (2014) also found that conducting positive SEI continuously among group members could improve the efficiency and effectiveness of computer-supported collaborative learning. However, the exorbitant SEI might become a disruptive factor that needs to be avoided in cooperative work, because it may cause interruptions in the knowledge construction cycle and harm student engagement. In order to control the SEI properly, some researchers (Aroyo and Kommers, 1999, Hou et al., 2009) have proposed integrating intelligent agents to provide automatic timely guidance to users in collaborative knowledge sharing and learning environments. In addition to intelligent agents, teachers could also clarify the cooperative requirements and evaluation criterion to assist students' self-regulation and self-control (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2004).

In addition, the challenge of better encouraging lower-engagement students to participate in online cooperative translation tasks is another issue that deserves our attention. Researchers have found that regardless of whether the learning environment is a classroom or online, engagement is a key influencing factor of students' academic performance (Blasco-Arcas et al., 2013, Corno and Mandinach, 1983, Davies and Graff, 2005, Zhao and Kuh, 2004). College students typically have sufficient self-organizing abilities for performing online cooperative translation activities. The reasons why some students do not actively participate in such activities may include a lack of learning motivation (Bates & Khasawneh, 2007), lack of interest (Flowerday, Schraw, & Stevens, 2004) or lack of self-efficacy (Sun & Rueda, 2012). Therefore, course instructors should take measures to motivate and stimulate students to take part in the cooperative translation tasks, such as making process-oriented evaluation plans and carrying out moderate competitions between groups. In addition, when a student encounters difficulties during the process of online cooperative translation, he or she should able to receive timely guidance and encouragement from other students or the instructor. Through such measures, students may become more self-confident with respect to finishing the translation tasks at hand.

In summary, this study investigated and compared the behavioral patterns of knowledge construction in online cooperative translation without teacher intervention, and the findings were helpful for both improving SETI and conducting further studies on cooperative translation among EFL learners. However, the study still had some limitations. First, by not establishing a control group, we could not identify the specific distinctions in the behavioral patterns of knowledge construction between the cooperative translation and the individual translation. Second, the positive and negative effects of SEI on student engagement and learning performance could not be clearly identified. Third, the learning activity itself may be an influence factor of generating significant behavioral sequences. That means the lack of sequential patterns might be the product of the activity itself.

In the future, we hope to take measures to enhance student engagement in online cooperative translation activities, and also compare different behavioral patterns of knowledge construction under different learning strategies (e.g., peer review vs. no peer review, competition vs. no competition). Furthermore, we plan to explore the role of SEI in online cooperative translation activities and its effect on P1-P5 behaviors and translation performance. For example, do not include P6 in the analysis model while taking it as a context, then investigate whether expressing disagreement in a friendly tone is more likely to elicit a counter-reply or rebuttal than a disagreement expressed without the use of a friendly tone.