Many faculty and staff in higher education have turned to digitally-enhanced professional learning networks (PLNs) as a means for situated learning that can help them grow in their various professional responsibilities. However, there is scant research on what these PLNs mean to the professional lives of higher educators. We report findings of a qualitative study that investigated participants' perspectives on their PLN experiences through analysis of survey data from 151 higher education faculty and professionals. Data analysis suggested that the anytime, anywhere availability of expansive PLNs, and their capacity to respond to educators' diverse interests and needs, fostered new learning experiences. Participants reported that their PLNs supported professional growth, specifically in the areas of teaching and learning. These findings have implications for defining the present and future of faculty learning and development in a digital age.


Keywords
Social media
Situated learning
PLN
Faculty development
Collaboration
Online networks

1. Introduction
Work in higher education is often highly specialized and competitive in nature, which can foster an isolating environment that hinders the growth of faculty and staff. As higher educators' roles, responsibilities, and commitments evolve, they need support to develop and improve their practice (e.g., Kukulska-Hulme, 2012). In the past, geographic and temporal factors have constrained opportunities to collaborate with colleagues with similar roles or expertise. However, widespread access to the Internet and social media has afforded new learning opportunities that can transcend traditional boundaries.

As a result, some higher education faculty and professionals have turned to social media to create professional learning networks that extend beyond their face-to-face contacts. We define these professional learning networks (PLNs) as unique “systems of interactions made up of people, spaces and tools that support learning and professional growth” (Krutka, Carpenter, & Trust, 2017, p.2). While there is research on faculty uses of specific social media for scholarship (Greenhow and Gleason, 2014, Veletsianos and Kimmons, 2012, Meishar-Tal and Pieterse, 2017) and teaching (e.g., Lin et al., 2013, Mondahl and Razmerita, 2014, Seaman and Tinti-Kane, 2013), there has been no prior research on the PLNs of faculty and higher education professionals. As more higher educators develop PLNs to grow their craft in collaboration with others outside of their local networks, it is important to understand how these professionals construct their PLNs and how PLN activities shape their learning and practice, as well as their students' learning. By examining PLN engagement and the impact of PLNs on teaching and learning, we can identify ways to support and empower higher education faculty and professionals to develop networks that positively shape their practice. Therefore, for this study, we collected survey data that would help us examine and understand higher educators' PLN engagement and influence.

2. Relevant literature
2.1. Situated learning theory
Both in theory and practice, professional learning in higher education is traditionally understood in terms of explicit instruction or training in which individuals acquire knowledge from workshops, seminars, courses, or conferences (e.g., Steinert et al., 2017). However, such methods and theories can be insufficient to explain the more organic social learning in which many higher education professionals engage in a time when technological affordances have influenced the ways we think, access information, and connect with others (Siemens, 2005). Horizontal self-organization around affinities can allow for both individual expertise and distributed knowledge to foster informal learning (Gee, 2004). Numerous educational theorists have posited that the concept of situated learning can help us understand professional learning as occurring within particular contexts (Korthagen, 2010, Lave and Wenger, 1991, Putnam and Borko, 2000). There are particular benefits when those contexts are social, and knowledge is distributed among participants. In such engagements, and in contrast to many formal learning arrangements, learners pursue shared interests in interactive learning systems where activities are authentic for individuals and groups. Individual learning cannot be separated from the learning environment in which it is gained, as participants both shape, and are shaped by, the ecosystem. Reasons for engagement often shift over time as participants' knowledge, needs, and aims change with their careers.

While situated learning can certainly be enacted in face-to-face environments, higher educators have increasingly engaged in online professional learning (Seaman and Tinti-Kane, 2013, Sherer et al., 2003). In digital spaces, learning experiences are mediated by the affordances, biases, and limitations of any platform, but these online spaces can also offer access to resources and dialogues that might not be available in local contexts.

In particular, social media platforms that are important to most PLNs, such as Twitter, Google +, LinkedIn, and Facebook, serve as portals that allow educators to enter affinity spaces for learning around common interests. As an example, teacher educators with varied skills and expertise affiliate around the #teacheredchat hashtag through the Twitter portal to engage in dialogue to improve their abilities to prepare pre-service teachers for the field. Regular participants in the hour-long, live #teacheredchat Monday chat (see Luo, Sickel, & Cheng, 2017 for research on Twitter chats) bring with them a tacit knowledge of how to engage in professional learning in this virtual environment by sharing ideas and resources, welcoming newcomers, and supporting participants among other activities (Carpenter and Krutka, 2014, Visser et al., 2014). In such spaces, there are various means of participation, including chat organizers, moderators who tweet questions, participants who respond to questions and peers' responses, and even lurkers who simply read or “like” tweets. Leadership within Twitter chats is porous and shifting based on what people can contribute and desire to learn. Each participant shares their specialized expertise developed through years of teaching, learning, research, or tweeting, but a more extensive or general knowledge is also valued and shared broadly. Through participation, higher education professionals not only grow in their individual knowledge but contribute to a collective knowledge that is evident on the hashtag feed and dispersed to chat archives, participant blog posts, and projects that extend beyond the Twitter realm. While professional learning in affinity spaces holds promise, educators and researchers must critically reflect on the effectiveness within affinity spaces and their own professional learning networks (Krutka, Carpenter, et al., 2017).

2.2. Professional learning networks
Professional learning networks, also sometimes known as “personal learning networks,” (Digenti, 1999, Tobin, 1998) consist of people, spaces, and tools that support professional growth (Krutka, Carpenter, et al., 2017). PLNs include people who can offer feedback, ideas, emotional support, and collaboration opportunities. Because each PLN is uniquely defined to support personalized learning, the range and types of people in educators' PLNs vary widely. One educator's PLN may include primarily individuals who teach the same subject, while another individual's PLN may feature people who offer diverse perspectives about the broad field of education. PLNs also rely on the spaces in which educators can connect and learn with others. These may be face-to-face spaces, such as conferences and coffee shop meetups, or virtual spaces, such as Twitter chats and Facebook groups. Through their PLNs, educators are able to access cognitive tools, such as ideas, information, and perspectives about teaching and learning, as well as technological tools, such as online websites and videos, that they can use to grow their craft (Krutka et al., 2017, Trust et al., 2016).

Although the concept of a PLN is not new (e.g., Lalonde, 2009), the rise in popularity of social media has afforded educators greater opportunities to cultivate PLNs that span across traditional spatial, temporal, and institutional boundaries. Originally, the term “personal learning network” referred to colleagues and tools (e.g., user manuals) in the workplace that could provide support, information, and help (Tobin, 1998). However, in the past decade, “new technologies such as the Internet have extended the reach of our interactions beyond the geographical limitations of traditional communities” (Wenger, 2006, para. 22). Kukulska-Hulme (2012) noted that in higher education settings, new technologies are “breaking down traditional barriers separating academic research from teaching, work-based learning and informal learning” (pp. 247–248). With social media, professionals' learning opportunities are no longer limited by their local networks or contexts. Instead, individuals can connect and learn with others who they have never met in face-to-face settings. They can share their expertise with and solicit feedback from a broad public audience. Also, with the abundance of information available through social media, professionals may discover exciting, relevant new information, connections, and opportunities that they were not originally seeking. These serendipitous learning experiences can foster creative and critical thinking (e.g., Kop, 2012). Thus, social media can be used to both expand PLNs and facilitate new learning experiences.

The majority of prior research related to PLNs has been situated in K-12 settings. These studies often focus on teacher learning in a single network or online community (Trust, 2012, Gesthuizen, 2012, Linton, 2016, Seo, 2014, Visser et al., 2014). We (Trust et al., 2016) conducted one of the first large-scale studies of K-12 teachers' PLNs. We found that K-12 teachers' PLNs in our sample were uniquely defined, dynamic systems that can shift and grow based on the individual's needs, interests, and goals. Many of our findings aligned with previous research about teacher learning in online networks and communities. Specifically, teachers engage in these online spaces to find, exchange, and construct knowledge (Carpenter and Krutka, 2015, Forte et al., 2012, Hew and Hara, 2007), collaborate (Seo, 2014, Seo and Han, 2013), develop social capital (Ranieri, Manca, & Fini, 2012), and even receive emotional support (Carpenter and Krutka, 2014, Carpenter and Krutka, 2015, Hur and Brush, 2009, Kelly and Antonio, 2016, Visser et al., 2014). We also found that PLNs can support professional growth in affective, social, cognitive, and identity aspects of teaching.

While researchers have not yet explored higher education faculty and staffs' PLN activities or experiences, scholars have examined the use of social media in higher education (e.g., Dabbagh and Kitsantas, 2012, Manca and Ranieri, 2016a, Stewart, 2015a). According to survey data from 7969 faculty, the majority of faculty (70%) use social media for personal reasons; a little more than half (55%) use social media professionally, and approximately 41% use social media for teaching and learning (Seaman & Tinti-Kane, 2013). In terms of professional social media activities, research suggests that faculty utilize social media to acquire professional knowledge (Meishar-Tal & Pieterse, 2017), share information, ideas, and resources (Veletsianos, 2012), engage in social scholarship (Greenhow & Gleason, 2014), ask for and offer advice (Veletsianos, 2012), draw attention to their work and manage their digital reputations (Shah et al., 2016, Stewart, 2015b), belong to a professional community (Meishar-Tal & Pieterse, 2017), and network with other professionals (Veletsianos, 2012, Meishar-Tal and Pieterse, 2017). While administrators and staff tend to use social media accounts (e.g., institutional Twitter accounts) to disseminate information (Davis et al., 2012, Kimmons et al., 2017), some college and university staff reported using social media to support students, build community, and expand connections (Davis et al., 2012, Junco, 2014). Many faculty and staff do, however, express some concerns related to professional use of social media, including issues related to privacy (Seaman & Tinti-Kane, 2013), defining personal and professional boundaries (Veletsianos & Kimmons, 2013), and the appropriateness of these media for teaching activities (Manca & Ranieri, 2016b).

Researchers have explored uses of social media for teaching and learning in higher education settings (e.g., Carpenter, 2015, Krutka et al., 2017, Lin et al., 2013, Mondahl and Razmerita, 2014, Seaman and Tinti-Kane, 2013). Social media is most commonly used in and outside classroom contexts to increase communication, share information, enhance collaboration, create a social presence in online courses, and encourage reflection. While the use of social media thus seems to have the capacity to enhance learning in a classroom setting, there is limited research concerning the impact uses of social media has on higher education faculty and professionals' learning and growth. As a result, we developed the following research questions to guide our study:

RQ1: How do higher education faculty and professionals define their PLNs?

RQ2: How do higher education faculty and professionals' PLN activities shape their learning and practice?

RQ3: How do higher education faculty perceive that participation in PLN activities influences their students' learning?

3. Methods
We sought to investigate faculty and staff conceptions of and experiences with PLNs in order to offer insights into how the Internet has affected the work of higher education professionals. Because of the rapidly shifting technology landscape, the online tools and spaces that play important roles in PLNs sometimes change “too quickly to fully grasp and leaves scholars permanently lagging behind” (Hogan & Quan-Haase, 2010, p. 309). Given this context of almost constant evolution, we aimed to uncover purposes for, and characteristics of, PLNs that were likely to persist despite changes in the popularity or nature of particular online spaces and tools.

3.1. Instrument
We created an anonymous online survey to collect data regarding educator PLNs. Existing germane literature (e.g., Wenger, Trayner, & de Laat, 2011), and our own experiences with PLNs, informed survey creation (see Trust et al., 2016 for more information regarding the instrument). The final survey was made using a commercial survey creation tool, and followed electronic survey quality design criteria, as suggested by Andrews, Nonnecke, and Preece (2003). The survey included ten demographic items, and between four and six PLN-related items, depending on the respondents' roles. Respondents were provided the following definition of PLNs: “A Professional Learning Network (PLN) is a system of interpersonal connections, tools, and resources that support informal learning related to a profession.” All respondents were asked to fill out a grid to describe the frequency of their professional use of various digital tools, and respond to three open-ended prompts. Respondents with teaching responsibilities (i.e., faculty) received an additional close-ended question and a fourth open-ended prompt (see Appendix A for selected survey items). This article explores the survey responses of all participants from higher education settings.

3.2. Data collection
Given that the idea of a PLN is still unfamiliar to many in higher education, trying to construct a sample from the general population of higher education professionals would likely result in a large number of potential respondents being unfamiliar with the concept of interest. Thus, we specifically shared the survey in professional online spaces known to be popular among higher education professionals (Seaman & Tinti-Kane, 2013) and where respondents would be more likely to have heard of PLNs. Upon securing IRB approval, we posted invitations to complete the survey to a variety of online sites, including Twitter, Google +, Facebook, and LinkedIn. We shared the invitations in relevant spaces, groups, or communities within these larger sites, such as the Connected Educator Month Facebook group, the Educational Technology Community Google + group, and various Twitter hashtags, including #highered and #edchat. A degree of snowball sampling occurred, as we posted invitations to additional online spaces after early survey respondents mentioned them as elements of their PLNs. Snowball sampling has previously been used in research on voluntary online activities for which it can be challenging to gather random samples (e.g., Baltar and Brunet, 2012, Carpenter and Krutka, 2014, Visser et al., 2014).

In order to limit the biases associated with such sampling, we posted invitations to a wide variety of online spaces (see Trust et al., 2016). Across these recruitment spaces, we systematically distributed the invitation to participate at various times of the day throughout the week to ensure visibility among educators with different online habits and in different time zones. After 75 days, we closed the survey when the daily response rate began to decrease noticeably.

3.3. Sample
A total of 1417 educators responded to the survey. This article focuses on the 151 respondents who indicated they worked in higher education settings. Trust, Krutka and Carpenter (2016) addressed the 732 participants who were PreK-12 teachers. Because the survey did not require participants to complete every prompt, response numbers for each prompt varied slightly. A little more than half of the higher education participants were male (n = 85; 56.7%) and lived in the United States (n = 93; 62.8%). Participants resided in 28 different countries including Canada (n = 7; 4.7%), Mexico (n = 5; 3.4%), and Saudi Arabia (n = 5; 3.4%). Respondents represented a variety of ages (see Table 1). Their years of experience in higher education ranged from 0 to 51, with an average of 15.9 years of experience (SD = 10.13).


Table 1. Participants' reported ages.

Age	%	Count
18 to 24	2.00%	3
25 to 34	16.00%	24
35 to 44	36.00%	54
45 to 54	22.00%	33
55 to 64	21.33%	32
65 or over	2.67%	4
Total	100%	150
Approximately two-thirds of the higher education participants were faculty members (n = 102; 67.5%). The remaining participants (n = 49; 32.5%) consisted of individuals in roles such as librarian, administrator, and instructional technology support staff. The participants reported affiliation with a variety of content areas, including computers/technology, English, history, math, nursing, business, teacher education, and educational technology (see Table 2).


Table 2. Participants' reported subjects taught.

Subject	Number of participants
Computers/Technology	45
English/Language Arts	24
Educational Technology/Instructional Design	21
History/Social Studies	16
Education	16
Math	10
Science	9
Health/Physical Education	4
Business	4
World Languages (e.g., Spanish, French)	3
ESL	3
Nursing	3
Philosophy	2
Research	2
Library	2
Creative Arts (e.g., art, music, drama)	1
Adult Education	1
Behavior Support	1
Economics	1
Total	168
Note. Some of the participants selected more than one subject.

3.4. Data analysis
With the goal of identifying and exploring patterns in the data, we conducted a thematic analysis, following the six phases defined by Braun and Clarke (2006): becoming familiar with the data, generating initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes, defining and naming themes, and producing the report. First, we independently read and reread the higher education survey responses. We then compared our initial interpretations of the data. Through discussion and consolidation, we were able to produce a first set of 20 tentative codes. Our research team video-conferenced in order to synchronously code and discuss a subset of responses, and in the process built a shared understanding of the codes. Next, two individuals coded the remaining responses for each prompt. The research team analyzed and compared these individuals' coding to reconcile differences of interpretation. Codes were then reconsidered, yielding a revised set of 24 codes (see Appendix B for codebooks). The full data corpus was then reread and recoded with the revised code set. Given the interpretive nature of this qualitative coding, we relied upon intensive group discussion and consensus to reach agreement upon codes, instead of an inter-rater reliability statistic (Saldaña, 2016, Sandelowski and Barroso, 2007).

Next, we prepared initial reports for each of the four prompts. These reports included analysis of code frequencies, exemplars of data that represented each code, and initial thoughts regarding salient themes. We discussed each report individually before convening additional meetings to consider how the reports related to each other and the research questions.

4. Findings
4.1. RQ1: how do higher education faculty and professionals define their PLNs?
Higher education faculty and professionals (n = 102) defined their PLNs in myriad ways. The majority of responses (n = 81) described multifaceted networks consisting of multiple tools, spaces, or people, or a combination of these components. For example, a higher education professional from Mexico commented that his PLN included “teachers, entrepreneurs, business people, researchers, health sciences professionals/LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, Yammer/ #elearning #teaching #creativity #entrepreneurs,” while a faculty member from Guatemala shared:

I am a member of AECT [Association for Educational Communications and Technology] / I sometimes check on Articulate's Learning Heroes Forum. /I am subscribed to the ITForum and the OER Forum lists; I am also subscribed to the mailing lists from Educause Review Online, Fundacion Telefonica in Spain and Portal Educativo de las Americas (Organization of American States). / /Twitter and Blog feeds are my most valuable tools to keep updated with what is being published and is relevant for instructional design and systemic change in education.

While Latin American higher educators were not widely represented in our dataset (n = 11), these two individuals' comments exemplified the multifaceted nature of PLNs. The participant from Mexico connected with diverse groups of people and engaged in learning in a number of online spaces, while the Guatemalan faculty member's PLN was defined in terms of organizations, online spaces as portals for connecting and learning with others, and digital tools (e.g., mailing lists).

Although most of the participants defined PLNs as multifaceted systems, some respondents (n = 6) described what appeared to be single-faceted PLNs. These individuals either listed one space (e.g., “My main PLN resides in Facebook”) or a single component of a PLN. For example, one participant identified defined her PLN simply as “faculty from related fields.”

Almost all of the participants' descriptions of their PLNs (n = 96) included a social component, such as people, or spaces for connecting with people. For example, a higher education professional from the United States shared:

My PLN consists mostly of technology integration specialists (in k12 environments) and education faculty (at various universities). Twitter has been the most convenient/most popular tool of choice to connect, but other tools such as Slack, Google +, and blogs have also provided pretty regular channels of communication among folks in my PLN.

This individual listed a number of ways of connecting and communicating with others in his PLN. The majority of respondents (n = 76) identified different types of people with whom who they connected and learned, including K-12 teachers (n = 38), professionals in various fields (n = 26), members of organizations (n = 22), faculty (n = 21), colleagues (n = 20), administrators (n = 13), students (n = 11), instructional designers (n = 10), friends (n = 7), leaders (n = 6), and researchers (n = 5).

More than a quarter of the respondents to this question (n = 29) mentioned one or more professional organization as a means of engaging in social learning. These participants listed 56 distinct organizations. One participant shared that his PLN includes “colleagues in AECT and various AERA SIGs [special interest groups] such as TICL [Technology, Instruction, Cognition & Learning]. I also follow and read journals and communications distributed by a wider range of professional societies.” Participants identified various ways of engaging in social learning with professional organizations, such as reading research articles written by other members, attending conferences, and engaging in discussions with members in online affinity spaces. For instance, an English/Language Arts faculty shared that her “PLN includes other members of the professional organizations to which I belong, and we communicate via conferences and online forums.” This faculty member engaged in learning with her PLN in both face-to-face and virtual spaces.

Many participants described the spaces in which they engaged in PLN activities. More than three quarters of the participants (n = 84) listed online spaces, including Twitter (n = 54), Facebook (n = 25), LinkedIn (n = 20), and Google + Communities (n = 12). Thirty-five participants included Twitter hashtags in their responses. These participants listed 71 different hashtags, with #edtech (n = 13) and #edchat (n = 12) being the most popular. Some participants (n = 13) also described face-to-face spaces in which they engaged in professional learning, such as conferences (n = 9), and local meetings (n = 3). In addition to participants' open-ended descriptions of their PLNs, we asked them to report their frequency of engagement with specific spaces and tools that are commonly cited in the existing PLN literature (see Table 3). Out of the 122 participants who responded to this prompt, 69% reported engaging with Twitter on a daily or weekly basis. Facebook (59%), blogs (57%), and online courses (56%) were also commonly frequented PLN spaces and tools by the participants.


Table 3. Participants' reported frequency of engagement with spaces and tools as part of their PLNs.

Daily	Weekly	Monthly	< 1 Month	Never	Total
Facebook	56	16	9	13	26	120
Twitter	60	24	12	10	15	121
Edmodo	14	11	7	24	65	121
Blogs	30	39	26	12	14	121
Social bookmarking	17	15	10	20	53	115
Google +	31	26	23	20	22	122
LinkedIn	19	34	22	24	19	118
Pinterest	5	22	22	22	48	119
Online courses	22	46	21	18	14	121
YouTube	25	23	20	27	22	117
Respondents reported using a number of digital tools as part of their PLN activities. The most popular tools were blogs (n = 35), curation tools (e.g., Flipboard, Zite, Feedly) (n = 12), newsletters (n = 9), email (n = 7), and professional journals (n = 7). A few participants also listed other tools, such as websites, Internet searches, library databases, and books/e-books.

Approximately 40% of the participants provided details about how they engaged in learning. One respondent shared that she, “attend[s] online conferences/webinars,” and another individual commented: “I engage in a number of online communities, often as part of short courses or MOOCs.” A faculty member identified a number of ways in which she engaged in learning with her PLN:

[I] find information regarding my profession in forums, blogs, books, video-courses, tweets and facebook posts. / I follow the blogs from EC-Council, Offensive Security, SANS and Cisco Systems. / I'm subscribed to newsletters from Kaspersky Labs, ESET and Rapid 7. I also visit the sites from the US-Cert, SANS, Cisco, Hillstone, Rapid 7, Offensive Security, often.

This individual, like many other respondents, described her PLNs in terms of following and reading various posts and websites to expand her professional knowledge, in contrast to other participants who emphasized more social and/or community aspects of their PLNs. Participants listed various ways that they engaged in learning, including connecting with other individuals, engaging in conversations, following specific people, hashtags, or blogs, finding professional knowledge, and curating information and resources. Some respondents detailed particular reasons for engaging in online spaces, while others seemed to have less specific goals. For example, a participant shared, “My PLN is informal and accidental.” This participant's comment exemplified the sometimes serendipitous nature of learning with PLNs.

While there were common themes across the responses, overall, the participants offered diverse PLN descriptions. Faculty and staff mentioned various types of people in their PLNs, ranging from friends and family to educators and entrepreneurs. Some respondents listed one or two online spaces in which they engaged, while others described multifaceted networks of people, spaces, and tools. This diversity highlights how PLNs can offer flexible, adaptable, and personalized learning experiences.

4.2. RQ2: how do higher education faculty and professionals' PLN activities shape their learning and practice?
Ninety participants (59%) described changes to their learning and 79 (52%) identified changes to their practice as a result of their PLN activities. These changes were as diverse and multifaceted as the participants' PLN descriptions

Respondents most commonly reported learning professional knowledge and skills (n = 73). While some responses were broad (n = 16), others (n = 22) listed specific skills or knowledge. For example, a computers/technology faculty from the U.S. commented that she learned about, “faculty issues with hiring international colleagues” from her PLN. A small number of participants (n = 5) reported learning how to develop certain skills, such as writing and planning.

More than one-third of the respondents reported learning about teaching strategies, ideas, and approaches (n = 34) from their PLN activities. For instance, a teacher education program faculty learned that “SBG [standards-based grading] is essential to creating a growth mindset in the classroom,” and another participant wrote that she discovered “current research and best practices in online learning from #onlinelearning in Twitter.” Some respondents (n = 30) reported making changes to their practice by implementing the teaching strategies, ideas, and approaches that they discovered from their PLN activities. For example, a computer/technology faculty from Ecuador wrote, “Now I use stories and case studies in my classes as introduction for new chapters.” These respondents credited their PLNs with providing them professional knowledge and/or skills that led to changes in particular aspects of their teaching.

Alongside the implementation of specific teaching strategies, more than a fifth (n = 17) of the respondents referred to more general changes in their approaches to teaching. For example, an elementary education methods course instructor wrote, “My classrooms do not have walls anymore because I have knocked them down to invite others in.” Multiple respondents reported that their PLN had influenced their teaching to become more student-centered. For instance, one participant commented, “I have also begun to move towards a student created curriculum where students construct the objectives and the learning tasks, as well as the assessments.”

In addition to teaching strategies, ideas, and approaches, some of the respondents (n = 24) indicated that they learned about various technologies and digital tools from their PLNs. A faculty member commented: “I learn a lot about how technology is actually working in a classroom through teacher blogs. This provides me with valuable practical information about tech tools and strategies.” A small number of participants felt that they were able to change their practice by incorporating more technology into their teaching. One respondent noted, “When teaching preservice teachers how to use specific applications, I have updated or changed resources, such as video tutorials on iMovie or provided alternative software options through information shared in my PLN.” This individual relied on her PLN to keep up-to-date on the latest software and tools that she could embed into her practice.

Twenty-eight participants reported that they discovered the value of connecting and learning with others in their PLNs. For instance, a technology integration specialist from the U.S. shared, “what I've learned and appreciate more is the concept of connection and how together we can make change.” The latter part of this comment speaks to the collective knowledge within affinity spaces. Some of the participants (n = 17) described changes to their practice related to the benefits of being connected to other people via PLNs. For instance, these connections provided access to “information crowdsourced via social networks. A good example of this was the crowdsourcing of materials for teaching about Ferguson on the #sschat hashtag.” The connections enabled by PLNs appeared to affect participants' work in multidimensional ways. For example, a creative arts faculty said of her PLN that, “I learn from my colleagues, and share my best practices with them, which helps me reinforce my own best practices! It's a win-win situation for me and my students.” This individual felt that she was able to grow her practice by sharing her expertise with peers.

Some of the participants (n = 19) reported that they developed new dispositions as a result of their PLN activities. Many of these responses centered on ideals of reciprocity and sharing. For example, one respondent wrote that the “most important thing I learned is to be generous. Others have provided information and support to me when I needed it, giving back is a way to continue the community of sharing. That is what a PLN is all about.” Another participant stated he learned how “growing your PLN helps you grow, academically, professionally and personally.” Both of these individuals felt that engaging in PLN activities helped them learn the value of supporting others, and contributing to the growth of their network colleagues.

Some of the participants (n = 17) felt that their PLNs contributed to changes in their dispositions specifically related to teaching and learning. For example, a faculty member claimed that her PLN had led her to “become a true lifelong learner.” Another participant described how the expanded interactions and opportunities she had experienced through her PLN had shifted her sense of the impact she could have: “I have been teaching for 17 years; I never wanted to leave a legacy or something with my name on it. I do now! I have a TRUE purpose!” Four participants described being more “confident” or “comfortable” in their teaching because of the network of support they had through their PLNs. For instance, a computers/technology faculty noted, “In general, I will ask questions of my PLN when I am struggling with an issue in my teaching.” The disposition changes reported by respondents were diverse in nature, with one faculty member from South Korea even indicating his PLN activities made him relatively less confident: “I am less sure of myself at times, as I have seen different perspectives … I am sometimes more aware of my own teaching and what I am doing.” This individual felt that the people in his PLN offered new perspectives that challenged his thinking.

Some participants (n = 35) noted that they discovered new information from their PLNs, such as learning opportunities, or consulting and job opportunities. Nine respondents indicated that their PLNs had made them more aware of current trends and information in their fields. For example, one participant commented that, “I'm constantly keeping up on the latest research and experiences of others in my field,” while another wrote that “Twitter keeps me up to date with breaking education stories and innovative approaches.”

Eight respondents specifically mentioned encouraging their students to grow PLNs after experiencing positive PLN experiences themselves. For instance, one participant explained, “I frequently tell students that I will check with my PLN or I recommend someone within my PLN that they should contact.” Several respondents even mentioned that they required their own students to initiate or develop PLNs. For example, one participant wrote, “Teaching my pre-service teachers how to be resourceful is the best gift I can give them. Helping them to understand the importance and value of a PLN is something they can carry forward into their careers.”

Four respondents indicated that they did not feel their PLNs had resulted in changes to their practice. For example, one participant said that her PLN simply “makes it easier find” things she had accessed by other means in the past. Eight respondents gave vague or unclear responses that were difficult to categorize. For instance, one participant only wrote that she/he has begun to “use tech more,” without providing any additional information about that use.

Overall, participants reported discovering or developing new information, ideas, strategies, approaches, technologies, values, and dispositions through their PLN activities. A number of respondents reported making changes to their practice. Yet, even though participants' responses were diverse, the majority of these responses related to teaching and learning. Changes to practice related to administrative work, service, and research activities were mentioned less frequently.

4.3. RQ3: how do higher education faculty perceive that participation in PLN activities influences their students' learning?
Of the total 151 respondents, 102 reported that they were faculty. These individuals were given an additional survey prompt that asked them to describe how their PLN activities shaped their students' learning. A total of 50 participants responded to this prompt. A few of these respondents (n = 4) indicated that changes were conveyed to them via formal student feedback. For example, a business faculty from the U.S. commented: “I have seen some improvement in end-of-course survey results from questions related to how much the students learned (self-reported) and whether they were engaged by the course.” However, others did not necessarily identify how they knew their students' learning had changed.

Overall, many participants appeared to struggle to draw connections between the changes they made to their practice as a result of engaging in PLN activities and changes in their students' learning. Eleven of the fifty responses were considered to be vague (e.g., “they use tech more”) or unclear (e.g., “put them on the cutting edge”). Nineteen responses were at least partially teacher-centered (e.g., “far more students are submitting better products - of course I have introduced better examples and refined performance criteria”), while seven respondents answered only by identifying things they had made (e.g., “it has improved my teaching”). Other participants (n = 7) noted that they were unsure whether their PLN activities contributed to students' learning, as one participant commented, “I am not 100% sure this has shaped my students learning too much.” In total, 18 respondents did not indicate a change in students' learning in their answer. One participant admitted that, “it is difficult to pinpoint specific outcomes.”

Among respondents who were able to clearly identify changes in students' learning, 13 reported modifications in learning outcomes that included increased engagement or improved academic outcomes. Students were described as “much more motivated,” “more responsive,” and possessing “greater enthusiasm for learning.” One respondent suggested specific academic improvement included “higher order thinking is reached and overall comprehension has improved” and another saw a “higher success rate” in the class. A faculty member from Germany noted that students “often tell by feedback and show by their engagement and their outcomes (e.g., an essay or a YouTube) that they are much more motivated, they read more and write longer, and discuss more issues amongst each other.” This individual shifted his teaching approach towards more student-centered, project-based learning, and as a result, his students were more active and involved.

Some of the participants (n = 13) believed that by changing their practice and sharing new ideas, resources, and tools from their PLNs, their students were more likely to implement what they learned in class. For example, a computers/technology faculty member noted that she changed her practice by “incorporat[ing] new knowledge” and as a result, her “students have taken new knowledge (trends, new technologies) and run with it to create presentations, reports, etc…” Another respondent commented, “I teach in the open and engage my students in both formal and informal learning experiences by design,” and subsequently, “my students now design learning experiences in the open and engage with PLN.” An educational technology faculty felt that since he advised his students “to create and maintain a PLN outside of our university,” his students “are participating in the field more (publishing, presenting, etc…).” These three individuals were able to make connections between changes in their teaching and students' actions and learning.

Eight respondents suggested that their students displayed dispositional changes. For example, one participant shared that his “students have shown great interest in learning how to successfully integrate technology as well as using it professionally after developing a solid foundation of pedagogical approaches.” Another faculty member shared that as a result of shifting to a constructivist model, her students started to “learn independently and discover the way they would like to learn.” Other responses indicated an increase in willingness to try new things. A U.S. faculty member shared that her students “take more risks with technology in their classrooms,” while another commented, “my students have started their own Twitter accounts and are experimenting with it.” These responses seemed to mirror the participants' changes in their practice, as some respondents indicated that engaging in PLN activities encouraged them to take risks in their practice, try new things, and transform the way they learn.

Finally, eight respondents indicated that their students learned how to develop and take advantage of PLNs. One participant noted that she, “infused professional networking in my Instructional Design and Technology courses where learners must begin building their own PLN for increased and ongoing professional growth,” and as a result her students are “finding and pulling resources from a variety of sources and individuals in their area of interest.” This participant felt that by encouraging her students to engage in PLN activities, they were able to contribute more to her courses. Other respondents indicated that their students learned to “actively use Pinterest, Livebinders, Diigo, and Listly as a way to curate resources” and “follow educators on Twitter to learn new strategies or resources for their future classrooms.” However, two respondents were skeptical their students were prepared to benefit from PLNs. One participant suggested that “most [students] are too focused on meeting other requirements and fail to understand how a PLN might help them,” while another participant felt that since her students were too busy with heavy work- and study-loads, “‘connected learning’ is still ‘too much work’ for them.”

Overall, many of the higher education faculty participants struggled to draw clear connections between their PLN activities, changes in practice, and alterations in student learning. Some of these participants provided teacher-centered responses, while others were unable to articulate specific changes in student learning. However, some participants identified specific improvements in student learning, such as increased engagement, better test scores, willingness to apply new knowledge and take risks, and increased engagement in PLN activities. Given that participants reported making varied changes to their own practice, it is fitting that participants indicated a broad range of alterations in student learning.

5. Discussion
While learning is often conceived of as a social process, isolation and the highly specialized nature of much work in higher education can restrict social interactions at times. This siloing can hinder collaboration, social learning, and professional growth. As a result, faculty and staff are often left to their own devices to figure out how to grow in their practice. In order for faculty and staff to adapt to changes in their field, they “need to plan and revisit their own development in a self-directed way within a community of learning (peers and/or students), taking into account the various aspects of their role and their own professional learning needs” (Kukulska-Hulme, 2012, p. 253). For many of the respondents in our sample, PLNs appeared to meet such needs.

Our study highlighted how higher education faculty and professionals have developed PLNs in a variety of ways to support their disparate interests, needs, and aims for professional growth. PLNs afforded situated, social, and distributed learning opportunities that fostered meaningful changes in practice and student learning. The flexibility of PLNs allowed higher educators to adapt their learning experiences based on the contexts in which they worked, and also offered opportunities for engagement, various means of participation, and even community that extended beyond the walls of physical institutions. Professional knowledge was distributed across people and tools in our participants' PLNs, which offered new learning experiences. For example, unlike one-size-fits-all workshops, or yearly conferences, engaging in learning with others through social media portals can happen anytime and anywhere with geographically dispersed colleagues.

According to our data, participants curated diverse PLNs that supported their professional growth in myriad ways. Respondents reported discovering new ideas, up-to-date information, teaching strategies and approaches, and both specialized and general professional knowledge. PLNs supported both new types of connections (e.g., finding and collaborating with new colleagues from other countries via Twitter) and the strengthening of more traditional connections (e.g., deepening participation with a professional association because of its expanded online activities). Some higher educators noted that their PLNs changed their dispositions, while others discovered the value of authentic learning and sharing with a community. A number of participants were able to draw connections between what they learned from their PLNs and changes in their practice. Fewer participants were able to identify how the changes they made to their practice impacted student learning. Overall, the findings from our study are aligned with previous results reported in the literature, including that higher educators use social media to share information, ideas and resources, ask for and offer advice, and connect and network (Veletsianos, 2012), and that PLN engagement resulted in positive changes in teaching and learning (Trust et al., 2016).

While there are various potential benefits to PLNs, our participants' responses centered on teaching and learning. Teaching is often only one of the many responsibilities of higher educators. We were surprised at how few of our participants' responses referred to other aspects of their work, including research, service, and leadership. Previous studies have indicated that some faculty use social media to engage in social scholarship (Greenhow & Gleason, 2014), draw attention to their work (Shah et al., 2016), and support students in connecting and learning outside of the classroom (Davis et al., 2012). The emphasis in our findings on learning to teach may reflect the lack of preparation for teaching many faculty members experience (Austin, 2002, Bok, 2015). Alternatively, some higher educators may simply still be learning how to cultivate PLNs that support all aspects of their work, or may not consider PLNs as related to some spheres of their work. For example, while many academics that have technology-enhanced PLNs likely use academic social networks such as Researchgate or Academia.edu (Meishar-Tal & Pieterse, 2017), these services did not appear in the PLN descriptions in our sample.

While the majority of participants defined their PLNs as multifaceted systems of people, spaces, and/or digital tools, compared to the K-12 teachers in our previous study, many of these higher education participants' PLNs appeared to be somewhat limited in scope. Some of the PLNs were not diverse in nature (i.e., they consisted of similar types of people, similar spaces, or only people from the same field). A few respondents described PLNs that mostly consisted of tools for curating or acquiring knowledge (e.g., blog posts, professional journals, or newsletters), which appears to suggest that their engagement with others was limited. Other participants listed only one or two spaces or groups of people; such individuals may not be tapping the full potential of PLNs. These findings show that there is still significant room for growth in higher educators' PLNs.

Given that PLNs can potentially support higher educators in breaking down silos and improving their practice, faculty and staff might benefit from enriching and expanding their PLNs to support all areas of their work and connect to new ideas, perspectives, and opportunities. By actively reflecting on the quality of their PLN interactions and experiences, higher educators can determine whether their PLNs positively impact relevant areas of their practice. While many respondents were able to identify at least one way that their PLNs shaped their practice, a few felt that their PLNs did not result in changes in their practice. Additionally, faculty in our study struggled to draw connections between their PLN engagement, changes in practice, and changes in students' learning, which aligned with our previous study about K-12 teachers' PLNs (Trust et al., 2016). Considering that time spent on social media might be dismissed by some in higher education, faculty and staff may run the risk of being perceived as wasting time on frivolous activities unless they can articulate the benefits of PLNs. Higher education professionals should be able to reflect upon and justify the value of their PLNs to their work and the goals of their institutions (e.g., increase impact of scholarship).

5.1. Implications for research and practice
Researchers can build upon this study to address the many gaps that remain in the literature. Future studies are needed to explore how higher education professionals learn to cultivate their PLNs, how they manage the interactions among the different components of their PLNs, and how their online and offline professional activities interact, relate, and impact learning. Research could also explore differences in PLNs by faculty rank and/or institution type. Longitudinal research and in-depth case studies are both needed to examine whether or how higher educators' PLN engagements leads to changes in their practices and students' learning. Comparative research could potentially shed light upon country-specific opportunities and challenges associated with PLNs that our research did not address. In the past, most higher education professionals have had limited opportunities to interact with colleagues from other regions and cultures, and research on what happens in, and results from, such collaborations could be of great value to the higher education field. Differences in cultures and higher education norms could lead to interesting cross-pollination of ideas, but also create obstacles to mutual understanding.

The low barriers to participation that exist with many social media tools create both opportunities and challenges for higher education faculty and staff. In addition to facilitating collaboration across boundaries that exist within higher education, PLNs have the potential to support higher education professionals in interacting with parties outside of the academy. Faculty and staff can take advantage of the open nature of many social media tools and more easily include people, tools, and spaces from beyond higher education in their PLNs. This can be mutually beneficial in a number of ways, as the work of faculty and staff can be more broadly shared, as well as be more informed by the expertise and experience of networks outside of academia.

Future studies are needed to examine the barriers, challenges, and concerns that shape higher educators' use of social media for professional growth. The roles of PLNs may be complicated by ambivalence regarding the social media technologies that are central to PLNs (Manca & Ranieri, 2016a). According to Inside Higher Ed's 2015 Survey of Faculty Attitudes on Technology, “sixty percent of faculty members agree they are concerned about recent attacks on scholars for comments they made on social media” (Straumsheim, Jaschik, & Lederman, 2015, p. 7), and one-quarter of the faculty members reported that they changed the way they communicate on social media as a result of these concerns. Social media can be perceived to challenge norms of authority, credibility, and expertise that have long been cherished in higher education, and as Veletsianos and Kimmons (2013) note, “While social networking sites can be used for professional purposes, faculty members may resist or reject the values embedded in such tools, which they feel may impact the ways that they perceive themselves, their teaching, and their research” (p. 43). The implications of the commercial nature of these media also should be considered. Further research that captures and makes sense of such voices would be beneficial to the field.

Additionally, subsequent research is needed with a larger, random sample in order to determine whether our findings can be generalized to a broader population. This study was limited by its use of non-random sampling. Respondents may not represent trends in the general population of higher education professionals. In particular, individuals who are more positive or enthusiastic about their PLNs may have been more likely to take them time to respond to our survey. Faculty and staff who had prior negative or unsatisfactory experiences trying to establish PLNs may have been less likely to visit the online spaces where we solicited participants. Also, since, in many cases, we distributed the survey invitations from our social media accounts, the nature of our own existing networks likely influenced our sample. For example, the fact that we are ourselves teacher educators likely contributed to the strong representation in our sample of faculty and staff involved in teacher education. This research is also limited by its reliance upon respondents' self-reporting. We thus presented our results so that fellow scholars might further interpret them in relation to their experiences, contexts, and research.

6. Conclusion
The development of dynamic PLNs by higher education professionals to connect, collaborate, and learn beyond their campus boundaries offers intriguing possibilities. The recent rise of social media platforms brings with it opportunities and challenges for professional growth. Some higher education faculty and professionals tap into the benefits of these new technologies to expand their PLNs and break down the silos that might have restricted professional growth. The results of our study suggest that a number of higher educators believe that their PLN engagement positively impacts their professional growth in a number of ways, including improving teaching, learning, and even student learning.

As the concept of technology-enhanced PLNs has only recently been taken up in higher education settings, there are still many questions about how informal and organic networks might interact with larger institutions. However, we believe this study offers sufficient evidence that many higher education professionals are already benefitting from the experiences their PLNs afford. In an increasingly networked society, PLNs could offer higher educators and their institutions ways to grow in new directions. Many participants in our study are already forging a path forward. Should other higher educators follow their lead?