This study examines whether blended first-year writing courses can function as Communities of Inquiry and analyzes whether the amount of time spent online impacts the extent to which students positively perceive teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence. A modified version of the 34-item Community of Inquiry survey instrument was delivered to students enrolled in 22 sections of a FYW course at the same university. Findings indicate students in high blend (50% online) classes perceived greater degrees of teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence than students in medium blend (33% online) classes. Analysis of survey results, alongside observations of the assigned online activities, suggest a correlation between online time on task and interactive learning activities that promote collaborative student-student interactions. Implications for blended writing instructors and opportunities for future research are discussed.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Blended learning

Hybrid learning

First-year writing

Online writing instruction

Writing studies

Community of inquiry

1. Introduction
For nearly two decades, the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2000) has been used to theorize online and blended learning (Anderson, 2016, Halverson et al., 2014). Garrison and Vaughan (2008) suggest that one of the reasons the CoI framework has been so successful “is that it builds upon two ideas that are essential to higher education--community and inquiry” (p. 9, emphasis in original). This dual orientation emphasizes that learners need to engage in ongoing inquiry in order to integrate new knowledge with their existing knowledge (Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Shea & Bidjerano, 2013; Vaughan, 2010). The field of composition studies operates under a similar assumption, emphasizing that writing, like learning, is a social activity (Bruffee, 1984; Ede and Lunsford, 2011, Gere, 1987). As the CCCC Position Statement on the Principles for the Postsecondary Teaching of Writing states, “every document is addressed to at least one reader and reflects a writer's understanding of that reader's social context. ... In practice, this means that writers learn the many ways in which writing is a social activity” (n.p.). The social nature of writing requires composition instructors to emphasize “audiences and contexts for reception” (n.p.), which they do in part by facilitating collaborative activities like peer review, group discussion, and collaborative writing. Consequently, we see an opportunity for applying the community of inquiry framework to composition pedagogy as a way to understand both how and what writing students learn.

We are especially interested in the context of blended, first-year writing (FYW) courses. FYW is a general education requirement at most American institutions of higher education. Because these courses are small—the recommended course cap is 20 students (CCCC Position Statement)—they provide a unique opportunity for college freshman to engage in communities of inquiry. We focus on blended FYW courses because the combination of face-to-face and online learning activities holds considerable potential for both learning in general (Garrison & Vaughan, 2008) and learning to write in particular (Snart, 2015). However, there is still some debate around how much time should be devoted to online activities (Owston & York, 2018). This article contributes to those conversations by analyzing CoI Survey responses from FYW students in medium blend (33% online) and high blend (50% online) courses.

2. Communities of inquiry in first-year writing courses
The CoI Framework maintains that social knowledge construction is facilitated when a course attends to three interrelated components: teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence. Understanding how these three presences inform each other is vital in order to “create and sustain a purposeful learning community” (Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, & Fung, 2010, p. 32), which can in turn help educators both design and assess their online and blended courses (Akyol, Garrison, & Ozden, 2009b; Shea & Bidjerano, 2009; Shea, Li, & Pickett, 2006).

“Teaching presence” refers to the instructional design and organization of the course as well as the ways in which teachers facilitate discussion and provide feedback that clarifies ideas and promotes learning (Garrison, 2017, p. 72–76). These aspects of teaching presence are characterized by three categories in CoI research: Design and Organization, Facilitating Discourse, and Direct Instruction. In addition to instructor actions, teaching presence should be enacted by students as they “develop metacognitive awareness and regulative abilities … to manage and monitor their learning” (p. 80). In this way, teaching presence creates active, student-centered learning environments in which students and teachers are equal participants in the learning experience. This type of learning is particularly important for writing instruction, where the writing teacher acts as a coach (Vanderstaay, Faxon, Meishchen, Kolesnikov, & Ruppel, 2009), helping students achieve their own writing goals rather than teaching one “right” way to write (Brannon & Knoblauch, 1982).

These student-centered environments are made possible by “social presence,” which creates “a climate that supports and encourages probing questions, skepticism, and the contribution of explanatory ideas” (Garrison, 2017, p. 37). Students with a high level of social presence bring their interests and experiences into the classroom and view themselves as working towards a common goal alongside their classmates. These elements are characterized by three categories of social presence in CoI research: Open Communication, Affective Communication, and Group Cohesion. Importantly, social presence “does not mean supporting engagement for purely social purposes” (37). Instead, social presence involves developing sufficient trust to facilitate genuine negotiation and collaboration. These trusting relationships are especially important for writing students, who are regularly asked to share their writing and critique each other (Corbett, LaFrance, & Decker, 2014).

The ultimate goal of a community of inquiry is for students to engage in critical thinking and knowledge construction, or “cognitive presence,” which CoI researchers measure according to the four phases of practical inquiry: Triggering Event, Exploration, Integration, and Resolution (Garrison, 2017, p. 55–57). This process encourages learners to “step back and critically examine ... assumptions and ideas,” which can facilitate the development of “a metacognitive awareness essential to worthwhile and continued learning” (p. 52). In the writing classroom, that metacognitive awareness can facilitate revision in response to feedback, as students learn to “see their writing through a reader's eyes” (Covill, 2010, p. 204). Metacognitive awareness is also developed through reflective writing in composition pedagogy as students reflect on their beliefs about writing and their identities as writers (Sommers, 2011).

Importantly, all three presences are required to create a community of inquiry, and they overlap and inform one another. CoI Survey research shows that social presence acts as a mediator between teaching and cognitive presence (Shea & Bidjerano, 2009), such that teaching presence creates the environment in which a combination of social and cognitive presence supports collaborative learning. In the writing classroom, the presences can also reinforce and enact the ways that writing is a simultaneously social and cognitive task.

The overlaps between the CoI framework and composition pedagogy have been gaining increased attention in composition studies. Scholars have theorized about teaching presence (Dockter, 2016) and studied the ways teaching presence informs feedback to student writing (Cox, Black, Heney, & Keith, 2015; Grigoryan, 2017). Social presence has been studied in second language writers' tweets (Lomicka & Lord, 2012) and in online writing students' use of avatars (Cunningham, 2015), and cognitive presence has been considered in first-year writing (FYW) contexts (Seward, 2018, Stewart, 2018a, “Cognitive Presence”). Other scholars have used the CoI framework to study the design of second language writing courses (Kim, 2016) and the design of FYW courses (Stewart, 2017, Stewart, 2018b, “Community Building”). However, our review of the literature found no studies that delivered the CoI survey to students in a blended FYW course. Meanwhile, institutions continue to increase the number of blended courses offered (Adams Becker et al., 2017), including writing courses, warranting additional research into students' perceptions of blended writing courses.

3. Blended communities of inquiry
Many researchers have examined blended learning through the CoI framework and have used the CoI survey to analyze how students perceive teaching, social, and cognitive presence in their blended courses. For the purposes of this article, blended learning refers to courses in which a significant amount of in-person class time is replaced by online activities (Allen, Seaman, & Garrett, 2007; Kenar, 2015). CoI studies comparing blended and online courses have found that students in blended courses had higher perceptions of all three presences (Akyol, Garrison, & Ozden, 2009a). Shea and Bidjerano (2013) found that students in blended courses “tend to rate their instructors' teaching presence behaviors significantly higher, to perceive their own learning as better,” and “to feel more affectively and socially connected to their peers” relative to those in solely online courses (p. 366). Research suggests that these high levels of the three presences can be attributed to the collaborative and learner-centered strategies that the blended format promotes through its sustained blend of active, synchronous activities and reflective, independent activities (Garrison, 2017; McGee, 2014; Rovai & Jordan, 2004; Stein & Graham, 2014).

Research also suggests that students perform better in blended environments than in solely face-to-face environments (Helms, 2014; Means, Toyama, Murphy, Bakia, & Jones, 2010; Schaber, Wilcox, Whiteside, Marsh, & Brooks, 2010; Spanjers et al., 2015). Many trace this to the nature of the online learning activities, especially those that “promote some form of interactive learning” (Castaño-Muñoz, Duart, & Sancho-Vinuesa, 2014, p. 157), particularly with fellow students (Garrison, 2017; Shea & Bidjerano, 2013; Stein & Graham, 2014; Swan, 2002; Wagner, 2005). For example, asynchronous discussion forums can be used to both extend and anticipate face-to-face discussions (Collopy & Arnold, 2009; Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Kearns, 2016; Stein & Graham, 2014; Ziegler, Paulus, & Woodside, 2006). The synthesis of asynchronous online and synchronous in-person discussion enables increased student participation and supports “higher levels of learning through critical discourse and reflection” (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004, p. 98).

Much of the research on blended learning compares the delivery format with face-to-face or online formats and concludes that blended formats can optimize student experiences. What is needed next is an exploration of how students spend their time in blended courses so that instructors and designers may make better informed decisions when they design online components.

This line of inquiry is particularly important for writing instructors because the content of the course emerges from a series of independent and interactive activities that help students navigate the writing process. Students benefit from reading and responding to each other's work, writing collaboratively, and analyzing and discussing course material with each other (Bruffee, 1984; Downs & Robertson, 2015; Elbow, 1973). They also need frequent opportunities for reflection as they write and revise multiple drafts (Silver, 2013; Taczak, 2015; Yancey, 1998). Engaging in activities like this helps students analyze ideas from multiple points of view, a critical skill in order to write effectively for a variety of audiences (Bedore & O'Sullivan, 2011; Gottschalk & Hjortshoj, 2004; Lindemann, 2001; Roozen, 2015).

Writing instructors have found that the online environment is ideal for many of these activities because students have more time to analyze and respond to each other than the time-bound, face-to-face classroom affords (Warnock, 2015). Moreover, engaging in these activities online requires students to do more of the very thing their course is about: writing (Hewett, 2015). The more frequent opportunities to write require low-stakes writing, which has a well-documented relationship to success in composition courses (Elbow, 1997; Gottschalk & Hjortshoj, 2004). Asynchronous discussion forums are a particularly popular tool for facilitating this low-stakes writing (Warnock, 2015), which makes sense given their ability to foster both social and cognitive presence through reflective writing (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004; Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Means et al., 2010; Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 1999) while providing an “opportunity for students to learn to express themselves in written form" (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004, p. 99).

In addition to low-stakes writing, designing interactive activities that are mediated through a variety of web-authoring platforms—from the asynchronous discussion forum that encourages carefully constructed posts within the constraints of the LMS to the more immediate Twitter that requires fast thinking within the constraints of a character count—enables students to work on several learning objectives on a regular basis: writing for an audience, writing in different genres, writing to learn, writing collaboratively, and many others. The tools employed to facilitate this learning have been an important part of the conversation in composition scholarship; in particular, writing studies research has shown that using various social media tools supports student learning through increased attention to genre and audience (Clark, 2010; Nobles & Paganucci, 2015; Ridolfo & Devoss, 2009; Vie, 2008; Wolff, 2013; Yancey, 2009).

The wide range of activities that support different learning outcomes in a first-year writing (FYW) course, and the different affordances of platforms within and outside of the LMS, reinforces the need for research on how students spend their time in blended writing courses. Of course, the importance of well-designed, meaningful, and engaging online learning activities is well-established in the literature (Bernard et al., 2014, Means et al., 2010). However, the optimal amount of time students should be engaged with such activities, particularly in blended courses, is much less clear.

Part of this is likely due to the slippery definitions of blended learning. When a blended course can mean anything from the addition of online resources and activities in a 100% face-to-face course to a course in which up to 70% of “seat time” is replaced by online activities, it remains difficult to distill generalizable recommendations for designing blended courses from the literature, even after twenty years of research in the field (Brown, 2016; Helms, 2014; Oliver & Trigwell, 2005). This issue is further complicated by arguments for moving beyond “seat time,” both in light of emerging—especially mobile—technologies (Bonk, Kim, & Zheng, 2006) and in favor of competency-based education that emphasizes learner achievement, not time on task (Welch, 2007). While we appreciate these arguments, we are also keenly aware that blended instructors operate within institutional constraints that dictate both the definition of blended courses and how they are scheduled (Snart, 2015). This is especially true at the programmatic level in which FYW courses operate. Individual instructors rarely have control over blended course scheduling formats, in part because of the scale at which writing instruction occurs. For example, at the institution under study in this project, there were 90 sections of FYW offered in Spring 2017. In order to provide institutions and administrators with guidance for their blended learning initiatives, we need to be able to present research-based recommendations on how much time should be allotted to the in-person and online learning environments (Halverson et al. 2013). This research also has the potential to help CoI researchers understand how communities of inquiry are maintained across a program.

Owston and York (2018) took up the problem of time in their recent study. In order to better understand the factors that contribute to student success in blended courses, they analyzed the proportion of online time on task students spent in twenty different blended undergraduate courses. In order to do this, Owston and York (2018) categorized the blended courses into four clusters “according to the proportion of time that online activities replaced classroom time”: high blend (50% online), medium blend (between 36 and 50% online), low blend (27% to 30% online), and supplemental blend (100% face-to-face lectures with online tutorial sessions) (p. 25). This categorization, which maps onto the blended classes researched in the present study, enables a more refined analysis of blended courses than is typical in the literature. Owston and York (2018) found that students in high and medium blend classes outperformed their counterparts in the low and supplemental blend models: “Across a wide variety of subject areas and course levels, student perceptions and performance appear to be higher when at least one-third to one-half of normal face-to-face time is replaced with online activities” (p. 31). To better understand these findings, the authors recommend that more research be conducted that analyzes “the amount and nature of online interaction among students and instructor and kinds of online activities in which students engaged” (Owston & York, 2018, p. 30). The present study does just this.

4. Research questions
This study analyzes high and medium blend first-year writing (FYW) classes through the lens of the CoI framework. Our goal is to better understand students' perceptions of their learning environment in order to further refine effective practices for blended course design and instruction in the context of writing studies (Crawley, 2015; Mick & Middlebrook, 2015; Pryiomka, 2017; Snart, 2015). We have framed the study as a comparison of high and medium blend students' responses to the CoI survey, going beyond a comparison of the three presences to also compare students' perceptions of the categories associated with each presence. This in-depth analysis will offer a close look at the extent to which FYW students perceive their high and medium blended courses as communities of inquiry.

1.
To what extent do medium and high blend students perceive teaching presence in their FYW courses? Do both groups report similar levels of Design and Organization, Direct Instruction, and Facilitating Discourse?

2.
To what extent do medium and high blend students perceive social presence in their FYW courses? Do both groups report similar levels of Open Communication, Group Cohesion, and Affective Communication?

3.
To what extent do medium and high blend students perceive cognitive presence in their FYW courses? Do both groups report similar levels of Triggering Events, Exploration, Integration, and Resolution?

5. Methods
5.1. Population and sample
Participants in this study included students enrolled in 17 blended sections of a first-year writing (FYW) course at a large, public, Mid-Atlantic, R1 institution. The course ran for 15 weeks in the spring of 2017. The 17 sections were taught by nine instructors, and 19 students were enrolled in each section (N = 323). Of the 229 survey respondents (71% response rate), 188 (82%) were freshmen, 31 (13.5%) were sophomores, 8 (3.5%) were juniors, and 2 (1%) were seniors. In addition surveying the students, we obtained written consent from the instructors to access their learning management system (LMS) sites as “observers.”

5.2. Course format
Blended sections in this FYW program are defined as those in which one class per week is held online. Online work for all blended FYW courses is conducted primarily through Canvas, the learning management system (LMS) supported by the university. The sections are delivered as either medium blends (33% online) or high blends (50% online). These definitions are based on those proposed by Owston and York (2018) in their study analyzing the relationship between online time on task and student perceptions of blended classes. Like Owston and York, the present study analyzes undergraduate courses taught by multiple instructors who maintained autonomy over the design of their online (and face-to-face) activities. Unlike Owston and York, who studied a variety of “fine arts, professional, and liberal arts undergraduate courses” (p. 25), this study focuses on students enrolled in multiple sections of the same FYW course.

Nine of the sections in this study were “high blend” and eight were “medium blend.” Five instructors taught between one to four high blend sections, and four instructors each taught two medium blend sections. The medium blends in this study, formatted to meet students' Monday-Wednesday-Friday (MWF) schedules, are those in which class is held in person twice per week (either MW or MF), and the rest of the classwork is conducted online asynchronously.

The high blend sections ran on a Tuesday-Thursday (TR) schedule and met once per week in person. In the high blend sections, the online class day and time was reserved in students' schedules by the registration system, which means that students could not schedule anything else, like a lab or a discussion section for another course, during this time period. Because high blend students had the online class day and time locked in their semester schedules, their instructors could schedule synchronous sessions on these days such as library research sessions, student conferences, or online classes in Adobe Connect, the university's supported web conferencing platform. Regardless of whether the online day was held synchronously, high blend students had a dedicated 75-min block of time for “English class” on online days. Medium blend students did not have this block.

5.3. Course design
While the students in this study were all enrolled in the same FYW course, the 17 sections varied considerably. In addition to the two main differences in delivery format (high blend versus medium blend), the sections were taught by nine instructors who retain autonomy over their course design and facilitation. These differences are observable on each section's LMS course site, which students use to access course materials, submit assignments, engage with online activities, and communicate with other course participants. An analysis of the course design variations can be found in the Findings section of this article.

5.4. Survey instrument
We modified the original, 34-item CoI Survey developed by Arbaugh et al. (2008). As illustrated in the Appendix, the modification includes two rephrased teaching presence items, one rephrased social presence item, and eight rephrased cognitive presence items. The revisions move away from asking about “course content” and instead ask about “writing skills” or “course activities.” For example, instead of “problems posed increased my interest in course issues,” the revised survey states, “course assignments increased my interest in writing” (Q12). The modified survey also includes one new social presence item that shifts the focus from a subject (content) towards a practice (writing) by asking if students believe their writing improved as a result of interacting with classmates: “Interacting with classmates improved my writing” (Q11). Stewart (in press) validated the modified survey in a study of four sections of a fully online writing course at an institution in the Mid-Atlantic.

For the purposes of this present study, we also added a second new social presence item, which distinguishes between online and in-class discussions. Instead of only asking if students felt comfortable conversing through the online medium (Q4), we also asked if students felt comfortable conversing through the face-to-face medium (Q5).

The survey used in this study includes 36 items that ask respondents to indicate if they agree or disagree with statements on a 1–5 Likert scale (strongly agree, somewhat agree, neither agree nor disagree, somewhat disagree, strongly disagree). The survey also includes three demographic questions (year, major, primary language) and one open ended question, “Do you have any other feedback or suggestions about the course?” A copy of the survey is in the Appendix.

5.5. Data collection and analysis
We delivered the modified CoI Survey to blended FYW students within the last two weeks of the course. Instructors were asked to provide the survey link to their students through the LMS and to encourage student participation by mentioning the survey in class. Some instructors gave students time to complete the survey in class, which contributed to the high response rate (71%, n = 229). After all identifying information was removed, we analyzed the data in SPSS.

In an effort to more fully understand the context of the courses, and thus create a more informed interpretation of the quantitative data, we accessed the course sites as “observers.” This level of access permitted us to view the course site navigation and instructor-authored documents such as assignment prompts and online activities, yet restricted us from being able to see any student data, including assignment submissions. During our observation, we created tables to categorize the types of activities medium and high blend students engaged with during their online class days and to calculate how frequently the students encountered student-student, student-instructor, and student-content activities.

6. Limitations
One limitation of the study is that we are analyzing student perceptions as reported on an end-of-semester survey; we did not conduct transcript analyses of discussion forums, a common method of analyzing CoI in online and blended courses, nor did we conduct interviews with either students or instructors. Additionally, while the observational data we collected provides some context and informs our analysis of the survey data, we gathered this information through retroactive observations of the LMS course sites. What we've reported is our estimation of activities that were intended to fulfill the online class days, though we recognize that we are not necessarily capturing everything. It is also the case that our retroactive observations are only of the online classes, not the in-person classes; with the exception of students who reference in-person classes in the open-ended response question on the survey, we have no in-person class data to analyze. At the same time, observational data of blended students' online activities (beyond asynchronous discussion forums) is scant in the literature, particularly of multiple sections of the same course in a program. The combination of survey and observational data in this study provides useful insight into how the blended students spent their time online and how they perceived those experiences.

7. Findings
7.1. Internal consistency of survey items
An analysis of internal consistency confirms that the survey items reliably measure the three constructs of the CoI Framework: teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence. In the original CoI survey research, Arbaugh et al. (2008) reported internal consistencies equal to 0.94 for teaching presence, 0.91 for social presence, and 0.95 for cognitive presence. In the current study, the Cronbach alpha coefficient for each presence was teaching presence = 0.95, social presence = 0.89, and cognitive presence = 0.94. We additionally measured the internal consistency of the survey items associated with each of the presence categories identified by Garrison et al. (2000). The Cronbach alpha coefficient for each of the ten categories fell into the “acceptable” to “excellent” range of statistical reliability (0.71–0.95). After confirming the reliability of the survey items, we created composite variables for each presence and for each category.

7.2. Comparing medium blend and high blend survey responses
As described in the Methods section, 38% percent of the survey respondents (n = 86) were in medium blend sections, and 62% of respondents (n = 143) were in high blend sections. Because the data in both groups did not follow a normal distribution, we employed the Mann-Whitney test to compare the high blend and medium blend students' responses to the survey. We report the medians (as opposed to the mean rankings) because it more intuitively demonstrates the students' responses to the 5-point likert-scale questions. Effect sizes (dCohen) were calculated with Lenhard and Lenhard's (2016) calculator and were interpreted according to Cohen's (1988) criteria of 0.2 = small, 0.5 = moderate, 0.8 = large.

As illustrated in Table 1, high blend students' perceptions of teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence were each significantly more positive than those of their medium blend peers. The effect size for teaching presence was moderate, and the effect size for social and cognitive presence was small.


Table 1. Mann-Whitney results for high blend versus medium blend responses to teaching, social, and cognitive presence.

Outcome	Group	U	z	dCohen
High blend	Medium blend
Mdn	n	Mdn	n
Teaching presence	4.92	143	4.54	86	4216	−4.13**	0.545
Social presence	4.45	143	4.05	86	4998	−2.38*	0.317
Cognitive presence	4.50	143	4.17	86	4950	−2.48*	0.331
** p < .000, * p < .05.

To further investigate the differences between the groups' ratings of the three presences, we ran Mann-Whitney tests to compare the students' responses to the categories associated with each presence.

7.3. Comparing high and medium blend students' responses to teaching presence
A closer look at the categories associated with teaching presence revealed that the differences were significant for all three categories (Table 2), with medium effect sizes for Direct Instruction and Facilitating Discourse and a small effect size for Design and Organization.


Table 2. Mann-Whitney results for high blend versus medium blend responses to teaching presence categories.

Outcome	Group	U	z	dCohen
High blend	Medium blend
Mdn	n	Mdn	n
Design & organization	5.0	143	4.75	86	4456	−4.17**	0.474
Direct instruction	5.0	143	4.50	86	4345	−3.94**	0.507
Facilitating discourse	5.0	143	4.40	86	4228	−4.27**	0.542
** p < .000, * p < .05.

High blend students' median score for Design and Organization was 0.25 points higher than their medium blend peers, with a small effect size. The survey items associated with Design and Organization” refer to the instructor's communication—the instructor communicated important “course topics” (Q24), “course goals” (Q25), and “due dates” (Q27), and “provided clear instructions on how to participate in course learning activities” (Q26). The high blend students' higher rating of this category suggests that they believed they had a clearer understanding of their instructors' expectations and goals for the course.

High blend students also responded more positively to Direct Instruction than their medium blend peers (the high blend students' median score for this category was 0.50 points higher, and the effect size was moderate). These survey items are related to the instructor's contributions to student learning. The contributions are instructor-student in the form of feedback: the instructor “provided feedback that helped me understand my strengths and weaknesses as a writer” (Q35) and “provided feedback in a timely fashion” (Q36). The contributions are student-student in the form of guiding discussion: “instructor actions reinforced the development of a sense of community among course participants” (Q33) and “helped to focus discussion on relevant issues” (Q34). The high blend students in this study seem to have had more positive perceptions of their instructor's facilitation of student-instructor and student-student relationships.

The difference in the students' responses to the Facilitating Discourse category was even more pronounced. The high blend students' median score was 0.60 points higher than their median blend peers, and the effect size was moderate. The Facilitating Discourse category focuses on the ways instructors encourage students to interact with one another. The items include statements about the instructor “identifying areas of agreement and disagreement” (Q28), “guiding the class towards understanding writing strategies” (Q29), “keep[ing] course participants engaged and participating in productive dialogue” (Q30), “keep[ing] course participants on task in a way that helped me to learn” (Q31), and “encourag[ing] course participants to explore new concepts in this course” (Q32). The fact that the largest difference existed between students' responses to the Facilitating Discourse category may suggest that high blend students not only experienced higher levels of teaching presence, but also that this teaching presence was in support of peer interaction. This finding is corroborated by the significant differences between students' ratings of the social presence categories.

7.4. Comparing high and medium blend students' responses to social presence
The differences between high blend and medium blend students' responses to the survey were significant (with small effect sizes) for two of the three social presence categories: Open Communication and Group Cohesion (Table 3).


Table 3. Mann-Whitney results for high blend versus medium blend responses to social presence categories.

Outcome	Group	U	z	dCohen
High blend	Medium blend
Mdn	n	Mdn	n
Affective communication	4.0	143	4.0	86	5557	−1.2	0.162
Open communication	4.75	143	4.5	85	4928	−2.5*	0.320
Group cohesion	4.5	143	4.0	86	5073	−2.2*	0.296
** p < .000, * p < .05.

There was a 0.25 point difference in the median scores for Open Communication. The Open Communication survey items focus on the extent to which students “felt comfortable” in the course, asking if they felt comfortable “conversing through the online medium" (Q4), “conversing through the face-to-face medium" (Q5), “participating in the course discussions” (Q6), and “interacting with other course participants” (Q7). Because the high blend students spent more time interacting with peers online, it is not surprising that they rated the Open Communication items more positively than their medium blend peers.

The difference between the students' median ratings of Group Cohesion was even larger (0.50 point difference). Of all the social presence questions, these survey items focus most closely on student-student collaboration. They ask if students “felt comfortable disagreeing with other course participants while still maintaining a sense of trust” (Q8) and if students felt like their “point of view was acknowledged by other course participants” (Q9). These items also focused on the relationship between peer interaction and learning to write, asking if the online discussions helped them “develop as a writer” (Q10) and if “interacting with classmates improved [their] writing” (Q11). Combined with the Facilitating Discourse findings, these Group Cohesion findings convincingly imply that the high blend courses may have provided more opportunities for interactivity that supported learning.

Interestingly, the difference between high blend and medium blend students' responses to the Affective Expression category was not significant. These survey items measure the extent to which students developed personal, social relationships with their peers. They question the extent to which students developed a “sense of belonging” (Q1) and formed “distinct impressions” of peers (Q2), and they ask if students believe “online or web-based communication is an excellent medium for social interaction” (Q3). The lack of significant difference between the high blend and medium blend students' responses to these survey items implies that delivery format may not have a significant impact on the extent to which students develop social relationships with peers.

7.5. Comparing high blend and medium blend students' responses to cognitive presence
In the Community of Inquiry Framework, cognitive presence is the end goal: teachers design environments that put students in situations (teaching presence) where they interact with peers (social presence) in a way that supports their learning (cognitive presence). Consequently, given the high blend students' more positive ratings of teaching presence and social presence, it is not surprising that their responses to cognitive presence were also higher than their medium blend peers. However, as with social presence, the differences between the groups were not significant for all of the categories. Instead, there were only significant differences for two of the four cognitive presence categories: Exploration and Resolution (Table 4).


Table 4. Mann-Whitney results for high blend versus medium blend responses to cognitive presence categories.

Outcome	Group	U	z	dCohen
High blend	Medium blend
Mdn	n	Mdn	n
Triggering event	4.0	142	4.0	86	5568	−1.13	0.148
Exploration	4.7	143	4.3	86	4717	−3.05*	0.397
Integration	4.3	143	4.3	86	5237	−1.93	0.250
Resolution	4.7	143	4.3	86	4613	−3.26*	0.428
** p < .000, * p < .05.

While there was no difference between the students' median scores for Triggering Event and Integration, the high blend students' median scores for Exploration and Resolution were both 0.40 points higher than their medium blend peers, and these differences were significant (with a small effect size). To interpret these findings, it is important to discuss the cognitive presence categories in terms of the four phases of practical inquiry.

The Triggering Event is the beginning of this process, in which students' curiosity is sparked. Survey items associated with this category include, “Course assignments piqued my interest in writing-related issues” (Q12), “course assignments piqued my curiosity” (Q13), and “I felt motivated to explore questions raised in this course” (Q14). The fact that students' perceptions of triggering events were not significantly different may point to the likelihood that most triggering events would have occurred in the face-to-face sessions, when instructors introduced assignments. It might also be the case that students were not feeling a lot of curiosity in either delivery format; for both high blend and medium blend students, Triggering Event was the lowest median of the four cognitive presence categories. This interpretation corroborates Kim (2016), who found that “curiosity” was not something students in a required general education course expected to experience.

The next phase of practical inquiry is Exploration, when students share and engage with multiple perspectives. There was a statistically significant difference in high and medium blend students' responses to this category. The survey items associated with Exploration include, “I utilized a variety of information sources to learn more about the topics I wrote about” (Q15), “brainstorming and finding relevant information improved my writing process” (Q16), and “online discussions were valuable in helping me appreciate different perspectives” (Q17). It is worth noting that the first two survey items could be interpreted as independent activities, while the third item implies social learning. It may be the case that while the high blend students in this study more positively reported on exploring a variety of information sources, those multiple sources of information were not necessarily affiliated with peers.

Once students have shared their perspectives, the process of Integration can begin, when students combine their perspectives with those of others to create new knowledge. Integration then leads to Resolution, where students test or apply the knowledge they constructed during Integration. The differences between high and medium blend students' reports of Integration were not statistically significant, but their reports of Resolution were. The Resolution survey items include, “I can describe ways to test and apply the writing skills I learned in this course” (Q21), “I have developed solutions to issues raised in this course that can be applied in practice” (Q22), and “I can apply the writing skills I learned in this course to my work or other non-class related activities” (Q23). The fact that high blend students rated Resolution higher than medium blend students suggests that they were more likely to believe that the skills they learned in the course could be applied elsewhere.

The fact that their reports on Integration were not significant is more difficult to interpret, but it might be related to the fact that medium blend students rated Integration and Resolution similarly (both categories received an median score of 4.3), while high blend students' median score for Integration (4.3) was lower than their median score for Resolution (4.7). Potentially, these findings suggest that high blend students were more likely to move into the fourth phase of practical inquiry. Alternatively, it may show that high blend students had more opportunities to engage with multiple perspectives (be it from peers or course material) and to apply what they learned during activities and assignments. The lack of difference between the groups' median scores for Triggering Event and Integration, and the lower ratings of those categories in general, may also show that students in this general education course were sharing perspectives and engaging in critical thinking, but perhaps not also grappling with the “intentionally puzzling, ambiguous, or even ill-structured” problems that characterize cognitive presence (Warner, 2016, p. 4).

7.6. Online activity type & frequency
To gain a better understanding of the differences we observed between high blend and medium blend students' survey responses, we conducted a retroactive observation of the LMS course sites. During our observation, we created Table 5, Table 6, which describe the types of online activities and the frequency with which those activities occurred, respectively. This data offers more information on how the high and medium blend students spent their time online.


Table 5. Online class day activities categorized by interaction type.

Section(s)	Blend	Student-Student activities	Student-Instructor activities	Student-Content activities
Section 1 (taught by Instructor A, n = 19)	High	Asynchronous discussion boards (6), Live classes conducted in Adobe Connect with breakout activities in Google Docs (2)	Live classes conducted in Adobe Connect (2), required conferences (2)	Independent activities submitted through LMS (12)
Section 2 (taught by Instructor B, n = 14)	High	Google Doc group activities (1), Asynchronous Facebook group discussions (14), Synchronous chat (14)	In-person Office Hours w/ UTA or Online Chat w/ instructor (14), UTA participation in Facebook group discussions (14); in-person library research day (2)	Independent activities submitted through LMS (5)
Section 3 (taught by Instructor C, n = 17)	High	Asynchronous peer Review sessions (3), Asynchronous discussion boards (8), VoiceThreads (3), hypothes.is group activities (3), Twitter chats (3), Live classes conducted in Adobe Connect with breakout activities in Google docs (7)	Live classes conducted in Adobe Connect (7), in-person library research day (1), Twitter chats (3)	Independent activities submitted through LMS (6)
Sections 4–7 (taught by Instructor D, n = 65)	High	Asynchronous Peer Review sessions (1), Discussion boards (6), Live classes conducted in Adobe Connect with breakout activities in Google Docs (2)	Live classes conducted in Adobe Connect (2)	Independent activities submitted through LMS (7)
Sections 8–9 (taught by Instructor E, n = 30)	High	Asynchronous Peer Review sessions (1), Asynchronous Discussion boards (7), VoiceThreads (2)	In-person Office Hours (8), In-person library research day (1)	Independent activities submitted through LMS (4)
Sections 10–11 (taught by Instructor F, n = 5)	Medium	Asynchronous Peer Review sessions (1), Asynchronous discussion Boards (14), VoiceThreads (4), Collaborative writing in Group blogs (2)	n/a	Independent activities submitted through LMS (3)
Sections 12–13 (taught by Instructor G, n = 35)	Medium	Asynchronous Peer Review sessions (1), Asynchronous discussion Boards (4)	n/a	Independent activities submitted through LMS (0)
Sections 14–15 (taught by Instructor H, n = 10)	Medium	Asynchronous discussion Boards (2)	n/a	Independent activities submitted through LMS (7)
Sections 16–17 (taught by Instructor I, n = 35)	Medium	Asynchronous Peer Review sessions (2), Google Doc group activities (1)	n/a	Independent activities submitted through LMS (11)
Table 5 divides the online class activities we observed into three categories, following Moore's (1989) types of interaction: student-student, student-instructor, and student-content. Categorizing the activities like this enables an initial analysis of the frequency of independent (student-content) and interactive (student-student and student-instructor) activities in each section. This table includes all of the assigned online tasks that we were able to observe. Student-student activities include any activities (synchronous or asynchronous) in which students had opportunities to interact with peers during an online class session. Student-instructor activities include synchronous opportunities for the students to interact with the instructor during an online session. Finally, student-content activities include independent online classwork, such as taking quizzes and submitting short writing assignments. We have opted to discuss the activities in terms of interaction, as opposed to modality (i.e., synchronous versus asynchronous) to underscore that opportunity for interaction seems more important than mode of interaction for facilitating communities of inquiry (Castaño-Muñoz et al., 2014; Crawley, 2015; McGee & Reis, 2012; Pryiomka, 2017; Richardson, Maeda, Lv, & Caskurlu, 2017). In the parentheses following each activity, we include a count to show how many of these activities occurred throughout the semester.

While all of the courses we observed had some form of student-student activity during some of the online class sessions, i.e., peer review sessions and asynchronous discussion forums (ADFs), there are noticeable differences between the high blend and medium blend course designs. Six of the nine high blend sections included synchronous classes in Adobe Connect with breakout sessions in Google Documents. Additionally, all of the high blend sections included at least one form of student-instructor synchronous interaction during the online classes. For example, during her synchronous online class periods, Instructor B held chat sessions through the native chat feature in the LMS while her Undergraduate Teaching Assistant (UTA) held her weekly office hours in the cafe of the campus library. Of course, these differences must be interpreted in terms of institutional constraints: medium blend instructors did not have the option for synchronous online interactions, because their online days weren't locked in the registration system like those of the high blend instructors.

Yet it is also the case that high blend sections included more frequent opportunities for asynchronous student-student interaction during online class sessions, interactions that were also available to medium blend instructors. This was particularly prominent in the differences between the number of assigned ADFs. On average, students in high blend sections were assigned 9.8 ADFs, and students in medium blend sections were assigned an average of 5.8 ADFs. The fewest number of ADFs in high blend sections was 6, while the fewest in medium blend sections was 0. One interpretation of this difference is that the high blend courses are 50% online, instead of 33% online; however, both medium blend and high blend courses each had one online class session per week, so the discrepancy between the frequency of ADFs remains pertinent. Across the sections, the high blend instructors seem to be using more of their online time to facilitate interactive activities than the medium blend instructors.

To further highlight students' opportunities for interaction (or lack thereof), we calculated the frequency of online class sessions that only included student-content interaction (i.e., submitting independent activities or reading/viewing assigned texts) (Table 6).

Table 6 demonstrates that six of the eight medium blend courses (sections 12–17) included content-only interactions during the majority of their online class sessions (64%–83%), while the highest percentage of content-only online class sessions in the high blend courses was 15%. Furthermore, six of the high blend sections had 0% of only student-content interaction during an online class day; in other words, every online session in these courses offered an opportunity for students to interact with each other, their instructor, or both their peers and their instructor. Only two medium blend courses did so. It follows that the high blend courses included more frequent opportunities for online interaction than the medium blend courses, which may explain why the high blend students rated the CoI survey items higher.


Table 6. Online days with only student-content interactions.

Section(s)	Blend	Online days w/ only Student-Content interactions
1	High	15%
2	High	0%
3	High	0%
4–7	High	15%
8–9	High	0%
10–11	Medium	0%
12–13	Medium	79%
14–15	Medium	64%
16–17	Medium	83%
8. Discussion
This study looked for variations in medium blend and high blend first-year writing (FYW) students' perceptions of the categories associated with teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence. We found that high blended students consistently rated each of the three presences higher than their medium blend peers on the CoI Survey. We additionally examined high and medium blend course websites to learn more about how these writing students were spending their time online. We found that high blend students had more opportunities for interaction during their online course sessions. The following sections put these sources of data in conversation to discuss the students' different perceptions of each presence.

8.1. Teaching presence
Students in both high blend and medium blend sections rated teaching presence highest over cognitive presence and social presence, which is consistent with prior CoI survey research (Díaz, Swan, Ice, & Kupczynski, 2010; Lambert & Fisher, 2013). Additionally, when comparing the responses by delivery format, we found more statistically significant differences between the two groups' responses to teaching presence than to cognitive presence or social presence. When we examined the three categories of teaching presence (Design and Organization, Direct Instruction, Facilitating Discourse), we found that students in high blend sections rated all three categories (and all of the survey items within those categories) higher than their medium blend counterparts.

8.1.1. Design and organization
It is possible that high blend students report higher levels of Design and Organization than their medium blend counterparts because the structure of high blend sections varies more sharply from traditional classes. While high blend students only meet in person once per week, medium blend students meet twice a week, as they would for several of their other, 100% f2f classes (e.g., all of their TR classes). In contrast, first-year students (82% of respondents) are less likely to be enrolled in other courses that only meet once per week. Therefore, it is possible that high blend students may have been more aware of their instructors' teaching interventions between f2f meetings than their medium blend peers.

That said, the questions associated with Design and Organization speak less to instructional design and more to communication, e.g., the instructor communicated important “course topics” (Q24), “course goals” (Q25), and “due dates” (Q27), and “provided clear instructions on how to participate in course learning activities” (Q26). Consequently, we suspect that the high blend students were not only more conscious of teaching interventions, but also were experiencing more direct communication from their instructors regarding expectations. Because high blend instructors only saw their students once per week, they may have written more instructions through the LMS and sent out more announcements and reminders between classes than their medium blend counterparts. In addition, they may have spent more time in their face-to-face classes clarifying expectations for the upcoming online assignments. All of these actions would promote higher teaching presence in the form of Design and Organization. Unfortunately, the observational data we collected for this study did not include an analysis of assignment instructions, announcements, or reminders, nor do we have data on the extent to which instructors prepared students for the upcoming online assignments in their face-to-face classes. Future research on the Design and Organization category of Teaching Presence in blended classes would benefit from such an analysis.

8.1.2. Direct instruction
The observational data provides more insight into Direct Instruction. The high blend instructors consistently provided opportunities for student-instructor interaction during the online days. For example, during each online class session in Instructor B's course, the students had the option for one-on-one feedback with their instructor or teaching assistant. This strategy corresponds directly with one of the Direct Instruction survey items: the instructor “provided feedback that helped me understand my strengths and weaknesses as a writer” (Q35). Similarly, one of the other high blend instructors, Instructor E, moved her office hours to the online class day and time halfway through the semester. This increased potential for one-on-one student and instructor interaction may explain why the high blend students rated Direct Instruction more positively than their medium blend counterparts.

Two of the other Direct Instruction survey items relate to guiding course discussion: “instructor actions reinforced the development of a sense of community among course participants” (Q33) and “helped to focus discussion on relevant issues” (Q34). That high blend students ranked these items higher than their medium blend peers makes sense in light of the fact that high blend students had a wider variety of ways to interact with each other during the online days. For example, the instructors who used the online class time block primarily for extra help sessions also made extensive use of online discussions, either through the LMS's native discussion tool or through a class Facebook group. The students in the other high blend sections met occasionally for class in Adobe Connect with breakout groups in Google Docs, platforms which are designed for instant communication and collaborative writing and have been shown to create a sense of community for students in online classes (Abdelmalak, 2014, Marquart et al., 2016; Rockinson-Szapkiw & Wendt, 2015).

At the same time, both of these survey items could easily be associated with the face-to-face sessions. Because students in the medium blend sections saw each other twice as often in person, their instructors would in theory have had more opportunities to foster a sense of community and facilitate focused discussions. Given this, it is difficult to determine why high blend students on average rated these two survey items higher than medium blend students. Nevertheless, the fact that the differences between the two groups' rankings of these items are significant indicates that the high blend students perceived their instructors as more committed to facilitating community-based inquiry than their medium blend counterparts.

8.1.3. Facilitating discourse
The high blend students' significantly higher ranking of Facilitating Discourse similarly suggests that they perceived that their instructors deliberately encouraged student-student interactions. This once again demonstrates that the reduction of face-to-face classroom time does not have an adverse impact on student relationships. In fact, for this study, the opposite may be true. It is possible that the high blend format itself prompts instructors to design more opportunities for student-student interaction than their medium blend counterparts who see their students twice per week. In other words, because a full 50% of the course is conducted online, instructors may feel a higher sense of urgency to create more opportunities for students to interact with each other on the online days than their medium blend counterparts, an interpretation consistent with Owston and York (2018, p. 28).

8.2. Social presence
Even if high blend instructors felt a greater sense of urgency to facilitate student-student interaction, we expected medium blend students' perceptions of social presence to be equal or greater to the high blend students' perceptions. Our hypothesis was rooted in the assumption that face-to-face learning is inherently more immediate, and that the experience of being physically co-present would enhance students' experience of feeling more “real” to each other, a perception often used to characterize social presence (Gunawardena, 1995, Paquette, 2016, Short et al., 1976; Swan et al., 2008). We further hypothesized that this immediacy would lead medium blend students to perceive themselves as members of a supportive learning community (Crawley, 2015; Pryiomka, 2017), a perception particularly important to writing classes in which students are asked to exchange and provide feedback on their work. This hypothesis is rooted in theories that tie social presence to learners' ability to perceive and contribute to a sense of community (Garrison and Vaughan, 2008, Paquette, 2016; Rourke et al., 1999, Tu and McIsaac, 2002). Nevertheless, high blend students reported higher levels of social presence than medium blend students, and the differences were significant for the social presence categories of Open Communication and Group Cohesion.

Even if high blend instructors felt a greater sense of urgency to facilitate student-student interaction, we expected medium blend students' perceptions of social presence to be equal or greater to the high blend students' perceptions. Our hypothesis was rooted in the assumption that face-to-face learning is inherently more immediate, and that the experience of being physically co-present would enhance students' experience of feeling more “real” to each other, a perception often used to characterize social presence (Gunawardena, 1995; Paquette, 2016; Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976; Swan et al., 2008). We further hypothesized that this immediacy would lead medium blend students to perceive themselves as members of a supportive learning community (Crawley, 2015; Pryiomka, 2017), a perception particularly important to writing classes in which students are asked to exchange and provide feedback on their work. This hypothesis is rooted in theories that tie social presence to learners' ability to perceive and contribute to a sense of community (Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Paquette, 2016; Rourke et al., 1999, Tu and McIsaac, 2002). Nevertheless, high blend students reported higher levels of social presence than medium blend students, and the differences were significant for the social presence categories of Open Communication and Group Cohesion.

We now recognize that our hypothesis assumed that students were encouraged to interact with each other in the face-to-face classroom, which may not be true. In fact, in the open response comments section at the end of the survey, the only comment related to social presence from a medium blend student was negative: “Aside from the friend I signed up for this class with, I don't feel that I really got to know any of the other students; I'd recommend more in-person group activities so students really get the chance to talk to each other.” This feedback is telling in that it indicates that, for this student at least, the face-to-face environment did not necessarily involve student-student interaction. As such, we must recognize that social presence is not predicated on the amount of time students see each other in person. Rather, it is the degree to which students interact with each other, regardless of classroom environment, that seems to have the most impact on social presence. In other words, social presence may be more related to interactivity than immediacy, which is supported by previous research (Abrami, Bernard, Bures, Borokhovski, & Tamim, 2011; Benbunan-Fich & Arbaugh, 2006; Castaño-Muñoz et al., 2014; Finlay, Desmet, & Evans, 2004; Shea & Bidjerano, 2013).

This conclusion is corroborated by the Open Communication indicator that explicitly addresses the face-to-face environment: “I felt comfortable conversing through the face-to-face medium" (Q5). On average, the high blend students rated this survey item higher than the medium blend students. That the students who only met in person once a week felt more comfortable participating in the face-to-face discussions than the students who met in person twice a week is particularly surprising. This may correlate with how often students interacted with each other on the online days. The observational data that compares the number of assigned discussion forums particularly underscores this point, as high blend students had more online discussions than medium blend students. Given this, our findings suggest that blended students who interact more frequently with each other online are more likely to feel comfortable with each other face-to-face.

The fact that the high blend students in this study reported a significantly different perception of Open Communication and Group Cohesion, but not of Affective Communication, also supports the interpretation that social presence is more related to interactivity than immediacy. The median rankings of Affective Communication were identical for the two groups, which is to say that both medium blend and high blend students had distinct impressions of their peers, felt that the online medium facilitated social interaction, and felt a sense of belonging in the course. But the high blend students felt more comfortable interacting in both the in-person and online environments, felt more comfortable disagreeing with their peers while maintaining a sense of trust, and they were more likely to report that interacting with peers improved their writing. In other words, the differences between the two groups were less related to student-student relationships and more related to the ways in which that interaction supported student learning, which is consistent with prior research (Abrami et al., 2011; Castaño-Muñoz et al., 2014; Lear, Ansorge, & Steckelberg, 2010; Richardson et al., 2017, So and Brush, 2008). This underscores the importance of creating ample opportunities for students to interact with each other, interactions that, when knitted together, create a community of inquiry that promotes cognitive presence (Akyol et al., 2009a; Denoyelles, Zydney, & Chen, 2014; Kanuka, 2011; Kozan & Richardson, 2014; Shea & Bidjerano, 2009).

8.3. Cognitive presence
Given the findings associated with social presence, we expected to see significant differences in high blend students' perceptions of cognitive presence. We were surprised, however, to find that the differences were only significant for two of the four phases of practical inquiry: Exploration and Resolution. The students in these courses, and especially in the high blend format, reported that they were sharing information and engaging in critical thinking. However, they were less likely to report that they engaged in Integration, which should be the phase between Exploration and Resolution, when students integrate their peers' perspectives and engage in knowledge co-construction The students in this study were even less likely to report that they were engaged in curious inquiry—in fact, students' rating of Triggering Event tied with Affective Communication as the lowest median of all of the categories on the survey.

The students' low rating of Triggering Event mirrors Kim's (2016) mixed methods study of Korean graduate students in an English writing course that was required for degree completion. Her interviewees reported that “curiosity was not the purpose of taking this course. They ... were taking this course as part of their graduation requirements rather than the free choice” (p. 108). Kim relates the low ranking of Triggering Event to the required nature of the course, which is also the case with the general education course in this study. The fact that the course in this study is designed for first-year students, not graduate students, may compound this issue. The degree of curiosity with which graduate students approach their special topics courses is not likely replicated by first-year students. One important next step for research on CoI in lower division general education courses, then, is to explore the ways in which cognitive presence is characterized by students.

The fact that the course in this study was a writing course may also be a factor. In contrast to other lower-level, general education courses that introduce students to a discipline, most FYW courses are not survey courses about Writing Studies as a field of study. Rather, they are closer to studio courses about writing as a vital skill to be honed. While all writing courses aim to teach concepts like rhetorical knowledge and audience awareness, the content of the course is often determined by instructors' interests and areas of expertise. A first-year writing course might be “themed,” where the instructor frames the course around a particular issue like social justice or fake news, or the course might be more open, where the students pursue topics that interest them. This last detail is particularly important and representative of most writing courses: students are often free to choose semester topics. This means that while the instructor may teach rhetorical concepts, the bulk of what students research and write about is individualized and multi-disciplinary: one student may write about GMOs and food safety, another may write about social media and voting participation, and another may write about racism in the criminal justice system. What writing students have in common is the instructor-led focus on the writing process. Students engage in discussions that involve defining and reflecting on course concepts like writing effectively for a specific audience, and they discuss their own unique approaches to and experiences with enacting those concepts in their own writing.

The unique context of writing studies may mean that understandings of cognitive presence need to be distinct from understandings of cognitive presence in a graduate-level special topics course or an upper-division major course, or even other lower-level introductory courses, where the primary goal is for students to engage with and deliberate about a particular body of knowledge. In other words, more research is necessary to understand what communities of inquiry look like in the specific context of FYW. In particular, student interviews and an analysis of student writing alongside asynchronous discussion threads and chat transcripts would shed more light on what students believe they are learning in these courses and the extent to which that learning is a result of community inquiry. This research would advance several previous CoI studies that focus on asynchronous discussion forum threads and chat transcripts (Akyol et al., 2009b; Akyol & Garrison, 2008; Darabi, Arrastia, Nelson, Cornille, & Liang, 2011; Morueta, López, Gómez, & Harris, 2016). We also recommend additional research on students' interactions with each other outside of the LMS in platforms such as Google Docs, Twitter, VoiceThread, hypothes.is, Slack, and others.

9. Conclusion and implications
This study used the CoI survey to investigate whether the proportion of class time spent online affects blended writing students' perceptions of teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence. Our results indicate that students in classes in which half of the course was conducted online perceived greater degrees of each presence than students in classes in which a third of the course was conducted online. These findings are consistent with Owston and York's (2018) study, which found that high blend students ranked survey items related to student-student interactions higher than all of the other students surveyed (medium blend, low blend, and supplemental blend) (p. 27).

Our study points to additional research needed on social and cognitive presence in blended writing classes. The results challenge the assumption that face-to-face learning is inherently more interactive or personal than online learning, and they raise questions about the nature of cognitive presence in first-year writing (FYW) courses. Furthermore, outside of a handful of open-ended comments on the survey, this study does not tell us what students were typically doing in their face-to-face classes. If all instructors who taught the students surveyed in this study facilitated their face-to-face classes in identical ways, then we would be able to draw sharper conclusions about the impact of the proportion of online time on task and the nature of online learning activities. Yet we do not know how time in the face-to-face classes was spent. Blended learning scholarship would benefit from more research into the nature of face-to-face instructional design to better understand how students' perceptions of the face-to-face setting influences their perceptions of, and success in, their blended courses.

In addition to exploring the ways the CoI framework can inform our understanding of blended writing instruction, this study contributes to CoI research by focusing on a lower-division, general education course. Most CoI survey researchers deliver the survey to graduate students (e.g., Akyol & Garrison, 2008; Kozan, 2016; Kozan & Richardson, 2014; Lambert & Fisher, 2013; Rockinson-Szapkiw, Wendt, Whigting, & Nisbet, 2016) or to a combination of undergraduate and graduate students (e.g., Shea & Bidjerano, 2009). The studies that do focus on general education courses often include lecture-based courses with large class sizes (e.g., Stover & Ziswiler, 2017). Because of the nature of large classes, these studies tend to use the CoI Framework to argue for active learning. This is distinct from our context, where active learning is already embedded into composition pedagogy. As such, research on CoI in FYW has the potential to open conversations about developing a culture of CoI across the curriculum. Conceivably, FYW could be a setting in which students are introduced to community-based inquiry, which might prepare them for collaborative learning in other courses.

Finally, this study has implications for blended instructors and instructional designers facing the perennial question of how much time blended students should be online and what students ought to be doing while they are there. Our findings suggest that increasing the amount of time students spend engaging with each other through online interactive activities is more conducive to promoting a community of inquiry, particularly in terms of students feeling comfortable interacting with peers and reporting that they learned as a result of interacting with their peers. While instructors do not always have control over the proportion of online versus in-person seat time in their blended courses (Snart, 2015), instructors do (one would hope) have control over the design of the online activities with which students are to engage between face-to-face classes. Consistent with prior research (Castaño-Muñoz et al., 2014; Owston & York, 2018), our findings suggest that students are more likely to perceive their blended course—and their learning—more favorably when engaged with online activities that are interactive and collaborative.

Appendix A. CoI in writing studies survey
A.1. Social presence
A.1.1. Affective expression
Q1. Getting to know other course participants gave me a sense of belonging in the course.

Q2. I was able to form distinct impressions of some course participants.

Q3. Online or web-based communication is an excellent medium for social interaction.

A.1.2. Open communication
Q4. I felt comfortable conversing through the online medium.

Q5. I felt comfortable conversing through the face-to-face medium.

Q6. I felt comfortable participating in the course discussions.

Q7. I felt comfortable interacting with other course participants.

A.1.3. Group cohesion
Q8. I felt comfortable disagreeing with other course participants while still maintaining a sense of trust.

Q9. I felt that my point of view was acknowledged by other course participants.

*Q10. Online discussions helped me to develop as a writer.

*Q11. Interacting with classmates improved my writing.

A.2. Cognitive presence
A.2.1. Triggering event
*Q12. Course assignments increased my interest in writing-related issues.

Q13. Course activities piqued my curiosity.

*Q14. I felt motivated to explore questions raised in this course.

A.2.2. Exploration
*Q15. I utilized a variety of information sources to learn more about the topics I wrote about.

*Q16. Brainstorming and finding relevant information improved my writing process.

Q17. Online discussions were valuable in helping me appreciate different perspectives.

A.2.3. Integration
Q18. Combining new information helped me answer questions raised in course activities.

Q19. Learning activities helped me construct explanations/solutions.

*Q20. Reflecting on course activities and discussions helped me understand fundamental concepts about writing.

A.2.4. Resolution
*Q21. I can describe ways to test and apply the writing skills I learned in this course.

*Q22. I have developed solutions to issues raised in this course that can be applied in practice.

*Q23. I can apply the writing skills I learned in this course to my work or other non-class related activities.

A.3. Teaching presence
A.3.1. Design & organization
Q24. The instructor clearly communicated important course topics.

Q25. The instructor clearly communicated important course goals.

Q26. The instructor provided clear instructions on how to participate in course learning activities.

Q27. The instructor clearly communicated important due dates/time frames for learning activities.

A.3.2. Facilitating discourse
Q28. The instructor was helpful in identifying areas of agreement and disagreement on course topics that helped me to learn.

*Q29. The instructor was helpful in guiding the class towards understanding writing strategies in a way that improved my writing process.

Q30. The instructor helped to keep course participants engaged and participating in productive dialogue.

Q31. The instructor helped keep the course participants on task in a way that helped me to learn.

Q32. The instructor encouraged course participants to explore new concepts in this course.

A.3.3. Direct instruction
Q33. Instructor actions reinforced the development of a sense of community among course participants.

Q34. The instructor helped to focus discussion on relevant issues in a way that helped me to learn.

*Q35. The instructor provided feedback that helped me understand my strengths and weaknesses as a writer.

Q36. The instructor provided feedback in a timely fashion.

*Survey item revised from original CoI Survey (for more details, see Stewart, in press, “CoI Survey”).