The purpose of this study was to examine why college students procrastinated in online courses from a self-regulated learning perspective. A sample of 207 college students participated in this study. Using path modeling, the results showed that students' perceived content relevance and technology usability indirectly predicted academic procrastination through the roles of task value and emotional cost. Conscientiousness was also an important predictor of academic procrastination. Perceived instructor engagement and peer interaction did not predict academic procrastination. These findings revealed that academic procrastination in online courses was a complex phenomenon and stemmed from the interrelationships between college students' perceptions of learning context, personal characteristics, and motivational beliefs. Practical implications for addressing academic procrastination in online courses are discussed in this paper.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online learning

Academic procrastination

Learning environment

Motivational beliefs

Conscientiousness

1. Introduction
Academic procrastination is a prominent phenomenon among college students. It often refers to unnecessarily postponing the initiation or completion of academic tasks such as doing assignments or preparing for exams despite the awareness of the negative consequences for such delay (Steel, 2007; Wolters, 2003a). Studies showed that more than 70% of undergraduate students reported engaging in procrastination on a regular basis (Schraw, Wadkins, & Olafson, 2007; Steel, 2007). Research has also suggested that procrastination is harmful to and never beneficial for students' academic achievement (Kim & Seo, 2015; Steel, 2007; van Eerde, 2003). Students' irrational postponement of their course work can become even more pervasive and prevalent in online learning environments.

Learning in a self-paced system such as online courses with diminished regulatory cues from teachers and peers is highly susceptible to procrastination (Levy & Ramim, 2012; Steel, Brothen, & Wambach, 2001). For example, Leasure, Davis, and Thievon (2000) reported that the reasons college nursing students preferred conventional courses over distance education were the decreased tendency to procrastinate and the increased opportunity to interact and obtain immediate feedback. Given the maladaptive nature of procrastination and an increasing number of college students enrolling in online courses each year (National Center for Educational Statistics, 2018), understanding the mechanism of academic procrastination in online learning environments is urgently needed.

However, compared to the literature on academic procrastination in traditional classrooms, students' irrational postponement in online learning environments is understudied and less understood. The limited studies conducted in online learning environments have mostly focused on examining the relationships between procrastination and academic achievement (Levy & Ramim, 2012; McElroy & Lubich, 2013). Hence, the mechanism underlying the incidence of academic procrastination in online courses remains unclear. For example, do college student procrastinate in online courses? What types of college students procrastinate more than others? What kind of conditions would promote or prevent procrastination in online courses? Answers to these questions would help better design courses to support college students' learning experiences in online learning environments.

Procrastination has been studied under the self-regulated learning (SRL) framework especially in traditional classrooms among college students (Kim et al., 2020, Wolters, 2003a, Wolters et al., 2017). The SRL framework offers a systematic approach to examining the complex processes involved in the procrastination phenomena. Built upon these previous works in traditional classroom settings, this study intends to address why college students procrastinate in online courses from a self-regulated learning perspective. This study also intends to provide a clear picture of the mechanism underlying academic procrastination in online learning environments and shed light on how to design online courses to reduce the prevalence of academic procrastination among college students.

2. Literature review
2.1. Self-regulated learning
Self-regulated learning (SRL) is a recursive process where learners actively manage their own learning through planning, monitoring, and controlling their internal and external resources to achieve personal goals in academic settings (Zimmerman, 2001). Over time, several SRL models have been developed (Efklides, 2011; Pintrich & Zusho, 2007; Winne & Hadwin, 1998; Zimmerman, 2000). The current study chose Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) model as the theoretical underpinnings since it has been widely used and validated to understand college students' academic procrastination in traditional classrooms (Wolters, 2003a; Wolters et al., 2017; Wolters & Hussain, 2015). Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) SRL model is informed by a social cognitive perceptive that an individual's capability to self-regulate is influenced by environmental and personal factors (Bandura, 1997). In addition, the model is developed based on a general assumption shared by many SRL models that motivational beliefs and self-regulation mediate the relationship between environmental and personal characteristics and actual performance.

According to their model (Fig. 1), the effectiveness of an individual's SRL process (Box D) is influenced by the learning context (Box A), personal characteristics (Box B), and motivational beliefs (Box C). First, learning context refers to those classroom contextual factors that are external to learners such as the nature of academic tasks, instructors' behavior, and evaluation system. Although the objective reality of the learning context is important, students' subjective evaluations of the psychosocial characteristics of the learning context seem to be even more crucial for their learning (Church, Elliot, & Gable, 2001; Fraser & Fisher, 1982). Students' perceptions of learning context, for instance their perceived course structures, reflect how they internalize the contextual features and consequently determine the strategies used during the SRL process. Second, personal characteristics reflect those stable, enduring, and intrapersonal entities that differentiate people from one another such as age, gender, ethnicity, and personality traits. The nature of these characteristics generally rarely changes across settings and, hence, is context-independent. Third, motivation can be defined as “the process whereby goal-directed activities are instigated and sustained” (Schunk, Meece, & Pintrich, 2014, p. 5). The process is not directly observable and encompasses different subjective beliefs about the underlying tasks such as efficacy or value that account for individuals' choices, effort, and persistence (Wolters, 2003b). Last, self-regulatory process is operationalized as those learning strategies employed by individuals to regulate their cognition, motivation, behavior, and context during the goal-directed process to successfully complete activities (Pintrich, 2004). Apart from the direct effects of learning context, personal characteristics, and motivational beliefs on individuals' self-regulatory processes, there is a reciprocal causality between motivational beliefs and self-regulatory process. That is, students' motivational beliefs might influence how they strategically approach academic tasks; on the other hand, SRL might affect students' motivational beliefs about their learning.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (70KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) SRL model.

To contextualizing the model in the current study, relevant variables are included under the SRL framework and presented in Fig. 2. In this contextualized SRL model for procrastination, online course structures represent the learning context (Box A); conscientiousness represents students' personal characteristics (Box B); academic self-efficacy, task value, and emotional cost represent students' motivational beliefs (Box C); procrastination represents the self-regulatory process (Box D). Since the main interest of this study is to explore the mechanism underlying academic procrastination (i.e., self-regulatory process as will be discussed in the following section), the role of achievement (Box E in Fig. 1) is not included in this study. Also, the direct path from motivational beliefs to self-regulatory process (path CD) has received most empirical supports in the existing literature (Kim et al., 2020; Sun, Xie, & Anderman, 2018; Wolters & Benzon, 2013). On the contrary, the reverse path from self-regulatory process to motivational beliefs (path DC) has not been well supported and, hence, will not be examined in the current study. We will elaborate on each component of this contextualized model and the relationships between these components in the following sections.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (63KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Contextualized SRL model for academic procrastination in online learning.

2.2. Academic procrastination as a maladaptive form of self-regulated learning
Academic procrastination can be defined as the irrational postponement of initiating or completing academic tasks despite the awareness of the negative outcomes that can be engendered by such delay (Steel, 2007; Wolters, 2003a). Several meta-analysis studies have reached the same conclusion that academic procrastination is harmful to and has a negative association with academic performance (Kim & Seo, 2015; Steel, 2007; van Eerde, 2003). Given the maladaptive nature of procrastination, researchers have attempted to understand the reasons behind students' dilatory behaviors (Steel & König, 2006; Wolters, 2003a). Meta-analysis and other empirical studies have strongly suggested that procrastination is deeply rooted in the malfunction of an individual's self-regulatory process (Kim et al., 2020; Steel, 2007; Wolters, 2003a).

Self-regulated learners have a great deal of declarative, procedural, and conditional knowledge about cognitive, motivational, behavioral regulation strategies to enhance their learning process and sustain their effort to increase academic performance (Pintrich, 2004; Zimmerman, 2002). They are organized and strategically manage their time and study environment to avoid distraction and stay focused on learning tasks (Schunk, & Zimmerman, B. J. (Eds.)., 2007). That is, self-regulated learners normally are engaged in the benign cycle of self-regulatory process. Moreover, self-regulated learners are often associated with adaptive motivational beliefs such as high levels of academic self-efficacy and task value (Pintrich, 2000; Wolters & Rosenthal, 2000).

On the other hand, procrastinators are often associated with maladaptive motivational beliefs, low levels of learning strategy use, the inability to meet deadlines, and mediocre academic performance (Steel, 2007; Wolters, 2003a; Wolters et al., 2017). Steel (2007) concluded that procrastination mainly reflects self-regulation failure. Recently, some scholars further propose that procrastination is not simply an outcome of a lack of self-regulation. Rather, procrastination itself is a maladaptive SRL strategy used by individuals to repair their temporal negative feeling state (Sirois & Pychyl, 2016; Tice & Bratslavsky, 2000) and can be viewed as mis-regulation (Baumeister, Heatherton, & Tice, 1994). That is, when dealing with aversive tasks, individuals' may resort to procrastination as a way to regulate their negative affective state despite the fact that it is a maladaptive and ineffective strategy for long-term goal-attainment (Sirois & Pychyl, 2013). The current study adopts this latest view: Academic procrastination is a maladaptive form of strategy that individuals may employ in self-regulated learning (Won & Yu, 2018). This conceptualization (i.e., procrastination represents a component of Box D) also aligns with the hypotheses of Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) model as empirical studies have shown that procrastination is the antecedent of negative affective states (path DC) (Schraw et al., 2007) and academic achievement (path DE) (Won & Yu, 2018). Accordingly, if academic procrastination is considered a learning strategy reflecting the maladaptive self-regulatory process, then the incidence of it should stem from the interrelationships between the nature of learning context, personal characteristics, and students' motivational beliefs in online courses.

2.3. The relationship between motivational beliefs and academic procrastination (path CD)
How students approach academic tasks is closely associated with their motivation (Pintrich, 1999). Students who sustain their goal-directed behaviors often hold positive beliefs about their capabilities to successfully complete a task (e.g., self-efficacy; Bandura, 1997) and about the value of the underlying task (Eccles & Wigfield, 1995). The value aspect of motivation explains why individuals want to do a task and is composed of both positive and negative component according to the expectancy-value theory of achievement motivation (Eccles, 2005; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). The positive valence, termed task value, pertains to beliefs about how interesting, important, and useful it is to engage in a task. The negative valence, termed cost, pertains to beliefs about “what is invested, required, or given up” to work on a task (Flake, Barron, Hulleman, McCoach, & Welsh, 2015, p. 235).

One of the important dimensions of cost that is closely related to individuals' self-regulation is emotional cost (Sirois & Pychyl, 2013). Emotional cost is a negatively psychological state that results from individuals' investing effort and energy in working on a task such as stress, anxiety, frustration, and worry (Flake et al., 2015). These theoretical perspectives suggest that when students feel efficacious and perceive tasks to be interesting, important, and useful, they are more likely to put forth greater effort, sustain their behavioral conduct, and use adaptive learning strategies to complete academic tasks on time and enhance performance (Wigfield, Hoa, & Klauda, 2012). On the contrary, when a task causes too much stress and frustration, individuals have the tendency to postpone the work to avoid the associated emotional distress (Sirois & Pychyl, 2013).

Several studies have revealed that motivational beliefs serve as an important precursor of academic procrastination. For instance, Wolters (2003a) found consistently in two studies among college students that academic self-efficacy negatively predicted academic procrastination. Another study based on a sample of college students enrolled in mathematics courses also noted that academic self-efficacy and task value negatively predicted academic procrastination over and beyond environmental factors (Corkin, Yu, Wolters, & Wiesner, 2014). Wu and Fan (2017) also found that college students' academic self-efficacy, task value, and perceptions of cost significantly predicted academic procrastination even after controlling for gender, GPA, and academic level. In their experimental study with random assignment, Tice and Bratslavsky (2000) found that when participants were put in the happy condition, (i.e., read a happy-endings story), they spent more time focusing on preparing for upcoming tasks and exhibited more self-control. On the contrary, participants in the negatively psychological state procrastinated more, spent less time on preparing for an upcoming test, and engaged more in alternative activities such as playing games and reading magazines. However, evidence for such relationship is somewhat limited in online learning literature. One study reported that there was a negative association between intrinsic motivation and academic procrastination in an online graduate level educational statistics and research methodology course (Dunn, 2014). Another study based on a sample of 81 graduate students enrolled in an online master's program in education found that intrinsic motivation negatively predicted academic procrastination (Rakes & Dunn, 2010). Studies examining the relationship between motivational beliefs and academic procrastination specifically among college students in online courses are still scarce.

2.4. Salient facets of online learning environments: course structures
Before presenting empirical evidence on the interrelationships between learning context, motivational beliefs, and academic procrastination, there is a need to first define what are the salient facets of learning context in online courses. Compared to traditional classrooms, online courses have their own distinct features. Four major facets of learning context have been hypothesized to play significant roles in students' learning in an online setting. These facets are instructor engagement, peer interaction, content relevance, and technology usability (Ally, 2004; Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 1999; Hillman, Willis, & Gunawardena, 1994; Moore, 1989; Trinidad, Aldridge, & Fraser, 2005). They are termed as course structures in the current study.

Instructor engagement refers to the extent to which instructors actively engage in interacting with students, responding to students' questions and messages, and providing feedback for students in a timely fashion (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007; Moore, 1989). Moore (1989) believed that instructors in distance learning programs bear important responsibilities to stimulate and maintain students' interest and motivate them to learn. It is pivotal for instructors to provide support during the application of knowledge. Xie, Durrington, and Yen, (2011); Xie and Ke (2011) noted that in online courses, instructors needed to email students on a regular basis and actively participate in online discussions to promote student engagement. Based on a sample of graduate and undergraduate students from 26 online courses, Kuo, Walker, Schroder, and Belland (2014) found that perceptions of instructor engagement positively predicted course satisfaction. Alqurashi (2019) also found a similar finding that perceptions of instructor engagement in online courses positively predicted course satisfaction and perceived learning among graduate and undergraduate students.

Peer interaction refers to the extent to which students are afforded the opportunity and encouraged to socially and academically interact with classmates, including receiving peer feedback and sharing thoughts and ideas with peers (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007; Trinidad et al., 2005). Moore (1989) believed that through interacting with peers, individuals are able to acquire skills of working with groups and feel motivated to learn in distance learning settings. A meta-analysis showed that perceptions of peer interaction in online learning environments were strongly associated with perceived learning and course satisfaction (Richardson, Maeda, Lv, & Caskurlu, 2017). On the contrary, when students feel that online learning community is distressing and stressful owing to the aggression and conflict between peers, they are less likely to be engaged in knowledge construction and self-reflection (Xie, 2013, Xie, Miller, & Allison, 2013).

Content relevance refers to the extent to which course materials are relevant, intellectually stimulating, and well-organized for learners (Ally, 2004, Huang et al., 2015, Trinidad et al., 2005). Moore (1989) argued that the content aspect is the essential element of distance education. When interacting with content, learners are engaged in intellectual transaction with course materials. An optimal content design should trigger the didactic self-talk about the information or ideas when individuals are engaged in learning those materials. Anderson (2003) also suggested that content needs to be designed in a way to be adaptive to learners' needs, abilities, and current level of mental structure at different levels of sophistication in distance education. Based on a sample of 111 graduate and undergraduate students from 11 online courses, Kuo, Walker, Belland, and Schroder (2013) found that perceptions of content relevance positively predicted course satisfaction and had a stronger effect than perceptions of instructor engagement and peer interaction. Another study also showed that perceptions of content relevance in online language courses positively predicted course satisfaction and perceived progress in learning over and beyond demographic factors (Lin, Zheng, & Zhang, 2017).

Technology usability refers to the extent to which technology and multimedia implemented in the course are easy to use and facilitate students' learning (Ally, 2004; Swan, 2004). Hillman et al. (1994) argued that distance education is infused with and mediated by different kinds of technologies such that technology is the integral part of all the other environmental facets in distance education. They further pointed out that technology used to mediate the communication and present information is not simply a delivery system or tool but also a medium that all the learning activities are based upon. For instance, a learning management system that is difficult to use will influence how learners interact with instructors and peers and engage in learning tasks. Thurmond and Wambach (2004) suggested that when designing technology components in online courses, learners' perceptions about technology usability need to be taken into consideration. If using a technology tool requires too much effort and time, learners are likely to have a negative experience of using it. Therefore, how to design the interface of a learning management system and make sure technology and multimedia embedded in an online course to be functional and user-friendly is crucial for online learning. Xie, Debacker, and Ferguson (2006) mixed methods study showed that perceived usability of the learning management system functions affected undergraduate students' participation in the online discussion activities. Cho (2011) also found in online graduate courses that perceptions of technology usability positively predicted course satisfaction over and beyond perceptions of instructor engagement, peer interaction, and content relevance.

2.5. The relation of perceived course structures with motivational beliefs and academic procrastination (Path AC and Path AD)
Theory on school and classroom environments has long posited that individuals are more likely to thrive and motivated when there is a close alignment between their needs and their perceptions of the opportunities afforded in the environments (Eccles et al., 1993). Research also showed that students' perceptions of classroom environments predicted their motivational beliefs, adaptive learning strategy use, and academic procrastination in traditional courses (Corkin et al., 2014; Wolters, 2004).

In online settings, there is some evidence that supports the relationship between perceptions of course structures and motivational beliefs (Path AC). For instance, Artino (2007) found that perceptions of instructional engagement was positively associated with online learning self-efficacy and task value. Xie et al. (2011); Xie and Ke (2011) also found in online undergraduate courses that students' perceptions of peer interaction significantly predicted intrinsic motivation to participate in online discussion activities. Another study based on a sample of 937 students from an online university in Korea showed that perceptions of content relevance positively predicted intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, and academic self-efficacy. Perceptions of technology usability also positively predicted intrinsic and extrinsic motivation (Lim, Park, & Kang, 2016).

In terms of SRL strategy use (Path AD), Shea and Bidjerano (2010) found that perceptions of instructor engagement and peer interaction in online courses are positively associated with effort regulation based on a large sample of 3165 students. A study on college students' perceptions of course structures in online courses showed that perceptions of instructor engagement, peer interaction, and content relevance were positively associated with metacognitive strategy use (Kuo et al., 2014). Similar findings were also reported by Lin et al. (2017) that perceptions of instructor engagement, peer interaction, and content relevance were positively associated with metacognitive strategy and languages strategy use in online language courses. Previous studies provide important insights into the relationship between perceived course structures and SRL. However, most of these studies have focused exclusively on the bivariate correlation. Predictive relationship is largely unexplored. In addition, the relationship between perceived course structures and academic procrastination in online settings has not been empirically tested.

2.6. The relation of conscientiousness with motivational beliefs and academic procrastination (Path BC and Path BD)
Apart from learning environments, individuals' personal characteristics (Box B) are also important antecedents of their motivational beliefs and the use of SRL strategies (Wolters & Hussain, 2015). One of the major personal characteristics that has been consistently correlated with motivational beliefs and academic procrastination is conscientiousness (Komarraju & Karau, 2005; Steel, 2007). Conscientiousness can be defined as “individual differences in the propensity to be self-controlled, responsible to others, hardworking, orderly, and rule abiding” (Roberts, Lejuez, Krueger, Richards, & Hill, 2014, p. 1315). Conscientiousness, as a stable trait characteristic, comprises a collection of motivational and self-regulatory tendencies. Therefore, highly conscientious individuals tend to invest a lot of effort, expect to succeed on tasks, and resort to various adaptive learning strategies instead of procrastinating (Bidjerano & Dai, 2007; Chen, Casper, & Cortina, 2001).

However, it should be noted that conscientiousness as a personality construct is conceptually and empirically distinct from motivation such as self-efficacy. Conscientiousness is a spectrum of constructs that describe an individual's relatively enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that reflect the tendency to be hard working, orderly, self-controlled, and responsible to others (Roberts, Chernyshenko, Stark, & Goldberg, 2005). On the contrary, self-efficacy is individuals' beliefs about their capabilities to successfully complete a specific task (Pajares, 1996). Therefore, conscientiousness does not pertain to the concept of competence or capability. Rather, conscientiousness covers domains of industriousness, order, and self-control that are manifested in not only thoughts or beliefs but also feelings and behaviors (Roberts, 2009). In addition, conscientiousness emphasizes meaningfully consistent responses to trait-evoking situations (Roberts et al., 2014), while self-efficacy is concerned with a more specific and situational view of perceived competence (Bandura, 1997). For instance, a conscientious student has the propensity to work hard and persist in different courses, while a student with high math self-efficacy will feel having knowledge and skills to work on math but not assignments in other subject areas.

Much evidence has shown that conscientiousness predicts individuals' efficacious beliefs (Chen et al., 2001; Lee & Klein, 2002; Trautwein, Lüdtke, Roberts, Schnyder, & Niggli, 2009). Some studies also suggested that the habitual patterns of conscientiousness can also manifest themselves in individuals' intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, and task value (Komarraju, Karau, & Schmeck, 2009; Mirhashemi & Goodarzi, 2014). Apart from the strong correlation between conscientiousness and academic procrastination as evidenced in a number of meta-analyses (Steel, 2007; van Eerde, 2003), conscientiousness is also an important precursor to individuals' decision to irrationally delay their work (Johnson & Bloom, 1995; Lee, Kelly, & Edwards, 2006). Taken together, these findings suggest that a conscientious college student who has the propensity to be industrious, self-controlled, and organized across different academic settings is more likely to feel efficacious about and interested in specific coursework and less likely to procrastinate. Conscientiousness is positioned to predict motivational beliefs (Path BC) and procrastination (Path BD) in the hypothesized model of this study.

2.7. Research questions
To address the gaps in the existing literature, the purpose of the current study was to examine why college students procrastinated in online courses based on a self-regulated learning perspective. The design of the current study was guided by one central question: What are the structural relationships between students' perceptions of course structures (i.e., instructor engagement, peer interaction, content relevance, and technology usability), conscientiousness, motivational beliefs (i.e., academic self-efficacy, task value, and emotional cost), and academic procrastination?

3. Method
3.1. Sample and procedure
Data were collected from six two-credit, seven-week online undergraduate courses offered by the department of animal sciences, anthropology, educational psychology, entomology, history, and nursing at a mid-western university in the United States during the spring 2019 semester. These six courses were offered fully online through the Canvas Learning Management System (LMS). These courses were recruited through a convenience sampling method. While these online courses were not selected based on a particular course design, they were all fairly self-paced with minimal collaborative learning activities. The coursework mainly involved individual work such as watching videos, listening to lectures, readings, and quizzes. Most of the assignments could be completed without any peer support. However, it should be noted that all the target courses had asynchronous discussion activities implemented to promote peer interaction. Details on the target courses and the possible sources of students' perceptions of course structures in each course are listed in Appendix A (Table A.1) based on the syllabi and non-participant observation of the courses by the researchers (Creswell, 2013).

A total of 207 college students participated in this study. Twenty-five percent of participants were male, and 75% were female. Sixty-four percent of participants were White, 17% were Asian American, 7% were African American, 4% were Hispanic, and 8% were other races. On average, participants were 21 years old. In terms of academic standing, 13% of participants were freshmen, 17% were sophomores, 32% were juniors, and 37% were seniors. The majority of participants were either full-time students or full-time students with part-time employment (87%). Eighty-seven percent of the participants did not have dependents. On average, participants had the experience of taking 3 online courses prior to the current one.

During the second section of spring 2019 semester, students enrolled in those six courses were invited by the authors to complete an online survey on their perceptions of course structures, conscientiousness, motivational beliefs, and academic procrastination along with demographic information.

3.2. Measures
3.2.1. Perceptions of course structures
Students' perceptions of course structures were composed of four facets. Perceptions of instructor engagement were assessed by five items adapted from Kuo et al. (2014). A sample item is “The instructor in this course responded to my questions in a timely fashion.” The Cronbach’ alpha is 0.83. Perceptions of peer interaction were assessed by 7 items adapted from Kuo et al. (2014). A sample item is “Coursework in this course led to interactions with my classmates.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.89. Perceptions of content relevance was assessed by 4 items adapted from Kuo et al. (2014). A sample item is “The learning materials in this course helped me understand better the subject matter.” Cronbach’ alpha is 0.89. Some of the items in the original scales for these constructs were rephrased to reflect the affordances of the learning environments instead of the extent to which students actively engaged in interacting with instructors, classmates, and content (i.e., student engagement). Perceptions of technology usability were assessed by 3 items developed by the authors. A sample item is “There were many technical glitches happening in this course.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.91. All items were measured on a five-point Likert scale (1 = strongly agree; 5 = strongly agree).

3.2.2. Conscientiousness
Students' conscientiousness, their tendency to be industrious, self-controlled, and orderly, was assessed by 5 five-point Likert scale items adapted from John, Donahue, and Kentle (1991). The original scale of conscientiousness is composed of 9 items (5 positively worded items and 4 negatively worded items). Our factor analysis indicated that the 4 negatively worded items of conscientiousness and items of academic procrastination were loaded on the same factor, which does not align with the theory. Therefore, the decision was made to exclude those negatively worded items in the main analysis. A sample item is “I am someone who does a thorough job.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.85.

3.2.3. Motivational beliefs
Motivational beliefs were composed of three constructs. Academic self-efficacy was assessed by 5 five-point Likert scale items (1 = not at all true; 5 = very true) adapted from the Patterns of the Adaptive Learning Survey (PALS; Midgley et al., 2000). A sample item is “I'm certain I can master the skills taught in this course.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.93.

Task value was assessed by 6 seven-point Likert scale items adapted from the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ; Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, & McKeachie, 1993). A sample item is “It is important for me to learn the course material in this course.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.95.

Emotional cost was assessed by 6 nine-point Likert scale items (1 = completely disagree; 9 = completely agree) adapted from Flake et al. (2015). The scale intends to evaluate students' negative emotional reaction to putting forth effort to completing academic tasks in a course such as stress, frustration, anxiety, and worry. A sample item is “This course is emotionally draining.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.95.

3.2.4. Academic procrastination
Academic procrastination was assessed by 5 five-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree) adapted from the Academic Procrastination Scale-Short Form (Yockey, 2016). A sample item is “I put off coursework until the last minute in this course.” Cronbach's alpha is 0.87.

The phrase, “in this course,” was inserted in all the survey items to make them course-specific except for conscientiousness. Survey items of all the constructs and the degree of adaption can be found in the supplementary material.

3.3. Statistical analyses
To evaluate the construct validity of measures used in this study, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) were employed. In line with Brown's (2015) suggestions, oblique rotation (promax) with iterated principal axis factoring was used for EFA to interpret the extracted factors. Since participants came from different courses, the assumption of observation independence is violated, which will lead to biased estimates of standard errors and incorrect statistical inference if the clustering effect is not accounted for (Hox, Moerbeek, & van de Schoot, 2018). The assumption of observation independence applies to not only manifest variable but also latent variable models such as factor analysis (Julian, 2001). Based on Huang and Cornell's (2015) suggestions, the “de-mean” approach was used to account for the nested data structure of participants' responses. All the survey items were group-mean centered prior to EFA and CFA, which removed the between-course variances and rendered the intraclass correlation coefficients of the survey items to be zero (Bear, Gaskins, Blank, & Chen, 2011). This approach is justified if the substantial research interest is in the Level-1 unit of analysis (Huang & Cornell, 2015). The results of EFA support a 9-factor solution with all the eigenvalues larger than 1 (Appendix B, Table B.1). The results of CFA also showed that a 9-factor model demonstrated adequate fit to the data (see the supplementary material). These findings suggest that these constructs are distinct from one another.

Path analysis was employed to address our central research question (Kline, 2016). Structural equation modeling (SEM) was not implemented owing to the concerns of statistical power and biased fit indices given forty-six indicator variables with a sample of around 200 participants in the current study1 (Shi, Lee, & Maydeu-Olivares, 2019). The robust maximum likelihood estimator (MLR) was used to account for possible non-normality. The hypothesized model included direct effects of perceptions of course structures and conscientiousness on academic procrastination. In addition, indirect effects of perceptions of course structures and conscientiousness on academic procrastination through the pathway of motivational beliefs were also specified (see Fig. 2). In line with Hu and Bentler's (1999) suggestions, the model fit of the structural models was evaluated based on the global fit statistics (i.e., measures of average model-data correspondence; see Kline, 2016), including the standardized root mean square residual (SRMR ≤0.08), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA ≤0.06), comparative fit index (CFI ≥ 0.95), and the Tucker–Lewis index (TLI ≥ 0.95) along with chi-square test. Nested models were compared through the scaled difference chi-square test (Satorra & Bentler, 2010). To evaluate the indirect effects of perceptions of course structures on academic procrastination, bias-corrected bootstrap confidence intervals (BCBCI) based on 5000 iterations were computed to examine if the indirect effects were significantly from zero. As Preacher and Hayes (2008) showed, the bootstrapping method is preferred given that the distribution of indirect effects may not be normally distributed. Therefore, using the Sobel test to gauge the significance of indirect effects may be biased. There is no missing data in the current study. The final analytic dataset included 207 cases.

4. Results
4.1. Descriptive statistics and bivariate correlation
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and bivariate correlation. The shapes of the distribution of all the constructs were not severally non-normal given the values of skewness and kurtosis (Kline, 2016). There was a variability in the extent to which students put off their coursework (Fig. 3). On average, students in our sample experienced a moderate level of procrastination. In terms of bivariate correlation, perceptions of instructor engagement, peer interaction, and content relevance were positively associated with one another. Perceptions of technology usability was significantly associated with content relevance. Conscientiousness was positively associated with perceptions of content relevance and academic self-efficacy. Motivational beliefs were significantly associated with one another. Academic procrastination was negatively associated with perceptions of peer interaction, perceptions of content relevance, perceptions of technology usability, conscientiousness, task value and positively associated with emotional cost.


Table 1. Descriptive statistics and bivariate correlation.

Variable	0.1	0.2	0.3	0.4	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.8	0.9
1. Instructor engagement	—								
2. Peer interaction	0.29*	—							
3. Content relevance	0.33*	0.30*	—						
4. Technology usability	0.12	0.05	0.28*	—					
5. Conscientiousness	0.05	0.09	0.16*	0.12	—				
6. Academic self-efficacy	0.21*	0.34*	0.50*	0.42*	0.29*	—			
7. Task value	0.12	0.19*	0.42*	0.23*	0.05	0.37*	—		
8. Emotional cost	0.01	0.01	−0.15*	−0.37*	−0.06	−0.26*	−0.33*	—	
9. Academic procrastination	−0.04	−0.14*	−0.17*	−0.15*	−0.28*	−0.11	−0.23*	0.23*	—
M	3.75	3.67	4.13	4.40	4.39	4.45	4.53	2.22	2.62
SD	0.70	0.79	0.69	0.78	0.64	0.68	1.67	1.63	1.00
Min	1.60	1.00	2.00	1.00	1.00	1.40	1.00	1.00	1.00
Max	5.00	5.00	5.00	5.00	5.00	5.00	7.00	9.00	5.00
Skewness	0.16	−0.58	−0.45	−1.59	−1.54	−1.33	−0.25	1.70	0.38
Kurtosis	−0.59	0.32	−0.41	3.01	3.72	1.93	−0.79	2.94	−0.40
* indicates p < .05.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (86KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Distribution of academic procrastination.

4.2. Structural relationships between perceived course structures, conscientiousness, motivational beliefs, and academic procrastination
The hypothesized model did not show a satisfactory fit for the data, χ(3)2 = 11.476, p = .009, CFI = 0.949, TLI = 0.557, RMSEA = 0.117, SRMR = 0.039. TLI was low and RMSEA was relatively high. Table 2 presents the results of the structural relationships. It was noted that task value was only significantly predicted by perceptions of content relevance. Also, emotional cost was only predicted by perceptions of technology usability. Consciousness only predicted academic-self-efficacy. All facets of perceived course structures were not significant predictors of academic procrastination. Given the relatively saturated property of the model and a number of non-significant paths, the path model was trimmed by constraining these non-significant paths to be zero (Kline, 2016). The results of the re-specified path model showed a satisfactory fit for the data, χ(15)2 = 21.341, p = .126, CFI = 0.962, TLI = 0.934, RMSEA = 0.045, SRMR = 0.060. The scaled chi-square difference test also favored the re-specified model, χΔ(12)2 = 8.590, p = .737. In terms of the indirect effects, there was a significant indirect effect of perceptions of content relevance on academic procrastination through the pathway of task value (β = −0.063; 95% BCBCI [−0.136, −0.009]). Also, there was a significant indirect effect of perceptions of technology usability on academic procrastination through the pathway of emotional cost (β = −0.068; 95% BCBCI [−0.145, −0.014]). Table 3 presents the results of the structural relationships of the re-specified model. Fig. 4 presents the standardized path coefficients.


Table 2. Predicting motivational beliefs and academic procrastination: hypothesized model.

Academic self-efficacy	Task value	Emotional cost	Academic procrastination
β	SE	β	SE	β	SE	β	SE
Instructor Engagement	0.008	0.047	0.013	0.070	0.031	0.069	0.018	0.067
Peer Interaction	0.199*	0.057	0.026	0.077	0.030	0.066	−0.104	0.072
Content Relevance	0.299*	0.058	0.333*	0.079	−0.007	0.082	−0.094	0.091
Technology Usability	0.294*	0.065	0.133	0.093	−0.355*	0.074	−0.063	0.086
Conscientiousness	0.206*	0.057	0.001	0.063	−0.033	0.070	−0.283*	0.071
Academic Self-Efficacy							0.174	0.089
Task Value							−0.131	0.073
Emotional Cost							0.189*	0.095
R2	0.400*	0.163*	0.129*	0.173*
Notes. * indicates p < .05.


Table 3. Predicting motivational beliefs and academic procrastination: Re-specified model.

Academic self-efficacy	Task value	Emotional cost	Academic procrastination
β	SE	β	SE	β	SE	β	SE
Instructor engagement	0.008	0.047						
Peer interaction	0.199*	0.057						
Content relevance	0.299*	0.058	0.382*	0.068				
Technology usability	0.294*	0.065			−0.355*	0.076		
Conscientiousness	0.206*	0.057					−0.288*	0.070
Academic self-efficacy							0.084	0.071
Task value							−0.165*	0.074
Emotional cost							0.191*	0.091
R2	0.400*	0.146*	0.126*	0.142*
Notes. * indicates p < .05.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (121KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The Re-specified path model.

Dotted lines indicate non-significant paths. Gray lines indicate significant paths but are not significantly associated with academic procrastination. Bold dark lines indicate significant paths that are directly or indirectly associated with academic procrastination.

5. Discussion
The findings of the current study lend support for using the SRL framework to understand why college students procrastinate in online courses. We found that college students in our sample did procrastinate in online learning environments, and procrastination was a salient aspect in their learning. In addition, there was a variability in the extent to which they put off their coursework. As the current study shows, this variation stems from the interrelationships between perceived course structures, personality traits, and motivational beliefs.

5.1. Relationships between perceived course structures and academic procrastination (Path AD)
The findings of path analysis do not support the direct effects of perceived course structures on students' procrastination. Rather, the effects of perceived course structures on academic procrastination were channeled through the pathways of motivational beliefs, including task value and emotional cost (Path AC → Path CD). This finding aligns with what has been reported in traditional classrooms (Wolters, 2004; Won & Yu, 2018). For instance, Corkin et al. (2014) found that the effects of students' perceived instructor support and academic press on academic procrastination were completely mediated by academic self-efficacy. The little direct effect of contextual variables suggests that individuals' maladaptive self-regulatory processes such as academic procrastination could be more directly associated with internal factors such as personality traits and motivational beliefs than external environments. The way contextual variables are related to academic procrastination is manifested through their association with motivational beliefs.

However, it should be noted that the nonsignificant effects of perceived course structures on academic procrastination do not suggest that those contextual facets are irrelevant to academic procrastination at all. According to the bivariate correlation (Table 1), peer interaction, content relevance, and technology usability had a significant association with academic procrastination, which suggested that they did play a role in relation to students' unnecessary postponement. The results of path model in this study only showed that when considering the role of conscientiousness and motivational beliefs, perceived course structures did not enhance the prediction of academic procrastination over and beyond those internal factors. It is theoretically and empirically plausible that facets of perceived course structures may interact with one another in relation to academic procrastination as suggested by previous research on traditional classroom environments (Fernandez-Rio, Mendez-Gimenez, & Cecchini Estrada, 2014; Myers & Fouts, 1992). How facets of perceived course structures may interact with one another in relation to academic procrastination would be a viable area for future studies.

5.2. Relationship between perceived course structures and motivational beliefs (Path AC)
5.2.1. Perceived instructor engagement and motivational beliefs
In terms of the relationship between perceived course structures and motivational beliefs, perceived instructor engagement did not serve as any significant predictor of motivational beliefs. This finding may be somewhat surprising given that this facet is highly emphasized in theories of distance learning (Ally, 2004; Garrison, 2007; Moore, 1989, Moore, 2013). Despite the fact that perceived instructor engagement has been linked with such learning outcomes as course satisfaction, perceived learning, and cognitive presence (Artino, 2007; Cho, 2011; Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, & Fung, 2010; Kuo et al., 2014), only a handful of empirical studies so far have specifically tested the predictive relationship between perceived instructor engagement and motivational beliefs. Although Shea and Bidjerano (2010) found that perceived instructor engagement significantly predicted academic self-efficacy, their study did not consider and account for perceived content relevance and technology usability. Artino (2007) and Lin et al. (2017) did include motivational beliefs in their studies. However, they only tested the bivariate correlation between perceived instructor engagement and motivational beliefs. Therefore, the predictive effect of perceived instructor engagement on students' motivational beliefs in online learning environments is still inconclusive despite the fact that this facet bears much importance in fostering students' adaptive motivation in traditional classrooms (Corkin et al., 2014; Wentzel, Battle, Russell, & Looney, 2010).

However, the correlation analysis revealed a significant correlation between perceived instructor engagement and students' academic self-efficacy. This finding suggests that instructor engagement did have an association with academic self-efficacy, but the other contextual facets played a more salient role in predicting students' motivational beliefs. It is theoretically and empirically plausible that perceived instructor engagement may interact with the other facets of course structures in relation to motivational beliefs as supported by previous research on traditional classroom environments (Fernandez-Rio et al., 2014; Myers & Fouts, 1992). More research is needed to explore the nuances of course structures to advance the findings here.

5.2.2. Perceived peer interaction and motivational beliefs
The current study found that perceived peer interaction significantly predicted academic self-efficacy, but not task value and emotional cost, which explained why this facet was not indirectly related to academic procrastination. Theoretically, peer interaction is hypothesized to play an important role in fostering students' motivation and high levels of learning experience in distance learning (Garrison et al., 1999; Moore, 1989). However, the predictive effect of this construct on students' learning in online courses has not been consistent. Similar to the findings of the current study, Shea and Bidjerano (2010) found that perceived peer interaction significantly predicted academic self-efficacy. Other researchers also found that perceived peer interaction was a significant predictor of course satisfaction, cognitive presence, intrinsic motivation to participate in online discussion activities, high-level of knowledge construction, and engagement in posting and non-positing behaviors on discussion boards (Cho, 2011, Garrison et al., 2010, Xie, 2013, Xie, Durrington, & Yen, 2011, Xie, Miller, & Allison, 2013, Xie & Ke, 2011). In online courses where knowledge construction is highly emphasized, perceived peer interaction is also strongly associated with motivational beliefs and learning outcomes (Ke & Xie, 2009; Ke, 2013).

However, a number of recent studies found a null effect of perceived peer interaction on students' learning at least in terms of course satisfaction (Kuo et al., 2013; Kuo et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2017). Kuo et al. (2014) even argued that perceived peer interaction “may be negligible in online course settings” (p. 35). Closely examining these recent studies, one will find that perceived peer interaction was significantly correlated with intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, self-regulated learning, and course satisfaction. The null effect of perceived peer interaction on course satisfaction was simply owing to the other stronger predictors in the models such as perceived content relevance and learning strategies. In light of the existing literature and the current finding, we believe that peer interaction is relevant to student learning in online courses since it predicts several aspects of student learning, especially academic self-efficacy despite not being the strongest predictor of course satisfaction as shown in some of the previous studies.

5.2.3. Perceived content relevance and motivational beliefs
In line with the existing literature, the current study also suggests that perceived content relevance is a strong predictor of students' learning in online learning environments. In his initial conceptualization of the salient aspects of learning environment in distance education, Moore (1989) argued that the content aspect is the essential element of distance education. Most of the empirical studies support this stance and demonstrate that compared to perceived instructor engagement and peer interaction, perceived content relevance was the strongest predictor of course satisfaction and perceived learning in online settings (Cho, 2011; Kuo et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2017). Despite its importance, the relationship between perceived content relevance and motivational beliefs has not been examined widely. Lin et al. (2017) showed that perceived content relevance was positively associated with intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, and learning strategies. Also, Kuo et al., 2013, Kuo et al., 2014 found that perceived content relevance was positively associated with Internet self-efficacy and self-regulated learning. However, these studies did not consider other motivational beliefs such as task value and emotional cost. Besides, their findings were only based on bivariate correlation.

The current study contributes to the existing literature by demonstrating the significant relationship between perceived content relevance and motivational beliefs in two aspects. First, the correlation analysis revealed that perceived content relevance was significantly associated with all types of motivational beliefs. Second, even after controlling for the other facets of perceived course structures and conscientiousness, perceived content relevance remained a significant predictor of academic self-efficacy and task value. Research has shown that these two motivational beliefs are important predictors of course satisfaction, learning strategy use, and cognitive presence in online learning environments (Artino, 2007, Artino, 2009; Shea & Bidjerano, 2010).

5.2.4. Perceived technology usability and motivational beliefs
As with perceived content relevance, our correlation analysis showed that perceived technology usability was significantly associated with all motivational beliefs. In the path model, even after controlling for the other facets of perceived course structures and conscientiousness, perceived technology usability remained a significant predictor of academic self-efficacy and emotional cost. These findings support that technology usability is an integral part in online learning environments since information, messages, and interaction are mediated by different kinds of technologies and multimedia (Hillman et al., 1994).

Despite its critical role for students' learning in online settings, perceived technology usability has been overlooked and understudied. A plethora of early studies have focused on how perceived instructor engagement, peer interaction, and content relevance are related to students' learning in online courses (Garrison et al., 2010; Kuo et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2017; Richardson & Swan, 2003). Only a few studies have examined the effects of perceived technology usability on students' learning in terms of course satisfaction and students' participation in the online discussion activities (Cho, 2011; Xie, Debacker, & Ferguson, 2006). How students' perceived technology usability is related to their motivation in online courses is still less understood. The findings of the current study reveals that perceived technology usability is strongly related to how motivated students feel in online courses. Specifically, the role of perceived technology usability lies in its close connection with students' efficacious beliefs and their psychological state of effort investment. Therefore, when students perceive that technology components are designed and implemented well in an online course, they tend to feel confident to successfully complete academic tasks and less stressful about putting forth their effort.

5.3. Relationship between motivational beliefs and academic procrastination (Path CD)
5.3.1. Academic self-efficacy and academic procrastination
The current study found that academic self-efficacy was not significantly associated with academic procrastination. This finding is somewhat surprising given that this construct has been hypothesized to be critical for procrastination (Steel & König, 2006), and its association with procrastination has a strong empirical basis (Steel, 2007). There are two reasons that may explain the discrepancy between the findings reported here and what is known in the existing literature. First, although research has showed that academic self-efficacy is associated with academic procrastination, some studies did not find this effect when controlling for covariates such as goal orientations, goal structures, learning strategies, time management, and grit (Corkin, Yu, & Lindt, 2011; Sirin, 2011; Wolters, 2004; Wolters et al., 2017; Wolters & Hussain, 2015). Therefore, although being a significant correlate, academic self-efficacy is not always the strongest predictor of academic procrastination when other factors are considered. Given the strong relationship between academic procrastination and conscientiousness, it is plausible that academic self-efficacy did not explain additional variance over and beyond this personality trait.

Second, it is likely that in the context of online courses, academic self-efficacy is not as strongly related to academic procrastination as it is in traditional classrooms. As learning environments are completely mediated by Internet-based technologies in online courses, other types of efficacious beliefs such as Internet self-efficacy, technology self-efficacy, and online learning self-efficacy may play a more significant role in explaining SRL (Tsai et al., 2011). Future studies are encouraged to examine this hypothesis.

5.3.2. Task value and academic procrastination
The current study showed that task value was a significant predictor of academic procrastination even after controlling for conscientiousness. This finding aligns with the theoretical conceptualization of academic motivation that students are more likely to persist and engage in academic tasks that are perceived interesting, useful, and important (Wigfield, 1994). Task value also promotes adaptive learning strategy use in both traditional and online classes (Artino & Jones, 2012; Wigfield et al., 2012; Wolters & Hussain, 2015). The finding of the current study contributes to the existing literature by highlighting that task value is a crucial predictor of academic procrastination since it explains unique variance over and beyond conscientiousness. Previous studies examining the relationship between task value and academic procrastination normally did not consider the role of conscientiousness (Corkin et al., 2014; Wu & Fan, 2017). Wolters et al. (2017) did include in their study metacognitive strategies and time management—constructs that are related to self-control and self-regulation. However, in that study, task value failed to significantly predict academic procrastination over and beyond these SRL variables.

Given that task value had a stronger relationship with academic procrastination than academic self-efficacy as demonstrated in the current study, it is possible that task value may play a more important role in relation to students' SRL in online courses than efficacious beliefs. For instance, in their early study, Artino and Stephens (2006) found that task value was a stronger predictor of students' use of elaboration and metacognitive learning strategies than academic self-efficacy. Artino and Jones (2012) was able to replicate previous findings that task value had a stronger relationship with students' SRL in online courses than their efficacious beliefs about online learning.

5.3.3. Emotional cost and academic procrastination
Apart from task value, the current study found that emotional cost was also an important factor in relation to college students' academic procrastination in online courses. This finding supports the conceptualization of procrastination as a maladaptive regulation strategy for short-term affect repair (Sirois & Pychyl, 2013; Tice & Bratslavsky, 2000). The relationships between maladaptive motivational beliefs and academic procrastination has been understudied in procrastination literature (Corkin et al., 2014; Wolters et al., 2017; Wolters & Hussain, 2015). The findings on the relationships between maladaptive motivational beliefs (e.g., mastery-avoidance, performance-avoidance, or work-avoidance goals) and academic procrastination are also not consistent (Wolters, 2003a, Wolters, 2004). Wu and Fan (2017) and Jiang, Rosenzweig, and Gaspard (2018) recently conducted studies on the relationship between perceptions of cost and academic procrastination. However, neither studies focused specifically on emotional cost. The current study demonstrates that maladaptive affect, specifically in terms of negative emotional reactions towards course materials, is critical for our understanding about college students' procrastination in online settings.

5.4. Relationship of conscientiousness with motivational beliefs (path BC) and academic procrastination (path BD)
5.4.1. Conscientiousness and motivational beliefs
In terms of personal characteristics, the current study showed that conscientiousness was a significant predictor of academic self-efficacy. In line with Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) SRL model, individuals' personal characteristics such as personality traits are important antecedents of their motivational beliefs. Much evidence has shown that conscientiousness significantly predicts individuals' motivational beliefs, especially self-efficacy (Chen et al., 2001; Lee & Klein, 2002; Trautwein et al., 2009). The current study further reveals that this predictive relationship also occurs in online learning environments. The association between conscientiousness and task value has only been supported by a handful of studies in the literature, which is consistent with the nonsignificant correlation between these two constructs as found in the current study. Therefore, conscientious college students who have the propensity to be hard working, self-controlled, and orderly across academic settings are more likely to feel that they have sufficient knowledge and skills to successfully complete required tasks in online learning environments but may not necessarily view coursework as being interesting, important, and useful.

5.4.2. Conscientiousness and academic procrastination
As documented consistently in the literature, conscientiousness is strongly associated with procrastination (Steel, 2007; van Eerde, 2003). In line with Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) SRL model, individuals' personal characteristics such as personality traits are important antecedents of SRL. The current finding extends the literature in two aspects. First, the strong relationship between conscientiousness and academic procrastination is not limited to the context of physical settings but also can be observed in online learning environments. Second, conscientiousness is a critical factor in online learning environments as it is not only associated with course satisfaction, online course impressions (i.e., engagement, value to career, overall evaluation, anxiety/frustration, and preference for online courses), and achievement (Cohen & Baruth, 2017; Keller & Karau, 2013), but also academic procrastination.

5.5. The role of instructor engagement and peer interaction
Our findings show that to help students avoid procrastination, resources and effort should be first devoted to the facets of content relevance and technology usability in online learning environments. However, we refute the conclusion that instructor engagement and peer interaction should be ignored in online courses or instructors do not play any role in preventing procrastination. First, the current findings only suggest that if an instructional goal is to reduce students' procrastination, making course materials relevant and technology components well-implemented should be the top priority for instructors. However, academic procrastination is one of several important aspects of student learning. There are other critical learning outcomes such as information retention, critical thinking, collaboration, or course satisfaction that may require high levels of instructor engagement and peer interaction. Online learning involves complex instructional design decisions. Our discussion is specifically targeted at the incidence of academic procrastination in online courses. Which facets of course structure should weigh more may depend on the targeted learning outcomes and student characteristics. Second, the fact that instructor engagement does not predict academic procrastination does not mean that there is little instructor need to do to help students avoid procrastination. As Moore (1989) pointed out, instructors in distance learning programs bear important responsibilities to stimulate and maintain students' interest and motivate them to learn. Although engaged in responding to students' questions in a timely manner or creating opportunities for students to interact with one another may not necessarily help students much in terms of preventing procrastinating, instructors should still be actively engaged in tailoring course materials to students' needs and strategically designing and integrating technology and multimedia into courses to promote adaptive motivation and positive emotions. Therefore, there are many solutions instructor can turn to in order to reduce the incidence of procrastination in their courses as we will suggest in the following section.

6. Conclusion and practical implications
The purpose of this study is to explore why college students procrastinate in online courses based on a self-regulated learning perspective. As the current study shows, academic procrastination is a salient aspect of online learning among college students, and the extent to which students postpone their coursework varies. The current study extends the existing literature by clarifying the mechanism underlying academic procrastination in online learning environments. Academic procrastination stems from the interrelationships between students' perceptions of learning context, personality traits, and motivational beliefs. When students perceive that course materials are intellectually stimulating and comprehensible, they are more likely to see the value of engaging in learning activities and procrastinate less frequently. In a similar vein, when they perceive that technology and multimedia implemented in a course are not disruptive, they are less likely to experience emotional distress and have the tendency to complete academic tasks on time. Conscientious students are less likely to procrastinate in online courses.

In summary, college students' unnecessary delay in online courses was indirectly related to external factors, including perceived content relevance and technology usability, and directly related to internal factors, including conscientiousness, task value, and emotional cost. Here, we offer some practical implications for instructional design and online instruction to help students avoid procrastination. However, it should be noted that the current study was based on cross-sectional data and did not involve any experimental design. Therefore, the implications for practice offered here and any causal assertations need to be interpreted with caution.

6.1. Improve content relevance and technology usability
One strategy that may improve students' perceived content relevance is to conduct needs analysis to gather information about students' prior knowledge, entry skills, and reasons for enrollment, which will be beneficial for tailing the course content to students' needs (Dick, Carey, & Carey, 2015). Multimedia such as Web 2.0 technologies may also be strategically utilized to enhance students' comprehension and attract their attention to the learning materials. Short instructional videos on Youtube or Khan Academy can be integrated into learning materials to facilitate the understanding of difficult concepts and increase comprehensible input (Hsin & Cigas, 2013).

In terms of fostering perceived technology usability, technology tools implemented in an online course need to be user-friendly, effective, accessible, and reliable. Prior to launching any online course, there is a need to trouble-shoot all the technical components such as weblinks, audio, video, and graphics, which will reduce the incidence of technical glitches throughout the semester. Also, providing students with vicarious experience through video tutorials on how to use all the required technologies (e.g., Google Docs, Adobe Connect, or Flipgrid) in a course is likely to help build up students' knowledge base and skills for using technology, and thus, may increase their perceived technology usability (Bandura, 1997). Third, Mayer's (2017) multimedia design principles and his recent integration of these principles into e-learning provide a great direction on how to choose and design quality multimedia in online settings. For instance, instructors should choose a multimedia lesson with graphics and narration instead of one with graphics, narration, and on-screen text since the former contains fewer redundant messages.

6.2. Foster conscientiousness
One common belief about personality traits is that they do not change at all since a personality trait represents the “relatively enduring, automatic patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors” (Roberts et al., 2014, p. 1316). However, Roberts, Hill, and Davis (2017) meta-analysis on personality trait change through clinical interventions showed clear evidence that significant changes in personality traits could take place over an average time of 24 weeks. A trait is a consistent manifestation of a state over time and situations. Therefor e, focusing on specific behavioral states and encouraging individuals to act in certain manner on a regular basis could foster the development of a desirable trait such as conscientiousness (Roberts et al., 2017). Motivation, especially the value aspect, is also a critical component for changing personality traits (Magidson, Roberts, Collado-Rodriguez, & Lejuez, 2014). Therefore, one viable strategy to foster students' conscientiousness in online learning environments is to focus on a specific state behavior associated with particular domains of conscientiousness such as self-control or punctuality (Roberts et al., 2014), model the value of changing this behavior, and encourage students to execute those behaviors on a regular basis. For instance, instructors can assess students' conscientiousness level at the very beginning of the semester and select those with low conscientiousness for an intervention. The intervention can focus on time management and requires participating students to plan their time accordingly for weekly assignments on the first day of every week and continue to do so over the whole semester. Meanwhile, the instructor needs to demonstrate why effective time management is valuable for them. By engaging students in deliberate practice repeatedly, their past tendencies and typical way of functioning may be changed and broken.

6.3. Balance task value and emotional cost
Apart from selecting relevant course materials, there are other viable strategies to foster students' task value and reduce emotional cost. First, in their experimental study, Rosenzweig et al. (2019) found that asking students to read and evaluate quotations from past students about how the learning materials in this course are connected with their personal lives is an effective way to enhance their task value. Second, instructors can also directly model the relevance aspect of the learning materials by sharing their thoughts with students on how specific module is interesting, important, and useful for them at the very beginning of each module (Brophy, 1999). Third, using a variety of learning activities throughout a course instead of asking students to do the same activity every week such as reading and writing is likely to facilitate the development of task value, especially their interest (Schunk et al., 2014). Fourth, affording students some choice of topics is also a good instructional strategy to foster task value (Patall, Cooper, & Robinson, 2008). These value induction and autonomy support strategies could also be effective for fostering positive emotions and reducing emotional cost such as anxiety, frustration, and worry in academic settings (Pekrun, Frenzel, Götz, & Perry, 2007). Instructors are also encouraged to engage in the empathic design practice through discovery, immersion, connection, and detachment in order to predict and understand the end user's emotional reaction to course materials and learning activities. This process will help instructors create a learning environment that will create positive emotional experience for students (Tracey & Hutchinson, 2019; Xie, 2021).

7. Limitations and future directions
There are five limitations associated with the current study. Each limitation points out possible directions for future research. First, the target courses in the current study were highly structured and self-paced without substantial portions of collaborative activities that necessitated a high level of peer interaction and the facilitation of instructors. These course design features could largely affect participants' perceptions of instructor engagement and peer interaction and be the main reason for the nonsignificant effects of both facets on procrastination. Therefore, whether the current findings can be generalized to courses that require high levels of instructor engagement and peer interaction such as small group work is uncertain. Researchers can specifically sample such courses and examine if similar findings can be replicated to verify the role of perceived instructor engagement and peer interaction in relation to academic procrastination.

Second, the main purpose of the current study is to examine the overall mechanism underlying college students' academic procrastination in online course based on a SRL model. We did not examine possible interaction between facets of course structures or between different dimensions or “boxes” within Pintrich and Zusho's (2007) SRL model. For instance, it is possible that the relationship between instructor engagement and academic procrastination may depend on specific student characteristics or motivational profiles. Instructor engagement could be very critical for students who do not have much experience in online learning or possess maladaptive motivational beliefs in terms of reducing their tendency to procrastinate. More research is needed to identify the optimal combinations of perceived course structures and how learning context, personal characteristics, and motivational beliefs may interact with one another in relation to academic procrastination.

Third, the current study focuses on students' perceptions of course structures instead of the actual course structures designed by the instructors. That is, the link between actual course structures and perceived course structures was not investigated. Therefore, what aspects of actual course structures will cause positive perceptions of course structures is a viable research area for future studies. Researchers should consider collecting multiple data sources and indicators to investigate what kinds of instructor engagement, peer interaction, content relevance, and technology usability are more conducive to developing positive perceptions of learning context, fostering adaptive motivational beliefs, and reducing procrastination.

Fourth, the current study is focused on college students enrolling in online credit courses. Therefore, the findings may not be generalized to other student population such as graduate students. As Artino and Stephens (2009) discovered, undergraduate and graduate students possessed different levels of learning experience, motivational beliefs, and strategy use coming to online learning environments. These characteristics are likely to influence their perceptions of course structures, and therefore, the interrelationships between perceived course structures, personal characteristics, motivational beliefs, and academic procrastination among graduate students could be different from those among college students. There is a need for future studies to verify this point. Last, the current study focused on the predictive relationships. Therefore, casual effects depicted in Pintrich and Zusho (2007) model may not be assumed. Future studies can employ cross-lagged panel model to take into consideration time sequence and the reciprocal relationship between motivation and academic procrastination.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Download : Download Word document (65KB)

Supplementary material

Appendix A


Table A.1. Possible sources of perceived course structures.

Course	Animal sciences
Goal	provide an overview of animals maintained by humans and the diversity among animal related industries
Enrollment	150
Assignments	quizzes, exams, participation, and final exam
Instructor Engagement	Emails would be replied within 48 h during Monday-Friday. For emails sent during Saturday and Sunday, a response no later than the following Tuesday was expected.
The Instructor provided feedback on the assignments within a week of the due date as indicated in the syllabus.
The instructor made 4 announcements regarding deadlines and updates on learning modules throughout the semester.
The instructor engagement in responding to students' discussion posts cannot be determined.
Peer Interaction	Students were required to interact with one another every week through the Packback Questions, an online learning community where students can feel safe to ask any big and curious questions on how course materials are related to the world.
Content Relevance	Students were expected to finish topic materials every week that were formatted through SoftChalk, an authoring software to make eLearning content more visual and engaging.
Technology Usability	Adobe Reader, online articles, Packback, SoftChalk, YouTube

Course	Anthropology
Goal	teach students to discover past through the material record of human societies and their historical engagement with environments around the world
Enrollment	40
Assignments	quizzes, essays, exams, poster, discussions, and workbooks
Instructor Engagement	Students were welcome to email any questions to the instructor or meet over Skype as indicated in the syllabus.
Emails would be replied within 24 h.
The instructor provided feedback on the assignments and discussion posts.
There was relatively high instructor engagement in responding to students' discussion posts.
The instructor would send a weekly email with instructions on learning modules as indicated in the syllabus.
The instructor made 24 video lectures for students to watch.
The instructor made 24 announcement posts or videos regarding the overview of the learning modules, clarifications on assignments, and grading throughout the semester.
Peer Interaction	Students were encouraged to respond to peers' discussion posts.
Content Relevance	There were 3 practical assignments that exposed students to the techniques real archaeologist use in their careers.
Apart from the lectures and readings, the instructor integrated a significant portion of YouTube videos and movies into weekly learning modules.
Technology Usability	Adobe Flash, Adobe Reader, online articles, pictures, PowerPoint, recorded lectures, YouTube

Course	Educational Psychology
Goal	teach students how to use the web for a successful college experience
Enrollment	25
Assignments	weekly posts and final post on the discussion board
Instructor Engagement	Students were welcome to email any questions to the instructor as indicated in the syllabus.
Emails would be replied within 40 h.
The instructor provided feedback on the assignments.
The instructor made 17 announcements regarding the overview of the modules, reminders of important deadlines, or grades throughout the semester.
There was low instructor engagement in responding to students' discussion posts.
Peer Interaction	Students were encouraged to interact with one another by writing constructive and thorough responses to their peers' posts on the discussion board.
Content Relevance	Both weekly posts and final post required students to think about how they could put what they had learned into practice.
Learning modules were quite relevant for students' college experience such as navigating academic web resources and service, using online tools for time management and or4gnaizaiton, developing strategies for online learning, communicating online, searching for academic content, and evaluating the credibility and usefulness of online resources.
Technology Usability	Adobe Flash, Adobe Reader, animation, Box, G Suite, infographics, mindmap, Office 365, pictures, podcast, online articles, recorded audios and videos by students, timeline, vlog, WordPress, YouTube

Course	Entomology
Goal	introduce students to the fascinating world of arthropod pests that impact the health and well-being of domesticated animals
Enrollment	300 (divided into 7 discussion groups)
Assignments	quizzes, blog assignments, and research assignments
Instructor Engagement	Students were welcome to email any questions to the instructor or teacher assistants or meet over Skype as indicated in the syllabus.
The instructor and teacher assistants were engaged in interacting with students by providing feedback on the assignments and discussion posts.
The instructor engagement in responding to students' blog assignments was moderate.
The instructor made 23 video lectures for students to watch.
The instructor made 27 announcements regarding the availability of learning modules and reminders of important deadlines throughout the semester.
Peer Interaction	Students were encouraged to interact with one another by writing constructive and thorough responses to their group members' blog assignments posted on the discussion board.
Content Relevance	Students were encouraged to attend extracurricular activities related to the course such as attending a research seminar, volunteering at an outreach event that educated the public about veterinary health, and finding example from popular culture or world history that related to veterinary entomology.
Technology Usability	Adobe Reader, digital camera, Office 365, online articles, pictures, podcast, recorded lectures, YouTube

Course	History
Goal	examine warfare in the ancient Near East and Mediterranean basin from the time of the earliest settlements to Late Antiquity
Enrollment	90 (divided into 10 discussion groups)
Assignments	discussion posts, quizzes, and exams
Instructor Engagement	Students were welcome to email any questions to the instructor or meet over Skype as indicated in this syllabus.
Emails would be replied within 1–2 h on weekdays from 9 am-5 pm. Anything sent after 5 pm would be responded to the next morning.
The Instructor provided feedback on the assignments within a week of the due date.
The instructor engagement in responding to students' discussion posts was low.
The instructor made 19 video lectures for students to watch.
The instructor made 14 announcements regarding the overview of the modules, assignments changes, or grades throughout the semester.
Peer Interaction	Students were required to participate in each video lecture's forum every week and expected to engage in responding to their peers within the same discussion group (200–300 words in length).
Content Relevance	Students were welcome to connect readings and lectures with relevant personal experiences in their discussion posts.
Technology Usability	Adobe Reader, Office 365, online articles, pictures, recorded videos by students, recorded lectures

Course	Nursing
Goal	examine informatics in health care emphasizing clinical information systems and the use of the information technology (IT) applications to support nursing practice
Enrollment	25 (divided into 4 discussion groups)
Assignments	VoiceThread presentation and discussion
Instructor Engagement	Students were welcome to email any questions to the instructor or meet over video conferencing software as indicated in the course.
The instructors checked email daily on weekdays. Emails after noon on Friday, may not be answered till Monday.
The instructor made 4 announcements regarding the welcome message, learning modules, spring break, and course evaluation survey throughout the semester.
The instructor engagement in responding to students' discussion posts was low, except for the students' introduction thread.
The Instructor provided feedback on the assignments within a week of the due date.
The Instructor provided written and video feedback on the assignments.
Peer Interaction	Students were required to interact with one another by writing constructive and thorough responses to their peers' discussion posts.
Content Relevance	VoiceThread presentation assignment allowed students to choose topics that affected quality or safety of care in their workplace in which informatics could be of assistance in resolving.
Technology Usability	Adobe Reader, Office 365, online articles, Panopto, recorded videos by students, Vimeo, VoiceThread, YouTube, Zoom
Appendix B


Table B.1. Exploratory factor analysis: factor loadings.

Indicators	.IE	.PI	.CR	.TU	.CON	.SE	.TV	.EC	.AP
IE1	0.33								
IE2	0.74								
IE3	0.92								
IE4	0.93								
IE5	0.65								
PI1		0.60							
PI2		0.66							
PI3		0.78							
PI4		0.82							
PI5		0.73							
PI6		0.79							
PI7		0.75							
CR1			0.75						
CR2			0.82						
CR3			0.85						
CR4			0.75						
TU1				0.88					
TU2				0.79					
TU3				0.87					
CON1					0.68				
CON2					0.85				
CON3					0.89				
CON4					0.55				
CON5					0.62				
SE1						0.73			
SE2						0.88			
SE3						0.81			
SE4						0.76			
SE5						0.89			
TV1							0.80		
TV2							0.90		
TV3							0.90		
TV4							0.88		
TV5							0.82		
TV6							0.90		
EC1								0.82	
EC2								0.93	
EC3								0.97	
EC4								0.89	
EC5								0.89	
EC6								0.84	
AP1									0.78
AP2									0.58
AP3									0.68
AP4									0.88
AP5									0.85
Notes. IE: instructor engagement; PI: peer interaction; CR: content relevance; TU: technology usability; CON: conscientiousness; SE: academic self-efficacy; TV: task value; EC: emotional cost; AP: academic procrastination.

