This study explores the research paradigms and topics of MOOCs to gain a deeper understanding of the MOOC phenomenon by reviewing 146 empirical studies of MOOCs published from October 2014 to November 2016. The results show that: (a) most studies used quantitative research methods followed by mixed research methods and qualitative research methods, (b) the most frequently adopted data collection method was survey, followed by platform database, interviews, and discussion forum, (c) more than half of the collected studies used at least two data collection methods such as survey and interview, (d) the majority of researchers used descriptive statistics to analyze data, followed by inferential statistics and content analysis, and (e) the research focus was mainly on students, followed by design-focused, context and impact-focused, and instructor-focused. Among the foci of that research, learner retention and motivation were the most mentioned, followed by learner experience and satisfaction, assessment, and instructional design.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Massive open online courses (MOOCs)

Research methods and topics

Empirical MOOC literature

Literature analysis and synthesis

Online education

1. Introduction
The origin of the term “MOOC” is attributed to educational researchers such as George Siemens and David Cormier (De Freitas et al., 2015, Fournier and Kop, 2015). Shortly after, Downes classified MOOCs into two main categories: (1) networks of distributed online resources (cMOOCs), and (2) well-structured learning pathway resources centralized on MOOCs platforms (xMOOCs) (Downes, 2008). With the increasing number of MOOC participants, MOOCs have gained extensive public interest and attention as a form of open and online education that have the potential to significantly impact the existing higher education system (Gašević et al., 2014, Pappano, 2012). The proliferation of MOOCs during the past decade has generated further research opportunities for educators, contributing to the rapid growth of empirical research on MOOCs during the past few years (Deng and Benckendorff, 2017, Veletsianos and Shepherdson, 2016).

Liyanagunawardena, Adams, and Williams (2013) reviewed MOOC research from 2008 to 2012 and identified MOOC studies into different categories. Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016) reviewed MOOC research between 2013 and 2015 regarding the research methods, citation, and regions of the authors. In a review of MOOC research studies from October 2014 to April 2016, Deng and Benckendorff (2017) examined the research methods adopted. These various review studies show that MOOC research topics and trends are rapidly changing (Veletsianos & Shepherdson, 2016).

As the number of MOOCs (Almanac 2017–2018, 2017, Shah, 2016, Shah, 2017a, Shah, 2017b) and associated MOOC studies continues to dramatically expand, detailed and systematic analysis and synthesis of existing MOOC empirical studies is required (Reich, 2015). Such a review of the research can lend important insights into current trends and recent impact areas related to MOOCs. Given that the research on MOOCs has continued to increase since prior research syntheses, including those from Liyanagunawardena et al. (2013), Gašević et al. (2014), Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016), and Deng and Benckendorff (2017), it is vital to further investigate what has transpired since those reports. Simply put, there is a scarcity of systematic analysis of empirical studies of recent MOOC research that targets all of the following aspects: research methods adopted by MOOC researchers, the research topics, the geographic locations of MOOC researchers, and the regions of the MOOC delivery. Such an analysis, which effectively both builds on and extends the work of those mentioned above, can offer a deeper and more diverse understanding of the MOOC phenomenon.

The research methods used in previous reviews vary. Most of the data used in these reviews come from databases such as Scopus focusing on journal articles of both quantitative and qualitative measures. There were various limitations with all of the research syntheses cited in the previous section as well as several important distinctions from the present study. Among the key distinctions, Gašević et al. (2014) relied on content analysis and citation network analysis research methods to review the 28 proposals submitted to the MOOC Research Initiative which was funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and administered by Athabasca University in Canada; they did not evaluate the resulting article publications or research methods actually implemented. Second, the study from Liyanagunawardena et al. (2013) was limited to 45 studies that were published between 2008 and 2012; in effect, these studies were conducted in the early years of MOOC design and implementation. In similarity to the present study, these researchers searched papers from journals and databases (e.g., Scopus). They employed quantitative methods to understand trends related to the year of the publication, publication name or outlet, and the types of publications for MOOC research (i.e., journal paper, conference proceedings, magazine article, report, etc.). In addition, Liyanagunawardena et al. (2013) tracked the number of publications per author. They also employed content analyses to examine the topics of the publications.

Third, the study from Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016), which included a more substantive MOOC research literature base (i.e., 183 studies), collected data from sources such as Scopus, the “Summon” search engine, Google Scholar, and two online libraries (i.e., EdITLib Digital Library and the EDUCAUSE Library). In addition, they employed a forward referencing process using Google Scholar to identify 60 additional documents that cited one or more of the 120 papers that they had already located. This systematic analysis from Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016) included empirical studies of MOOCs that employed both quantitative and qualitative data analysis methods. They created an 11-item coding scheme to classify the types of research undertaken on MOOCs (e.g., basic qualitative study, grounded theory, discourse analysis, social network analysis, correlational, descriptive statistics, ethnography, phenomenological, natural language processing, experimental and quasi-experimental, and other). This researcher team focused on research from January 2013 to January 2015; 37 studies were from 2013, 129 from 2014, and the remaining 17 were in press at the time of their analysis. As a result, these researchers did not include many studies from 2015 and likely none from 2016.

Finally, the Deng and Benckendorff (2017) study, while more current (i.e., January 2014 to April 2016), searched electronic databases for recent peer-reviewed journal articles, conference papers, book chapters, and unpublished theses and dissertations. This review yielded 53 studies meeting their stated criteria. Deng and Benckendorff utilized both quantitative methods and thematic analysis to evaluate the data. Excluded from their MOOC research analyses were studies in which the students and/or instructors had no previous experience using MOOCs. While it was unclear how this criterion could be verified, these researchers were interested in the types of research methods employed to better understand student and instructor use of MOOCs. However, such selection criteria limited their findings; a larger sample of the prevailing MOOC research would potentially have been more informative of the research methods and focus areas selected by MOOC researchers.

While addressing some of the gaps in the research literature, this study extends the previous review of MOOC research by adding more updated sources through critical examination of topics that were not fully addressed previously. Researchers in the present study reviewed 146 empirical MOOC studies from October 2014 to November 2016. As MOOC offerings continue to surge (Almanac 2017–2018, 2017, Shah, 2016), researchers need current data about the research topic areas, methods, focus, dissemination outlets, etc., on MOOCs in order to learn from them and build upon these approaches in follow-up research. This study is intended to help MOOC researchers better understand the typical research methods and trends and provide important implications for future MOOC research.

2. Literature review
A MOOC is an online course with the option of free and open registration, an open curriculum, and open-ended outcomes (McAuley, Stewart, Siemens, & Cormier, 2010). In 2008, the term of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) was coined by George Siemens and David Cormier when they referred to the Connectivism and Connective Knowledge course developed by Stephen Downes and George Siemens (De Freitas et al., 2015, Fournier and Kop, 2015). Anyone with an Internet connection can enroll in a MOOC, obtain access to the resources, interact with peers, and reflect and share their knowledge with classmates (Kop, 2011, Koutropoulos et al., 2012).

MOOCs were categorized by Downes into two main types based on different learning theories: networks of distributed online resources (cMOOCs) such as found in the MOOC titled “Connectivism and Connective Knowledge” (CCK08) and structured learning pathways centralized on digital platforms (xMOOCs) such as Coursera and edX (Downes, 2008). This innovative approach, which makes higher education more accessible to massive audience in a global scope, has received significant attention in higher education (Bali, 2014, Bulfin et al., 2014, Carver and Harrison, 2013, Jacobs, 2013, Liyanagunawardena et al., 2013) as well as the prevailing media. Early research revealed that the median MOOC enrollments are over 40,000 students (Jordan, 2013). The number of MOOC participants worldwide in 2016 was over 58 million people, representing an increase in MOOC enrollments from the previous year of more than 23 million people (Shah, 2015, Shah, 2016). Given that nearly 7000 MOOCs were offered in 2016 alone (Shah, 2016), it is not too surprising that there is enormous research attention and resources being placed in this new field.

During the past few years, researchers have started to pay closer attention to trends in research on MOOCs as well as document the remaining gaps. Some of these researchers have conducted extensive reviews of the MOOC literatures, including Ebben and Murphy (2014), Hew and Cheung (2014), Jacoby (2014), Kennedy (2014), Liyanagunawardena et al. (2013), Raffaghelli, Cucchiara, and Persico (2015), Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2015), Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016), and Deng and Benckendorff (2017). These review studies have diverse goals and perspectives. They have also conducted their reviews on studies from different time periods.

For example, Ebben and Murphy (2014) reviewed empirical studies from 2009 to 2013 to capture the themes in MOOC studies, whereas Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016) examined the research strands, publication outlets, citations, and research methods of MOOCs studies during 2013 and 2015. Liyanagunawardena et al. (2013), on the other hand, reviewed 45 published MOOC studies (2008–2012) and categorized the literature interest into eight different areas: (1) introductory, (2) concept, (3) case studies, (4) educational theory, (5) technology, (6) participant focused, (7) provider focused, and (8) other. The Liyanagunawardena et al. study indicated that many MOOC researchers used case studies and focused on learners' perspective.

A year later, in 2014, four different literature review studies on MOOC were published. For instance, Ebben and Murphy (2014) reviewed empirical studies (2009–2013) to capture the themes in MOOC studies in two phases. This study claimed that themes in Phase One (2009–2011) included the development of Connectivism theory and technological experimentation and innovation in cMOOCs. Themes in Phase Two (2012 − 2013) included the emergence of xMOOCs, the development of MOOC pedagogy and platforms, learning analytics and assessment, and a critical discourse about MOOCs. In the latter phase, students' drop-out rates, cultural translations (Nkuyubwatsi, 2014) and retention (Yuan, Powell, & Olivier, 2014) issues in MOOCs were criticized.

That same year, Hew and Cheung (2014) summarized the motivations and challenges of using MOOCs. Their study shows that students mainly have four motivations when enrolling in MOOCs: (1) extending knowledge, (2) curiosity about MOOCs, (3) personal challenge, and (4) obtaining certificates. They also discovered that the motivations of MOOC instructors included curiosity, personal rewards, and a sense of altruism. However, instructors also faced challenges such as choosing appropriate assessment methods, lecturing without a live audience, the time-consuming and money-consuming nature of MOOCs, and fostering interaction in online discussion forums.

Jacoby (2014) reviewed the literatures from a unique perspective. He used disruptive innovation theory to examine the influence of MOOCs on higher education. The findings showed that MOOCs have affected different aspects of the research on MOOCs such as the common pedagogical approaches, delivery methods, and business models. However, she also stated that there was a need for researchers to examine the extent, level, and permanence of the disruption that MOOCs brought.

One year later, Raffaghelli et al. (2015) examined the methodological approaches used in prior research literature on MOOCs (2008–2014). They found that previous MOOC studies have primarily focused on theoretical research and case studies. In effect, there is a lack of studies on MOOC methodologies and research paradigms. At about the same time, Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2015) reviewed MOOC studies (2013–2015) from an interdisciplinary perspective. They found that MOOC researchers were mainly from the fields of education and computer science. Their analysis also revealed more interdisciplinary studies than found in prior research from 2008 to 2012.

The following year, Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016) published another study which investigated the research strands, publication outlets, citations, and research methods of MOOCs studies (2013–2015). The authors found that most of the researchers were from North America and Europe. Among their other key findings were that MOOC research papers and reports were not widely cited and that quantitative research methods are preferred by researchers. And, of particular interest in the current study, Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016) insightfully pointed out that research targeting MOOC instructors is quite limited.

In regards to researcher methods adopted by researchers, a study by Deng and Benckendorff (2017) showed that surveys, interviews, and log files were the most frequently adopted data collection methods. They also discovered that, as might be expected, most researchers employ singular research method.

The literature review mentioned above provides a general overview of MOOC research to date; however, the studies reviewed show that the research topics and trends are continually and rapidly changing (Veletsianos & Shepherdson, 2016). Even though MOOC studies were mainly conceptual studies at the beginning (Kennedy, 2014), the field has changed, and more empirical studies have emerged (Veletsianos & Shepherdson, 2016). Given the “big data” available to illustrate student learning in MOOCs, one of the challenges in MOOCs is the research methods selected employed to study them including the data collection and analysis methods (Bieke, De Laat, Teplovs, & Voogd, 2014).

However, there are only a few studies that have explored the empirical literature in MOOCs in terms of the research methods adopted and topics of that research. For this reason, a comprehensive picture of the methodological approaches adopted to study MOOCs to date would be needed to better understand and characterize key educational problems and begin to address them in a less tentative way. Moreover, the diversity of methodological approaches needs to be explored to reveal the gaps in the research as well as the critical issues, topics, research aims, and methods available for data collection and analysis. In brief, by analyzing the methodological approaches adopted in the existing research, MOOC researchers can perhaps move from a state of “perpetual transformation” to a more stable picture.

In the fast growing discussion about MOOCs, researchers and educators could benefit from a more detailed and comprehensive picture of the research methods and topics of MOOCs. More specific reasons include the following: (a) as MOOC courses and enrollments have rapidly increased around the world, they have inspired a discussion in education, especially, in instructional technology, (b) researchers need to reflect on the appropriate methods for data collection and analysis (Raffaghelli et al., 2015), (c) there is a scarcity of meaningful results from the MOOC research literature (Jona & Naidu, 2014), and (d) there is wide and growing diversity of subject areas of MOOCs researchers (Liyanagunawardena et al., 2013, Veletsianos and Shepherdson, 2015).

Thus, the purpose of the current review of research paradigms and topics of MOOC research is to gain a deeper and more diverse understanding of the current MOOC phenomenon by reviewing recent articles. This study also aims to increase the awareness of methodological issues and make recommendations for future research by examining empirical research from an educational perspective. In that regard, the following four research questions guided our inquiry:

1.
What are the research methods researchers employed in empirical MOOC studies?

2.
What are the research topics or focuses in MOOC studies?

3.
How are researchers of empirical MOOC studies geographically distributed?

4.
In terms of the delivery of the MOOC, what are the countries which are attracting the most research?

3. Methods
To answer these four research primary questions, the data collection and analysis methods below were adopted.

3.1. Data collection
The research team collected the study data by searching electronic databases, Scopus, and peer-reviewed journal articles from October 2014 to November 2016. However, a few in press articles were also included. To ensure the relevance of the review, the researchers utilized seven selection criteria.

First, the study had to be an empirical study. Non-empirical study, such as literature reviews and conceptual papers, were not included. Second, the study must mainly investigate educational aspects of MOOCs, such as a focus on instruction design, students, instructors, the general context and impact of MOOCs, and other topics. Articles which addressed topics such as software development or software engineers, platform development, and librarian issues, were excluded from the analysis. Third, as indicated above, the research studies included were published between October 2014 and November 2016; however, several articles in press for 2017 that were listed in the Scopus database were also included. Fourth, Scopus database was the primary source of the article selection process. In addition, as noted below, several journals which were not indexed by Scopus were included since they were targeted by previous research studies (e.g., Veletsianos & Shepherdson, 2016) or were known to publish MOOC-related research. Fifth, the keywords “MOOC” and “Massive Online Open Course(s)” were used to screen titles, abstracts, and keywords of the literature. Sixth, the types of documents included in this review were journal articles. Conference papers or proceedings, article reviews, book chapters, and unpublished theses and dissertations were not included. Finally, only studies in English were included in this review.

To create efficiencies, the workload for article collection and analysis was distributed about evenly between two of the researchers on the team. One researcher searched articles from five key journals in Scopus which tended to publish MOOC-related articles (i.e., Computers & Education, British Journal of Educational Technology, International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, Distance Education, and Educational Media International). She also searched through several other targeted journals not indexed by Scopus but which tended to publish MOOC research (e.g., EDUCAUSE Review, EDUCAUSE Quarterly, Online Learning, the International Journal on E-Learning, Journal of Interactive Media in Education, Journal of Online Learning Research, the Journal of Open Flexible and Distance Learning). The other researcher searched the descriptions of the rest of the articles found in the Scopus search. When completed, nearly equal numbers of MOOC research articles were indexed by each researcher.

The two researchers searched for and then analyzed the articles individually. More specifically, each researcher searched their respective papers and read the abstract to decide whether it met the seven criteria. If the researcher could not make decision by reading the abstract, she read the full paper to make the final decision. Full text versions of the accepted documents were downloaded to the computer and then uploaded to a shared Google drive.

In the first phase of data collection, each researcher found and analyzed twenty MOOC research articles. Next, they exchanged the data collected and cross-checked the re-coded information; in particular, they checked the research methods, data collection and data analysis methods, general study focus, specific study focus, and the location of the authors. Two researchers discussed and negotiated the items that were not in agreement. After reaching consensus, they continued their data collection and analysis processes. When they completed data collection, they discussed their analyses and cross-checked each other's work. The final number of papers collected for this review was 146. The overall inter-rater agreement across all items was 91.1%. The recorded data of each study included a variety of dimensions such as authors and their affiliations, location of the authors, location of the MOOC delivery, year of publication, title, journal name, general analytic method (e.g., qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods), data collection methods, data analysis methods, general study focus, special study focus, and article URL.

3.2. Data analysis
As mentioned previously, the current research project entailed collecting empirical studies related to MOOCs that were published in more than a dozen different journals from 2014 to 2017. As illustrated in Fig. 1, 26 out of 146 articles (17.8%) were published in 2014, 68 articles (46.6%) were published in 2015, and 50 articles (34.2%) were published in 2016. The remaining two articles (1.4%) were in press for 2017.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (82KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The number of papers that were published in each year (2014–2016) (note: two additional studies were in press at the time of this article analysis).

These papers were distributed in different journals. Table 1 reveals the twelve primary journals of MOOC publications during the span of this study. As is clear, most articles were published in International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (IRRODL) (n = 31) followed by Computer and Education (n = 12), British Journal of Educational Technology (n = 9), and Online Learning (n = 7).


Table 1. Primary journals of MOOC publications (2014–2017).

No.	Journal	Total
1	International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (IRRODL)	31
2	Computers & Education	12
3	British Journal of Educational Technology	9
4	Online Learning	7
5	Distance Education	5
6	Educational Media International	5
7	Internet and Higher Education	5
8	Journal of Computer Assisted Learning	5
9	Computers in Human Behavior	4
10	Open Learning	4
11	Journal of Online Learning and Teaching	3
12	Journal of Asynchronous Learning Network	3
The following section describes the analysis methods used to answer each particular research question.

To answer Research Question 1 (RQ1) related to the research methods typically employed in empirical MOOC studies, the two researchers coded the papers using three general categories. These three research categories were identified by Creswell as quantitative research, qualitative research, and mixed-methods (Creswell, Plano Clark, Gutmann, & Hanson, 2003). Each researcher examined the paper and categorized it using these codes. Then the other researcher reviewed the analysis. If the second researcher disagreed with the first researcher, the two of them discussed the issue with each other until they reached a consensus. To obtain a deeper understanding of the research methods, the researchers examined data collection and analysis methods as well. In addition to data collection methods identified by Tashakkori and Teddlie (2003), namely, interviews, surveys, focus groups, tests, and observations, the researchers also added discussion forum, platform database, and learning analytics as coding categories. We categorized data from MOOC platform such as enrollment information, clickstream logs, percentage of finished assignments, and video/page views as platform database. For items that failed to fit into any of these categories, the researchers listed the individual method employed.

To examine the research focuses in MOOC studies as directed by Research Question 2 (RQ2), the researchers used categories identified earlier by Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2015) as the coding scheme. The five categories were: (1) student-focused, (2) teacher-focused, (3) design-focused, (4) context and impact, and (5) other. The researchers first read the MOOC research articles and identified the specific research focuses of each paper which eventually evolved into 24 distinct topics. Next, the researchers categorized these topics into the five categories mentioned above. The researchers followed the same cross-check process as data analysis method described for RQ1.

To examine the MOOC researchers' geographical distribution (RQ3), we first examined the affiliations of all the authors of these 146 studies. When completed, we calculated the country location for all the MOOC authors in this study as well as the locations for just the first author of the 146 MOOC studies.

To better understand the countries of MOOC origin or delivery in MOOC empirical research (RQ4), the researchers determined the countries of the MOOC being studied. For the published studies which used did not specify the name or the location of MOOC delivery or used the general MOOCs as research, the researchers coded them as “Global.”

4. Results
4.1. Research question #1: what are the research methods researchers employed in empirical MOOC studies?
In this study, as discussed previously, we divided the research methods into three types; namely, quantitative, qualitative, or mixed method. Based on our analysis of the general research methods used in these 146 published MOOC studies, 27 articles (18.5%) were qualitative in nature, 67 articles (45.9%) were quantitative, and the remaining 52 studies (35.6%) were mixed methods (see Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (88KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Research methods employed in empirical MOOCs studies (2014–2016).

4.1.1. Data collection methods
We also analyzed the main data collection methods. Most of the empirical MOOCs studies used one (43.8%) or two (31.5%) data collection methods. In addition, 16.4% studies (n = 24) used three data collection methods. Only 8.2% studies (n = 12) used more than three data collection methods (see Fig. 3).

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (102KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The number of data collection methods in empirical MOOCs studies (2014–2016).

Among all these data collection methods, survey techniques were used most frequently (n = 87), followed by platform database (n = 25), interview (n = 24), discussion forum (n = 15), quiz or test results (n = 11), observation (n = 6), focus group interviews (n = 5), and learning analytics (n = 5) (see Fig. 4). When reanalyzing this data, it was found that 30 out of 146 studies (20.5%) relied on surveys as the sole data collection method, whereas 34 out of 146 studies (23.3%) combined surveys with one other data collection method. Other studies combined survey with two (11.6%) or more than two (4.1%) data collection methods. Among the 146 empirical research projects analyzed in this study, only 8 out of 146 studies (5.5%) used platform database as the only data collection methods. Other studies combined platform database with one (9.6%), two (1.4%) or more than two (0.7%) other data collection methods. Another less used data collection method was the reliance on interviews. Six studies (4.5%) used interviews as the sole data collection method. Other studies combined it with one (5.5%), two (4.1%), or more than two (2.7%) other data collection methods.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (145KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Data collection methods used in empirical MOOCs studies (2014–2016).

4.1.2. Data analysis methods
In addition to data collection methods, it is vital to know how such data is analyzed. In this study, 107 out of 146 studies used two or more data analysis methods. Fig. 5 depicts the data analysis methods adopted in empirical MOOC studies. Descriptive statistics were used most (78.1%), followed by inferential statistics (43.2%), content analysis (40.4%), social network analysis (6.2%) and thematic analysis (5.5%). As illustrated in that figure, other qualitative data analysis methods included, constant comparative method (n = 1), grounded approach analysis (n = 1), collaborative autoethnography (n = 1), phenomenological analysis (n = 1), and SWOT analysis (n = 1).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (204KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Specific data analysis methods for MOOC research (2014–2016).

4.2. Research question #2: what are the research focuses in MOOC studies?
As described earlier, in terms of the general focus of empirical studies on MOOCs, we divided the research focus into five different categories, i.e., student-focused (n = 74), design-focused (n = 48), context and impact (n = 20), instructor-focused (n = 5), and other (n = 7) (see Fig. 6).

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (108KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Primary/general focus of MOOC delivery (Note: some studies have more than one area of focus) (2014–2016).

Slightly more than half of MOOC studies (50.7%) concern the MOOC participants or students. Among those student-focused studies, they tend to focus on learners' behaviors, motivation, satisfaction, performance, interaction, and retention. However, new topics like communication patterns, the social structure of the discussion threads, and attitudinal change are emerging.

The less frequently focused studies were design-focused studies (32.9%). The topics in these publications address design collaboration activities, assessments, learning community, digital badging, and the quality of the design. Other topics of design studies related to design MOOCs for professional development, attitude change, and engaging MOOC learners.

The third most common type of MOOC research in this study related to context and impact. Nearly 14% of MOOCs studies focused on context and impact. Those particular studies included MOOC use in higher education, the impact of MOOC in developing countries, and the flexibility or effectiveness of MOOCs.

In contrast to the above three research areas, only 3.4% of the studies targeted instructors. The topics of instructor-focused studies cover instructors' experience of designing and developing MOOCs, instructors' teaching presence, and roles in MOOCs.

The studies that did not fall into any of the four categories were put into the “other” category (4.8%). These studies included the goals of institutions, value change in MOOCs, approaches to face MOOCs challenges, and social media in MOOCs.

Besides analyzing the general focus of MOOC delivery, we also investigated the more specific topic or detailed focus of MOOC delivery. Table 2 below presents the list of detailed MOOC focuses.


Table 2. Specific topical focus of MOOC studies.

Detailed focus	Total
Motivation	11
Retention and completion/dropout	11
Assessment/measurement/evaluation	10
Instructional/MOOC design	10
Learners' experience	10
Satisfaction	10
Engagement	8
Attitude	7
Performance/outcome	7
Collaborative learning and peer support	6
Communication/interaction	6
Higher education	5
Professional development	5
Effectiveness	4
Self-regulated learning	4
Learners' behavior	3
Social learning	3
Student/instructor's role	3
K-12/pre-college	3
Pedagogy	3
Quality of MOOC	3
Blended learning	1
Cheating	1
Underserved students	1
4.3. The relationship between research topics and research methods
Each research area used a variety of research methods. Among student-focused studies, 52.7% (n = 39) used quantitative research methods, 35.1% studies (n = 26) used mixed methods, only 12.2% studies used (n = 9) qualitative methods (see Table 3). In design-focused studies, 39.6% studies (n = 19) used quantitative research methods, 35.4% studies (n = 17) used mixed methods, and 27% (n = 12) used qualitative methods. Among studies which focused on context and impact, 45% studies (n = 9) used quantitative methods, 30% (n = 6) used qualitative methods, and 25% (n = 6) used mixed methods. However, in instructor-focused studies, 3 out of 5 used qualitative methods; the remaining two studies used mixed methods. No studies of MOOC instructors employed quantitative methods.


Table 3. Research methods used in each research topic.

Quantitative	Qualitative	Mixed methods
Student-focused	39	9	26
Design-focused	19	12	17
Context and impact	9	6	5
Instructor-focused	0	3	2
4.4. Research question #3: how are researchers of empirical MOOC studies geographically distributed?
Based on the location of the affiliations of all the authors of MOOCs studies, the five countries with the most empirical MOOC research were the U. S. (n = 68), the UK (n = 20), Australia (n = 11), Canada (n = 10), China (n = 9), and Spain (n = 8). Regarding the locations of the first authors of MOOCs studies, first authors from the U.S. (n = 68) were the most frequent, followed by the UK (n = 17), Australia (n = 10), China (n = 8), Spain (n = 7), Canada (n = 6), Netherlands (n = 4), Taiwan (n = 4), and Turkey (n = 3) (see Fig. 7). Our findings also reveal that some researchers collaborate with people from the same countries, whereas others may collaborate with researchers across continent. It seems that many researchers from Canada collaborate with authors from other countries but not as the first author.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (109KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The location of the first author of MOOCs studies (2014–2016).

4.5. Research question #4: in terms of the delivery of the MOOC, what are the countries which are attracting the most research?
In this sample of 146 MOOC research studies, most of it describes the specific country of MOOC origin, but some studies that we analyzed did not specify the country. The research articles which did not specify the country from which the MOOC was offered typically were conducted by MOOC vendors such as Coursera, edX, and Udemy. MOOCs from the U.S. were researched the most (n = 53). MOOCs from the UK were the second most researched (n = 13). In addition, China and Spain were third with seven studies completed (see Fig. 8). Thirty-three studies were conducted on MOOCs without a clear country of origin. Such findings might serve as a stepping stone for those seeking to find MOOC research partners and collaborators, book project or special journal issue contributors, research subjects and data, and sources of research funding. It can also help scholars interested in researching leadership issues and policy making in the field of MOOCs. Finally, when such data is viewed across time, shifts in where the research is occurring can be a signal of where governmental or institutional policies and practices are making an impact or where demand for such learning has significantly accelerated or decreased.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (100KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Countries of MOOC delivery in which the research was conducted (2014–2016).

During our analyses, we noticed that more than one in five of the studies included in this review were classified as “global” (see Fig. 8) since they did not specify a university or country of origin. Given these findings, it might be advantageous for future MOOC developers and instructors to focus on learning objectives that highlight international and global perspectives, interests, and concerns. Such a focus may help more MOOC learners to grasp the long-term or societal implications and applications of the course, thereby potentially aiding in learner retention. Instructional designers should also be sensitive to the fact that important issues and topics of interest might be raised in MOOC discussion forums or chats from anywhere in the world. As a result, pedagogical methods and activities that acknowledge and embrace the diversity of perspectives and multicultural perspectives found in MOOCs should prove beneficial. When culturally rich discussions are provoked and supported in MOOCs that are sensitively and adaptive to different points of view, such activities can potentially increase learner persistence and tendencies to stay in the course.

5. Discussion
The purpose of this review study of the research paradigms and topics related to MOOCs was to gain a deeper understanding of the MOOC phenomenon. We hope that the findings will provide vital information and increase the awareness of MOOC researchers of the methodological issues and research trends in MOOC studies.

The 146 studies examined in this report reveal several interesting trends and issues related to the research on MOOCs published between October 2014 and November 2016. The authors' geographic information, years of publication, publication journals, research methods, data collection methods, data analysis methods, and research focuses were analyzed. As detailed in the results, the empirical MOOC studies increased significantly from 2014 to 2015. Around half of the papers were published by the first authors whose affiliations were from the U.S. The UK was second. Most of them are affiliated with universities, and the rest of them are affiliated with educational consulting, governmental bodies, or independent organizations. If people from organizations outside of universities settings became more involved in MOOC research, they might enrich the perspectives related to MOOC applicability and design challenges. They might also lend important insights into MOOC functioning and the innovations needed for the success of MOOCs in the future.

These MOOC research reports have been published in a variety of journals. Interestingly, approximately one-fifth of the studies were published in International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (IRRODL) which had more empirical MOOC studies than any other journal during the time period of the present research project. The results showed that 45.9% studies adopted quantitative research methods, while only 18.5% adopted qualitative research methods. Correspondently, survey research was the most used data collection method, and descriptive statistics was the most adopted data analysis method. Finally, the study findings revealed that most of the studies addressed MOOC students or participants. This is actually not a surprising finding, considering that students motivations, experiences, and also engagement in the MOOC environment have been challenged and questioned through news, magazines, and various discussion forums.

As shown in this study, MOOC researchers most often used quantitative research methods to gather and analyze their data. This finding probably can be explained by the statement that the easy access to MOOC data sets have made quantitative research more preferable compared to other research methods (Veletsianos, Collier, & Schneider, 2015). Some studies, however, adopted mixed methods. Nevertheless, few studies adopted qualitative research method. Such data respond to the suggestion for the methodological diversity in MOOCs research made by Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016).

As has been reported here and elsewhere, those planning to research MOOCs should be considered moving from survey and platform data and other easily obtainable descriptive statistics and content analyses toward to more complex and sophisticated research. For instance, where appropriate, they might utilize in-depth learner and instructor interviews, focus groups, and actual MOOC session observations, as well as social network and thematic analyses. As an example, course data and discussion forums have been used by some researchers for social network analysis in attempts to better understand communication and interaction patterns of the learners (Kellogg et al., 2014, Park et al., 2015, Skrypnyk et al., 2015).

The results of this study show that research topics mainly target learners' needs and experiences in MOOCs. Such findings are well aligned with previous research (Coffrin, Corrin, de Barba, & Kennedy, 2014). The specific focus of such MOOC research often relates to learner motivation, participant completion rates, assessment methods, the learning experiences and satisfaction of MOOC participants, learning engagement, etc. The second most frequent research concern is instructional design. However, few studies address MOOC instructors or the context and impact of MOOCs. There seems to be a growing need to explore researchers related to MOOC instructors, such as instructor motivations when offering MOOCs, instructor design and development experiences related to MOOCs, the instructor role in MOOC design and delivery, and instructors' interaction with TAs, guest experts, and other assistants in MOOCs. Among the few MOOC research reports included in the current study that focused at the instructor level, no studies used quantitative research methods. As a result, future studies may consider conducting quantitative or mixed method studies focusing on instructors.

The analysis of geographic information of the first authors' affiliations demonstrated that most of the authors' affiliations were in the U.S., followed by the UK, Australia, China, Spain, and Canada. These results align well with a previous study by Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016, p. 215) which stated “over 80% of authors were affiliated with institutions in North America or Europe.” The replication of their findings is a signal that MOOC researchers are geographically concentrated. It would be of value to analyze articles written by researchers from different countries or regions of the world to see different perspectives. Of course, these findings are at least partially attributable to the fact that the papers included in this study were all written in English. To address this issue, future research might examine studies which include research reports written in other languages and geographic regions of the world.

6. Study limitations
This study has several limitations. First, this study only used Scopus and certain journals to search empirical MOOCs studies. Even though Scopus is a large database of peer-reviewed literature, there might be some studies that were not included in the Scopus that were missed in this study. Second, the 146 published research articles in this study are from a limited time frame of about three years; hence, the findings are limited to representing MOOCs studies in this time period. Stated another way, there are undoubtedly numerous new studies since that time that would alter the trends of MOOCs studies revealed here. Third, this study was limited to the publications written in English, meaning MOOCs studies written in other languages such as Chinese, Spanish, German, and Korean were not included in this research. Fourth, we only used published articles in peer-reviewed journals. There likely are some valuable empirical MOOCs studies in book chapters, conference proceedings, technical reports, and master's and dissertation theses that were not included here.

7. Conclusion and future research
Based on our exploration of 146 empirical MOOC research articles which were published between 2014 and 2016, almost half of all MOOCs research used quantitative methods for gathering and analyzing data; of which survey research methods were the most prominent. As such, this study effectively extends as well as replicates previous research findings from Veletsianos and Shepherdson (2016) and others. In particular, most MOOCs research remains concentrated at the participant or student level and is quantitatively based. Therefore, it may be advantageous for MOOC researchers to more actively target MOOC instructors as well as instructional designers and the entire course development, production, and evaluation team. Such research should triangulate methods to inquire more deeply into decisions related to MOOC quality criteria, cultural sensitivity, pedagogical issues such as course interactivity and engagement, and assessment practices. In terms of location of the MOOC researchers, the U.S. was once again identified as the country most widely conducting MOOC-related research. What is clear during the past few years is that the research on MOOCs remains a vital and growing area of interest for educational researchers across disciplines and regions of the world.

By understanding these consistent trends, researchers will be better equipped to build upon and extend the MOOC studies to date by addressing novel topic areas and learner populations as well as by conducting more collaborative research while experimenting with research methods yet to be attempted. Along these same lines, potential funding agencies and institutes will have a better grasp of research areas and topics related to MOOCs that might be highly beneficial. As such, research on MOOCs during the next few years should prove to be both highly informative and valuable in setting programmatic and policy directions.

To improve MOOC design practice, MOOC instructors and instructional designers can better understand topics that are insufficiently researched as well as the results of those that are more extensively investigated. They can also review MOOCs in countries which have attracted the majority of the MOOC research and read the related MOOC researchers' study findings to potentially find key insights and inspirations for their own MOOC design. In the future, once MOOCs have been offered over a longer period of time and have potentially evolved to more engaging and effective levels, such types of synthesis studies might examine the types of quality indicators (Margaryan, Bianco, & Littlejohn, 2015) and learning-related enhancements, pedagogical supports, and instructional scaffolds that are consistently explored in MOOC research. Documentation of the findings in these and other aspects of MOOC quality should prove informative and valuable for MOOC instructors and instructional designers. Given the well-publicized documentation about the relatively high learner attrition rates in MOOCs (Belanger and Thornton, 2013, Chuang and Ho, 2016, Jordan, 2013, MOOC @ Edinburgh, 2013 – Report #1, 2013), inroads into learner engagement in MOOCs could prove especially momentous.

As we approach the end of the first decade of the existence of MOOCs and the associated trailblazing research on them, the early research summaries and reviews by Liyanagunawardena et al. (2013), Gašević et al. (2014), Veletsianos and Shepherdson, 2015, Veletsianos and Shepherdson, 2016, Deng and Benckendorff (2017), and several others, are now in need of follow-up and extension. The present study extended and built upon these previous research analyses by including more recently published MOOC studies. For future research, we recommend that a continuous expansion of methodological approaches in MOOCs research is needed. Cross-cultural comparison research might further inform people in the field of how MOOC research paradigms, methods, and topics of interest differ in various regions of the world. Another possible direction of the research would be to hone in on more localized understanding of educational philosophies, research paradigms, goals, and values. We look forward to the exciting next decade of MOOCs and the various groundbreaking MOOC-related research approaches and analysis methods.