Based on a synthesis of traditional attrition models and the empirical literature, an online doctoral persistence model was developed using archival data from 148 candidates. A predictive, correlation design and logistic regression were used to examine if a linear combination of institutional (financial support; program, curriculum, and instruction; and support services) and integration variables (academic, social, economic, and familial integration) could be used to distinguish between doctoral students who persist from those who withdraw during the dissertation process. The entire model, including all institutional and integration variables, were found to significantly predict whether or not online doctoral students will persist in the candidacy stage of the program. Moreover, support services; quality of the program, curriculum, and instruction; academic integration; social integration with faculty; and familial integration each individually contributed to explaining the likelihood of online doctoral persistence. Social integration, financial support, and economic integration were not individual significant contributing factors explaining persistence.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Doctoral persistence

Online

Social integration

Academic integration

Faculty

1. Introduction
As persistence is often considered a measure of higher education program effectiveness, residential, doctoral attrition rates, ranging between 40% and 60% and as high as 70% for Doctor of Education (EdD) programs (Bowen & Rudenstine, 1992; National Science Foundation [NSF], 2009; Nettles & Millett, 2006), are worrisome. Of greater concern are the attrition rates for programs offered in the online (i.e., via the internet) format, which are 10% to 20% higher than programs offered in a residential (i.e., on a college or university campus) format (Holder, 2007, Rovai, 2002, Terrell et al., 2009). While doctoral attrition can occur at any stage, the largest degree of attrition in online and residential programs is documented during candidacy (NSF, 2009), when a candidate enters the research and scholarship stage of the program (i.e., the dissertation stage) (Rockinson-Szapkiw & Spaulding, 2014). Attrition at this stage is not surprising as the doctoral candidate must make the transition “from being a consumer of knowledge… to creator” (Gardner, 2009, p. 328) and demonstrate the ability to independently design, conduct, analyze, and present research. For many candidates, the challenges associated with accomplishing these tasks are unlike any they faced previously in their academic careers. Due to feelings of loneliness, poor motivation, dissatisfaction, and problems with dissertation advisors, candidates in residential programs chose to dropout (Lovitts, 2001). While similar, but albeit more complex and still in need of investigation, online candidates drop out due to poor community and isolation, inability to be self-directed, and poor mentorship and feedback (Ponton, 2014, Rovai, 2014, Terrell et al., 2012).

To reduce perennially high attrition rates, specifically in online programs, the factors associated with online doctoral attrition and its antithesis, persistence, particularly in the research and scholarship stage of the program, need to be better understood. Understanding factors associated with online doctoral attrition and persistence during specific stages in the program can inform educators' strategies and program policies to decrease withdrawal and encourage degree completion (Smallwood, 2004).

Unfortunately, while there is a plethora of attrition and persistence research, there is a dearth of theoretically grounded research on online doctoral persistence. For example, Tinto, 1975, Tinto, 1993 student integration model and Bean and Metzner's (1985) student attrition model are foundational to understanding persistence in higher education; however, these models were created prior to the evolution of online education. They focus primarily on undergraduate and community college students. While research is emerging on retention in online environments, this research is largely conducted with undergraduate students enrolled in bachelors or associate degree programs (Boston et al., 2014).

Research examining attrition and persistence in doctoral students has generally focused on PhD candidates in residential programs (Golde, 2005, Lovitts, 2001). These candidates are typically young, enroll directly after completion of an undergraduate or graduate degree, and usually hold on-campus assistantship (Holder, 2007). These characteristics do not describe typical online doctoral candidates who maintain residence at a distance from campus (e.g., 100 miles to thousands of miles), choosing not to uproot their families for their educational goals. These candidates, especially those enrolled in EdD programs, remain in their careers as educators and administrators of academic institutions; thus, struggle to balance their home, school, and work lives (Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, & Lunde, 2016). Given the uniqueness of this population, it is reasonable to hypothesize that their reasons to depart or persist may differ from their residential counterparts. In fact, Tinto (2006-2007) acknowledged, “the process of student retention differs in different institutional settings, residential and non- residential” (p. 4).

Thus, there is a need to examine factors associated with online doctoral persistence, defined as continual enrollment in a doctoral program with the goal of degree completion (Bair, 1999). The purpose of this study was to build a quantitative model to investigate how institutional factors (i.e., financial support, program factors, and support services) and integration factors (i.e., implicit in persistence theories and doctoral research; academic, social, economic and familial; Tinto, 1993, Wao and Onwuegbuzie, 2011; Author, 2014) may predict online EdD student persistence during candidacy.

2. Theoretical framework
While classic persistence models are limited in their explanatory power for online doctoral persistence, they provide a preliminary framework for this study. Tinto's (1975) seminal work originally focused on residential, undergraduate students has evolved over the decades becoming the foundation for thousands of retention studies (Tinto, 2006-2007). Notable in his original theory and its evolutions are the concepts of social and academic integration. Tinto (1975) posited that in order to persist, students need to integrate into both academic (e.g., evidenced by GPA) and social systems (e.g., extracurricular activities) within the university. Tinto (1975) acknowledged personal (e.g., gender, race) and background characteristics (e.g., socioeconomic status, education) as important to the decision to persist; however, Bean (1980) stressed that background or external characteristics determine students' satisfaction and their decision to stay or depart from a university.

In the evolution of Bean's (1980) original work, Bean and Metzner (1985) explained that external variables play a significant role in the persistence of students who do not live on campus, and, thus developed the Student Attrition Model for the nontraditional, commuter student. Bean and Metzner purported that persistence is dependent upon the interaction of academic and external variables. Students are not likely to persist when academic and environmental variables are unfavorable. Thus, to foster persistence, at least for residential undergraduate and commuter students, these theorists hold that it is essential for universities to encourage integration and provide institutional support that minimizes students' external stressors (e.g., finances). In other words, integration and institutional variables influence persistence.

3. Literature review
To understand the salient and unique integration and institutional characteristics that promote online doctoral persistence, it is important to examine the online education and doctoral education literature.

3.1. Integration factors
Literature on doctoral and online students suggests a myriad of factors are associated with persistence. Among the factors that promote persistence are variables analogous to Tinto's (1975) constructs of integration - community, relationship, and interaction (Brockman et al., 2011, Mansson and Myers, 2012, Rovai, 2002, Terrell et al., 2009, Terrell et al., 2012). According to the National Association of Graduate Professional Students'' (2000) National Doctoral Program Survey, belonging, which is a construct that has been associated with and used to measure social integration (Barnett, 2014, Deil-Amen, 2011), is an additional factor that distinguishes completers from non-completers. So, while academic and social integration into the university, as originally defined by Tinto (1975), may not be relevant to online, doctoral candidates, the concepts of both academic and social integration are necessary. For example, social integration via participation in extracurricular activities may not be important for online doctoral candidates who remain in their professions and struggle to balance familial and professional lives on top of academic responsibilities (Author, 2016; Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011). However, participation in a community of practice focused on their dissertation topic and composed of doctoral peers can be central to persistence (Terrell et al., 2012).

3.1.1. Social integration
Community, connectedness, and social presence are all terms often used synonymously with social integration in the literature and are associated with doctoral candidates' reported intent to persist (Cockrell and Shelley, 2010, Terrell et al., 2009). In distance education literature, there is a growing body of research demonstrating the importance of social integration (i.e., community with faculty and peers) in online student retention (e.g., Boston et al., 2014, Garrison et al., 2000, Moore, 1993, Müller, 2008, Picciano, 2002, Rovai, 2002). Community has been defined by a number of researchers, and many have developed self-report instruments to measure social presence and community. Rovai, Wighting, and Lucking (2004) explained that social community “represents the feelings of the community of students regarding their spirit, cohesion, trust, safety, trade, interdependence, and sense of belonging” (p. 269) and sought to measure college and university students' sense of community through the creation of the Classroom and School Community Inventory. This concept of community has been applied to the study of online doctoral programs. In 2009, Terrell, Snyder, and Dringus operationally defined doctoral community or social integration as student-to-student connectedness and student-to faculty connectedness via the creation of a self-report instrument [i.e., Doctoral Student Connectedness Scale (DSCS)].

Student-to-student connectedness consists of having open communication, feeling cared for, and developing trust (Terrell et al., 2009). Throughout the doctoral and distance education literature, isolation from peers has been cited as a reason for drop out during the dissertation process (Ali & Kohun, 2006). Alternatively, community with peers is associated with persistence for adult learners (Rovai, 2002) and high satisfaction and increased confidence in graduate and post-doctoral students (McDaniels, Pfund, & Barnicle, 2016). Online students who are adept at developing peer relationships are more likely to persist (Kemp, 2002) as stronger social connections provide needed support and encouragement through the academic process (Müller, 2008, McDaniels et al., 2016). Moreover, participation in virtual communities is associated with feelings of trust and discriminates between persistence verses non-persistence in doctoral programs (Ivankova & Stick, 2005; Author, 2014). Golde (2005) also noted that university interaction at the microenvironment level (i.e., interaction with peers) is needed for doctoral persistence. Doctoral students need to experience a sense of connectedness with their peers, as well as faculty members, if they are going to choose to complete their degrees (Erwee, Albion, & van der Laan, 2013).

Student-to-faculty connectedness as defined by Terrell et al. (2009) is similar to student-to-student connectedness and entails open communication with a dissertation advisor, receiving valuable feedback, and feeling confident in the doctoral faculty support. Examining the perspective of doctoral students, Gardner (2009) and others (Goode, 2007, Manathunga and Goozée, 2007) found that candidates believe faculty members are vital to their completion of their dissertation and ability to graduate. Facilitation and advisement about the research process from an accessible and approachable faculty mentor is what candidates report they need to be successful in their research and programs (Barnes, 2009, Earl-Novell, 2006, Gardner, 2009). Examining 141 doctoral candidates from four institutions representing five disciplines, Cockrell and Shelley (2011) found that students satisfied with the mentorship they received had mentors who taught them “survival skills” (p. 476), in addition to effective research practices. Online dissertation chairs also emphasize the importance of social integration in the dissertation process, citing a strong chair-mentee relationship marked by personal connection and trust as essential to their candidates' dissertation completion (Rademaker, Duffy, Wetzler, & Zaikina-Montgomery, 2016).

3.1.2. Academic integration
Distance education, doctoral persistence, and attrition literature provide insight into not only defining social integration for the online doctoral population but also operationally defining academic integration. Academic integration refers to the “acquisition of knowledge and development of skills” (Tinto, 1997, p. 600), more precisely, the satisfaction with learning and academic performance, which is more relevant to adult learners and a better measure of learning than GPA (Rovai, Wighting, Baker, & Grooms, 2009). Academic integration is generally dependent on students' satisfaction with faculty assistance through the program and preparation for the dissertation process (Barnes, 2009, Earl-Novell, 2006; Author, 2012; Terrell et al., 2012). Park and Choi (2009) affirmed this, stating, “online learners are less likely to drop out when they are satisfied with the courses, and when the courses are relevant to their own lives” (p. 215). For candidates in the research and scholarship stage, consistent, timely, and substantive feedback from the dissertation chair fosters academic integration and persistence (Rademaker et al., 2016).

Research also consistently demonstrates that when doctoral student expectations about the program, coursework, and policies are met, there is an academic match. Academic match is the “correspondence between (a) student goals and reasons for pursuing the degree and (b) the program focus and the curriculum” (Hoskins & Goldberg, 2005, p. 183), and candidates whose expectations are “matched” or met are less likely to withdraw. Thus, satisfaction with faculty, curriculum, and learning as well as academic match are relevant to online, doctoral students' academic integration.

3.1.3. Economic and familial integration
In addition to social and academic integration, doctoral persistence literature, focusing on both online and residential doctoral candidates, has suggested that two additional forms of integration are necessary for doctoral persistence and time-to-degree completion, economic integration, and familial integration. Economic integration goes beyond simply the provision of financial aid to the “degree to which student's financial needs are met while pursuing the doctorate” (Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011, p. 117). Wao and Onwuegbuzie discussed the importance of economic integration or students' financial needs being meet in their mixed methods study focusing on doctoral time-to-degree completion. Their findings confirmed previous research (Earl-Novell, 2006) that doctoral students who are self-financing and lack financial aid are less likely to persist because they experience financial stress and strain. Lovitts' (2001) also found that 20% of students cited financial reasons as a factor for their withdrawal. When doctoral students are financially stressed, strained, and in need, they are less likely to persist.

Familial integration is “the degree to which the candidate's sense of connectedness with family members is met while pursuing the doctorate” (Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, Swezey, & Wicks, 2014, p. 196). This concept “not only includes the maintaining of familial relationships and relatedness (a sense of belonging and care) but also includes the ‘fit’ between the degree and family values” (p. 196). In a grounded theory study examining persistence in online EdD candidates who grew up in poverty, Author et al. found familial integration was of great significance in the candidates' persistence. An emphasis on maintaining connectedness with family members was central to the choice to enroll in an online program while also serving as a motivator to persist. These findings support and extend previous doctoral persistence research establishing the strong association between a supportive family and doctoral persistence (Lott, Gardner, & Powers, 2009).

3.2. Institutional factors
As Bean and Metzner (1985) suggested, institutional support in addition to integration factors are associated with persistence. Institutional variables refer to the provisions offered by the university to support a student. Examination of doctoral and distance education literature rendered three important institutional factors related to persistence, these include (a) financial support, (b) support services, and (c) program, curriculum, and instruction.

3.2.1. Financial support
Finances are typically of significant concern to adult learners (Mollison, 2000). While students in residential doctoral programs are often recipients of fellowships, research, or teaching assistantships that include stipends and tuition scholarships, doctoral students enrolled in online programs typically have families and careers. They do not often qualify for university financial supports (Terrell et al., 2012). Although not consistent throughout the literature, researchers have identified a relationship with increased financial aid and persistence (Groen, Jakubson, Ehrenberg, Condie, & Liu, 2008). Financial support differs from financial integration. Financial support is the funding provided directly from the institution. Whereas, financial integration addresses the interaction between the financial support received from the institution and the student's personal finances and consequential stress and strain felt by the doctoral student.

3.2.2. Support services
Even before the explosion of online education, Bean and Metzner (1985) observed that support services, such as academic advising, career services, and library resources, were essential to supporting nontraditional students' persistence. Support service such as counseling services (Oswalt & Riddock, 2007), writing support (Elgar, 1998), and housing (Mills, 2006) influence graduate students' choice to complete a degree. Conversely, lack of support services and PhD students' awareness of these services have been named as contributing factors to non-persistence (Greene, 2014).

Support services have also been well established as influential to student satisfaction and persistence in online graduate programs (Lim, 2001). As computer knowledge and proficiency are essential to online students, informative websites, technical support, computer support, and online student seminars are significant in supporting online students (Müller, 2008, Sachs and Hale, 2003). Further, as online students typically do not have access to brick and mortar libraries, access to large electronic databases, library support, and resources are essential to their persistence across coursework and particularly during the dissertation phase.

3.2.3. Program, curriculum, and instruction
Finally, when considering a model for predicting doctoral persistence, whether online or residential, program, curriculum, and instruction (e.g., connection between course-work and professional practice, preparation to execute the dissertation, faculty guidance, facilitation, instruction, and clear information about program processes and expectations) need to be considered. Throughout the distance education literature, it is documented that a faculty member's presence is vital to students learning and community (Shea et al., 2006, Provident et al., 2015, Rademaker et al., 2016). Teaching presence includes a faculty's plans and preparation for the curriculum and courses. Teaching presence encompasses a faculty member's facilitation of discourse and direct instruction that leads to critical thinking and the skills and knowledge needed to be successful in the course and program (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001).

Similarly, doctoral persistence literature demonstrates a connection between a candidate's persistence in the dissertation process and his or her preparedness for conducting independent research (Rademaker et al., 2016). Research demonstrates that doctoral persistence increases when faculty account for the challenges related to the transition between stages and design coursework specifically assisting students in developing the skills, knowledge, and values needed to become independent scholars and complete their dissertation research (de Valero, 2001, Jimenez, 2011, Rademaker et al., 2016). Moreover, Jazvak-Martek (2009), Kiley (2009) and others (Kiley, 2009, Kiley and Wisker, 2010, Humphrey and Simpson, 2012) noted that well developed, systematic coursework and benchmarks embedded in doctoral curriculum are central to students successful development as a scholar and in turn completion of their dissertation.

3.3. Current study
Grounded in persistence (Tinto, 1975, Tinto, 1987, Tinto, 1993) and attrition models (Bean & Metzner, 1985) and in consideration of the literature identifying a number of institutional and integration variables (e.g., Author, 2014; Terrell et al., 2009, Terrell et al., 2012, Wao and Onwuegbuzie, 2011) as potentially influencing online doctoral persistence, a model was created to examine the predictive relationship between institutional and integration variables on persistence. Integration variables included (a) academic integration, (b) social integration, (c) economic integration, and (d) familial integration. Institutional variables addressed (a) financial support, (b) support services, and (c) program, curriculum, and instruction. A logistic regression (LR), a common method of predicting and modeling retention, was used with the outcome variable of persistence consisting of two categories (i.e., continuation of program enrollment in the EdD program after the first semester of candidacy; withdrawal from program enrollment after the first two semester of candidacy). Table 1 outlines the study hypotheses regarding the predictive validity of each factor for persistence.


Table 1. Hypotheses for the study.

Category	Predictive relationship with persistence
Financial support	Positive, individual contributor
Curriculum, & instruction	Positive, individual contributor
Support services	Positive, individual contributor
Academic integration	Positive, individual contributor
Faculty social integration	Positive, individual contributor
Student social integration	Positive, individual contributor
Economic integration	Positive, individual contributor
Familial integration	Positive, individual contributor
Before explaining the study, a caveat on the exclusion of personal factors is needed here. While individual characteristics consistently influence both doctoral and online attrition and persistence (Cross, 2014, Lovitts, 2001, Spaulding and Rockinson-Szapkiw, 2012), they were not examined in this investigation because universities have little influence over these factors. Further, institutional and integration factors exert more influence on doctoral persistence than student characteristics (Bowen and Rudenstine, 1992, Lovitts, 2001). In her seminal work on doctoral attrition, Lovitts (2001) found that over 50% of dropouts cited academic or institutional reasons (e.g., isolation, loss of advisor, problems with advisor, dissatisfaction with program) and 20% of dropouts cited financial reasons. Only 20% of doctoral students who dropped out cited personal or environmental reasons. As students transition from the coursework stage of their doctoral journey to the more independent structure of their doctoral journey, researchers have demonstrated over and over that integration with social networks and supportive institutional programs are primary to their persistence (Ali and Kohun, 2006, Terrell et al., 2009, Zahl, 2015). Thus, this predictive correlation study was delimited to include only integration factors and institutional factors.

4. Method
4.1. Participants and setting
Data for this study were archival and came from 148 doctoral candidates enrolled in an online Doctor of Education (EdD) program with second generation characteristics (see Perry, 2012). A second generation program is where the focus of course work and the dissertation is situated in the intersection of the education profession and the university; the dissertation research is usually conducted in a workplace or educational setting where theory is applied to practice (Perry, 2012). There has been exponential growth in distance education doctoral programs and second generation EdD programs (Perry, 2012). For, distance education, second generation EdD programs have removed obstacles that once kept many from pursing doctoral degrees. Their convenience and focus has enabled individuals to remain in their hometowns with family and remain in their profession while pursuing their doctorate. Research on these programs is only beginning to emerge, providing further significance impetus that this study is needed.

The online Doctor of Education (EdD) program with second generation characteristics program, which requires 51 online credit hours and 9 residential credits, is fully accredited through the Southern Association of College and Schools. At the time of the study, approximately 2000 students were enrolled in the program with about 400 of these students having obtained doctoral candidacy. The 148 candidates examined in this study entered candidacy between Spring 2013 and Summer 2014. They took their first class, an online prospectus development course, immediately following passage of a comprehensive exam. Passing the eight week online prospectus development class depended on the candidate's ability to construct a viable dissertation prospectus. From here, a prospectus could then be developed into a dissertation proposal, and then ultimately a defendable dissertation, in subsequent courses under the direction of a chair and committee members. After successful completion of the prospectus class, candidates continuously enroll in a proposal development class until they are ready to defend their dissertation. Passing the proposal class each semester is dependent upon candidates making progress on their manuscript and research and regular (i.e. once a month is recommended) communication with the dissertation committee. Individual who fail to make progress and regularly communicate with a committee fail the proposal course. Failing the proposal course twice results in program dismissal.

Of the sample population (N = 148), there were 24 African American, 116 Caucasian, 3 Latino, 4 Asian, and 1 American Indian participant(s). The majority reported their age range as 30–39 (n = 52, 35.1%) or 40–49 (n = 53, 35.8%). The majority were female (n = 101, 68.2%). Most of the candidates were married (n = 122, 82.4%) and worked full time (n = 133, 89.9%). Candidates were employed in the field of education as K–12 teachers, K–12 administrators, school psychologists, social workers, counselors, or university staff, faculty, and administrators. Per the program administrators' report, this sample was representative of the program population, which is majority Caucasian and female. It is also consistent with the National Science Foundation (2015) that demonstrates that women and Caucasians are the primary recipients of education doctorates in the U.S.

4.2. Instrumentation
During the final week of the eight week online prospectus development course, candidates completed a course embedded program survey. The survey consisted of validated instruments and questions program faculty developed with the aim of better understanding the candidates' doctoral experience. The primary intent of the survey was to inform the betterment of the program. However, after the data was collected and analyzed for the program, it was recognized that the data could also contribute to the discussion of doctoral persistence in the literature. Thus, the survey data (used to measure the predictor variables) and enrollment data (used to measure the criterion variable) were obtained as archival data for research.

Persistence served as the criterion variable. Throughout the literature, persistence has been operationalized in a number of ways. One common retention metric is continual enrollment in a program or enrollment semester after semester (e.g., Davidson et al., 2009, Mortenson, 2005). Thus, doctoral persistence, the criterion variable, was operationally defined as enrollment and completion of the dissertation proposal course for two semesters following the dissertation prospectus class. This operational definition of persistence consisting of two semesters in the proposal development phase is consistent with the selected program's degree completion plan and an industry standard for Doctor of Education programs. Research has also revealed that doctoral students have great difficulty in transitioning from the structured format of course work into the unstructured, independent work of the dissertation as they begin to engage develop their scholarly identities and develop their research proposals (Baker and Pifer, 2011, Baker and Pifer, 2014; Pifer and Baker, 2016, Walker et al., 2008). The transition into proposal development stage can be lonely and absent of social and academic integration, which critical for persistence (Golde, 2005).

Enrollment data was obtained from the university registrar's office upon receiving Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. Data were provided by a university employee via an excel spreadsheet with all student identifying information removed. Upon receiving the data, cases were coded where candidates did not enroll in the proposal course the semester after the prospectus course as zero. Cases where candidates withdrew from the proposal course or failed were also assigned a zero. None of the candidates in this study withdrew after the first two weeks of the course, and there were no requested leave of absences from the program. Cases where candidates enrolled and earned a pass for two semesters in the proposal course immediately following the prospectus course were coded as one.

Fifteen of the bipolar and five-point Likert type scale items, as well as the Doctoral Student Connectedness Scale (DSCS; Terrell et al., 2009) from the program survey served to measure the predictor variables. Many of the variables that the survey assessed used single items. While psychometric literature generally recommends the use of multiple item scales to increase the reliability of capturing the variable the researcher intends to measure (DeVellis, 2003), it was also recognized that too many multiple item scales can lead to common method variance, where “systematic error variance shared among variables measured with and introduced as a function of the same method and/or source” (Richardson, Simmering, & Sturman, 2009, p. 762). As this concern exists and precedent has been set that a single, clearly written item can measure a variable (e.g., Postmes, Haslam, & Jans, 2013), a single item was sometimes chosen rather than multiple items to assess a variable. The predictor variables are summarized in Table 2 and discussed further below.


Table 2. Instrumentation for institutional and integration factors.

Predictor	Constructs	Question or Instrument	Question scale	Question range	Empirical or theoretical support
Institutional variables
Financial support		Do you receive grants/scholarships that partially cover your tuition costs (grants, scholarships, tuition waiver, Federal Work/Study, graduate/teaching assistantships, etc.)?	Yes, full remission tuition (2)
Yes, partial tuition support (1)
No (0)	0–2	Bean & Metzner, 1985 (D)
Support services		How satisfied are you with the support services offered (e.g., library, advising) while pursuing your EdD.?	Very satisfied
Satisfied
Neutral
Dissatisfied
Very dissatisfied	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, Braxton et al., 1998, Tinto, 1975
Curriculum & instruction	Curriculum for dissertation preparation	How well did the courses you took during your EdD program prepare you for successfully completing your dissertation?	Very well
Well
Fair
Poor
Very poor	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, de Valero, 2001 (D); Jimenez, 2011(D); Tinto, 1975
Clarity of expectations and organization	(R) How clear have the faculty and the online resources been in detailing what you need to do in order to be successful in dissertation?	Very unclear
Somewhat unclear
Neutral
Somewhat clear
Very clear	1–5	Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001 (DE); Song, Singleton, Hill, & Koh, 2004 (DE); Wasburn-Moses, 2008 (D)
Facilitation	In general, when you receive evaluative feedback from dissertation instructors (e.g. research consultant, committee) how useful has it been in determining how to improve?	Very often
Somewhat often
Sometimes
Rarely
Very rarely	1–5	Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001 (DE); Wasburn-Moses, 2008 (D)
Direct Instruction	In general, rate the quality of instruction you have received about your dissertation?	Very quality
Quality
Neutral
Poor quality
Very poor quality	1–5	Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001 (DE); Wasburn-Moses, 2008 (D)

Integration variables
Academic integration	Satisfaction with quality of faculty help	How satisfied are you with the quality and level of instrumental help (e.g., coaching, challenging, critical feedback for dissertation improvement, encouragement of productivity in terms of publishing and presenting), psychosocial help (e.g., counseling, role modeling, empathizing), and networking assistance (e.g., helping students makes connections in the field, serving as a professional reference) you have received from faculty during your EdD program?	Very satisfied
Satisfied
Neutral
Dissatisfied
Very dissatisfied	1–5	Earl-Novell, 2006 (D); Hoskins & Goldberg, 2005 (D); Spaulding & Rockinson-Szapkiw, 2012 (D); Tinto, 1997, Wao and Onwuegbuzie, 2011(D)
Satisfaction with curriculum	How satisfied are you with the courses you took while pursuing your EdD?	Very satisfied
Satisfied
Neutral
Dissatisfied
Very dissatisfied	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, Tinto, 1975, Wao and Onwuegbuzie, 2011(D)
Satisfaction with curriculum for dissertation preparation	How satisfied are you with how the program prepared you for your dissertation process?	Very satisfied
Satisfied
Neutral
Dissatisfied
Very dissatisfied	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, de Valero, 2001 (D); Jimenez, 2011(D); Tinto, 1975, Wao and Onwuegbuzie, 2011(D)
Overall “fit” with the program	How well did your EdD program meet your expectations?	Very Well
Well
Some
Not Well
Not At All	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, Wao and Onwuegbuzie, 2011(D)
Concern about lack of skills and knowledge	(R) How often are you concerned that your acquisition of research and analysis skills and knowledge did not prepare you to successfully complete your dissertation?	Very often
Somewhat often
Sometimes
Rarely
Very rarely	1–5	Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011(D)
Social integration: faculty	Faculty connectedness	Doctoral Faculty Connectedness Scale, 9 item faculty subscale (Terrell et al., 2009)	Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree	9–45	Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001 (DE); Rovai, 2002 (DE); Terrell et al., 2009 (D); Tinto, 1997
Social integration: student	Peers connectedness	Doctoral Student Connectedness Scale, 9 item peer subscale (Terrell et al., 2009)	Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree	9–45	Garrison et al., 2000, Rovai, 2002 (DE); Terrell et al., 2009 (D); Tinto, 1997
Economic integration	Financial stress	(R) In light of college costs, How often do you worry about having enough money to meet your and your family needs?	Very often
Somewhat often
Sometimes
Rarely
Very rarely	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, Earl-Novell, 2006 (D); McAlpine & Norton, 2006 (D); Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, Swezey & Wicks, 2014 (D); Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011 (D)
Financial strain	How difficult is it for you or your family to be able to handle college costs?	Very difficult
Somewhat difficult
Neutral
Somewhat easy
Very easy	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, Earl-Novell, 2006 (D); McAlpine & Norton, 2006 (D); Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, Swezey & Wicks, 2014 (D); Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011(D)
Financial need	(R) Considering on your current financial situation, how inclined are you to take on additional work in order to pay bills?	Very
Somewhat
A little
Not vary
Not at all	1–5	Bean and Metzner, 1985, Earl-Novell, 2006 (D); McAlpine & Norton, 2006 (D); Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, Swezey & Wicks, 2014 (D); Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011 (D)
Familial integration		(R) How much do aspects of your family life and connection with your family suffer because you are a doctoral candidate?	Very much
Much
Some
Little
Very little	1–5	Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, Swezey & Wicks, 2014 (D)
Note. (R) = Reverse scoring, (D) = Doctoral Education Literature, (DE) = Distance Education Literature.

4.2.1. Financial support
One item in the program survey served to measure the predictor of financial support (i.e., the aid the candidate was receiving to finance his or her doctoral program). This variable was treated as a continuous variable in our analysis, and the possible scores on this item ranged from zero to two.

4.2.2. Support services
We were also interested in the support services that the institution offered, therefore, we included one item on the survey reflective of services candidates were provided by the institution. This item asked candidates to rate their satisfaction on a five point Likert-type response scale with services such as advising and the library. As is common in educational research with Likert-type scale items (Gall, Gall, & Borg, 2007), this variable was treated as a continuous variable in the analysis with scores ranging from one to five. The higher the score, the more satisfied the candidate was with the support services received.

4.2.3. Program, curriculum, and instruction
Four items on the program survey were indicative of the program, curriculum, and instruction received in the doctoral program. A five-point Likert-type response scale was used for each item, and the researchers analyzed the sum of the items for the program, curriculum, and instruction variable. The range for the sum was 4–20, and the Cronbach's coefficient alpha for the sample was adequate at 0.64, although slightly below the desirable level of 0.70. This lower internal reliability value could indicate that the set of items grouped on this dimension need to be spilt into multiple dimensions in future studies. For example, students in this data set some students indicated that they were satisfied with the curriculum, but not the instruction they receive. These constructs may need to be separated into two scales.

4.2.4. Academic integration
Measure of academic integration was captured through five items with five-point Likert-type response scales. These items asked students to self-report their level of satisfaction or evaluation of academic fit with a variety of faculty and program elements. The sum of the items were analyzed with scores ranging from 5 to 25. Moreover, the sample's Cronbach's coefficient alpha for these items was 0.82, indicating good reliability.

4.2.5. Social integration
To measure social integration with both faculty and peers, the Doctoral Student Connectedness Scale (DSCS) (Terrell et al., 2009) was used. This self-report measure has 18 items, 9 measuring connectedness with faculty and 9 measuring connectedness with peers. Candidates respond to items such as, I feel that students currently working on their dissertation care about each other and I feel that I am encouraged to ask questions to the faculty about the dissertation process on a five-point Likert-type scale (Strongly agree, Agree, Neutral, Disagree and Strongly disagree). Each subscale score ranges from 9 to 45, with higher scores indicating better connectedness or social integration. This instrument is validated as results of a principal-components analysis with oblique rotation confirmed that the two subscales were dimensions of connectedness (Terrell et al., 2009). Cronbach's coefficient alpha for the full connectedness scale was 0.87 (Terrell et al., 2009). In the current study, Cronbach's coefficient alpha was 0.93 for faculty connectedness and 0.96 for student connectedness.

4.2.6. Economic integration
Wao and Onwuegbuzie (2011) defined economic integration as “the degree to which student's financial needs are met while pursuing the doctorate” (p. 117). Three items addressed financial stress, strain, and need to measure the variable of economic integration. The sum of these three five-point Likert-type scale item responses (range: 3–15) were analyzed. Cronbach's coefficient alpha for these three items was acceptable at 0.70.

4.2.7. Familial integration
Familial integration, “the degree to which the candidate's sense of connectedness with family members is met while pursuing the doctorate” (Rockinson-Szapkiw, Spaulding, Swezey & Wicks, 2014, p. 196), was addressed in one survey item. This item had a five-point Likert-type scale item response with higher scores indicating higher familial integration.

5. Analysis and findings
A logistical regression analysis was conducted to examine how online doctoral persistence can be explained by institutional and integration variables. This analysis was chosen as it is commonly used when researchers want to understand the relationship between predictor variables and a categorical outcome or criterion variable (Warner, 2013). Assumption testing was completed prior to conducting the analysis.

5.1. Descriptive statistics, zero-order correlations, and assumption tests
Descriptive statistics for predictor and criterion variables are reported in Table 3. It is significant to note that a large percentage (75.7%) of the candidates persisted.


Table 3. Descriptive statistics for the predictor and criterion variables (N = 148).

Block/variable	Yes (n)	No (n)
Persistence (criterion)	112 (75.7%)	36 (24.3%)
M	SD
Financial assistance	0.38	0.62
Support services	4.33	0.72
Curriculum, & instruction	16.28	2.54
Academic integration	19.29	4.53
Social integration: connectedness to faculty	36.53	7.87
Social integration: connectedness to other students	35.32	7.60
Economic integration	9.12	2.78
Familial integration	3.22	1.18
A correlation matrix demonstrating the association among the predictor variables (see Table 4) was completed. While most of the bivariate correlation coefficients are statistically significant, the majority had small to moderate effect sizes based on Cohen's (1992) conventions. Interestingly, the variables of family, social, and academic integration were significantly, negatively associated with satisfaction of support services. This may be indicative of the fact that students who were support by their families and integrated social and academic into their programs, having good relationships with faculty and peers, did not need to rely heavily on support services offered. Economic integration and financial support had a significant, but small positive relationship. Moreover, the various types of integration (e.g. family, social, and academic) were all positively, moderately associated. Thus, multicollinearity was not a concern in the analysis.


Table 4. Intercorrelations between predictor variables (N = 148).

Measure	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
1. Financial support	–							
2. Support services	− 0.11	–						
3. C&I	− 0.10	0.21⁎⁎	–					
4. Academic Int.	− 0.03	− 0.32⁎⁎	0.55⁎⁎	–				
5. SI: Faculty.	− 0.03	− 0.30⁎⁎	0.45⁎⁎	0.64⁎⁎	–			
6. SI: Student	0.02	− 0.16	0.44⁎⁎	0.48⁎⁎	0.59⁎⁎	–		
7. Economic Int.	0.33⁎⁎	− 0.01	− 0.05	0.00	02	0.06	–	
8. Family Int.	0.02	− 0.20⁎	0.42⁎⁎	0.61⁎⁎	0.55⁎⁎	0.46⁎⁎	− 0.02	–
Note. SI = Social Integration; Int. = Integration; C&I = Curriculum and Instruction.

⁎⁎
Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (two-tailed).

⁎
Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (two-tailed).

Additional assumption testing (i.e., examining the presence of outliers by examining the residuals) was also completed. Four cases did not fit the model well. However, upon close inspection, the cases were not removed for the analysis as ZResid values (e.g. 1.89, 1.95, 2.10, 1.96) did not raise major concerns. That is, the values were not above 2.5 or below − 2.5. As such, the analysis was conducted with all 148 cases.

5.2. Findings
Results of the direct logistic regression analysis demonstrated that the entire model, including all the institutional and integration variables, significantly predicted whether an online doctoral candidate would persist in the dissertation phase of his or her program, X 2 (8, N = 148) = 104.99, p < 0.001. According to Cox and Snell (1989) R Square and Nagelkerke R Square, respectively, the model accounted for between 50.8% and 75.8% of the variance in online doctoral persistence. The model correctly classified 93.2% of the cases. Thus, the null hypothesis stating that the linear combination of the integration and institutional variables would not significantly predict whether an online doctoral candidate would persist or dropout was rejected. Table 5 demonstrates that support services; program, curriculum, and instruction; academic integration, faculty connectedness, and familial integration each made significant individual contributions to the model explaining persistence.


Table 5. Summary of logistical regression findings.

Predictor variable	B	S.E.	Wald	df	p	Odds ratio	95% CI. For EXP (B)
Lower	Upper
Financial support	0.994	0.793	1.571	1	0.210	0.270	0.571	12.799
Support services	1.070	0.519	4.245	1	0.039*	0.343	0.124	0.949
Program, curriculum, & instruction	0.170	0.161	1.102	1	0.001*	0.294	0.863	1.626
Academic integration	0.340	0.112	9.192	1	0.002*	1.405	1.128	1.751
Social integration: faculty	0.119	0.060	3.857	1	0.050*	1.126	1.000	1.268
Social integration: student	0.063	0.049	1.642	1	0.200	1.065	0.967	1.173
Economic integration	− 0.020	0.168	0.014	1	0.906	0.980	0.705	1.363
Family integration	0.959	0.391	5.998	1	0.014*	2.608	1.211	5.618
Thus, five of the eight hypotheses were supported (see Table 6). As expected based on previous research (Author, 2014), familial integration, with an odds ratio of 2.61, was a strong predictor of persistence. Online doctoral candidates with good familial integration were over two times as likely to persist in the dissertation phase of the doctoral process compared to students who had poor familial integration. Consistent with Tinto's (1997) theory, social and academic integration were associated with persistence. The positive odds ratio of over one indicated that the higher the online doctoral candidate's academic integration and social integration with faculty, the more likely he or she was to persist. Higher satisfaction with support services and program, curriculum, and instruction also significantly increased the likelihood a student would continue in the dissertation courses in their online program. In sum, the entire model of both integration and interaction variables was significant and able to distinguish persistence versus non-persistence in the dissertation phase of a doctoral program; five variables individually explained persistence and four did not.


Table 6. Hypotheses for the study.

Category	Conclusion about the null hypothesis
Financial support	Not rejected
Program, curriculum, & instruction	Rejected
Support services	Rejected
Academic integration	Rejected
Faculty social integration	Rejected
Student social integration	Not rejected
Economic integration	Not rejected
Familial integration	Rejected
6. Discussion
Predictors examined included the institutional variables of (a) financial support; (b) program, curriculum, and instruction; and (c) support services; the integration variables examined included (a) academic, (b) social (faculty and peer), (c) economic, and (d) familial integration. The findings cohere with previous research (e.g., Earl-Novell, 2006, Hoskins and Goldberg, 2005; Author, 2012; Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011) and theory (Bean and Metzner, 1985, Tinto, 1997) as the entire model, including all institutional and integration variables, was found to significantly predict whether or not online doctoral students will persist in the candidacy stage of the program. Moreover, support services; quality of the program, curriculum, and instruction; academic integration; social integration with faculty; and familial integration each individually contributed to explaining the likelihood of online doctoral persistence. As hypothesized, each of these individual contributors had a positive statistically significant association with the likelihood to persist in the dissertation phase of the online doctoral program. While social integration with faculty individually explained whether or not a doctoral student persisted, social integration with peers did not. Moreover, financial support and economic integration were not individual significant contributing factors explaining persistence.

Individually influential in candidates' choice to persist was support services. Consistent with previous research, technology, library, and advising services are significant in supporting online EdD students (Lim, 2001, Müller, 2008, Sachs and Hale, 2003). Candidates who were academically integrated and perceived the program, curriculum, and instruction to be of high quality preparation for the dissertation research were more likely to persist, suggesting that candidates may benefit from faculty and administrators intentionally designing curriculum in a manner that developmentally prepares them for the research and scholarship stage and the research that they are expected to carry out for their dissertation. This finding also suggests that central to persistence is faculty's instrumental help (e.g., coaching, challenging, critical feedback for dissertation improvement, encouragement of productivity in terms of publishing and presenting), psychosocial help (e.g., counseling, role modeling, empathizing), and networking assistance (e.g., helping students makes connections in the field, serving as a professional reference). Candidates in this study, consistent with the Gardner (2009) and others (Goode, 2007, Manathunga and Goozée, 2007), believed faculty members were central to their degree completion. This suggests that being successful in the dissertation research is associated with being encouraged to ask questions, receiving timely feedback from faculty and having confidence that the dissertation committee will be supportive. Likewise, candidates who experienced integration with family members while pursuing the doctorate were also more likely to persist, validating findings generated from a grounded theory study explaining persistence in online doctoral students from backgrounds of poverty (Author, 2014) and from a study examining the persistence of female doctoral students (Rockinson-Szapkiw et al., 2016).

Given Bean and Metzner's (1985) attrition model, we were however surprised to find that variables related to finances (e.g., economic integration and financial support) were not individual contributors of persistence. Underscoring the importance of generating a model specific to online doctoral candidates, previous research reports finances are a concern for doctoral candidates. However, previous research has focused primarily on students attending programs in residence who left their professional employment to become full time students and live on a fellowship or teaching assistant salary (Wao & Onwuegbuzie, 2011). The uniqueness of the online environment and programming provides students with the opportunity to maintain their residence and full time jobs while enrolled. The fact that the majority of the participants in the online doctoral program examined generally remained gainfully employed in the field of education while enrolled could explain why financial factors were not individually significant in this study.

Also, surprising was the lack of individual contributions of the social integration with peers. Again, as online candidates have the opportunity to maintain their residence while working on their doctoral degrees, they often maintain strong support systems with friends and family. As such, being busy professionals with locally established support systems may minimize the need for peer interaction in the program. Furthermore, while researchers note that interaction among participants is vital to the learning process in online courses (e.g., Garrison, Anderson, & Acher, 2001), they also suggest differences in the level of collaboration necessary depends on the type of course and program level (Rungtusanatham, Ellram, Siferd, & Salik, 2004). In fact, Arbaugh and Rau (2007) found high levels of peer interaction in graduate level courses are related to higher levels of course dissatisfaction and recommend against encouraging too much peer interaction in graduate level courses. Considering this research, online doctoral candidates may not require a high level of peer interaction when working on their dissertation. It is important to note that this does not necessarily suggest that they do not need higher levels of peer interaction in earlier stages of the doctoral program.

While some of the factors that did not provide individual significant contribution to the model, it is important to recognize that this does not mean they are not important, especially given the limitations of the analysis. Although the logistic regression analysis provided a useful tool for modeling the dependence of the binary variable, persistence, on the multiple variables and identifying individual contributions, the analysis does not allow for complex modeling in which interactions among variables were explored. Additional research and more complex modeling is needed to understand the interaction of all the variables, especially those that were not significantly individually contributors on online doctoral persistence.

In summary, this study makes an important contribution to the persistence literature and distance education literature by investigating multiple predictors of persistence for a population that has been given little attention to date in the persistence literature – online EdD candidates. Clearly, institutional and integration factors predict retention during candidacy, with several factors making individual contributions in explaining online EdD persistence; thus, providing evidence that elements of classic theories are relevant to the persistence of online, doctoral candidates. For example, findings support Tinto's (1993) presupposition that persistence is “shaped by the personal and intellectual interactions that occur within and between candidates and faculty and the various communities that make academic and social systems of the institution” (p. 231). However, findings also provided evidence that classic theories need to be expanded to include additional constructs to more fully explain the persistence of this unique population. The phenomenon of familial integration, which was previously “defined as the degree to which the candidate's sense of connectedness with family members is met while pursuing the doctorate” (Rockinson-Szapkiw et al., 2014, p. 196) was found to significantly explain online, doctoral candidates' persistence. Although family support has been associated with doctoral persistence (Lott et al., 2009), familial integration is a newer concept. As this study confirms the relevance of the construct to persistence, it provides impetus for further investigation and validation of constructs for persistence theories. Implications for program administrators and faculty in terms of program supports and structures can also be derived from this study's findings.

7. Implications
As satisfaction with support services is positively associated with online persistence, and the typical profile of the online doctoral candidate is a married, professional employed full time, with community and familial responsibilities (Jimenez, 2011, Smith et al., 2006; Author, 2014), these candidates can benefit from support personnel (e.g., advisors, librarians, writing and statistics coaches) who are available during non-traditional business hours (i.e., evenings and weekends). To facilitate and augment this support, well-established online communication systems and up to date resources that are easily accessible anytime and anywhere are crucial, as these candidates are at a distance.

Effective and efficient online tools and resources are not only necessary for the optimal delivery of support services and resources, but are also central to academic and social integration in the university. Faculty can foster academic integration through regular communication via e-conferencing systems (e.g., Webex, Skype) and by providing timely feedback on manuscripts. Faculty can foster social integration by providing opportunities for engagement via research focused Communities of Practice and via program sponsored social media pages (e.g., Facebook). On social media, tips, updates, and opportunities for student-faculty interaction can be made available. The results of this study also support previous recommendations for the use of online collaborative workspaces to facilitate faculty and candidate interaction and increase their connectedness (Atkins & Cole, 2010; Author, 2012). For example, programs can develop a “one stop shop” site where students can access information and resources necessary for success in coursework, as well as in the dissertation process. For this site, faculty can compile lists of helpful resources (topical or research methodology specific), as well as templates, checklists, statistics guides, and editing and composition resources. Interaction can be promoted via discussion forums and file sharing.

Programs can further foster social integration with faculty and online candidates through assigning a faculty member to serve in the advisory capacity from program entry through candidacy. This mentor may be a methodologist or content expert, not necessarily a chair; however, he or she can provide acculturation into the culture of academia and socialization to the nature of the doctoral journey and the skills and knowledge needed across the distinct phases (Author, 2014). In addition to helping doctoral students develop essential skills and knowledge, a positive student relationship with faculty advisors and mentors fosters community, trust, and dedication – all central to persistence (Rovai, 2002, Tinto, 1997).

Also of importance student's satisfaction with how the instruction, coursework, and program assisted them in developing the skills (e.g., research and writing skills, analytic 263 + thinking, etc.) and knowledge (content specific) necessary to develop and execute a doctoral dissertation research study. Developing skills necessary for the dissertation, the phase where the greatest attrition occurs (Grover, 2007, Tinto, 1993), must be facilitated throughout the coursework stage of the program through curriculum and instruction. As Gelso and Lent (2000) observed, “programs can have their greatest impact through the training practices they implement” (p. 109) during the coursework phase of the doctoral process. The literature on effective research training environments (RTEs) identifies several essential interrelated ingredients (Gelso et al., 2013, Gelso and Lent, 2000) that should be considered when developing an online doctoral program in a systematic manner, including:

•
Quality research skills and knowledge training, which comprises a focus on relevant methodologies and analyses;

•
A variety of research methods and approaches within the discipline;

•
Communication that research is both an internal and social activity;

•
Faculty modeling of and teaching about how research and practice may be wedded;

•
An emphasis on using research skills and knowledge in professional settings.

•
Involving students in research early in their training and in a minimally threatening way;

•
Positively reinforcing research activity in the environment, both formally and informally;

•
Modeling of appropriate behavior and attitudes by faculty; and the emphasis on research as a partly social experience (Gelso & Lent, 2000, pp. 121–122).

Given Gelso and Lent's (2000) emphasis on research training being “partly a social experience” (p. 122), it needs to be recognized that complex concepts related to research and analysis are often difficult to ascertain via purely asynchronous communication, characteristic of online education. Russell (2005) purported that “all of these technologies lack fundamental corporeal dynamism of classroom work” (p. 3). Audio feedback and synchronous communication in the online environment has been found to improve learning in the area of doctoral research (Rockinson-Szapkiw, 2012) and increase a sense of teacher connectedness in online graduate education (Rockinson-Szapkiw, Baker, Neukrug, & Hanes, 2010). Therefore, skills and knowledge developed in coursework can further be augmented through offering topical and methodological workshops offered in flexible and varied formats (e.g., face-to-face, online, synchronous, etc.), not limited to asynchronous formats.

Finally, with familial integration (Author, 2014) being a salient factor in the online doctoral persistence model, programs should provide opportunities for family to be included throughout the process, beginning with a family orientation to the doctoral process that provides family members information on the nature of the degree, program, and the level of commitment needed by the candidate. This orientation can help candidates along with their families develop realistic expectations, thereby decreasing feelings of frustration, confusion, and disappointment. During the orientation, candidates and families can also be provided resources and materials to collaboratively develop timelines, goals, and corresponding schedules that account for the expectations and nature of the process at each doctoral stage. Additionally, the timeline can also aid in aligning with each family's goals and values. These family orientations may be held online using a webinar format or at a onetime on campus orientation residency. Though economic integration was not an individual contributing factor in the model, helping families understand the time investment needed to persist in the process is important (Author, 2014). Family can continue to be included throughout the doctoral journey using the plethora of web technologies (e.g., wikis, Facebook, Twitter). Dissertation tips can be posted for students and tips on supporting the doctoral candidates can be posted for family members.

8. Limitations and recommendations for future research
While the study is significant and provides insight to promoting persistence, the study findings are necessarily limited and provide insight into areas for future study. The findings are limited by the fact that they are derived within a limited timeframe from a single online EdD program with second generation characteristics. This limitation of external validity requires researchers desiring to extrapolate and apply the finding to do so with caution, especially considering the variation in EdD program goals and characteristics (e.g., first generation versus second generation EdD programs; Perry, 2012). Further investigation needs to be done at other universities with online EdD programs and across disciplines.

Given the finding that institutional and integration factors exert greater influence on doctoral persistence than student characteristics (Bowen and Rudenstine, 1992, Lovitts, 2001), coupled with this study's aim of informing online doctoral program faculty and administrators on factors they can influence (i.e., institutional and integration factors), student characteristics were not examined in this online doctoral persistence model. However, just as Bean (1980) disaggregated findings by males and females in his Causal Model on Student Attrition, in future study a distinction between male and female experiences in online doctoral programs may be warranted. A growing body of literature demonstrates that female doctoral students' struggles to persist may differ from their male counterparts (Lynch, 2008). Women experience tension managing their multiple roles as students, mothers, and professionals (Oswalt and Riddock, 2007, Rockinson-Szapkiw et al., 2016, Smith et al., 2006, Ward and Wolf-Wendel, 2004, Wolf-Wendel and Ward, 2014), and “stress of trying to be successful as both a mother and a student contributed to dissatisfaction in both roles” (Haynes et al., 2012, p. 3). The potential consequence of this stress on choice to depart needs to be further investigated. Special attention in this line of research also needs to be given to racial and cultural diversity (e.g., Latinas, American Indian, and African Americans), as the discourse about women in academia has been a homogenizing discourse focusing primarily on Caucasian women (Englander, Yáñez, & Barney, 2013). Nuances among disciplines as well as women's life stages (e.g., single, married, child-bearing, child-rearing) during her doctoral program (Mason, Wolfinger, & Goulden, 2013) needs to also be considered when pursuing this line of research.

This study also focused on candidates who persisted and did not consider the alternative phenomenon of attrition. As Tinto (1997) purported that these two phenomenon are distinct, and the reasons students persist may or may not provide insight into reasons they dropout. Furthermore, students who departed should be contacted and interviewed about their decision so faculty and administrators can gain insight and intervene before students choose to depart.

Instrumentation may also be a limitation. While the use of single item questions to measure some constructs is acceptable (Postmes et al., 2013), this could be considered a limitation, as the validity and reliability of these items could not be assessed. Further, although some variables used multiple-item measures, and reliability was ascertained and found acceptable, validated instruments were not used as they did not exist for the population studies. Most certainly, there are a myriad of other variables that may predict retention that were not considered here. For example, recent research is demonstrating that self-regulated learning beliefs and strategies are significant predictors of success in an online learning environment (Greene et al., 2010, Greene et al., 2014); these variables may influence persistence and could be added to future predictive models. Future researchers may also consider creating and validating an instrument for the persistence variables in this study with the population examined, for the predictive validity of the factors for online doctoral persistence need to be investigated using an instrument with strong psychometric factors that examine each variable. This study is only the first step toward examining this phenomenon quantitatively.

A few other limitations exist. A causal inference is precluded from this study given its exploratory, correlational nature. The self-report nature of the predictors are also a limitation, as the assumption is that all participants reported honestly and accurately, which cannot be verified. Behavioral observation measures in upcoming studies could be considered to minimize this limitation. It is a commonly accepted practice in educational research to treat Likert type scale data as a continuous variable and use parametric analyses. Many like Norman (2010) have suggested that Likert type scale data can be treated as a continuous variable and analyzed using parametric tests without fear of arriving at a wrong conclusion; however, this could be considered a limitation of this study. Finally, while a valid measure of persistence often used in the literature is semester-to-semester enrollment. Actual conferment of the degree needs to be explored in future studies. As previously noted, more complex modeling and analysis could be conducted.

9. Conclusion
While doctoral attrition is high (NSF, 2009), and online doctoral attrition even higher (Terrell, 2005), the final model generated from this study provides clear implications for facilitating candidates' persistence in online EdD programs. Generated using a predictive, correlation research design and logistic regression to examine how online doctoral persistence verses non persistence can be distinguished by the linear combination of institutional and integration variables, The study's final model indicates that specific support services, strategic curriculum, and instruction, academic integration, combined with program structures that foster social integration with faculty (e.g., cohorts, social media tools) and familial integration (e.g., family orientations), can promote online doctoral persistence.