Technology extends the accessibility of work integrated learning (WIL) experiences in higher education – a key strategic priority for many universities. Despite growth in the implementation of electronic WIL (eWIL) initiatives, to date no studies provide design principles to guide development of these initiatives as called for by the literature. To address this gap, this research uses a co-design approach with sixteen interviews with undergraduate and postgraduate students who had participated in eWIL. Four design principles for eWIL are proposed, including (1) authenticity, (2) integration of technology, (3) effective support processes, and (4) fostering of co-presence and relationship building. The study found student and expert academic insights from extant literature on design principles generally aligned, however, the importance of fostering co-presence and relationship building emerged from the interview data along with an expanded understanding of authenticity within the eWIL context.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Electronic work integrated learning

eWIL

Work integrated learning

WIL

Design principles

Co-design

1. Introduction
The introduction of technology into work integrated learning (WIL) experiences has the potential to be one of the most important modern advancements in higher education. WIL incorporates a range of approaches that integrate theory with workplace practice (Patrick et al., 2008; Smith, 2012). Electronic WIL (eWIL) is defined as the ‘use of technology to support the administrative processes or students of WIL and/or deliver entirely online or blended WIL experiences’ (Schuster & Glavas, 2017, p. 65). Using technology to deliver WIL experiences can remove geographical barriers (Holmes, Kinslow, & Pope, 2012) and reduce its associated time and financial costs for universities and students (Peach, Gomez, & Ruinard, 2013) while maintaining positive learning outcomes (Fong & Sims, 2010). These benefits may increase the accessibility of WIL and its transferability to larger cohorts (Landorf, Brewer, Maund, & Ward, 2015; Peach et al., 2013). This is significant, as research shows that WIL significantly enhances graduate employment and, as such, many universities have enthusiastically embraced it (Silva et al., 2018).

A recent systematic literature review highlights that extant research, while relatively nascent, generally provides support for the use of eWIL but highlights that further investigation of eWIL design is necessary (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). Existing studies, for example, diligently describe the approach taken to eWIL and subsequently report on the outcomes of that approach (e.g. Fong & Sims, 2010; Holmes et al., 2012). However, to date no research integrates the findings of previous research to propose design principles that can be used to guide development of eWIL experiences. This is important given design principles, or fundamental guidelines for design, have been shown to improve service design (Russell-Bennett, Glavas, Previte, Härtel, & Smith, 2017). A further consideration is that existing recommendations are largely derived from educators rather than students. This could lead to eWIL that is expert-driven in design. Research in service design criticises such a top-down approach on the basis that it may not adequately consider service users' – in this case students' – specific needs and requirements (e.g. Wetter-Edman et al., 2014). Given learning experiences are co-created between educators and students (Cook-Sather, 2014), limited involvement of students in eWIL design is likely to have a negative impact on eWIL outcomes given the integral role of students in co-creating the experience. On this basis, the research aims to address the following two research questions: (1) What do students consider to be key for the design of eWIL?, and (2) How aligned are student views with the expert views identified in the literature on the design of eWIL?

One way in which to ensure that student voices are adequately represented is to involve students in the design of eWIL experiences. One such approach is to ‘co-design’, which combines the knowledge of service users into their needs with professional or expert knowledge (Trischler, Pervan, Kelly, & Scott, 2018). Through co-design, students can provide insights into their needs and contribute to ideas for eWIL beyond those which would be achieved through expert-design alone. Co-design has been shown to result in improved service outcomes relative to services designed by experts alone (Trischler et al., 2018). As such, this research aims to develop design principles for eWIL using a co-design process, combining insights from students who have participated in an eWIL program with insights from extant research in this domain. This is a unique approach to furthering understanding of eWIL design, as called for by the literature (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). In addition, this research contributes to the contemporary topic of examining co-design as an approach to enhance ‘mindful service experiences that are beneficial to the recipients’ (Ranaweera & Sigala, 2015, p. 6). It will provide actionable design principles that can be used by educators to design eWIL experiences. This is achieved using interviews with students who completed an eWIL unit at either undergraduate or postgraduate level within the business faculty of an Australian university. The paper reviews recent literature on pedagogical practices in eWIL, outlines the adopted methodology, presents the results, and discusses the findings.

2. Review of related literature
2.1. Definition of eWIL
WIL is described as a partnership among students, educational institutions, and industry (Raelin, 1997). Patrick et al. (2008, p. 3) define WIL as ‘an umbrella term for a range of approaches and strategies that integrate theory with the practice of work within a purposefully designed curriculum’. WIL can vary considerably, including clinical or other professional placements, internships, workplace projects and practicums (Patrick et al., 2008). Technology, such as the Internet, has the potential to advance WIL offerings by augmenting learning outcomes and the way in which WIL is managed and delivered (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). Schuster and Glavas (2017) show through a systematic literature review that a number of different types of technologies have been used in WIL, including: (1) communication technologies such as email, forums, discussion boards, video conferencing, social media, online repositories, mobile apps, (2) online portals such as Blackboard and (3) virtual reality platforms such as Second Life. Subsequently, they define eWIL as the ‘use of technology to support the administrative processes or students of WIL and/or deliver entirely online or blended WIL experiences’ (Schuster & Glavas, 2017, p. 65).

eWIL thus spans instances where immersive technology is employed to deliver eWIL experiences (e.g. WIL through virtual reality) to instances where technology is used to support WIL (e.g. online role-plays combined with face-to-face placements) (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). As an example of the former, Mundkur and Ellickson (2012) created a virtual learning environment encompassing two authentic-looking websites and an online role-play to teach policy development. As an example of the latter where technology is used to support WIL, Holmes et al., 2012) study describes a WIL experience where some distance students interacted with their team (on-campus students), their supervisor and client entirely through digital communication modes to develop multimedia-training manuals for a large alumina refinery. As such, the perspective taken by the paper is that eWIL encapsulates other terms employed in the literature such as ‘virtual WIL’ or ‘blended WIL’ in line with the definition of eWIL proposed by Schuster and Glavas (2017).

2.2. Design principles for eWIL
To date, no studies have developed design principles for eWIL. In contrast, a number of studies have developed design principles for traditional WIL. For instance, Patrick et al. (2008) proposed a strategic framework for WIL, advocating an adequately resourced stakeholder approach. Billett (2011) also provides a strategic framework for WIL, emphasising the importance of integration between the classroom and work experience. Smith (2012) proposes a framework for evaluating WIL design, focusing on authenticity, integrated learning supports, alignment of learning activities and assessments, supervisor access and induction/preparation processes. Notably, Jackson (2015) takes a student perspective and shows that student views align broadly with existing design principles for WIL design. While extant research on eWIL provides rich insights into critical success factors for eWIL, what is lacking relative to the broader WIL literature are studies designed specifically to elucidate design principles. Current research focuses exclusively on evaluating the specific form of eWIL implemented, while other studies are reflective accounts from the perspective of the organisations and educators involved or otherwise provide purely conceptual recommendations for eWIL (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). Nonetheless, these existing studies provide a foundation for understanding how best to design eWIL experiences and their findings are discussed below.

The eWIL literature suggests that authentic experience with complexities that match the real-world working environment is critical (Beuerlein, 2015; Holmes et al., 2012). This extends to teamwork situations (Beuerlein, 2015; Holmes et al., 2012; Fong & Sims, 2010). It is proposed that virtual internships, for example, should reflect real-world experience by ensuring consistency between the challenges students face in virtual and physical internships in terms of the tasks required and the application of appropriate resources to those tasks (Beuerlein, 2015). This could take the form of interacting with virtual or other student co-workers, or through well-contextualised learning activities (Beuerlein, 2015). Authenticity in eWIL also requires quality software (Stokes-Thompson, Wood, Scutter, & Dobinson, 2012) or ICT infrastructure and equipment (Fong & Sims, 2010). Appearance, ease of use and content are considered key components of quality software (Landorf et al., 2015).

Moreover, the need for training in the use of the technology to prepare students, educators and partner organisations was highlighted by a number of studies particularly when new technologies, such as augmented reality, were employed (e.g. Fong & Sims, 2010; Peach et al., 2013). Availability, accessibility, and reliability of the technologies employed were also key considerations, along with back-up strategies in case of technology failure (Fong & Sims, 2010). Further, the literature highlighted the importance of designing learning activities that make effective use of the affordances of the technology (Trede et al., 2016); that is, that leverage the technology's strengths such as in the case of the ‘real-time’ capacity of mobile technologies.

The importance of the support systems in eWIL is also apparent in the literature. For instance, there is a need to establish a shared understanding and clear agreement among the different stakeholders, including educators, partner organisations and students, regarding their role in the eWIL experience (Fong & Sims, 2010; Trede et al., 2016), while recognising the need for fluidity of these roles throughout the project (Ruggiero & Boehm, 2017). A need for appropriate eWIL support systems, such as those that handle more common work placement arrangements, has also been identified, so that time devoted to administrating eWIL is streamlined (Holmes et al., 2012). A part of this is ensuring that students are appropriately assessed and that any technology-based assessment methods, such as online reflective journals, are aligned with the WIL experience and appropriately scaffolded (Larkin & Beatson, 2014).

While undoubtedly useful, these studies do not adequately capture student views on eWIL. Traditionally less is known about the ‘student voice’ in higher education settings compared to secondary and other settings (Cook-Sather, 2014; Seale, 2010), with it being rare for students and educators to engage in dialogue about learning activities and processes owing to the fact that traditional structures in higher education support separation between educators and students (Cook-Sather, 2014). To address this gap, this study aims to combine, through co-design, the expert insight provided by extant literature with student insights generated by this study to develop a set of design principles for eWIL.

2.3. Co-design
Participatory research methods have been proposed as a means through which to augment the ‘student voice’ in higher education (Seale, 2010). Participatory design is different to other design approaches advocated by the eWIL literature, including the backward design, where a set of critical graduate skills are identified as the basis for all subsequent development activities (Beuerlein, 2015). Nevertheless, participatory design of learning improves student learning outcomes as well as supports educator reflection on learning and teaching (Cook-Sather, 2014; Könings, Seidel, & van Merriënboer, 2014). The concept of co-design is tightly connected with participatory design (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011).

Studies show that user-generated ideas from co-design can increase user benefits (Kristensson, Gustafsson, & Archer, 2004) and be highly innovative (Magnusson, 2009). Different to user involvement research, co-design is not focused on involving innovative user groups but rather those who are directly affected by a design (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011). However, it is important to note that not all users possess equal capacity to contribute to co-design (Dietrich, Trischler, Schuster, & Rundle-Thiele, 2017). Although previous research has contributed generic theoretical frameworks for service design, including co-design (e.g. Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser, 2011), research shows that these need to be adapted when working with potentially vulnerable service users (Dietrich et al., 2017). Vulnerable individuals may have less motivation and different levels of ability to contribute to co-design (Dietrich et al., 2017). The power distance between students and educators in higher education settings (Seale, 2010) may create vulnerability for students in the context of co-designing learning activities and, on this basis, this study employed the six-stage framework for involving vulnerable consumers in co-design processes (Dietrich et al., 2017).

The six-stage framework comprises: resourcing, planning, recruiting, sensitising, facilitation, and evaluation (Dietrich et al., 2017). In the resourcing stage, experts or researchers take on a key role by sourcing relevant inputs as well as reflecting on potential barriers that may hinder participation. The planning stage involves close collaboration and communication, typically with intermediaries or with users themselves, to plan the timing and location of co-design opportunities. The recruitment stage involves identifying and recruiting a sufficient number of users for co-design. The sensitising stage should familiarise users with the requirements of the co-design opportunity and the actual service to be re-designed. Facilitation involves implementing the actual co-design activities and tools (e.g. interviews, card sorting and competitions) and last, the evaluation stage involves evaluating the ideas or innovations presented by users (Dietrich et al., 2017). The way in which this framework was applied in this research is outlined in the section below.

3. Method
3.1. Research design
This research employed a qualitative co-design approach using semi-structured in-depth interviews to develop design principles for eWIL. We combine insights from students who have participated in eWIL with insights from existing literature identified in the resourcing stage of the co-design framework employed by this research. During the recruitment stage, it was necessary to identify and contact the academic coordinators of eWIL units to gain their agreement to participate in the project. We targeted students who had previously participated in eWIL on the basis that they would possess sufficient understanding to be more confident in their ability to contribute to the design of eWIL. This overcomes a potential barrier to participation in co-design highlighted by previous studies, specifically a lack of understanding of the purpose and nature of the service (e.g., Dietrich et al., 2017), which was identified in the resourcing stage. Two business school unit coordinators of eWIL units, one at the undergraduate level and one at the postgraduate level, were successfully recruited. The eWIL units comprised both online and offline components that supported and delivered the WIL experience and, as such, can be classified as technology-blended eWIL units (see Schuster & Glavas, 2017). The technology-blended eWIL units were delivered as a 13-week course.

3.2. Sample
The target population for this research included students who had previously participated in eWIL in higher education. We chose to target students with experience, rather than those who had no previous experience, on the basis that these students had been ‘sensitised’ to the idea of eWIL; that is, previous participation in an eWIL unit sensitised students to the topic prior to the interviews and provided them with sufficient understanding to more confidently contribute to identifying eWIL design principles. The basic principle of sensitising is to let people express and reflect on memories, opinions, and past experiences around a specific topic (Sleeswijk Visser, Stappers, Van der Lugt, & Sanders, 2005). The researchers designed an email invitation which unit coordinators sent to students. Students had to opt-in to the research by contacting one of the researchers. The recruitment, timing and location of the interviews were planned in collaboration with the eWIL unit coordinators. Specifically, recruitment and implementation of the interview sessions were scheduled to occur after final results were released so as to minimise impact on learning outcomes. This also served to provide further separation between participation in the project and student grades. It was decided that the researchers would conduct the interviews without the coordinators and that coordinators would be provided with a summary of the results, rather than the de-identified transcripts, to protect students' anonymity. We offered students an AU$20 Coles Group and Myer voucher to thank them for their time. A total of 19 students responded to the initial participation invite (two reminder emails were sent to students). From the 19 students who initially responded, 16 students participated in the research. Table 1 provides a summary of participant characteristics.


Table 1. Summary of student demographic information.

Code	Gender	Age	Year of Study
s01	Female	21	Third year
s02	Male	29	Second year
s03	Male	22	Third year
s04	Male	24	Second year
s05	Female	21	Third year
s06	Female	24	Third year
s07	Female	37	Second year
s08	Male	26	Second year
s09	Male	26	Third year
s10	Female	28	Second year
s11	Female	20	Fourth year
s12	Male	20	Second year
s13	Female	21	Third year
s14	Female	21	Third year
s15	Male	20	Third year
s16	Female	21	Third year
3.3. Data collection procedure
Data were collected primarily through semi-structured, face-to-face interviews with students. For the semi-structured interviews, a list of pre-determined, open-ended questions focusing on student experiences were utilised to prompt students' reflections on design principles for eWIL. The interview guide was developed on the basis of the literature review on eWIL. For example, to assess authenticity of the eWIL experience, students were asked: ‘What skills do you think you have developed as a consequence of being involved in the eWIL unit?’ and ‘To what extent did you feel that assessments represented real-world practice?’ To understand the use of technology in the eWIL unit, students were asked: ‘What did you like/didn't you like about using the technologies?’. Last, more open questions were also included to capture new insights: ‘What does technology add to the WIL experience that the traditional environment cannot offer?’ and ‘Is there anything you would like to share in relation to your experience?’ Additionally, probing ‘follow-up’ questions, such as ‘Can you explain what you mean by…?’, were often used to offer students the opportunity to elaborate further on their thoughts. The interview times ranged from 31 to 56 min.

3.4. Analysis of the data
Last, the evaluation stage in the co-design framework involves evaluating the ideas or innovations presented by users (Dietrich et al., 2017). To understand the ideas generated by students relative to extant literature, we used Fereday and Muir-Cochrane's (2006) hybrid process of inductive and deductive thematic analysis. This involved both a deductive a priori approach as well as a data-driven inductive approach. It commenced with preliminary coding, which involved a thorough read-through of each transcript. Next, a line-by-line approach was utilised. This process (stage one) involved coding the data according to the a priori template of codes built around the themes identified in the literature. Additional themes to emerge from the data were also considered and were incorporated into the analysis of all transcripts. The data were then re-coded (stage two) to explore emergent patterns in greater depth. The re-identified themes were then utilised to categorise the data into the design principles (stage three). Manual coding procedures were supplemented with QSR–NVivo.

4. Findings and discussion
The purpose of this study was to develop principles for designing eWIL by integrating student perspectives gained from interviews with expert insight from the eWIL literature. Four design principles were identified for eWIL. The data supporting these design principles are now outlined and discussed.

4.1. Design principle 1: provide an authentic eWIL experience (learning activities, assessment and technology)
The findings provide additional empirical support for proposing that authenticity is vital in WIL delivered online or in virtual environments (Holmes et al., 2012). Further, the findings expand current understanding of authenticity. That is, the interview data showed that authenticity in eWIL comprises three components: authenticity in the types of tasks or learning activities required, authenticity in the assessment, and authenticity in the types of technology employed in eWIL. While authentic tasks and assessment have been previously identified as important by the literature, the notion that the type of technology used to facilitate or deliver eWIL impacts perceptions of authenticity has not been previously considered. These findings are discussed in greater detail below.

Students' value authenticity in the tasks to be completed as it provides exposure to real-world practices in their field of study and, thus, practical experience that is not always accessible through other more traditional units:

I think everyone knows the value of a work integrated learning course especially because the whole point is to get real-world experience … It's a real-world internship … you are seeing how things really work out there.

(s14)
I [have improved my] digital technology skills … And the other thing is that we have also developed our creative thinking skills because we have to think about things from different perspectives … no other unit can provide so much value in a 13-week course … you are working on real-world projects and tasks … and involves real work experience.

(s10)
The findings also demonstrate the importance of authentic assessment, as highlighted in previous eWIL research (Larkin & Beatson, 2014), which allows students to demonstrate meaningful application of essential knowledge and skills:
The assessment included a presentation which you had to communicate to your mentor. I think this is exactly what you would have to do maybe when you're working at a real company, [the assessment] really reflects the real world.

(s02)
Finally, it was found that, for eWIL initiatives to succeed, the learning that takes place must occur in authentic environments. In eWIL, this means that the technologies used to support or deliver the eWIL experience should align with the technologies used in practice. The findings suggest that conducting eWIL via platforms that are not used in practice may detract from the authenticity of the eWIL experience. For example, hosting team meetings in the virtual world SecondLife may be perceived as less authentic than using other platforms such as Zoom or Skype. There is tangential support for this notion in the literature, with a study on the use of mobile technology demonstrating the challenges of this particular technology given that, while it is commonplace in some workplaces, in others it is prohibited or faces significant cultural barriers (Trede et al., 2016).
We used tools to facilitate online communications, such as OneDrive to share files easily… we also met in Google Hangouts to avoid miscommunication … these tool[s] allowed us [the team] to be more productive, it also promoted self-learning … we improved our research skills and digital literacy skills.

(s02)
Furthermore, while the use of technologies that are typically employed in the work environment was identified as central to authenticity in this study, it was also the balance between technology and interpersonal interaction that was important. The findings indicate that eWIL processes are more successful in terms of meeting student needs when technology is combined with opportunities for communication and interaction in physical settings, which is reflective of most work situations in the real-world. The findings point toward the need to ensure touchpoints throughout the eWIL journey capitalise on both technology and interpersonal elements:
I think technology can enrich the [eWIL] experience, but I think it also has to be equally balanced with the person-to-person learning.

(s01)
I never thought I would work [in company X]. I thoroughly enjoyed the eWIL unit, everything about it was great for me… our team met up every week for a cup of tea, and we also met our mentors regularly. We used Skype, email and messenger as well as the [eWIL] platform … I know in the real world a lot of communication is done via technology, but the face-to-face meetings provide valuable interaction, but also a sense of belonging, because you aren't just communicating with a computer screen.

(s07)
4.2. Design principle 2: carefully select and integrate technological platforms employed to support or deliver eWIL
There was alignment between expert and student perceptions regarding the integration of technology into the WIL experience. Specifically, the availability, accessibility and reliability of the technologies employed (Fong & Sims, 2010). Unlike traditional WIL initiatives, where the student is placed physically in an external organisation, eWIL programs are typically established and maintained within host universities via technological platforms (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). The findings highlight a preference for mobile technology in this context:

I think mobile apps are very necessary, it allows us to really communicate immediately, especially with the mentors. We use Facebook, we use our phones, we use email, virtual learning websites, and we use online Blackboard [the university's learning management system], but mobile is important … however, nothing was compatible with mobile.

(s10)
We had to pitch over the phone in a conference environment … No one within my team was comfortable with that because the quality of the sound was very bad … Basically, that was not a good idea … with all the technology we have nowadays it's important to provide students with a range of options [technology platforms], like mobile apps with Skype [and/or] Zoom options.

(s08)
Social media, mobile technology and cloud services are technologies that are rapidly transforming society and education. This is important to consider given that the Internet and related technologies have contributed to students becoming more demanding, particularly regarding the expectation that information should be readily available, with the capability to be instantaneously accessed (Henderson, Selwyn, & Aston, 2015):
Immediacy of information is important … People want instant [information] … Information at your fingertips it's more conducive to better work … I also love instant notifications, I think the [eWIL platform] needs to have notifications and instant messaging.

(s07)
Technology makes everything way more convenient … can get an instant answer, you don't have to come in to do everything and there's generally no delay … you can work on projects immediately because everything [information] is there [available] online.

(s09)
Compatibility between the technological platforms selected is also important, with students reporting that they found it difficult to locate information between technological platforms, negatively impacting their eWIL experience:
Between the online WIL platform and Blackboard [the university's learning management system], I have no idea where to find the main materials … All information needs to be consistent across all sites [technological platforms]. I found our team wasted a lot of time; we could have benefited substantially if we had the information [in the beginning].

(s02)
4.3. Design principle 3: develop effective administrative processes to support eWIL
Analysis of the interview data provided support for the need for adequate support systems for eWIL identified in the literature review. Care should be taken to ensure the administrative processes that support the eWIL experience are as effective and efficient as the eWIL experience itself. Adequate student administrative support during eWIL has been previously acknowledged as a critical success factor (Holmes et al., 2012). The data revealed a need to improve student preparation and induction processes prior to and during eWIL processes. Students reported feeling disorganised as they lacked insight, particularly because key information about eWIL requirements and processes were difficult to obtain:

We were given a lot of learning opportunities but across all learning platforms it was hard to link up what matched. I think a little bit more guidance in that sense would, even just from the very beginning, just like a little template or something, would have been really useful. It was quite frustrating for us.

(s05)
Although seemingly innocuous, poorly administered WIL can lead to unorganised learning experiences, resulting in disengaged students and organisational partners (Ryan, Toohey, & Hughes, 1996). Thus, there is a need to ensure that effective administrative processes are established in the nascent stages of program formation. Research (see Peach et al., 2013) explored the emergence and ongoing development of blended WIL experiences and pointed to the reality that students in online environments often face increased challenges associated with accessing online administrative resources that are simplified and standardised. Such challenges can lead to discontinuities between students, staff and industry partners, as evidenced by the following student participant:
The structure of the WIL unit, I would say it was all over the place in terms of where things were located on the site itself, and also in terms of navigating the site. Things were hidden, and you weren't sure where to look and that kind of thing … some induction process needs to happen … There was replication of information, I couldn't find what I needed which was de-motiving.

(s05)
Furthermore, management of key stakeholder relationships between university staff, students and industry mentors was identified in the systematic literature review as critical for effectively implementing eWIL (Fong & Sims, 2010; Ruggiero & Boehm, 2017; Trede et al., 2016). The findings suggest that key stakeholder expectations should be managed prior to and during the eWIL experience. The data indicates that when the key processes, roles and responsibilities of staff, students and industry mentors are not clearly outlined and managed it can be detrimental to students' overall eWIL experience:
We didn't really connect well with the mentors until week 6 and 7 … I think input from the mentors earlier on for idea generation could have helped us, rather than just focusing on learning content … there should be an opportunity to ask questions right from the start … a few groups, including mine, got off-track easily, at times there was a mismatch between the university and what the mentors were saying.

(s13)
This study's findings point toward the need for stakeholders to develop expectations and learning goals collaboratively in the initial stages of the eWIL process. The following quote demonstrates how expectations inconsistently reinforced or developed mid-way through the eWIL process can be discouraging:
The information between what was online, what was on [the online platform] and what was mentioned in [physical] meetings was inconsistent … more transparency in the beginning would have made it easier to adjust … it was difficult to keep everyone on track with different [inconsistent] information throughout … it was hard to get cohesion, no one really knew their roles, especially the more senior [industry] mentors.

(s01)
4.4. Design principle 4: promote co-presence and relationship building
Beyond the principles identified by extant literature, the analysis of the interview data revealed the importance of promoting ‘co-presence’ in eWIL. Students indicated that the constrained social cues of technology-mediated communication were challenging in eWIL:

I'm the kind of person that really relates to people and I benefit from being in a room with someone and kind of vibing off their energy and their ideas. I think it's so much different when you're face to face with a person and you can see their body language … face to face avoids errors and misinterpretation.

(s05)
The findings highlight the difficulty in establishing ‘co-presence’ in eWIL environments. Nowak (2001) explained that co-presence is a way of evaluating the sense of connection with another mind. Whilst Goffman (1963) originally defined the concept of ‘co-presence’, stating that the concept involves a sense of being together whereby individuals become “accessible, available, and subject to one another” (p. 22); the concept has further evolved taking into account the nature of psychological interaction in virtual environments (see Biocca, Harms, & Burgoon, 2003; Podkosova & Kaufmann, 2018; Riva, Davide, & IJsselsteijn, 2003; Sanchez-Vives & Slater, 2005; Slater, Usoh, & Steed, 1994). For instance, Riva et al. (2003) describe co-presence as the intersection between physical presence and social presence, or the sense of being together in a shared space, such as 3D immersive and collaborative learning environments. Research highlights that co-presence in virtual environments necessitates the need for mutual awareness of individuals (Biocca et al., 2003), taking into consideration the properties of the virtual environment (Bulu, 2011). As one interviewee stated:
If we had that accountability of getting everyone in [into a physical meeting] we could have given feedback, critique, constructive criticism and that sort of stuff. Because we worked mainly online it meant that we couldn't run things past each other as effectively … As uncomfortable as it is, sometimes you just need to hear it ‘it's terrible, start again’, and doing that in a [physical] meeting can be more effective …

(s14)
The current research suggests that one way to help develop co-presence in eWIL is to incorporate at least some level of physical interaction between stakeholders. Several students highlighted the importance of incorporating physical team interactions and meetings into the eWIL process as a way to ensure mutual awareness of the task at hand and also to mediate team-formation processes:
In the actual real world, you're not just speaking to your co-workers online … if you just do it online then I think … teams aren't going to connect, they're not going to have that initial early phase where they have to figure out the strengths and weaknesses of each team member and figure out how to go forward.

(s03)
Allowing sufficient time for quality interactions increased the potential for relationship development between students and organisational partners. This finding supports previous research regarding the importance of quality interactions between students and organisational partners or mentors in virtual internships, particularly the formation of personal and cooperative relationships (Ruggiero & Boehm, 2017). The following quote demonstrates that students are more motivated to engage when opportunities for building interpersonal relationships are apparent:
The structured time we actually had to see our mentors was very minimal … we'd only be able to see our mentor for about two hours at a time sporadically … I find our group was more motivated when we connected with our mentor.

(s05)
In addition to allowing sufficient time for interactions, supporting social presence emerged as another means through which to assist relationship building. Social presence is the degree of salience between people, their interactions, and subsequent interpersonal relationships (Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976). The communication medium used to support the development of social presence can impact on the immediacy of interactions, as well as the degree of intimacy (Bulu, 2011). The current research further suggests that the quality of the eWIL experience increases when there is a higher level of social presence between students and industry partners, and that could be facilitated by some level of offline communication:
We tried to be in contact with our mentors as much as we could. We arranged physical meetings at least once a week … as well as seeking feedback through communicating online via emails and teleconferences … the meetings really helped to drive home the fact we were really contributing and working for a real-world company … its feels more real visiting the [company] because we get to physically be there … an ideal [eWIL program] would be not 100% online and not 100% offline.

(s08)
5. Theoretical and practical implications
In answering research question one, the research identified four principles for designing eWIL experiences in higher education from students' perspective: (1) authenticity, (2) integration of technology, (3) effective support processes, and (4) fostering of co-presence and relationship building. The primary theoretical contribution is that it addresses a call for further research on the design of eWIL (Schuster & Glavas, 2017). Specifically, the research contributes theoretically by collating and extending the largely expert-led perspective on the design of eWIL experiences with new insight from students, who have been under-represented in research to date. Thus, providing a step toward greater representation of the ‘student voice’ in higher education as called for by the literature (Cook-Sather, 2014; Seale, 2010). In addition, through applying the co-design framework by Dietrich et al. (2017), this research showcases an approach that explicitly recognises and addresses the potential vulnerability of students, stemming from the power distance between students and educators, which could affect their willingness and ability to contribute to the design of eWIL experiences.

In answering research question two, the study finds that generally expert and student views align in that (1) authenticity, (2) integration of technology and (3) effective support processes are key design principles for eWIL. This is an important finding in and of itself as it provides evidence that expert and service user perspectives can be complementary in eWIL design, similar to what was found in the design of traditional WIL experiences (Jackson, 2015). However, the findings from the interviews with students provide additional insight in two ways. First, the findings extend the operationalisation of authenticity within an eWIL context. Specifically, while learning activities and assessment have been identified in previous research (see Schuster & Glavas, 2017) to contribute to the authenticity of the eWIL experience, the findings from the student interviews highlight that the type of technology employed in the eWIL experience is also important. Further, the study identified a fourth design principle that was not evident in the literature. That is, students emphasised the need to promote co-presence and opportunities for relationship building in eWIL. They highlighted that technology presented unique challenges to co-presence and relationship building that should be actively addressed in the design of eWIL.

Last, the research further contributes to research on co-design, specifically in that it tests the applicability of the co-design framework proposed by Dietrich et al. (2017) for vulnerable consumers in a higher education setting. As such, it contributes to the understanding of the contextual boundaries of the framework and to further understanding of the potential of co-design as a theoretical approach to service design, an area of growing importance (Trischler et al., 2018). Specifically, it demonstrates the co-design framework's suitability for use in higher education settings.

Practically, the design principles presented by this research provide educators with a comprehensive framework that can be utilised to design eWIL, particularly within business school settings. The findings suggest the primacy of authenticity in eWIL design, in that all aspects of the eWIL experience including the learning activities, the assessment and the technology selected to support or deliver the experience should reflect real-world practice. As an example, this could mean that technologies such as live video conferencing platforms are selected in preference to virtual worlds if the former are more likely to be used in practice. The findings also highlight the need for technology to be integrated mechanically (to be compatible) and functionally (provide consistent information) to effectively support or deliver eWIL. Adequate administrative support systems, such as what are available for traditional WIL, are also key for eWIL. Last, the findings highlight the challenges student face in experiencing co-presence and in relationship building via technology interfaces. Students in this study expressed a preference for combining opportunities for face-to-face communication with technology-enabled communication as a means to manage relationship building.

6. Limitations and future research
The findings of this research should be considered in light of specific limitations. First, although this study synthesizes research on eWIL across a variety of disciplines, the primary research within this study was conducted within a business school setting. As such, future research is needed to validate the fourth design principle, which was derived from the primary research, across different student populations and higher education settings. Further participants were selected based on their experience level, that is, students with eWIL experience were directly targeted as they were deemed to have sufficient understanding to confidently contribute to identifying eWIL design principles. However, the sample size, while appropriate given the difficulty in gaining access to students who have previously participated in eWIL, can be extended in future research. Third, given the nature of self-reporting and the requirement for students to recall past events and experiences, it is important to note that questions posed to students were potentially subject to retrospective bias. Future research could be designed to incorporate current student behavior/s rather than relying on past situations, events, and experiences. Last, whilst the research identified four design principles for eWIL in higher education, the research provides an important basis for further developing knowledge around designing eWIL programs. As such, future research in particular should investigate how applying the design principles identified affect eWIL outcomes for students, universities and organisational partners.