In next-generation networks (NGN), a very large number of devices and applications are emerged, along with the heterogeneity of technologies, architectures, mobile data, etc., and optimizing such a network is of utmost importance. Besides convex optimization and game theory, swarm intelligence (SI) has recently appeared as a promising optimization tool for wireless networks. As a new subdivision of artificial intelligence, SI is inspired by the collective behaviors of societies of biological species. In SI, simple agents with limited capabilities can achieve intelligent strategies for high-dimensional and challenging problems, and thus SI has recently found many applications in NGN. However, SI techniques have still not fully investigated in the literature, especially in the contexts of wireless networks. In this work, our primary focus will be the integration of these two domains, i.e., NGN and SI. Firstly, we provide an overview of SI techniques from fundamental concepts to well-known optimizers. Secondly, we review the applications of SI to settle emerging issues in NGN, including spectrum management and resource allocation, wireless caching and edge computing, network security, and several other miscellaneous issues. Finally, we highlight challenges and issues in the literature, and introduce some interesting directions for future research.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
5G and beyond

6G

Artificial intelligence (AI)

Computational intelligence

Swarm intelligence (SI)

Next-generation wireless networks

1. Introduction
Four generations of cellular networks have been introduced since the inception of the first generation in the early 1980s. It is expected that massive numbers of connected devices, applications, technologies, network architecture, etc. will be available in next-generation communication networks (NGN, i.e., fifth-generation (5G) and sixth-generation (6G)) (Pham et al., 2020a). In 5G, three main use cases are enhanced mobile broadband, massive Internet of Things (IoT), and ultra-reliable and low latency communication. Besides the benefits offered by NGN, there are many challenges needed to be tackled to make it successful. For example, how to reduce the expenditure and operation complexity for network operators, and simultaneously support a large number of use cases and services from third-party companies. Many problems need to be studied in NGN such as power control and user clustering in non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) (Dai et al., 2018), task offloading and resource allocation in multi-access edge computing (MEC) systems (Mao et al., 2017), network slicing in virtualized wireless networks (Tun et al., 2019), and beamforming in multi-antenna systems (Pham et al., 2019). Several powerful techniques, e.g., convex optimization, game theory, and conventional machine learning (ML) have been used to solve these problems. In cases if an optimization problem is convex, some well-known methods and off-the-shelf solvers can be useful to derive the (near-)optimal solution. However, the convexity feature is rarely available, and the underlying problem is usually approximated as a sequence of convex problems. Moreover, the computational complexity of approximate algorithms typically increases significantly with the optimization dimensionality, e.g., the numbers of IoT devices and the quantization levels of channel states. In such a case, heuristic algorithms are highly preferred thanks to their features of simplicity and low complexity. However, the main drawback of such heuristic schemes is that the convergence to the optimal solution and the existence of the optimality are not guaranteed.

As a subset of artificial intelligence (AI), swarm intelligence (SI) has been widely used in the literature. SI methods have the capability to obtain computationally-tractable and high-quality solutions while guaranteeing convergence and robustness (Pham et al., 2020b). The main advantages of SI and other nature-inspired algorithms over conventional approaches like gradient-based and game-theoretic algorithms are as follows:

•
Black-box optimization, i.e, we do not need to know the internal mechanisms of a problem and estimate the optimal solutions by tuning the inputs while monitoring their changes in the output. Therefore, SI would be beneficial when convex optimization methods are not applicable, e.g., when the objective function is highly coupled and non-linear even some block variables are fixed (Pham et al., 2020b).

•
SI methods can tune the optimization parameters to balance exploration and exploitation, and thereby increasing the chance to get the optimal solutions.

•
Gradient-free optimization, i.e., no need for the gradient information as required in many approaches (e.g., backpropagation in ML and FedAvg in federated learning). Therefore, SI can avoid several pitfalls such as trapping into local optima and slow convergence speed.

•
Simplicity and easy implementation.

Consequently, SI methods have been integrated into various systems to solve challenging real-world problems in both science and industry. However, many potential and emerging SI techniques have not been well investigated, especially in wireless networks. Filling this gap, we carry out a contemporary survey on applications of SI techniques for NGN. The investigation on emerging issues includes spectrum management and resource allocation, wireless caching and edge computing, network security, and some other emerging issues for future NGN.

1.1. Swarm intelligence for next-generation wireless networks
The main challenge in solving optimization problems in NGN is an exponential increase in the complexity levels (e.g., in time and computing resources). In such cases, algorithms that find exact solutions are not efficient. Especially, the existence of many coupling constraints and the massive numbers of connected devices, base stations (BSs), channel states, heterogeneous resources, etc., make a lot of challenges in finding the exact solutions. Some typical examples of such problems are mobility-aware user association in ultra-dense networks, signal detection and channel estimation, and routing in IoT networks.

As a subset of bio-inspired and nature-inspired algorithms, SI studies complex and collective behavior of the systems composed of many simple components that can interact with other agents locally and with their surrounding environment (Dressler and Akan, 2010). The particularities of SI have made it a promising solution in various research areas, and therefore have been applied to solve an increasing number of problems in NGN (Chen et al., 2020). NGNs can realize SI/AI techniques (also known as collective intelligence) to address challenging problems, which are not effectively solved by conventional approaches. For example, an ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm is proposed to optimize the mobility trajectory for a mobile sink in home automation networks (Wang et al., 2015), the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method is employed to optimize antenna placement in distributed multi-input multi-output (MIMO) systems in Forooshani et al. (2014), and the Firefly algorithm (FA) is utilized to find the key update and residence management for enhanced handover security (Vien et al., 2019). Another application of SI can be found in Jiang et al. (2020), where the PSO is adopted to solve a resource scheduling problem in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-MEC systems and generate training samples for a deep network. The SI techniques such as ACO and PSO are also leveraged to solve emerging problems in 6G wireless systems such as privacy-preserving in 6G IoT (Lin et al., 2021), scheduling of diverse 6G IoT services (Wan et al., 2020) and distributed autonomous systems (Wang et al., 2020). The above literature has shown many promising results, e.g., high performance and computational tractability. This observation stimulates the increasing use of SI as a vital tool for solving emerging issues in NGN.

1.2. State-of-the-art surveys and our contributions
Although there are some surveys related to SI, their focuses are not on the applications of SI in NGN. Specifically, there have been existing surveys, such as Mavrovouniotis et al., 2017, Tan and Ding, 2016 and Ertenlice and Kalayci (2018), but they are specifically for other topics rather than NGN, e.g., dynamic optimization (Mavrovouniotis et al., 2017), graphical processing unit (GPU)-based implementation (Tan and Ding, 2016), and portfolio optimization (Ertenlice and Kalayci, 2018). There have been also surveys using SI to address particular problems in wireless networks such as Saleem et al., 2011, Bitam et al., 2014, Zhang et al., 2014, Balusamy et al., 2015, Primeau et al., 2018, Anandakumar and Umamaheswari, 2018, Jung et al., 2018 and Asim et al. (2020). For example, the surveys in Saleem et al. (2011) and Bitam et al. (2014) are dedicated to the routing mechanisms in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs), the survey in Zhang et al. (2014) presents SI for self-organized networking, the survey in Balusamy et al. (2015) presents bio-inspired mechanisms in cloud computing like resource scheduling, load balancing, and security, the survey in Primeau et al. (2018) provides reviews of various problems (e.g., data aggregation, sensor fusion, scheduling, and security) in WSNs using computational intelligence approaches, and the survey in Anandakumar and Umamaheswari (2018) reviews bio-inspired SI for social cognitive radio network applications. Recently, the survey in Ji et al. (2021) discusses the use of computational intelligence (e.g., AI, SI, and fuzzy control system) in NGN-enabled network in box architecture. Moreover, there have been some surveys dedicated to the applications of a specific SI technique. For example, Zhang et al. (2017) reviews theoretical results on the ACO and its applications to routing protocols in WSNs and Zhang et al. (2015) presents fundamentals of PSO and its application to WSNs. Recent years have also seen various surveys on other AI techniques for NGN such as ML for wireless networks (Sun et al., 2019), deep learning (DL) for mobile networking (Zhang et al., 2019), FL for mobile edge networks (Lim et al., 2020), and transfer learning for future wireless systems (Nguyen et al., 2021a).

The above surveys either consider the applications of SI for other topics, discuss the applications of SI for conventional problems in wireless networks (e.g., routing protocols in WSNs), or review other AI disciplines (e.g., ML, DL, and FL). However, we are not aware of any survey that specifically discusses the applications of SI for emerging issues in NGN. Moreover, most of the related surveys on SI were published many years ago, so discussions about emerging problems in NGN have not been well investigated. These observations motivate us to conduct this survey with an overview of SI and a thorough review of the applications of SI to address emerging issues in NGN. For convenience, three major issues are reviewed in this survey, including spectrum management and resource allocation, wireless caching and edge computing, network security. Also, other important applications of SI for emerging topics will be reviewed, such as UAV placement and path planning, clustering and routing in IoT, smart city applications, and energy management in smart grid. In summary, the main contributions of this survey are summarized as follows.

•
To provide an overview of SI for general readers: We present fundamental knowledge of SI and provide a review of representative SI techniques such as PSO, artificial bee colony (ABC), ACO, FA, gray wolf optimizer (GWO), and whale optimization algorithm (WOA).

•
To investigate how SI techniques can be used to solve the technical problems in NGN: we discuss applications of SI for major issues in NGN, including spectrum management and resource allocation, wireless caching and edge computing, data privacy and network security, and a number of miscellaneous issues.

•
To delineate key challenges and future research directions: The use of SI in solving problems of NGN is being actively investigated and developed, but there is still room for improvement in the future. We highlight a number of important challenges and future research directions for the use of SI in NGN.


Table 1. List of the acronyms.

Acronyms	Meaning	Acronyms	Meaning	Acronyms	Meaning
5G	Fifth-Generation	6G	Sixth-Generation	ABC	Artificial Bee Colony
ACO	Ant Colony Optimization	AI	Artificial intelligence	BS	Base Station
ACO	Ant Colony Optimization	D2D	Device-to-Device	FA	Firefly Algorithm
GA	Genetic Algorithm	GWO	Gray Wolf Optimizer	HetNet	Heterogeneous Network
HHO	Harris Hawks Optimizer	IoT	Internet of Things	LTE	Long Term Evolution
MANET	Mobile Ad Hoc Network	MEC	Multi-Access Edge Computing	MIMO	Multi-Input Multi-Output
MLD	Maximum Likelihood Detection	mmWave	millimeter-Wave	NGN	Next-Generation Wireless Networks
NOMA	Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access	OMA	Orthogonal Multiple Access	PSO	Particle Swarm Optimization
QoS	Quality of Service	QAM	Quadrature Amplitude Modulation	RF	Radio Frequency
SDN	Software-Defined Networking	SER	Symbol Error Rate	SI	Swarm Intelligence
UAV	Unmanned Aerial Vehicle	WOA	Whale Optimization Algorithm	WSN	Wireless Sensor Network
1.3. Paper organization
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the fundamentals of SI. Sections 3 SI for spectrum management and resource allocation, 4 SI for wireless caching and edge computing, 5 SI for network security review applications of SI for emerging issues in NGN. Miscellaneous issues using SI are presented in Section 6. Section 7 outlines the challenges, open issues, and some future research directions. Finally, Section 8 concludes the survey paper. For clarity, the list of frequently used acronyms is shown in Table 1.

2. Swarm intelligence: An overview
In this section, we present an overview of evolutionary algorithms and a summary of some well-known SI approaches.

2.1. Fundamentals of SI and stochastic optimization
The term “swarm intelligence” appeared in Beni and Wang (1993) when cellular robotic systems were empowered by the intelligence of swarms. It refers to biological systems, in which multiple individuals achieve certain goals with local interaction without any centralized control unit. For instance, an ant colony is made of a queen and many workers, soldiers, babysitters, etc (Dorigo and Di Caro, 1999). The queen is just responsible for laying eggs, but other ants construct the nest, raise larvae, defend the colony, collect food, etc. The queen is not a commander, and somehow tasks are coordinated and goals are achieved. Ants are proved to communicate locally using pheromone and solve complex problems to ensure the survival of their colony.

Like other types of meta-heuristics including evolutionary, physics-based, and event-based ones, SI methods belong to the class of stochastic optimization algorithms (Faris et al., 2018). In this class, random mechanisms are prominent as opposed to deterministic algorithms, in which there is no random component. Stochastic algorithms start the optimization process with a set of randomly generated solutions. Depending on the underlying mechanism of the algorithm, this set is improved until the satisfaction of an end condition, which may include one or more solutions, as shown in Fig. 1. The set of solutions is often called the set of candidate solutions since it includes potential solutions for a given problem. If the set has one solution, the algorithm is individual-based or single-solution. On the other hand, the algorithm is called population-based of multi-solution in case of using multiple solutions (Faris et al., 2018).

Two questions that naturally arise are about the pros and cons of stochastic and population-based algorithms as compared to deterministic and individual-based ones. On the one hand, deterministic algorithms find the same solutions in each run and are usually computationally less expensive. However, they tend to be trapped in local optima and mostly require gradient information of the problem. Stochastic algorithms benefit from higher local optima avoidance thanks to the stochastic component. On the other hand, single-solution algorithms use one solution in each step of the optimization, and they generally have lower computational complexities than those of population-based techniques. Moreover, they have fast convergence but suffer from entrapment in local optima. Population-based algorithms are computationally expensive but better avoid trapping into local optima. Many studies demonstrate that population-based algorithms can solve complex engineering problems with close results (BoussaïD et al., 2013).

Due to the advances in the area of population-based stochastic algorithms, one might ask whether such methods require enhancements. As stated by the No-Free-Lunch theorem (Wolpert and Macready, 1997), no algorithm can solve all optimization problems, i.e., one algorithm may perform best in a set of problems but maybe worst in other sets. This theorem has motivated researchers to improve such algorithms significantly. One popular method of improving the performance of stochastic algorithms is to hybridize them (Talbi, 2002). Hybrid algorithms can be designed in different ways, including but not limited to, borrowing some of the operators from an algorithm, sequential use of two or more algorithms, adding chaotic maps, etc. The majority of these methods increase the computation cost but result in more accurate results. A taxonomy of hybrid meta-heuristics can be found in Talbi (2002).


Fig. 1. The general framework of stochastic optimization algorithms.

The majority of real-world problems also have constraints that should be considered when evaluating candidate solutions obtained by SI methods (Gandomi and Yang, 2012). In case of any violation at any level, the solution is not practical. Such solutions are called infeasible, which means that they are optimal but do not satisfy the constraints. There are different methods to handle constraints. Penalty functions are very popular in this area (Yeniay, 2005), in which a violated solution is penalized so that it does not show better objective values as compared to others. In this way, SI methods do not favor them as feasible solutions.

2.2. Popular SI approaches
SI is a field study that develops computer algorithms mimicking collaborative and collective phenomena in nature that leads to problem-solving. Most of the techniques in this area are proposed in the form of optimization algorithms that help scientists and reactionaries to solve optimization problems (Yang, 2014).

The framework that such algorithms use when optimizing problems is quite similar, as shown in Fig. 1. The optimization process starts with a random set of solutions. Each solution in this set is a candidate optimal solution for the problem on hand. The accuracy of solutions is determined by an objective function, which is also often called a cost or a fitness function. The set of candidate solutions is iteratively improved until the satisfaction of an end condition. What makes such algorithms different from each other is the rules and principles used to improve the solutions. For instance, each solution in the set might be considered as a bee, and then foraging of bees in nature can be used to improve the set. The ultimate goal is to find the best optimal solution for the problem, which is called global optimum.

The literature shows that SI techniques have been widely used to solve problems in both science and industry (Yang, 2014). There are several reasons for the popularity of SI. Firstly, swarm-based optimization algorithms mostly used a set of solutions, so they benefit from the better capability of avoiding locally optimal solutions, which is always an issue in mathematical optimization algorithms. Secondly, an optimization problem is considered as a blackbox when using them, so they do not need to calculate the derivative of the objective function. This makes them more practical than derivative-based algorithms. Finally, they follow natural principles that increase their chance of findings a reasonable estimation of the global optimum. As a drawback, however, such methods are considered computationally expensive.

The literature shows that the benefit of SI algorithms outweighs their drawbacks. This has been one of the main reasons that we carefully studied and surveyed them in this work for NGN. We note that SI can be divided into two main segments, including insect swarm algorithms and animal swarm algorithms. GWO (Mirjalili et al., 2014) and WOA (Mirjalili and Lewis, 2016) are examples of animal swarm algorithms, whereas ABC (Karaboga and Basturk, 2007), ACO (Dorigo and Di Caro, 1999), FA (Yang, 2010), bacterial foraging optimization (Das et al., 2009), and glowworm swarm optimization (Krishnanand and Ghose, 2009) are examples of insect swarm algorithms. In the following, some well-regarded and recent SI algorithms that have been widely used in wireless and mobile networking are briefly presented.

2.2.1. Particle swarm optimization
PSO was initially introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 as a global optimization algorithm for nonlinear functions (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995). It mimics the social and individual intelligence of birds in a flock when foraging. This algorithm considers an optimization problem as an -dimensional space, in which  is the number of parameters. Each bird represents a candidate solution. The birds update their positions using their personal best solutions and the best solution obtained by the entire swarm. This allows PSO to constantly search around the most promising solutions obtained by the particles while maintaining the best one.

2.2.2. Artificial bee colony
ABC emulates the natural swarming behavior of bees for finding food (Karaboga and Basturk, 2007). Just like any other population-based algorithm, there is a population of solutions. This population is divided into three classes: worker beers, onlookers, and scouts. Each worker is associated with a food source and comes back to the nest to the others by means of the waggle dance. Scout bees search for food sources before assigning them to workers. Onlookers choose the food source based on the waggle dance of other bees.

2.2.3. Ant colony optimization
ACO is firstly introduced in 1996 by Dorigo et al. as a nature-inspired meta-heuristic method for finding the solution for combinatorial optimization problems (Dorigo and Di Caro, 1999). In this algorithm, stigmergy, in which communication is done by the manipulation of the environment in swarm, has been used as an inspiration. It has been proved that ants communicate by depositing pheromone on the ground or objects as a way to convey certain messages to other ants. They use different pheromones for different tasks in a colony. For instance, they mark different paths to a source of food from their nest to attract other ants for transportation purposes. Since the longer path faces a longer period of time for vaporization before re-depositing pheromone, the shortest path is chosen automatically using this simple communication.

In the original version of ACO, the problem should be formulated as a graph, each ant is a tour and the objective is to find the shortest one. There are two matrices: distance and pheromone. Each ant uses both of them to update their paths. After several iterations and updating of both matrices, a tour will be established, in which all ants travel through it. This will be considered as the best estimation for the problem. There are other variables of ACO that can be used for problems with continuous variables, constrained, multiple object ices, etc.

2.2.4. Firefly algorithm
FA is a meta-heuristic that mimics the mating behavior of fire flies in nature (Yang, 2010). This algorithm first creates a population of random solutions. Each firefly in the population can attract others proportional to its fitness value. The main position updating equation is as follows (Yang, 2010): (1)where  is a random number in ,  shows the position of th solution,  indicates the light absorption coefficient,  is the attractiveness at the distance , and  is a randomization parameter.

2.2.5. Gray wolf optimizer
GWO is invented by Mirjalili et al. in 2014, which mimics the social hierarchy of wolves and their hunting behaviors (Mirjalili et al., 2014). A set of randomly generated solutions is first initiated and evolved over multiple iterations. During the optimization process, the three best solutions obtained so far are used to update the position of others. These best solutions represent the hunting ability of alpha wolf, beta wolf, and delta wolf (Mirjalili et al., 2014). The inspiration is that the alpha, beta, and delta wolves usually have a better knowledge of the location of the prey. The GWO algorithm has been one of the most widely-used recent meta-heuristics with a wide range of applications that demonstrate the capability of this algorithm in solving real-world problems (Faris et al., 2018).

2.2.6. Whale optimization algorithm
Proposed by Mirjalili and Lewis (2016) in 2016, the WOA is inspired by the bubble net foraging mechanism of humpback whales. This is an intelligent way of catching a school of fish by creating and shrinking net of bubbles to drive them towards the surface. Just like GWO, a set of whales are considered as the candidate solutions for a given optimization problem. Their positions are updated using two mechanisms: encircling prey and spiral movement. The former method is similar to that in GWO, while in the latter approach, a spiral equation is used to update the position. There is a 50% chance of choosing one of these methods for each of the whales.

3. SI for spectrum management and resource allocation
3.1. Power control and channel allocation
The power and channel allocation problems play a major role in various wireless systems. The term “channel allocation” varies in different scenarios, e.g., user clustering/grouping in NOMA, channel/subcarrier allocation in device-to-device (D2D) communications and heterogeneous networks (HetNets). For instance, the channels occupied by cellular users can be re-used by D2D users on the condition that the interference level imposed by D2D users to the co-channel cellular users is smaller than a predefined threshold. In such scenarios, important tasks are to adjust the transmit power of D2D transmitters and to allocate the channels to D2D users. The main focus of this subsection is on the optimization of power control and channel allocation in NGN using SI techniques. Fig. 2 illustrates the diagram of a three-tier HetNet (macro cell, pico cell, and femto cell) and applications of SI.

A number of problems in D2D communications have been solved by SI techniques. For example, two joint channel allocation and power control problems are studied in Xu et al. (2018a), where the channel occupied by one cellular user can be reused by multiple D2D pairs. While the first problem considers individual rate requirements for cellular users, the second problem requires the total rate of all cellular users to be greater than a threshold value. For both problems, the standard continuous and binary PSO schemes are used to update power allocation and channel allocation, respectively. The proposed algorithm is then compared with a random PSO scheme, where channels for D2D pairs are randomly assigned. This work is extended to the unlicensed band in Girmay et al. (2019), where D2D pairs causing strong interference to cellular users are forced to use the unlicensed band. Simulations demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms the algorithm in Xu et al. (2018a) (only licensed band) and the scheme when only one D2D pair is allowed to reuse the same licensed channel. It is elaborated in Sun et al. (2019) that coalition game cannot achieve high performance and low complexity simultaneously. To solve this challenge, the authors consider the concept of “priority sequences” to improve the initialization and formation phases of the coalition game. To further improve the D2D sum rate, the WOA is used to solve the power control problem. In particular, the objective function is designed in a such way that maximizes the D2D sum rate while guaranteeing minimum rates of cellular users.

Considered as a potential multiple access technology for NGN, NOMA has received much interest from the research community. SI is a vital alternative for solving many user clustering and power control problems in NOMA systems. The work in Masaracchia et al. (2019) adopts PSO to minimize the total transmit power by optimizing NOMA pairing decisions. Then, two representative scenarios are considered: disaster and UAV communications, where low power consumption is an important aspect. An interesting observation from this work is that minimizing the transmit power depends on not only channel conditions but also the number of sub-channels as well as the available bandwidth. Another application of PSO can be found in Jiao et al. (2020) for NOMA resource allocation in satellite-based IoT systems. The Lyapunov optimization framework is adopted to transform the long-term problem of data and power allocation into a sequence of online problems, which are then solved at the corresponding time slots. Compared with the conventional optimization approach, the PSO-based scheme achieves better utility in terms of average delay, while obtaining a good tradeoff between complexity and memory. Very recently, the Harris hawks optimizer (HHO) is utilized to solve the joint UAV placement and power allocation problem for NOMA-enabled visible light communications (Pham et al., 2020b). The main advantage of HHO over existing methods is that the problem can be solved directly instead of solving subproblems iteratively in an alternative manner. Moreover, the HHO-based algorithm relaxes the assumption of exponential-distance models in existing studies. Simulation results show that the HHO-based algorithm is superior to the conventional orthogonal multiple access (OMA), power allocation, and random schemes under various settings, and also outperforms several SI techniques such as PSO, evolution strategy, and genetic algorithm (GA). A combination of D2D and NOMA in MEC systems is studied in Diao et al. (2019). In particular, the joint computing resource, power and channel allocation problem is investigated and PSO is applied to allocate transmit power within individual groups and for different groups. Other applications of SI techniques for edge computing can be found in various studies, e.g., joint resource allocation in dense HetNets (Guo et al., 2018) and in multi-tier MEC systems (Huynh et al., 2020), and task scheduling problem (Jiang et al., 2019a).

3.2. User association and load balancing
User association refers to the process of associating users with their preferred BSs, and load balancing refers to the distribution of workloads across multiple BSs. According to these surveys, According to Liu et al. (2016), five metrics are mainly used for user association, including outage and coverage probability, spectrum efficiency, energy efficiency, quality of service (QoS), and fairness. Moreover, the frameworks from convex optimization, game theory, and stochastic geometry can be used to provide tractable methods for optimization problems of these issues. Henceforth, we focus on reviewing user association and load balancing mechanisms, which are designed with the help of SI techniques.

PSO is adopted in Kuribayashi et al. (2020) to overcome drawbacks of the conventional cell range expansion techniques, i.e., users tend to connect to the BS with the highest received signal power. Instead of maximizing the sum rate as considered in existing literature, this work considers maximizing the number of users with satisfactory rate requirements and the number of BSs with at least one connected user. PSO is used to optimize the bias values assigned to individual BSs, thus implicitly improving the load balancing in dense HetNets. Experiments illustrate that the PSO-based algorithm can achieve superior performance (in terms of resource utilization and the ratio of satisfactory users) than the unified cell range expansion bias approach and classical PSO methods. Since the limited resources of small cell BSs and the QoS of users are not jointly considered in existing user association mechanisms, the work in Zhong et al. (2019) proposes to use a multi-leader multi-follower Stackelberg game to solve this issue in backhaul-limited HetNets. In this context, BSs are regarded as the first mover and can adjust the prices according to their loads, while users are considered as the follower and compete with each other to have the desired association. PSO is adopted at the BSs to determine their prices and obtain the perfect Nash equilibrium. The work in Plachy et al. (2019) considers a joint BS’s position and user association in a dense network, where UAVs can be deployed as flying BSs. Two evolutionary algorithms, PSO and GA, are then applied to obtain the optimal UAV’s positions. Both the PSO- and GA-based algorithms are shown to outperform the k-means clustering scheme. Interestingly, there is a trade-off between PSO and GA, while the PSO-based algorithm has lower complexity, the GA-based scheme achieves better network throughput, radio of satisfactory users, and active number of flying BSs. Applications of the WOA for user association and task offloading decision in edge computing systems are considered in Pham et al. (2020c). Game theory and ACO are jointly adopted to address the user association problem with multi-radio access technologies (Li et al., 2018).

Besides user association in ultra-dense HetNets, SI techniques have found lots of applications for load balancing in cloud and edge computing. To overcome the issue of unbalanced workload in mixed manufacturing, an energy-aware load balancing and job scheduling is studied in Wan et al. (2018). Fog nodes are used to abstract and then an energy consumption model of smart factory equipment, whereas PSO is employed to find the workload allocation solution. An adaptive-step size algorithm based on the glowworm swarm optimization (GSO) and sine cosine algorithm (SCA) is proposed in Dong et al. (2019) to find the server selection and improve the load balancing between edge servers and the central cloud. For mobile learning services, a dominant FA approach is proposed for load balancing among cloud virtual machines in Sekaran et al. (2019). The proposed dominant FA algorithm can ensure that learners can receive m-learning content without delay, and interestingly the proposed algorithm is superior to various methods, including ACB, ACO, and the weighted round-robin algorithm. The GWO and PSO are jointly used to find the solution of load balancing in cloud computing (Gohil and Patel, 2018). Another work on load balancing in cloud computing is Ebadifard and Babamir (2018), where PSO is used to distribute the tasks among cloud virtual machines.

3.3. MIMO detection, channel estimation, and precoding
3.3.1. MIMO detection
In MIMO systems, the receiver may use some detection strategies to estimate the transmitted symbols that may be corrupted by interference and noise over the medium. However, the detection complexity highly depends on the system size (e.g., the number of antennas and the modulation scheme), matrix multiplication and inversion operations (Albreem et al., 2019). The maximum likelihood detection (MLD) is an optimal algorithm in terms of the probability. Unfortunately, the MLD searches over a very huge solution space and the complexity would increase exponentially with respect to the number of transmitter antennas. For instance, to obtain the optimal signal for 64-QAM, the detector needs to perform  enumerations for an MIMO system with  antennas at the transmitter to support 16-QAM.

SI algorithms can be considered as alternative approaches for MIMO detection problems. The first application of ACO for the MIMO detection problem is proposed in Lain and Chen (2010). Inspired by the ACO algorithm, the MIMO MLD can be formulated as the shortest path problem, in which each transmit antenna is regarded as a city and the transmitted symbols are viewed as the potential paths to a specific city. Corresponding to a solution component in ACO, a similar concept of path movement is defined in Lain and Chen (2010). The solution component  indicates the solution that the antenna  should transmit the symbol . The cost function to estimate transmitted symbols is then converted to a heuristic value by means of a sigmoid function. Next, the pheromone levels and Euclidean distance values are used to calculate the transition probabilities, which are used to select the transmitted symbols. To be more specific, the symbol with a smaller distance has a higher chance to be selected by the artificial ant. To avoid the convergence to local optima in the original ACO, a modified ACO scheme is adopted, in which ants are enabled to have non-identical sets of pheromone trails, i.e., the hard decision symbol used in estimating the distance is now replaced by the tentatively chosen symbol. For a 16-QAM 16 × 16 MIMO system, ACO can achieve a near-MLD SER performance when the number of ants is around 20,000.

The work in Lain and Chen (2010) can be considered as a pioneering study on SI for the MIMO detection problem. However, the advantage of the proposed ACO algorithm in Lain and Chen (2010) is limited by a large number of ants and slow convergence. A hybrid algorithm, as a combination of ACO and PSO, is proposed in Mandloi and Bhatia (2016). Unlike the ACO and PSO based MIMO detectors, the concepts of distance in ACO and velocity in PSO are jointly considered to create a new probability metric, i.e., the fitness value is calculated as a weighted sum of the distances traveled by the solutions and the velocity of each solution. The proposed hybrid algorithm offers several advantages compared to the original ACO and PSO: (1) avoiding convergence to locally optimal solutions, (2) faster convergence, (3) lower computational complexity, and (4) removing the sensitivity to the choice of initial solutions as in Khan et al. (2007). The simulation results in Mandloi and Bhatia (2016) show that the proposed scheme performs close to the sphere decoding detector and is superior to the existing ACO detection mechanisms in Lain and Chen (2010) and Mandloi and Bhatia (2015). More specifically, at the target BER of , the proposed hybrid algorithm attains 2.5 dB and  dB improvement in signal-to-noise ratio with respect to the ACO algorithms in Lain and Chen (2010) and Mandloi and Bhatia (2015), respectively. More recently, the FA algorithm is used to investigate a robust detection in Datta and Bhatia (2019); however, the detector developed in this work is applicable for MIMO systems with 4-QAM signaling only. For future work, detection schemes for massive MIMO systems with higher modulation orders can be investigated.

3.3.2. MIMO beamforming
Beamforming plays a major role in MIMO systems because the transmitter needs to direct the spatial data-stream at the intended receiver. Basically, beamforming implies that multiple antennas are used to adjust the wave directions by appropriately changing the magnitude and phase of each antenna in the array. There are three types of beamforming in multi-antenna wireless systems: digital beamforming, analog beamforming, and hybrid digital–analog beamforming (Molisch et al., 2017). SI and bio-inspired techniques are promising candidates to solve beamforming optimization problems, which represents the theme of this subsection.

The work in Hefnawi (2016) considers the concept of cooperative MIMO in cognitive radio enabled WSNs. In particular, a very large number of sensors are divided into different clusters and each cluster is treated as a virtual antenna in a multi-cluster MIMO system. The PSO approach is applied to optimize the transmit beamforming vectors so as to maximize the ergodic capacity of each cluster. The main benefit is that it does not require gradient search operations, thus reducing the complexity significantly. Simulation results show that the PSO-based scheme can achieve competitive system capacity, and interestingly impressive performance can be obtained when the number of clusters is small. Owing to the importance of spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks, various SI-inspired methods to improve spectrum sensing have been proposed in the last few years. For example, a hybrid PSO-gravitational search algorithm (GSA) is studied in Eappen and Shankar (2020) for optimizing the performance of joint spectrum sensing and energy efficiency, and a random walk GWO method is investigated in Karthikeyan et al. (2019) for deriving sensing and data transmission schedules.

To enable low-complexity and efficient mmWave massive MIMO communications, various studies have been dedicated to beamforming optimization. The work in Zhu et al. (2019a) jointly optimizes transmit (Tx) and receive (Rx) beamforming vectors and power allocation for an NOMA-mmWave MIMO system. Since the Tx-beamforming sub-problem is non-convex and the original PSO may be trapped into local optima, a boundary-compressed PSO approach is devised. Particularly, two boundary values, inner and outer, are introduced, and the inner value increases linearly during the course of optimization. A similar study can be found in Xiao et al. (2019), where the max–min problem is optimized and PSO is used to obtain the upper bound value. Also using the boundary-compressed PSO, hybrid beamforming is considered in Zhu et al. (2019b), which achieves a better performance than the OMA and fully digital beamforming cases in terms of spectral efficiency and energy efficiency, respectively. SI approaches are also considered to solve various problems in MIMO systems. The work in Souto et al. (2020) considers a reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) assisted MIMO system. However, estimating CSI accurately in RIS-aided MIMO systems is a challenging task, and state-of-the-art solutions may not be practical because of large overheads, high complexity, and hardware challenges (Souto et al., 2020). To solve these challenges of channel estimation, the authors in Souto et al. (2020) adopt PSO to optimize active beamforming at the BS and passive beamforming at the RIS. Unlike conventional methods, the PSO-based method is not dependent on CSI acquisition and does not require one RF chain for each RIS passive element, thus reducing the cost and energy consumption.

3.3.3. MIMO channel estimation
Channel estimation is a vital means to enhance the overall performance of wireless systems. With accurate channel estimation, the potential advantages of massive MIMO systems (and other networks as well) can be exploited to enhance the network performance. Nevertheless, there are several challenges related to channel estimation problems, e.g., time-varying and frequency-selective channels, pilot contamination, a large number of channels (e.g., in an RIS based system), etc. In this part, we focus on channel estimation using SI algorithms.

Among SI techniques, PSO is a vital alternative for well-known channel estimators such as minimum mean squared error and least-squares. In Knievel and Hoeher (2012), PSO and cooperative PSO (CPSO) are applied for channel estimation in terms of mean squared error performance. The CPSO is highly preferable when the search space has a very high dimension since the whole search space is partitioned into smaller subsets, and multiple swarms (i.e., solutions) are maintained at a time instance instead of only one swarm in PSO. Thus, the CPSO is suitable for massive MIMO systems. The channel estimation problem becomes more difficult when it couples with other optimization variables. For example, the work in Zhang et al. (2013) investigates a joint channel estimation and multi-user detection problem, which is solved by four evolutionary techniques (including genetic algorithm, repeated weighted boosting search, PSO, and differential evolution). In particular, an iterative algorithm is designed by applying continuous versions for channel estimation and binary versions for multi-user detection. Recently, the work in Jiang et al. (2019b) applies an enhanced variant of the WOA and compressed sensing to allocate the pilot in underwater acoustic orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems. To improve the original WOA, three strategies are investigated, including (1) good initialization to avoid the prematurity issue, (2) chaotic switching to prevent traps from falling into a local minimum, and (3) nonlinear parameters to appropriately adjust the transition between exploration and exploitation. The proposed enhanced WOA is shown to have better performance than some other algorithms such as PSO, original WOA, and GA.


Table 2. Summary of the state-of-the-art SI techniques for spectrum management and resource allocation.

Category	Paper	Techniques	Highlights
Power control and channel allocation	Pham et al. (2020b)	HHO	The HHO is used to solve a joint UAV placement and power allocation problem in NOMA-based visible light communications. The HHO is also employed as a trainer of deep neural networks.
Xu et al., 2018a, Girmay et al., 2019	PSO	Each cellular user can share its occupied channels with multiple D2D pairs. Extension to consider both licensed and unlicensed (WiFi) bands in Girmay et al. (2019) would significantly improve the system rate.
Sun et al. (2019)	WOA	An improved variant of coalitional game is used for channel allocation.
The WOA is used for power allocation and the fitness function is designed to maximize the total sum rate of D2D users while guaranteeing the QoS requirements of cellular users.
User association and load balancing	Kuribayashi et al. (2020)	PSO	The fitness function is to maximize the numbers of satisfactory users and serving BSs. The PSO-based schemes achieve better performance than conventional user association mechanisms.
Wan et al. (2018)	PSO	Energy-aware load balancing in fog computing enabled smart manufacturing is optimized by PSO.
Sekaran et al. (2019)	FA	A dominant FA approach is proposed for load balancing among cloud virtual machines. Thanks to the proposed FA algorithm, mobile learning services are provided without delay.
MIMO applications	Lain and Chen (2010)	ACO	The MIMO detection problem is solved by ACO. A tradeoff between complexity and SER is obtained, and the ACO scheme approaches the near-MLD performance when the number of ants is sufficiently large.
Mandloi and Bhatia (2016)	PSO and ACO	A hybrid (PSO and ACO) scheme is adopted for MIMO detection and can achieve a gain of 2.5 dB over ACO in Lain and Chen (2010).
Hefnawi (2016)	PSO	PSO is used to optimize transmit beamforming of virtual antenna. Besides system rates, the computational complexity is significantly reduced when compared with the conventional gradient-based methods.
Nimmagadda (2020)	GWO and LA	A tradeoff between spectral and energy efficiencies is optimized and significant improvements are reported over PSO, FA, and original GWO and LA.
Jiang et al. (2019b)	WOA	Three WOA variants and compressed sensing are employed for pilot allocation in acoustic OFDM systems.
3.4. Summary
In this section, we survey the applications of SI for spectrum management and resource allocation in NGN. In particular, we discuss three aspects, including power control and channel allocation, user association and load balancing, and MIMO applications (signal detection, channel estimation, and precoding). As a prominent SI approach in the last two decades, PSO is widely used for many problems. However, new SI techniques may find their suitability and practicality in several other applications. For example, since the original ACO is proposed to solve mixed-integer problems, it is highly suitable for MIMO signal detection. Another observation is that since each SI approach has its distinct features and disadvantages, combining multiple SI techniques to solve a specific problem is widely investigated and the combined algorithm typically outperforms individual algorithms. Besides, recent SI techniques have demonstrated better performance than the old ones, but the comparison among recent advances is usually not available in the literature. In summarizing this section, the reviewed literature, used techniques, and highlights are summarized in Table 2.

4. SI for wireless caching and edge computing
Caching at the wireless edge has emerged as a great solution to meet the traffic requirement in NGN and to improve the performance of low-latency applications (Liu et al., 2016). Meanwhile, edge computing (e.g., MEC and fog computing) has been developed to distribute cloud resources from the central cloud to the network edges, and thus enabling new compute-intensive and latency-critical applications at the device level.

4.1. Wireless caching
Back to several decades ago, caching has been developed for various application domains such as web caching and memory caching in operating systems. As of massive traffic, network densification, and stringent services in NGN, the centralized caching cannot accommodate user demands (Liu et al., 2016). Therefore, the concept of wireless/edge caching has been recently studied. Generally, content placement and content delivery are the two main problems in wireless caching. While the former decides the location and size of each content chunk, the latter is about how to deliver the content to the requesters (Liu et al., 2016). Indeed, SI techniques have found their applications in achieving competitive performance for wireless caching systems.

Caching at the network edge is the main theme and has been considered in many studies. The work in Li et al. (2019) proposes a socially aware caching mechanism in D2D-enabled for radio access networks. The proposed scheme is composed of three main phases, in which the first phase deals with the clustering of fog nodes, each one is typically located at a corresponding BS. After the clustering is completed, a center user scheme is proposed to select users within the coverage of each fog node to cache data for the other users. The caching problem at the selected users is then formulated as a discrete problem and then solved by ACO. Numerical results demonstrate that the ACO-based approach outperforms several benchmarks in terms of cache hit ratio and average total delay. Another work on wireless caching at the edge is considered in Jin et al. (2019). In particular, a new concept, namely information-centric virtual content network, is proposed by combining network function virtualization (NFV) and content-centric network. Based on the proposed architecture, an optimization problem is studied to minimize the total weighted hops in a HetNet. The problem is solved by ACO and compared with several baseline schemes like cache everything everywhere and popularity-based schemes. The autonomous vehicular edge framework is proposed in Feng et al. (2017) to exploit redundant resources and realize in-vehicle applications. This work also proposes a caching algorithm and adopts ACO to solve the workload allocation problem. Cache-enabled UAV communications are studied in Wu et al. (2019), where a rotary-wing UAV is deployed to cache files and to serve a number of downlink vehicles. For given solutions of trajectory and content delivery, PSO is used to solve the binary content placement problem. Simulations show a small optimality gap between the PSO-based scheme and the optimal caching solution. Very recently, the work in Huang et al. (2020) considers a caching decision problem for the Internet of vehicles (IoV) and proposes to deploy a quantum PSO based algorithm at the edge to obtain the caching solutions.

HetNet is a key enabler to enhance the performance of cache-based wireless systems. As shown in Yang et al. (2016), HetNet with caching capabilities (popular contents can be cached at multi-tiers, including macro BS, relay, and nearby users), can achieve a throughput gain of 57.3% compared with that of the HetNet without caching (i.e., popular contents are cached at the macro BS only). A caching mechanism is investigated in Tan et al. (2019a), where full-duplex relays are deployed and the mobility patterns of users are modeled to improve the throughput gain. Illustration of a cache-enabled three-tier HetNet is shown in Fig. 3. More specifically, there are possibly four cases for a content request, i.e., the requested content is available at (1) the local cache, (2) at least nearby users, (3) nearby relays, and (4) the macro BS. For a given set of cached contents, a PSO-based approach is proposed to solve the joint caching placement problem whose objective is to maximize the network throughput. The main advantages of PSO are near-optimal performance and very low complexity when it is compared with the optimal exhaustive search algorithm. Similar to Tan et al. (2019a), the work in Ali et al. (2020) also exploits the mobility patterns of users to improve the offloading probability, but the use of an adaptive bat algorithm is shown to outperform the PSO-based approach. In order to solve the inter-dependencies among the density of HetNets, dynamics of harvested energy, and diverse QoS requirements of users, the work in Zhang et al. (2020) considers a caching problem so as to minimize the total energy consumed by the small cell BSs (SBSs) and backhaul links. Furthermore, based on the energy level and traffic offloaded from the macro BS, a binary PSO scheme is studied to decide the sleeping status of SBSs.


Fig. 3. Illustration of a cache-enabled three-tier HetNet, where the content can be cached at the local device, nearby users, relays, and macro BS.

4.2. Computation offloading
Along with the massive connectivity and diverse QoS requirements, computation offloading has been regarded as a key solution for many compute-intensive and latency-critical applications and services (Pham et al., 2020, Guan and Boukerche, 2021). According to Pham et al. (2020a), besides network optimization, game theory, and AI, many computation offloading (sometimes referred to as task scheduling and task allocation in the literature) problems can be solved effectively by SI techniques with competitive performance and low complexity. The application of bees swarm for computation offloading in fog computing is examined in Bitam et al. (2018), which shows significant improvements over the GA and PSO algorithms. In Mishra et al. (2018), the service allocation problem for industrial application is optimized by three SI techniques, including the continuous and binary PSO, and bat algorithm. The work in Zhu et al. (2019) optimizes the task allocation problem to achieve a trade-off between latency and quality in vehicular edge computing systems. More precisely, vehicles can migrate their workloads to other vehicles with computing capabilities and stationary edge servers. The mixed-integer task allocation problem is first solved by the linear programming method, but it has high computational complexity. Therefore, this work proposes a binary PSO based algorithm to achieve efficient solutions. Using real-world traces to model the mobility of edge servers, PSO is shown to have lower service latency than the linear programming method when the quality is relaxed, but it is not preferred to use when the quality requirement becomes stricter. To support latency-sensitive IoV applications, the work in Hou et al. (2020) considers combining software-defined networking (SDN) and edge computing, and proposes a holistic architecture. Moreover, this work investigates a reliable computation offloading scheme by considering the reprocessing latency. To overcome the difficulties of non-convexity and NP-hardness, PSO is utilized to design a fault-tolerant algorithm. Motivated by the fact that offloading tasks to stationary nodes (e.g., road side units) is highly expensive, the allocation of tasks among vehicles is considered in Chen et al. (2020). More specifically, a vehicle may offload its computation task to one among multiple idle vehicles and the max–min completion time is optimized. To deal with the challenge that an idle vehicle shall not participate in the tasking processing, a PSO-based algorithm is proposed. Recently, various PSO variants are proposed task allocation, e.g., improved discrete PSO algorithm in Shao et al. (2021) and two slow-movement PSO schemes in Zhang et al. (2020).

Utilizing IS for computation offloading of IoT applications has also been received much attention. To achieve the load balancing among fog nodes and latency requirements of IoT delay-sensitive applications, two algorithms based on ACO and binary PSO are investigated in Hussein and Mousa (2020). A number of simulations are conducted to verify two proposed algorithms, and it is observed that the proposed ACO-based approach performs better than the round-robin and PSO algorithms in terms of average completion time and load balancing. A recent study in Sharma and Saini (2020) considers the problem of task allocation in data deduplication for industrial IoT applications such as air pollution. In particular, a four-layer architecture is considered, IoT device layer, fog layer, cloud layer, and service layer. A multi-objective WOA algorithm, including node degree, residual energy, and distance to other devices, is proposed to divide IoT devices into multiple clusters. After that, each cluster head reports hash information (used for checking data duplication) to a fog node, that is selected by another SI approach, namely fast artificial fish swarm optimization. The potentials of SI techniques for IoT offloading applications can also be found in Adhikari et al. (2020) and Huang et al. (2020). An accelerated PSO scheme is proposed in Adhikari et al. (2020) for solving the application offloading problem, and the fitness function is designed from multiple parameters such as resource utilization and total (computing and memory) cost. In order to minimize the total energy consumption for latency-sensitive applications, the work in Huang et al. (2020) studies a joint task offloading decision and computation resource allocation problem and proposes a bilevel optimization approach to get the solution. As most offloading decisions are infeasible due to the latency constraints, a prune policy is first proposed to eliminate infeasible solutions. Then, ACO and monotonic optimization are used to obtain the upper and lower values, respectively, so as to achieve the offloading decisions and to optimize resource allocation. The simulation results confirm that the bilevel method in Huang et al. (2020) can approach almost the same performance as the optimal solution, while it is superior to several baseline schemes.

4.3. Joint resource optimization
The fact is that NGN supports not only communication services as in earlier network generations, but also caching, computing, and control (Pham et al., 2020a). In this context, the optimization variables can computing resources (e.g., local central processing unit (CPU) frequency and edge computing capabilities), radio resources (e.g., transmit power, subcarrier, and time allocation), and scheduling decisions (e.g., what to cache and where to remotely execute), whereas the objective can be energy consumption, delay minimization, or both (Pham et al., 2019). The work in Hu et al. (2019) considers a joint computing, caching, and communication problem in vehicular networks. Due to complex environments and vehicle mobility, a two-time scale is proposed to solve the problem, where PSO and deep reinforcement learning are used at the large timescale and short timescale, respectively. More specifically, the actions to be optimized at the large timescale are caching placement decisions (i.e., the caching location and size) at the road side units and offloading decisions from the vehicles. In the meanwhile, the actions at the small timescale are the assignment of road side units to each vehicle and the offloading decisions. It is reasonable since a vehicle is now under the coverage of a road side unit, but it shall not be in a future time instance. To deal with the mobility and intermittency of edge nodes, the work in Mseddi et al. (2019) investigates a joint problem of container placement and task scheduling, which aims at maximizing the number of satisfied tasks subject to a number of constraints, such as the resource utilization of each fog node should be less than one and the number of requests to all fog nodes of a user should be less than its total load. Two solution approaches are proposed: a greedy approach and a metaheuristic which is designed based on the PSO algorithm. Real-world data experiments show that the proposed PSO with reparation achieves performance close to the optimum, especially in the static scenario, whereas it outperforms the Folo in terms of success probability. The application of the WOA to solve a joint task scheduling and local CPU frequencies is investigated in Peng et al. (2019). Interestingly, the WOA can achieve a shorter task completion time compared with PSO, while both achieve almost the same energy consumption. In a hierarchical edge computing system, the work in Huynh et al. (2020) utilizes PSO to optimize the computation offloading decisions and allocates computing resources by a close form solution. Compared with three baseline schemes, the PSO-based algorithm can reduce the computation overhead significantly.

SI has also been leveraged to solve the optimization problems when different technologies are combined, for example, NOMA, D2D, UAV, and blockchain. The combination of NOMA and MEC in densely HetNets with applications of PSO is considered in Seng et al. (2018). Firstly, the total utility of all the BSs is optimized by a user association mechanism. This is followed by a resource allocation problem, which aims at maximizing the network energy efficiency and is solved by PSO to attain an efficient solution at reasonable complexity. The proposed PSO-based algorithm is verified to outperform two existing algorithms: OMA and a mechanism that uses the minimum-distance as the design metric. The use of SI for NOMA-MEC systems can also be found in Pham et al. (2020), where both WOA and its binary version are used to jointly solve a mixed-integer non-linear programming problem of computation offloading and resource allocation. The work in Zhu et al. (2018) minimizes the energy consumption by jointly optimizing radio and computing resources under constraints on latency and spectrum restriction. In particular, a UAV shall partially offload the task to one among multiple terrestrial edge servers, which may cooperate with the other servers to process the received workload. PSO and simulated annealing are combined to obtain the solution for a computation resource allocation problem, which would avoid the trap of falling into local optima by the original PSO. More recently, a learning based CPSO approach is investigated in Sun et al. (2021) to solve the task priority and resource allocation in MEC-enabled UAV forest fire detection systems. From simulation results, the proposed learning CPSO approach is superior to several benchmarks (e.g., cooperative genetic programming, cooperative GA, and multi-agent PSO) in terms of the best and average response time. SI techniques have also found potentials for blockchain-based edge computing systems. More recently, to enable mobile blockchain for e-commerce services, Deng et al. (2019) investigates a joint server selection and computing resource allocation problem, which is then solved by several metaheuristic approaches, including GA, simulated annealing algorithm, ABC, and PSO.


Table 3. Summary of the state-of-the-art SI techniques for wireless caching and edge computing.

Category	Paper	Techniques	Highlights
Wireless caching	Li et al. (2019)	ACO	ACO is introduced to solve the socially-aware caching problem in D2D-enabled radio access network.
Tan et al. (2019a)	PSO	Four caching scenarios are studied in a full-duplex relying three-tier HetNet, as illustrated in Fig. 3, and PSO is used to optimize the sum throughput of all the users.
Zhang et al. (2020)	PSO	A PSO-based algorithm is proposed to minimize the total energy consumption while considering users’ QoS, network density, and dynamics of energy harvesting.
Computation offloading	Zhu et al. (2019)	PSO	A task allocation problem is formulated to achieve the balance between the completion latency and quality. PSO is adopted to obtain solutions with competitive performance.
Sharma and Saini (2020)	WOA	A multi-objective WOA approach is introduced to solve the clustering problem for industrial IoT applications.
Huang et al. (2020)	ACO	A prune policy is first proposed to remove infeasible solutions. Then, ACO and monotonic optimization are used in a bilevel framework. The ACO-based algorithm can achieve almost the same performance as the exhaustive search and significantly outperforms baseline schemes.
Joint resource optimization	Tan et al. (2019b)	PSO	A two-timescale method is investigated in vehicular networks, where PSO and deep reinforcement learning are used at the large timescale and small timescale, respectively.
Peng et al. (2019) and Pham et al. (2020c)	WOA	The WOA is introduced to solve the joint task allocation and computation resource allocation problem. The WOA-based algorithm is shown to have competitive performances compared with the traditional PSO and the optimal solution.
Deng et al. (2019)	Simulated annealing ABC, PSO	Several SI techniques are adopted to solve the joint server selection and computation resource allocation for mobile blockchain services.
4.4. Summary
The applications of SI for wireless caching and edge computing problems are reviewed in this section. More specifically, we review three main problems in edge computing systems, including wireless caching, computation offloading, and joint resource optimization. Since edge systems comprise many optimization variables along with environment dynamics and mobility, typically problems are very challenging to be solved to get the globally optimal solution. Similar to the earlier section, we observe that ACO and PSO optimizers are widely used in the literature thanks to their high performance and originality (i.e., ACO is originally developed to solve discrete problems). However, recent approaches still find their applications and advances in improving the network performance, e.g. WOA in Pham et al. (2020c) and Peng et al. (2019). The review in this section opens many opportunities to use SI techniques for optimizing edge computing, when combined with new NGN technologies such as terahertz (THz) communications and RIS. To summarize this section, representative reviewed references, used techniques, and highlights are presented in Table 3.

5. SI for network security
Security is always a key concern for any network generation. It has become a major task due to the changes and complexities in underlying network and the emergence of many technologies and services. In this section, we discuss the applications of SI in dealing with security problems in NGN.

5.1. Access control
Access control mechanisms aim to prevent malicious users and attacks from accessing resources, e.g., computing or storage resources. The use of access control approaches such as attribute-based access control is important for ensuring flexible network management against security attacks, by allowing only legitimate users and devices to use the network resource while blocking any external threats for security improvement. SI is able to provide viable solutions to achieve efficient access control for 5G networks. For example, an extended attribute-based access control method is proposed in Chang et al. (2019) to enhance the confidentiality and integrity of SDN. For improving the security of the access data flow in the SDN switch, PSO is used to obtain the optimal path of multi-level security and multi-switching nodes where SDN switches are considered as environmental attributes. The simulation results confirm high security capability achieved by PSO with a low network response delay. Another effort for access control in SDN is in Abdulqadder et al. (2018). More specifically, an enhanced PSO-based routing protocol with a cuckoo search is proposed to support SDN controllers in route selection with respect to the available links, latency, and controller load balancing. The key purpose of Abdulqadder et al. (2018) is to realize the optimal routing for improving the QoS while minimizing the malicious user access possibility with efficient threat prevention.

Moreover, SI-based algorithms can provide access control for cloud-based 5G networks. In fact, how to implement intelligent user access control in the cloud computing environments is highly important in the context of complex user patterns (e.g., cloud data storage, cloud data computing, and cloud data flow tracking). SI has emerged as a promising technique to enable smart data access analysis for security guarantees (Dadhich et al., 2014), by supporting cryptography algorithms in deducing optimum keys based on statistical probability for cryptanalysis that is necessary for network transmission monitoring. Additionally, SI is also applied to cloud scheduling tasks (e.g., data offloading) (Islam and Habiba, 2012a). In this case, an ACO-enabled algorithm is derived to solve data-intensive scheduling problems, i.e., task level scheduling and access reliability levels, with respect to overall throughput, running cost, scheduling deadline. The simulation results from using the ACO scheme with cloud datasets in virtual machines confirm a better security level compared to the traditional baselines. Further, SI-based algorithms such as PSO can also solve the multi-objective time-varying problem in cloud computing (Liu et al., 2020), by optimizing the execution time and task priority.

5.2. Data privacy
In NGN, network operators and mobile users interconnect and form business models where a large amount of information can be exchanged over the networks. The ubiquitous information sharing among data users over the mobile networks may raise many critical privacy concerns such as data leakages and user information attacks. Therefore, NGN must consider an end-to-end data protection approach to provide high degrees of user privacy where SI can provide highly efficient solutions. Indeed, SI-based methods such as PSO can build security-preserved network models for IoT networks (Rashid and Pajooh, 2019) that can be divided into a multi-layer clustering system using decentralized blockchain technologies. At each cluster, a local data privacy mechanism is designed to perform self-clustering for IoT that optimizes the network lifetime with the data integrity enhancement. PSO is also applied to solve different privacy in data clustering with a particle subswarms collaborative clustering scheme (Census et al., 2019). The aim is to group particles to enhance the collaboration between subswarms in a fashion the datasets are processed separately and only coefficient information is exchanged. This would solve the data clustering problem without compromising data privacy requirements. To realize fractal intelligent data privacy preservation in social IoT networks, PSO has been considered in Wei et al. (2018) thanks to its high optimization ability by simulating bird predation behavior. A social data privacy protection model is formulated based on the security situation prediction scheme, and a PSO algorithm is adopted to solve the formulated privacy problem, showing a significant improvement in the privacy protection accuracies over the traditional schemes, such as semisupervised learning methods and matrix factorization schemes.

In NGN, data privacy protection is an urgent problem. The work in Budhraja et al. (2017) shows the first attempt to use SI techniques in order to preserve data privacy in SDN-based 5G networks. The current SDN routing schemes often focus on data packet transfer without privacy concerns, e.g., information leakage, in the communication channels among SDN controllers and users. SI-based algorithms such as ACO can arrive to build distributed routing optimization models by taking privacy exposure and risk definition into consideration. Each controller selects some different features such as data packet types, network topology, and data routing history, which are classified by K-mean learning. Then, these classification outputs are used as the parameters of the ACO-based real-time routing scheme, aiming to find the optimal route with minimum privacy risks. The application of SI to deal with privacy issues in cloud-based networks is also considered in Madan and Goswami (2018). In cloud computing, the real-time data transmission and the complex data usage patterns make it challenging to protect data privacy against external attacks and cloud third parties. Therefore, a new dragon PSO algorithm is suggested to establish a k-anonymization criteria to derive the fitness function that represents the privacy and utility levels of cloud migration services. The experiments using an Adult database verify the efficiency of the privacy-preserved model against information loss risks (Madan and Goswami, 2018). Moreover, the work in Stévant et al. (2018) presents a data privacy-preserved PSO algorithm for cloud computing. Especially, the traditional cloud is replaced by a cloud microservice that is deployed at the mobile device instead of the remote cloud. In this regard, a quality of experience-aware model is developed to minimize the application response time with privacy awareness.

5.3. Network authentication
Network authentication mechanisms are used to authenticate the identity of an entity, e.g., data requestors, data access users, in order to detect and prevent malicious network attacks. SI can provide new intelligent network authentication solutions for mobile networks towards 5G. For any authentication modes in wireless networks, the evaluation of authentication depends on two main classes: authorized and unauthorized. SI can be used to build intelligent user authentication systems in wireless networks, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Here, SI algorithms such as PSO can perform user classification in off-line and on-line stages based on user patterns, e.g., access frequency, data usage behaviors, in order to determine whether this user is a legitimate network entity or not. Recently, some research efforts have been made to apply SI techniques to improve network authentication. For example, the study in Darabseh and Namin (2015) builds a user authentication system to capture the user patterns in minimal time including two phases: the enrollment phase for data capturing and pattern learning, and the verification phase for feature extraction and comparison with the biometric pattern. In particular, the feature selection is done by a PSO algorithm associated with support vector machine and Naïve Bayesian. To perform security protocols in mobile ad hoc networks (MANET), an ACO-based approach is proposed in Junnarkar et al. (2018) with the objective of securing communications and authenticating users in MANET in the presence of attacks while ensuring low network latency. The ACO algorithm is able to learn the optimal routing path with data reliability (e.g., authenticated data access) and QoS preservation. A joint framework using ACO and elliptic curve cryptography is considered in Saad et al. (2016) for VANET. The focus is on analyzing some primary issues in VANET, such as security improvement including data validation and authorization services, and randomness minimization of existing traffic management systems. For security provision, a mutual authentication scheme is integrated with learning using radio frequency identification to detect intelligently any false vehicular communication messages (i.e. wrong traffic messages) in dynamic vehicular settings.

In cognitive radio networks, how to enable secure and trusted communication is highly important. Some learning-based solutions such as PSO may be very useful in the authentication classification and attack verification (Balamurugan and Kumar, 2020). In this work, a mutual authentication mechanism is designed where the user identity and real identity are produced by both the transmitter and receiver for authentication validation enabled by a PSO-based access feature selection. The simulation results confirm a high user authentication level (i.e., detection accuracy) with improved system throughput and enhanced packet delivery ratio, compared to the traditional schemes. Enabled by SI that forms a closed-loop system like swarms in humans when the groups can perform better in analyzing and achieving the consensus, an SI-inspired intelligence approach is also proposed in Rauniyar et al. (2018) to deal with cognitive radio authentication. Three use cases are employed to evaluate with vehicular fog, including measurable security, privacy, and dependability of autonomous vehicles, showing a better security level and more reliable authentication in comparison with non-intelligence schemes. SI has been also adopted in Islam and Habiba (2012b) to build a self-defensive multi-layered cloud computing platform that is promising to develop self-aware 5G systems where entities such as users and service providers can work together for cooperation in network operations including authentication, based on the concept of SI.


Table 4. Summary of the state-of-the-art SI techniques for network security.

Category	Paper	Techniques	Highlights
Access control	Chang et al. (2019)	PSO	An attribute-based access control method is proposed using PSO to enhance the confidentiality and integrity of SDN-empowered 5G networks.
Abdulqadder et al. (2018)	PSO	A method using PSO algorithms is introduced for access control in SDN, aiming to realize optimal routing for improving (QoS) while minimizing the malicious user access possibility with efficient threat prevention.
Islam and Habiba (2012a)	ACO	An ACO-enabled scheduling algorithm is derived to solve data-intensive scheduling problems, i.e., access control, with respect to overall throughput, running cost, scheduling deadline.
Data privacy	Rashid and Pajooh (2019)	PSO	A PSO algorithm is built for security-preserved network models in 5G IoT networks.
Wei et al. (2018)	PSO	A PSO-based scheme is provided to realize fractal intelligent data privacy preservation in social IoT networks.
Budhraja et al. (2017)	ACO	An ACO-based framework is designed to preserve data privacy in SDN-based 5G networks.
Madan and Goswami (2018)	PSO	A new dragon PSO algorithm is suggested to establish a k-anonymization criteria to derive the fitness function that represents the privacy and utility levels of cloud migration services.
Network authentication	Saad et al. (2016)	ACO	A joint framework using ACO and elliptic curve cryptography is considered for VANET for security improvement including data validation and authorization services.
Balamurugan and Kumar (2020)	PSO	A learning-based solution such as PSO is introduced for the authentication classification and attack verification.
Rauniyar et al. (2018)	SI	An SI-inspired intelligence approach is proposed to deal with cognitive radio authentication. This scheme can provide better security levels and more reliable authentication.
Attack detection	Kalaivani et al. (2019)	ABC	An ABC-based optimization classifier is built to perform classification of the cloud data packets for intrusion identification that is potential to solve DoS attacks.
Sharma and Kaul (2018)	SI	A dolphin SI is investigated where the biological features associated with SI can be used to optimize the detection and accuracy of intrusion identification.
Xu et al. (2018b)	WOA	A WOA scheme is proposed for intrusion detection in wireless networks that can achieve better classification accuracy with using fewer feature subsets.
Prasath and Perumal (2019)	PSO	A binary PSO algorithm is designed to identify unauthorized users and detect data attacks in SDN.
5.4. Attack detection
Attack detection aims to identify and prevent any attacks and threats to wireless networks. In the context of 5G where attackers become much more sophisticated, intelligent attack detection solutions are of paramount importance for 5G security. SI has the potential to provide feasible solutions for efficient attack detection. Indeed, SI can build security decision making models to fight against malicious threats and intrusions based on security postures and intelligence information using full-text search, mathematical optimization, logical reasoning, and probability analytic. For a typical use case, the work in Kalaivani et al. (2019) tries to adopt SI for intrusion detection in cloud computing. An ABC-based optimization classifier is built to perform classification of the cloud data packets for intrusion identification that is potential to solve security issues such as denial-of-service (DoS) attack, replay attack, and flooding attacks in cloud computing. For intrusion detection systems (IDS) in VANET, dolphin SI has been investigated in Sharma and Kaul (2018) where the biological features associated with SI can be used to optimize the detection and accuracy of IDS. Also, the dolphin swarm behaviors such as hunting and spraying have demonstrated the feasibility for detection and prevention of malicious nodes, e.g., malicious vehicles, and data attacks from the VANET. The SI-enhanced IDS is also considered in Xu et al. (2018b) for wireless networks. The simulation from KDD CUP 99 dataset shows the proposed WOA scheme in Xu et al. (2018b) can achieve better intrusion detection accuracy, compared to its counterparts such as the PSO algorithm.

SI has been applied to attack detection tasks in SDN-based 5G networks. For instance, a binary PSO algorithm is designed in Prasath and Perumal (2019) to identify unauthorized users and detect data attacks in SDN. First, a security rule is defined by using an ML-based random forest algorithm and prediction results obtained from the training procedure with the KDDTest21FS dataset. Then, PSO is applied to feature selection that is necessary for user classification. The proposed scheme not only achieves high attack identification accuracy but also brings a lower detection sensitivity. In Ammal and VinodChandra (2018), a bio-inspired algorithm is developed for attack detection in SDN controllers which can perform a data flow management function for user access monitoring. To prevent distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack detection in SDN, Dayal and Srivastava (2018) investigates an optimized PSO learning approach. In this case, how to differentiate the DDoS attack traffic from the genuine traffic is a challenge. Motivated by this, a PSO-based classification model is derived to classify the network traffic patterns. The real-time implementation of the proposed system model indicates the practicality of the proposed SI algorithm for handling the attacks and minimizing the data loss risk for legitimate users.

5.5. Summary
This section reviews the applications of SI for problems related to network security in NGN. The most popular SI technique used in network security is PSO that can provide flexible and intelligent solutions for security in NGN platforms such as cloud, MEC, SDN, and NFV. Reviewing the available literature, we discuss the roles of SI in four key security services, including access control, data privacy, network authentication, and attack detection. In fact, SI is able to improve the security of the access data flow in NGN, e.g., SDN systems, where PSO-based algorithms are useful to provide multi-level access control mechanisms, aiming at minimizing the malicious user access possibility with efficient threat prevention (Chang et al., 2019, Abdulqadder et al., 2018). Enabled by the high optimization ability by simulating bird predation behavior, SI-based methods such as PSO can build security-preserved network models for IoT to promote universal data exchange without compromising data privacy requirements (Census et al., 2019). Recently, some SI algorithms are also considered for SDN and cloud computing-based 5G networks (Stévant et al., 2018) by forming service migration functions with privacy awareness. Other SI techniques such as ACO (Junnarkar et al., 2018) also facilitate the network authentication with bio-inspired algorithms embedded at the network controllers for securing communications and authenticating users with QoS preservation. Moreover, the potential of SI is also reflected in the attack detection tasks thanks to its learning and classification capability (Sharma and Kaul, 2018). The discussion in this section highlights the advantages of SI techniques in solving security issues in NGN and opens new opportunities for emerging SI-inspired security applications. The reviewed literature, used techniques, and highlights are summarized in Table 4.

6. SI for miscellaneous issues
In this section, we survey the use of SI in miscellaneous yet important applications in 5G networks.

6.1. UAV placement and path planning
In this section, we discuss the benefits of SI approaches in the placement and path planning design of UAV in NGN.

6.1.1. UAV placement
By relying on the underlying concept of self-organized behavior in nature, SI algorithms have proved their great potential in improving UAV-related communication designs, such as UAV placement. The work in Shakhatreh et al. (2017) presents a three-dimensional (3D) UAV placement framework for wireless coverage of the indoor environments in high-rise buildings under disaster situations, i.e., earthquakes. To optimize the transmit energy consumed to cover the building, a PSO-based algorithm is designed that can find exactly the location of UAV under the random distributions of users. The 3D UAV placement for indoor users in small coverage areas is also considered in Sawalmeh et al. (2018) whose model can be used in wireless convergence for massively crowded events. Here, the UAV altitude placement is formulated with the objective of minimizing the transmission power and achieving the optimal altitude for both single UAV and multiple UAVs cases. Another UAV placement solution for massively crowded events is studied in Sawalmeh et al. (2017). UAVs can be used to provide wireless coverage for indoor and outdoor users by using the ground BSs. To specify the optimal 3D UAV placement, both Air-to-Ground and Outdoor-to-Indoor path loss models are employed to optimize the data rates of indoor and outdoor users under a UAV transmit power budget. Meanwhile, the research in Perabathini et al. (2019) focuses on the 3D UAV placement problem with QoS awareness in ad hoc wireless networks. The number of aerial BSs and transmit power of each station are jointly formulated and then solved by a PSO optimization algorithm in an iterative manner. The simulation results show a significant improvement of performance gain of the joint scheme that can provide an energy-efficient solution for 3D UAV placement of BSs in an ad hoc network.

6.1.2. UAV path planning
A bio-inspired optimization learning environment can be built to simulate the UAV path-planning models (Duan et al., 2015), as shown in Fig. 5. Here, SI approaches such as ACO, PSO, and ABC are exploited to perform a student learning process for supporting the UAV path planner located at the ground control station. In this regard, by combining the control signals generated by SI algorithms and measurement and sensing parameters obtained from sensors, the UAV path planner can make an intelligent UAV path planning with optimal routing for transmit power minimization. Based on the statistical analytic results, SI-inspired algorithms show superior advantages in terms of strong robustness in comparison with directed-search approaches with simplicity of implementation and strong adaptability in different UAV path planning scenarios. An improved ACO-based UAV path planning architecture is proposed in Cekmez et al. (2016) with obstacles taken into account in a controlled area with several radars. To build a feasible path for UAVs, a traveling salesman problem is formulated via a tour construction of an ant that mimics the salesman routing in cities. To this end, a multi-colony ACO algorithm is built to solve the formulated path planning problem, showing a better performance than the classical ACO scheme. Moreover, the path planning issue for UAV swarms is also solved in Wang et al. (2019) where each UAV is regarded as an intelligent agent which performs searching its targets by updating the position and velocity in reconnaissance contexts. A distributed PSO model is taken to generate the optimal paths for UAVs for fast convergence and minimal latency for target detection. The work in Wai and Prasetia (2019) also employs a set-based PSO algorithm with adaptive weights to implement an optimal path planning scheme for a UAV surveillance system, aiming to minimize the energy consumption and improve the disturbance rejection response of UAVs.

6.2. Clustering and routing in IoT networks
The clustering and routing problems have become mandatory for a variety of wireless IoT networks, for example, mobile/flying ad hoc networks, WSNs, and complex communication networks. SI has the potential to provide flexible and intelligent clustering and routing solutions for IoT networks.

6.2.1. Clustering in IoT networks
Recently, some research efforts have been devoted to using SI techniques to solve clustering issues in wireless IoT networks. For example, the work in Osamy et al. (2020) suggests an SI-based clustering framework for wireless IoT sensor networks. The focus is on the energy efficiency improvement and energy usage balance through a fitness function that is optimized by a chicken swarm optimization algorithm. Meanwhile, a hierarchical clustering approach is proposed to implement the data clustering of the sanitized dataset in a fashion the confidential IoT data is kept while allowing to discover useful information (Lin et al., 2019). In this regard, a multi-objective PSO algorithm is adopted as a sensitization method to hide confidential information. Furthermore, to acquire a better positioning accuracy of the clustering tasks in location identification within MIMO sensor networks, a PSO algorithm is derived in Mukherjee et al. (2020) to optimize the cluster head in terms of reduction of calculation complexity and clustering decision convergence improvement. The authors in Nii et al. (2019) present a mobile sensing cluster using SI to create multiple swarms in mobile devices. This solution is promising to solve the turnaround searching latency issue caused by the single swarm configuration and creates new ways for dynamic multiple swarming for multiple sensing events in a given time.

6.2.2. Routing in IoT networks
The work in Shreyas et al. (2020) implements an optimized routing model for the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) where the main objective is laid towards communication performances in terms of packet delivery ratio and energy constraints. In particular, an ABC algorithm is employed to perform the selection of optimal routing between the source and destination IoMT nodes in order to improve both packet delivery ratio and energy usage. In terms of routing in vehicular networks, the authors in Bui and Jung (2019) apply an ACO scheme to enable a distributed intelligent traffic system for connected vehicles. Each vehicle can act as an intelligent agent to make routing decisions for minimizing waiting time in automated driving tasks. Besides, in wireless IoT sensor networks, how to perform flexible routing for traffic congestion control is highly important to enhance the QoS provisions regarding network lifetime and data packet drop ratio. The PSO-ML algorithm can be employed in these scenarios to optimize a fitness function by implementing a local searching using swarm particles and node discovery (Manshahia, 2018). The simulation results confirm a better routing performance than that in the ACO and ABC approaches. PSO is also applied in Al-Janabi and Al-Raweshidy (2018) for energy-efficient routing in IoT networks to facilitate the network scheduling to find the best routing for IoT nodes.

Moreover, SI techniques such as PSO have been proven their potential in building intelligent routing solutions in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). For example, a recent work in Bao et al. (2020) considers a clustering vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) routing algorithm based on PSO to improve the V2V efficiency. This is enabled by the joint design of cluster creation, route particle coding, and routing in cluster or among vehicular clusters. The information of vehicles including position and velocity is collected to construct stable cluster and compute the fitness of the V2V links using a PSO algorithm. Another study in Husain et al. (2020) also suggests a PSO-based approach for optimizing geocast routing in VANETs. Due to its adaptability to the varying environment via observations and optimization, PSO is able to address diverse issues related to high mobility and the lack of scalability in dynamic VANETs. SI is also applied to facilitate routing in mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs). For example, the authors in Jamali et al. (2013) use PSO to build an energy-efficient routing protocol for MANETs, by taking both routing length and energy consumption into account. A routing issue as an optimization problem is formulated that is then solved by PSO to choose a route which maximizes a weighted function of the route length and the route energy level. PSO is also utilized in Chaudhry et al. (2018) to achieve a network lifetime maximization for geographical routing in MANETs. In this case, the network delay and energy consumption are minimized to increase the lifetime of the network. In addition, SI techniques are also envisioned to realize the optimal routing of satellite networks. Indeed, SI methods such as PSO can be employed for satellite position prediction (Durand and Abrão, 2017), which helps build intelligent systems to achieve several space missions such as attitude control, telemetry, and communication. Further, a power allocation scheme is built in Durand and Abrão (2017) by using PSO that can solve the problem of power usage minimization in the multiple narrow spotbeams for satellite networks, aiming to provide the minimum signal-to-noise plus interference ratio required by Earth station users to establish reliable satellite-ground communications.

6.3. Smart city applications
SI techniques have been also applied to enable smart city applications. The work in Sato and Fukuyama (2017) presents a first attempt to use PSO optimization algorithms for a smart city in the context of smart communities. Here, both the power supply and power consumption models are taken into account where energy costs, actual electric power load at high load hours, and the amount of carbon dioxide emission are jointly optimized. The model is investigated at Toyama city, Japan, showing a performance enhancement in terms of lower energy consumption and emission, compared to other schemes like differential evolution. Another work pays attention to using SI for privacy guarantee in smart power systems in smart cities (Alamaniotis et al., 2016). In practice, the energy usage patterns of customers can be disclosed in the smart grid operations, i.e., energy consumption calculation process. Then, PSO can arrive as a solution to create group consumption patterns that can hide individual consumer characteristics for privacy preservation.

SI has been used to support other smart city services such as vehicular networks. As an example, the work in Naseer and Jaber (2019) provides an SI-enabled solution for smart mobility and autonomous driving in smart cities with edge, fog, and cloud computing. Each vehicle can act as an intelligent agent in the SI algorithm that can estimate the traffic conditions and vehicle diversity for driving control and traffic routing. SI has been adopted in Duan (2018) to predict the traffic flow in smart cities. A PSO algorithm is essential to select the learning parameters in the support vector machine-based prediction model. In addition, to support the vehicular clustering process, a GWO technique is proposed in Fahad et al. (2017) where the number of vehicular clusters is optimized with respect to grid size, load balance factor, vehicle speed, and movement range. Since the algorithm is inhered from the social nature of gray wolves, the proposed scheme is able to explore better the searching space for finding the more concise optimal solution that is promising to achieve high vehicular routing performances in terms of reduced traffic delay and better network resource usage.

6.4. Energy management in smart gird
In addition to the above use case domains, SI has been also useful in energy management for smart grid. For instance, to facilitate cost-efficient power management in multi-source renewable energy microgrids, a PSO algorithm is used in Keles et al. (2017). The key objective is to minimize the daily power cost of renewable microgrids, by finding the maximal energy mixing rate with PSO under energy balance and anti-islanding conditions. The implementation using PSO confirms a better energy efficiency along with the flexible adjustment of the mixing energy rate. The use of SI for energy management is also investigated in Rehman et al. (2016). Here, a binary PSO algorithm is developed to implement the home energy management scheduling by following the energy consumption patterns of customers in a fashion the total power cost is minimized while satisfying user comfort. A similar SI-based energy management model is studied in Wang et al. (2017) for energy storage systems in microgrids. The main goal is focused on improving the operational efficiency that can be achieved by using PSO with respect to power constraints and energy flow constraints.

Recently, an SI-based framework is designed to solve the energy resource management problem in smart grids, by minimizing the total operational cost while maximizing the power system income (Dabhi and Pandya, 2020). As shown in Fig. 6, the energy aggregator enabled by SI optimization can perform efficient energy scheduling with respect to the uncertainty of energy sources such as solar energy, vehicles to grid, and electricity markets, in order to meet the various load demands. A testbed is also implemented using PSO that proves its efficiency in implementing the flexible energy consumption management for profit maximization with multiple energy demands. GWO is applied to enable efficient energy management in Moazzami et al. (2018). In this research, the planning and management of renewable energy sources with energy storage units are formulated that can be simulated by a GWO-based algorithm for reducing voltage deviation and pollution caused by grid operations. The operational planning for energy management is also studied in Sato and Fukuyama (2019) where a joint scheme of PSO and reinforcement learning is designed to optimize the energy consumption cost of small buildings without facility considerations.


Table 5. Summary of the state-of-the-art SI techniques for other applications in 5G networks.

Category	Paper	Techniques	Highlights
UAV placement and path planning	Duan et al. (2015)	ACO, PSO	A bio-inspired optimization learning environment is built to simulate the UAV path-planning models where ACO and PSO are exploited to perform a student learning process for searching UAV paths.
Perabathini et al. (2019)	PSO	A PSO-based algorithm is used to solve the QoS-aware 3D UAV placement problem in ad hoc networks.
Cekmez et al. (2016)	ACO	An improved ACO-based UAV path planning architecture is proposed with obstacle taken into account in a controlled area with several radars.
Wang et al. (2019)	PSO	A distributed PSO model is taken to generate the optimal paths for UAVs for fast convergence and minimal latency for target detection in reconnaissance contexts.
Clustering and routing in wireless IoT networks	Osamy et al. (2020)	SI	An SI-based chicken swarm optimization framework is proposed for clustering in wireless IoT sensor networks to bring the energy efficiency improvement and energy usage balance.
Lin et al. (2019)	PSO	A multi-objective PSO algorithm is adopted to implement the data clustering of the sanitized IoT dataset as a sensitization method to hide the confidential information.
Mukherjee et al. (2020)	PSO	A PSO algorithm is derived in to optimize the cluster head in terms of reduction of calculation complexity and clustering decision convergence improvement.
Bui and Jung (2019)	ACO	An ACO scheme is proposed to enable a distributed intelligent traffic routing system for connected vehicles.
Al-Janabi and Al-Raweshidy (2018)	PSO	PSO algorithms are proposed to perform bio inspired SI for cluster head selection with energy awareness in IoT networks.
Bao et al. (2020)	PSO	A routing algorithm based on PSO is considered to improve the V2V efficiency with cluster creation and route particle coding.
Jamali et al. (2013)	PSO	A PSO-based scheme is proposed to build an energy-efficient routing protocol for MANETs, by taking both routing length and energy consumption into account.
Smart city applications	Sato and Fukuyama (2017)	PSO	A project is proposed using PSO optimization algorithms for a smart city in the context of smart communities.
Alamaniotis et al. (2016)	PSO	A PSO scheme is considered for privacy guarantee in smart power systems in smart cities.
Duan (2018)	PSO	A PSO algorithm is associated with support vector machine for vehicular traffic prediction in smart cities.
Fahad et al. (2017)	GWO	A GWO technique is proposed to optimize the number of vehicular cluster for supporting vehicular clustering process.
Energy management in smart grid	Keles et al. (2017)	PSO	A PSO algorithm is designed to facilitate the cost-efficient power management in multi-source renewable energy microgrids.
Rehman et al. (2016)	PSO	A binary PSO algorithm is developed to implement the home energy management scheduling in a fashion the total power cost is minimized while satisfying user comfort.
Dabhi and Pandya (2020)	PSO	A PSO-based framework is designed to solve the energy resource management problem in smart grids, by minimizing the total operational cost of energy aggregators while optimizing the power system income.
Moazzami et al. (2018)	GWO	A GWO-based algorithm is developed for the planning and management of renewable energy sources with energy storage units for reducing voltage deviation and pollution caused by grid operations.
6.5. Summary
This section reviews the roles of SI in many other applications in NGN, including UAV placement and path planning, clustering and routing in IoT networks, smart city applications, and energy management in smart grid. Among SI algorithms, PSO has emerged as a prominent technique in different use case scenarios. SI algorithms have proved their great potential in improving UAV-related communication designs, such as UAV placement and path planning design (Shakhatreh et al., 2017, Duan et al., 2015, Cekmez et al., 2016). As an example, PSO can provide intelligent 3D UAV placement solutions for indoor users in small coverage areas that are promising for wireless convergence in massively crowded events. SI has also many applications, ranging from providing IoT sensor network clustering for energy efficiency improvement and energy usage balance (Osamy et al., 2020) to enabling optimized routing models for IoT ecosystems such as vehicular networks (Bui and Jung, 2019). Recently, SI has been used in smart city and smart grid domains, where bio-inspired algorithms such as PSO, ACO help realize intelligent services such as vehicular traffic prediction (Naseer and Jaber, 2019) and cost-efficient power management (Keles et al., 2017). The interesting findings from the use of SI techniques in these applications are expected to shed new light on future research for emerging SI-inspired 5G services. To summary this section, the reviewed literature, used techniques, and highlights are summarized in Table 5.

7. Research challenges and future directions
In this section, we discuss some key research challenges and highlight possible directions on the use of SI in NGN.

7.1. Research challenges
7.1.1. General challenges using SI methods
In the preceding sections, the reason for the high applicability of SI methods is discussed. However, this does not mean that they are off-the-shelf optimizers, that is, we need to formulate the problem in a way that is suitable for the algorithm. The majority of SI methods require the designer to formulate the problem in a way to have all the parameters in a vector. This vector is used in the algorithm to optimize an objective function. Therefore, we need to provide an objective function to evaluate each vector combination that represents a potential solution for the problem. For instance, SI methods can be used as ML algorithms. In any learning algorithm, some parameters should be optimized to reduce the error rate. In this context, SI techniques can be employed to optimize the learning parameters. All the controlling parameters of the ML algorithm should be represented as a vector first (Mirjalili, 2015). In neural networks, for instance, the connection weights and biases can be used in a vector and the objective function is the error rate. Another challenge when solving real-world problems is the existence of multiple objectives. The objectives are typically in-conflict as well, so we have to find the best trade-offs between them. Therefore, there are no single solutions for problems with multiple objectives. A set called Pareto optimal solution is the answer for multi-objective problems (Mao-Guo et al., 2009).

7.1.2. Reduction in size of search space
Since many optimization problems in NGN are defined over a large parameter search space, SI algorithms may have difficulties in finding high-quality solutions (close to global optima). Moreover, this issue becomes more challenging when the optimization problem involves both binary and continuous variables. One possible solution is to design prune policies to eliminate infeasible solutions and accelerate the optimization process (Huang et al., 2020). Another solution is to initialize high-quality solutions so that SI algorithms do not fall into the trap of local points.

7.1.3. Ability to find the globally optimum
It is important to note that SI algorithms typically solve an optimization problem directly regardless of its convexity and optimality, i.e., they are problem-independent. After reviewing many references, we observe a common mistake that the authors usually state that their SI-based algorithms would obtain the globally optimal solutions. For instance, it is written in Jiang et al. (2020) that the proposed hybrid algorithm can keep “the advantages of the PSO in finding globally optimal solutions”; however, it seems to be not correct. The fact that any SI approach maintains a balance between exploration and exploitation, and almost all SI algorithms are suitable for global optimization, but there is no guarantee for such optimality (Yang, 2014). Therefore, to evaluate the global optimality of an SI-inspired algorithm, one should conduct comparisons with other global optimization techniques like branch-and-bound and exhaustive search. From the learning perspective, improving the balance between exploration and exploitation would increase the possibility of achieving the global solution. For example, the work in Nguyen et al. (2021b) includes the properties of the binary search space and develops an adaptive strategy in designing a binary PSO algorithm.

There are other difficulties when solving real-world problems using SI methods, including but not limited to, expensive objective function, discrete variables, binary variables, highly constrained problems, noisy objective functions, etc. There are different techniques to handle each of these areas. Covering all these challenges is outside the scope of this work. In sum, although SI has great potential for the design and optimization of NGN, many issues should be taken into consideration when SI-inspired algorithms are investigated for specific applications.

7.2. Future directions
7.2.1. SI for solving large-scale optimization problems
As the network will be very complex and heterogeneous, it is really difficult to optimize such systems by SI techniques with reasonable performance and fast convergence. Utilizing SI techniques for the design and optimization of large-scale IoT systems is challenging. A promising solution is dividing the entire network into smaller regions and region heads (e.g., edge server and macro BS) are responsible for coordination. Another solution is integration with SDN and NFV, which would gather and maintain global network state and information. The SI community has also developed various SI techniques for large-scale optimization. An example can be found in Lan et al. (2020) with a two-phase optimizer, which is motivated by the fact in real life that a smart leader can guide the team to have better achievements. These scalable techniques would improve the large-scale system performance in a comparison with conventional approaches.

7.2.2. Hybrid algorithms for performance improvement
From the available literature, we observe that hybrid algorithms typically outperform the original algorithms if they are designed properly. For instance, Mandloi and Bhatia (2016) shows that the hybrid algorithm has better convergence speed and lower computational complexity than the original PSO and ACO methods. We note that hybrid methods can be designed in many ways, e.g., combining two or more basic SI techniques, adding chaotic operations, and controlling the balance between exploration and exploitation. Recently, many research works also consider integrating SI with DL techniques to accelerate and improve the solution. An example can be found in Nguyen and Lee (2020), where the initial solution for a metaheuristic is approximated by a deep neural network. Simulations demonstrate that the proposed approach with DL can obtain almost the same performance as the original method while reducing the computational complexity up to 85%. In sum, we expect that hybrid approaches, if designed properly, can improve the system performance significantly.

7.2.3. SI for federated learning with applications to communication systems
While SI algorithms are typically deployed in a centralized fashion, many emerging applications and services should be implemented distributedly. Moreover, security and data privacy are paramount aspects. In such a case, federated learning (Lim et al., 2020) is a promising concept as the training data does not need to be transmitted to and stored at the central server, that is, the model training can be completed while the training data is kept locally at users. Thanks to its particularities, federated learning has been recently found in many applications, especially ones at the edge networks like autonomous driving and medical services (Nguyen et al., 2021c). However, there are many challenges in deploying federated learning solutions such as resource allocation, communication security, and convergence guarantee for non-convex loss functions. To overcome these challenges, SI can be applied to find efficient solutions with competitive performance and convergence guarantee of FL, and a new concept, namely swarm federated learning, can be developed.

7.2.4. SI for 6G networks
Studies on 6G have been already initialized by the research communities. Several technologies have been proposed as key enablers of 6G such as THz communications, spatial modulation, RIS, cell-free networks, 3D networking, blockchain, distributed AI (Dang et al., 2020, de Alwis et al., 2021). Moreover, many new use cases will be available, which shall include massive uRLLC and human-centric services. It is expected that AI will be the central theme for the design and optimization of 6G systems. As a branch of AI, SI shall find many applications in 6G. For example, for a very complex problem with many constraints and optimization variables, SI can be used as a tool to generate the initial dataset, which is then used by other DL techniques to train and improve the system. The combination of SI with DL and data analytics seems like an effective way to optimize 6G wireless systems.

8. Conclusion
This survey has provided the fundamentals of SI and reviewed many potential applications of SI techniques to NGN. Firstly, we have presented an overview of SI and several well-known SI optimizers. Secondly, we have provided a state-of-the-art review on the applications of SI for emerging issues in NGN, including spectrum management and resource allocation, wireless caching and edge computing, network security, UAV placement and path planning, clustering and routing in IoT systems, smart city, and energy management in smart grid. We have discussed challenges for the use of SI techniques for NGN such as many general challenges, reduction in size of the search space, and ability to find the globally optimal solution. Such challenges are also open research questions for future works. Finally, we have presented promising research directions that can be investigated to efficiently solve technical problems in future wireless systems, including SI for large-scale networks, hybrid SI algorithms, swarm federated learning. We hope that this survey will serve as a starting reference for the applications of SI to NGN, and drive great ideas in the future.