Previous studies have reported the importance of metacognition on learning performance. However, little effort has been made to develop group metacognitive scaffolding (GMS) in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environments. The present study sought to extend current understandings of scaffolding in CSCL, by examining the effects of GMS on group metacognitive behavior, group performance, and cognitive load in CSCL environments. In total, 111 college students participated in the study. Participants were divided into small groups and assigned to experimental and control conditions. Students in the experimental group received GMS during an online collaborative learning process, while those in the control group performed online collaborative learning without GMS. The results indicated that GMS had significant impacts on group metacognitive behavioral transition and group performance. Moreover, GMS did not increase students' cognitive load. The results of this study and their implications for teachers and developers are discussed.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Metacognitive scaffolding

Computer-supported collaborative learning

Metacognitive behavior

Group performance

Cognitive load

1. Introduction
Research on computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) focuses on how people learn together with the aid of computers (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). CSCL is reported to be an effective approach for helping learners reflect on their own thoughts and develop social experiences by interacting with peers (Fu & Hwang, 2018). Most previous research in the field of CSCL has explored knowledge building, support for argumentation, discourse analysis, and the use of design-based research or quasi-experimental studies to examine technologies and pedagogies in different subject domains (Stahl, 2015). Researchers have proposed that the ultimate goal of collaborative learning is to advance the knowledge of individuals and collectives through interactions with peers (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014).

However, Dillenbourg and Fischer (2007) proposed that collaborative learning does not often occur spontaneously. Similarly, Soller (2001) reported that simply dividing students into different groups does not necessarily produce productive social interactions. Previous studies indicated that learners need the support of scaffolding during collaborative learning (Yoon, Anderson, Park, Elinich, & Lin, 2018), since scaffolding can provide just-in-time support to engage students in acquiring skills during problem solving (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). Scaffolding appears in different forms, including tools, strategies, guidelines, questions, prompts, and feedback (Simons & Klein, 2007). Furthermore, it has been reported that scaffolding has significant impacts on students' learning performance (Belland, Walker, Kim, & Lefler, 2017; Hsu, Chiu, Lin, & Wang, 2015) and can be beneficial for building collaborative knowledge during collaborative learning (Lin & Reigeluth, 2016). Hill and Hannafin (2001) differentiated four kinds of scaffolding, including conceptual scaffolding, metacognitive scaffolding, procedural scaffolding, and strategic scaffolding. Conceptual scaffolding helps learners to identify and understand concepts (Hogan & Pressley, 1997). Metacognitive scaffolding helps learners to assess what they know, and to reflect on their own learning (Hill & Hannafin, 2001). Procedural scaffolding helps learners identify how to use resources and strategic scaffolding provides alternative ways to perform tasks (Hill & Hannafin, 2001).

While most previous studies have focused on providing conceptual scaffolding during collaborative learning (Rummel, Mullins, & Spada, 2012; Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, & Fischer, 2017), only a small number of studies have implemented metacognitive scaffolding at the individual level in a collaborative learning context (Kwon, Hong, & Laffey, 2013). One study reported that metacognitive scaffolding promoted positive interdependence, productive interactions, and group productivity in online collaborative learning (Kwon et al., 2013). However, little attention has been paid to methods for providing metacognitive scaffolding at the group level in online collaborative learning environments. Most online collaborative learning environments have included online discussion forums (Koh, Herring, & Hew, 2010), tools for constructing concept maps (Sangin, Molinari, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2011), and tools for sharing knowledge (Stahl, 2006), whereas few studies have developed metacognitive scaffolding at the group level in online collaborative learning environments. To the best of our knowledge, the effects of group metacognitive scaffolding (GMS) on metacognitive behaviors, group performance, and cognitive load have not been previously examined. In the current study, we sought to fill these research gaps by developing a GMS approach and validating its effectiveness in facilitating online collaborative learning.

2. Literature review
2.1. CSCL scaffolding
In the past 20 years, CSCL has been adopted in various learning domains, including social science (Law, Chung, Leung, & Wong, 2015; Wichmann & Rummel, 2013), natural science (Sung & Hwang, 2013), and engineering science (Wang & Hwang, 2017). Previous studies have revealed that CSCL is an effective method for helping students solve problems (Retnowati, Ayres, & Sweller, 2017), improving learners' critical thinking skills (Loes & Pascarella, 2017), and stimulating learners' intrinsic and extrinsic motivations (Serrano-Cámara, Paredes-Velasco, Alcover, & Velazquez-Iturbide, 2014). These effects have mainly originated from pooled knowledge, observational learning, explanation, error-correction, and reduced memory load during collaborative learning (Nokes-Malach, Richey, & Gadgil, 2015).

However, simply situating students in discussion forums or online collaborative learning environments does not lead to high levels of social interaction (Brandon & Hollingshead, 1999; Resta & Laferrière, 2007), and collaboration is unlikely to emerge without scaffolding (Winne, Hadwin, & Perry, 2013). Previous studies revealed that it is necessary to develop technology-based scaffolding in CSCL environments to engage learners in collaborative learning processes (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016). Researchers have developed various types of scaffolding to support learners during collaborative learning processes. For example, Sung and Hwang (2013) developed knowledge organizing tools as scaffolding methods to guide learners to interact with each other during collaborative learning. Ak (2016) adopted technology-based scaffolding to support learners' knowledge construction in asynchronous discussion. In addition, scripts as a form of socio-cognitive scaffolding were found to exert a small effect on domain-specific knowledge and a large effect on collaboration skills (Vogel et al., 2017). Overall, previous studies appear to have largely focused on the applications of conceptual scaffolding at the individual level in the field of CSCL.

2.2. Metacognition and metacognitive scaffolding
Metacognition is conceptualized as knowledge about the regulation of cognitive activities in learning processes (Flavell, 1979), and includes metacognitive knowledge and metacognitive skills (Veenman, Van Hout-Wolters, & Afflerbach, 2006). Metacognitive knowledge is defined as knowledge related to people and cognitive entities, as well as cognitive tasks, goals, actions, and experiences (Flavell, 1979). Metacognitive skills are concerned with strategy use, including setting goals, making plans, monitoring, controlling, and regulating learning (Pifarre & Cobos, 2010).

Metacognition has typically been studied at the individual level, neglecting group metacognition (Biasutti & Frate, 2018; Zion, Adler, & Mevarech, 2015). However, group metacognition is an essential element that underpins successful collaborative learning (Rapchak, 2018). Group metacognition refers to the cognition of group members' cognitions (Schoor & Bannert, 2012). Group metacognition is conceptualized as the ability to reflect on groups' cognitive skills as well as the ability to plan, monitor, and evaluate the activities of groups during collaborative learning (Biasutti & Frate, 2018).

Group metacognition in collaborative learning is underpinned by social constructivism theory, which emphasizes the importance of social interactions among learners (Vygotsky, 1978). Vygotsky (1978) proposed that every function in learners' cultural development appears twice: first, on the social level, and then, on the individual level. Collaborative learning is characterized as a combination of interactivity, synchronicity, and negotiability (Dillenbourg, 1999). Intensive social interactions are considered to comprise the nature of collaborative learning (Yang, Chen, & Shao, 2004). However, productive social interactions do not often occur naturally and need to be triggered by scaffolding (Dillenbourg & Fischer, 2007).

Scaffolding was initially proposed based on the zone of proximal development postulated by Vygotsky (Wood et al., 1976). Metacognitive scaffolding aims to provide guidance about how to think through domain general support (Hannafin, Land, & Oliver, 1999). Theoretically, group metacognitive scaffolding is underpinned by Vygotsky's scaffolding model and social constructivism theory. Group metacognitive scaffolding aims to help group members jointly plan, monitor, reflect and evaluate groups' cognition and collaborative learning activities.

In the context of CSCL, it was found that metacognitive scaffolding can drive social interactions among group members (Molenaar, Sleegers, & van Boxtel, 2014). Metacognitive scaffolding has been reported to enhance positive interdependence and group productivity (Kwon et al., 2013). Metacognitive scaffolding can also function as an instructional design method to facilitate social interactions during CSCL (Molenaar et al., 2014). Furthermore, metacognitive scaffolding at the group level can support synergy and synchronicity during CSCL (Siegel, 2012). During collaborative learning, learners need to plan, monitor, coordinate, and evaluate peers' and their own learning activities (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016) to achieve shared understanding of subject matters. Metacognitive scaffolding at the group level can also stimulate group members to plan, monitor, negotiate, and evaluate group cognition, thus promoting collective knowledge advancement in CSCL.

However, previous studies have mainly investigated metacognitive scaffolding at the individual level. Furthermore, it has been reported that planning, monitoring, and evaluating are the most important metacognitive activities during learning (Biasutti & Frate, 2018; De Backer, Van Keer, & Valcke, 2012; Khosa & Volet, 2014; Zion et al., 2015). Therefore, the current study aimed to develop group metacognitive scaffolding (GMS) in CSCL context to activate group metacognition. GMS refers to metacognitive scaffolding at a group level rather than an individual level, including planning scaffolding, monitoring scaffolding, as well as evaluating and reflecting scaffolding. The present study sought to examine the effects of GMS on group metacognitive behaviors, group performance, and cognitive load during CSCL. The following research questions were addressed to examine the effects of GMS:

1.
Do students using GMS show better learning performance than those learning with conventional collaborative learning?

2.
Do students using GMS demonstrate better metacognitive behavior patterns than those learning with conventional collaborative learning?

3.
Do students using GMS experience less cognitive load than those learning with conventional collaborative learning?

3. Methods
3.1. Participants
Participants were recruited via posters at a public research university in Beijing, China. In total, 111 students volunteered to participate in the study (seven male and 104 female participants; average age: 21 years). The substantial imbalance between males and females in our sample was in accord with the university's broader student population. The majority of students at the university were female (approximately 80%), similar to our sample. The sample included students majoring in physics, educational science, psychology, politics, management science, economics, and educational technology. Students worked in groups of three students, resulting in a total of 37 three-student groups. Eighteen of these groups were in the control condition, with 19 in the experimental condition. Each group contained three members studying different subjects, who had not engaged in collaborative learning together before this experiment.

3.2. Group metacognitive scaffolding in online collaborative learning environment
To facilitate groups' metacognitive activities, a GMS method was developed and embedded in an online collaborative learning environment. GMS provided support for three phases: planning, monitoring, and evaluation and reflection. The whole collaborative learning process was as follows:

(1)
Group members evaluated the tasks in terms of value, difficulty, and available resources.

(2)
Group members set goals and made plans to complete the task. All group members were required to engage in online discussion to reach a consensus about the goals and plans of the group. After decisions were made, the group leader input those decisions into the scaffolding box.

(3)
Group members began to complete the task together. They were able to share information and engage in discussion to solve problems. Some questions were embedded as scaffolding to facilitate group discussion. Group members selected the knowledge they had acquired, which was demonstrated in the latest progress module. Group members were also able to check the latest progress during collaboration. In addition, certain prompts were provided when participants had problems.

(4)
After they completed the task, the group products were uploaded and submitted by one of the group members.

(5)
Finally, group members conducted self-testing to evaluate whether they had achieved the expected outcomes. If they did not achieve the expected goal, a prompt appeared to remind them to revise their plans or strategies. After they achieved the expected goal, the whole group was required to reflect on the collaborative learning process and outcomes via discussion with group members. When they reached agreement, the group leader input those decisions into the evaluation and reflection scaffolding box.

Hannafin et al. (1999) reported that students' needs cannot be determined in advance. Therefore, GMS was provided only when learners needed help. All scaffolding appeared only if certain conditions were satisfied. For example, prompts appeared only when learners sent negative emoticons. In addition, scaffolding could be triggered by clicking the corresponding buttons when learners needed help or guidelines. Table 1 demonstrates the design rationale of GMS in detail.


Table 1. The design rationale of the group metacognitive scaffolding system.

Different types of scaffolding	Conditions	Forms	Content
Planning scaffolding	When group members do not know how to set goals	Hints	1. When your group sets the goal, please consider the requirements of collaborative learning task.
2. Please set a specific goal rather than a general goal. You can discuss this with your group members when you set the group goal.
3. After your group set the goal, please consider whether or not the goal is feasible.
Questions	What are the final goals of our group? How do we set specific goals?
When group members do not know how to make plans	Hints	1. When your group makes a plan, please consider the group goal first.
2. Please allocate the time slots and subtasks as well as assigning roles for group members. You can discuss this with your group members.
3. After your group makes a plan, please consider whether or not the plan is feasible. Otherwise, your group can improve it further.
Questions	How do we make a plan? How do we allocate the time slots and subtasks? How do we assign the different roles?
Monitoring scaffolding	When learners check the latest progress during discussion	Questions	How is the group going? What are the problems in our group? How far is the group from the target?
If a member did not send any message for 10 min	Prompt	Two heads are better than one. Please discuss this with your peers.
After group members have discussed for 20 min	Prompt	Please check your latest progress and contribute more.
When members sent an anxious emoticon	Prompt	Don't be anxious. Take it easy.
When members sent an angry emoticon	Prompt	Don't be angry. It is just a joke.
When members sent a sad emoticon	Prompt	Don't be sad. Think of the bright side. Share your ideas with peers.
Evaluating and reflecting scaffolding	When the average score of group members did not achieve the expected outcome	Prompt	Your group has not achieved the expected outcome. Please keep trying. Your group may revise your plans or strategies so as to reach the expected achievement.
When group members reflect on the whole collaborative learning process	Seven questions	For example:
What are the major problems during the collaborative learning process?
3.3. Procedure
Fig. 5 shows the experimental procedure of the present study. Before the collaborative learning activity, a pre-test of prior knowledge was conducted for 10 min. The collaborative learning task and online collaborative learning tool were introduced to all participants for 20 min. Next, an online collaborative learning activity began, in which each group was provided with the same learning materials and completed the same task. The collaborative learning task was to design an instructional plan regarding the concepts, elements, categories, and equilibrium conditions of a lever in a physics course for Grade 8 students. During the online collaborative learning activity, students in the experimental group learned with the online collaborative learning tool embedded GMS, while students in the control group learned with the online collaborative learning tool without GMS. Thus, students in the control groups did not receive any guidance, hints, prompts, or questions during online collaborative learning. The learning materials, collaborative learning tasks, and duration for both the experimental and control groups were the same. This stage took 120 min. Each group submitted an instructional plan as a group product by the end of the online collaborative learning activity. All participants then completed a questionnaire regarding cognitive load for 5 min. Finally, five students from the experimental group were randomly selected to conduct one-on-one semi-structured interview for 20 min.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (274KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Experimental procedure.

3.4. Instruments
The instruments in this study included a test of instructional design prior knowledge and a cognitive load questionnaire. The pre-test was designed to examine whether students in the experimental group and control group had equivalent knowledge regarding instructional design. There were 10 multiple-choice items (60%) and two short-answer items (40%). The perfect score on the pre-test was 100. The pre-test items were designed by an experienced teacher. After all participants finished the pre-test, two experienced teachers graded the pre-test. The Cohen's kappa value of the pre-test was 0.91, showing excellent consistency between the two teachers. In the present study, the post-test of knowledge about instructional design was not adopted, since group performance was measured by knowledge-building level and group products.

The cognitive load questionnaire was adapted based on the 7-point Likert scale developed by Hwang, Yang, and Wang (2013). The questionnaire includes five items for the mental load dimension and three items for the mental effort dimension. The Cronbach's alpha value of the questionnaire was 0.84, indicating good reliability. Only the cognitive load post-questionnaire was adopted, because participants did not employ the GMS approach before the experiment.

3.5. Data analysis
The data set for this study mainly came from 37 groups' online discussion transcripts and 37 groups' products recorded in our online collaborative learning tool, 111 test papers about instruction design prior knowledge, 111 questionnaires of cognitive load, and interview records from five students.

In the present study, we adopted a content analysis method (Chi, 1997), a lag sequential analysis method (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997), and a computer-assisted knowledge map analysis method (Zheng, Huang, Hwang, & Yang, 2015) to analyze the data. To analyze metacognitive behavior in each group, both the content analysis method and the lag sequential analysis method were adopted. Table 2 shows the coding scheme of metacognitive behaviors, which was adapted from Zheng & Huang (2016). Two raters coded all discussion transcripts of 37 groups based on the coding scheme. The episode was selected as an analysis unit since group metacognition involve all group members. The inter-rater Kappa reliability was 0.81, showing a good reliability (Fleiss, 1981). Finally, all of discrepancies were discussed and resolved. A lag sequential analysis (LSA) was then conducted using the Generalized Sequential Querier (GSEQ) tool to examine the probability of behavior transition.


Table 2. Coding scheme for group metacognitive behaviors.

Code	Behaviors	Descriptions	Examples
OG	Orientating goals	Establishing task demands and setting goals	“Our group goal is to design an instructional plan.”
MP	Making plans	Making plans about how to reach the group's goals, including selecting strategies and setting timelines; negotiating the division of labor	“Let's discuss the plan and division of labor.”
ES	Enacting strategies	Advancing and explaining solutions; coordinating conflicts.	“First, we should establish the instructional goal, then select the appropriate strategies and tools.”
MC	Monitoring and controlling	Monitoring or controlling the whole group progress; claiming (partial) understanding or comprehension failure; detecting errors or checking plausibility	“How is our group going?”
“We need to speed up.”
ER	Evaluating and reflecting	Evaluating current solutions; reflecting on the group goals and progress	“Let's discuss the feasibility of our plan.”
“Our group progress is a little slow.”
AM	Adapting metacognition	Making adaptions to goals, plans, or strategies	“Maybe we need to revise our instructional strategies.”
In the current study, a computer-assisted knowledge map analysis method developed by Zheng et al. (2015) was adopted to analyze groups' knowledge-building level, which was conducted in three steps. First, drawing an initial knowledge map based on collaborative learning objectives and tasks. Second, coding and segmenting discussion transcripts based on the coding scheme. Third, calculating the knowledge-building level and generating the final knowledge map for each group. Two coders analyzed all groups' discussion transcripts. The inter-rater Kappa reliability achieved 0.81, indicating good reliability. The knowledge-building level was automatically calculated using our analytical tool (for more detail about the knowledge map analysis method, please refer to Zheng, 2017).

The group product, particularly the instructional plans, were evaluated by two researchers based on the rubric given in Table 3. Spearman's correlation analysis revealed that the inter-rater reliability of group products reached 0.85, indicating a high level of consistency between the two researchers.


Table 3. The rubric of the instructional plan.

Criterion	Descriptions	Weight
Instructional goals	Instructional goals are clearly defined and described.	10
Learners' characteristics	The instructional plan is designed based on students' prior knowledge, skills, learning style, background, and personalities.	10
Instructional content	The instructional content, learning tasks, and key points of instructions are clearly described and analyzed.	10
Instructional strategies	The instructional strategies and tools are carefully designed and applied appropriately based on instructional goals and content.	10
Instructional processes	The instructional process is complete and the instructional procedures are properly arranged. The timeslots are allocated appropriately.	10
Learning activities are elaborately designed to engage students in learning.	20
Exercises, assignments, and discussion are designed in line with instructional goals.	20
Evaluation	Appropriate assessment methods are designed and the rubrics are consistent with instructional objectives.	10
Five students were interviewed based on the same interview protocol. All interviews were audiotaped and transcribed. The interview protocol addressed the following five questions:

1.
Did you think the group metacognitive approach was helpful for improving metacognitive skills? Why?

2.
How did you use the planning scaffolding in collaborative learning?

2.
How did you use the monitoring scaffolding when you completed the collaborative learning task?

3.
How did you use the evaluation and reflection scaffolding after you completed the collaborative learning task?

4.
Did you think the group metacognitive approach was helpful for improving group performance? Why?

4. Results
4.1. Analysis of group performance
First, the normality distribution and homogeneity of variance were examined to determine whether the data could be analyzed using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results indicated that all data sets were normally distributed (p > .05). Furthermore, it was found that the homogeneity of variance was not violated for the knowledge-building level (F = 0.40, p = .53 > 0.05) and group product performance (F = 2.79, p = .103 > 0.05). These results indicated that the assumption of homogeneity of variance could be accepted and ANCOVA could be employed to analyze whether metacognitive scaffolding affected group performance by excluding the impact of the pre-test scores in the study.

Two ANCOVA analyses for knowledge-building level and group product scores were conducted using the pre-test score as the covariant and the learning approach as the independent variable. The results are shown in Table 4. The results revealed a significant difference in knowledge-building level between the experimental group and control group (F = 4.65, p = .038 < 0.05). Furthermore, the adjusted mean scores of the experimental group were significantly higher than in the control group, implying that GMS can significantly improve groups' knowledge-building level compared with conventional collaborative learning. An eta squared value η2 = 0.12 implies a medium effect size (η2 > 0.059) based on Cohen's (1988) criteria.


Table 4. The ANCOVA results of knowledge building and group product of the two groups.

Items	Group	N	Mean	SD	Adjusted mean	SE	df	F	η2
Knowledge building	Experimental group	54	227.38	91.35	225.72	20.96	1	4.65⁎	0.12
Control group	57	160.03	81.41	161.61	20.38			
Group products	Experimental group	54	90.00	2.56	89.73	0.74	1	12.75⁎⁎⁎	0.27
Control group	57	85.74	3.70	85.98	0.72			
Note. ⁎p < .05, ⁎⁎⁎p < .001.

The results also revealed that there was a significant difference in group product achievement between the experimental group and control group (F = 12.75, p = .001 < 0.05). Furthermore, the experimental group outperformed the control group in terms of group product achievement. This finding indicated that GMS had a significant impact on group product performance. The eta squared value η2 = 0.27 implies a large effect size (η2 > 0.138) based on Cohen's (1988) criteria.

4.2. Analysis of metacognitive behavior patterns
To analyze metacognitive behavior patterns of participants, participants' behavioral transitions were analyzed using a lag sequential analysis method. As shown in Table 5, the behaviors in the left-most column denote the starting behaviors and the behaviors in the top-most row denote the subsequent behaviors. A Z-score was calculated to judge possible behavior sequential patterns. Z-scores above 1.96 indicated that the behavior sequence achieved a significant level (Bakeman & Quera, 2011). Table 5 shows the adjusted residuals of the experimental group. The results demonstrated that there were seven significant behavior sequences, namely OG → OG, OG → MP, MP → ES, ES → ER, ER → AM, AM→MC, MC → ES. Fig. 8 shows the behavioral transition diagram of the experimental group.


Table 5. Adjusted residuals of the experimental group.

Starting behavior	Subsequent behavior
OG	MP	ES	MC	ER	AM
Orientating goals (OG)	2.15⁎	4.76⁎	1.1	−2.76	−1.91	−1.85
Making plans (MP)	1.8	−1.06	2.76⁎	−0.96	−0.88	−2.01
Enacting strategies (ES)	−0.36	0.46	−5.21	1.11	5.12⁎	−0.58
Monitoring and controlling (MC)	−1.21	−1.41	3.31⁎	−1.33	−0.65	0
Evaluating and reflecting (ER)	−1.26	−0.54	0.5	0.27	−3.03	4.53⁎
Adapting metacognition (AM)	−0.35	−1.91	−1.05	3.62⁎	−0.18	−1.04
Note. ⁎p < .05.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (88KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The behavioral transition diagram of the experimental group.

Similarly, the adjusted residuals of the control groups were also calculated, as shown in Table 6. It was found that only five behavior sequences reached a significant level, including OG → OG, MP → MP, OG → MP, MC → ER, ER → AM. Fig. 9 shows a behavioral transition diagram for the control groups.


Table 6. Adjusted residuals of the control group.

Starting behavior	Subsequent behavior
OG	MP	ES	MC	ER	AM
Orientating goals (OG)	3.39⁎	3.5⁎	−0.52	−1.02	−1.64	−0.68
Making plans (MP)	1.27	4.1⁎	0.96	−1.6	−2.84	−0.69
Enacting strategies (ES)	−1.12	−1.93	−0.63	1.78	1.45	−1.42
Monitoring and controlling (MC)	−0.67	−1.06	−0.25	−1.13	2.91⁎	−0.81
Evaluating and reflecting (ER)	−0.68	−1.58	0.29	0.3	−1.15	3.91⁎
Adapting metacognition (AM)	−0.29	−1.26	0.15	1.27	−0.05	−0.68
Note. ⁎p < .05.

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (74KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Behavioral transition diagram for the control group.

Comparison of the experimental group and control group revealed several differences between the experimental and control groups. First, the experimental group demonstrated more behavioral transition than the control group. There were four significant behavior sequences (MP → ES, MC → ES, ES → ER, AM → MC) that only occurred in the experimental group, as shown in Table 7. The result demonstrated that the behaviors of enacting strategies (ES), monitoring and controlling (MC), and evaluating and reflecting (ER) could be crucial behaviors leading to better learning performance in the experimental group compared with the control group. Second, the behavior sequences of the control groups demonstrated more repetitive behavior transition, such as OG → OG, MP → MP. Therefore, students in the experimental group demonstrated stronger metacognitive behavioral transition than the control groups.


Table 7. Significant behavior sequences that only occurred in the experimental group.

Starting behavior	Subsequent behavior
OG	MP	ES	MC	ER	AM
Orientating goals (OG)						
Making plans (MP)			MP → ES			
Enacting strategies (ES)					ES → ER	
Monitoring and controlling (MC)			MC → ES			
Evaluating and reflecting (ER)						
Adapting metacognition (AM)				AM→MC		
4.3. Analysis of cognitive load
Cognitive load denotes the load that is imposed on a learner's cognitive system when performing a learning task (Sweller, 1988). An independent t-test was used to investigate differences in cognitive load between the experimental group and control group, as shown in Table 8. The results indicated no significant differences in cognitive load between the experimental group and control group (t = 1.23, p = .22 > 0.05). In addition, Cohen's d was 0.23, indicating a small effect size.


Table 8. The t-test results of the group product performance of the two groups.

Group	N	Mean	SD	t	p	d
Experimental group	54	3.68	1.00	1.23	0.22	0.23
Control group	57	3.45	0.96			
4.4. Interview results
The interview results indicated that participants perceived GMS to be helpful for activating metacognitive behaviors and improving group performance. In terms of activating metacognitive behaviors, students reported that the method was very effective for setting goals and making plans before collaborative learning with the aid of GMS. During online collaborative learning, participants could monitor the collaborative learning process of the whole group through the module showing their latest progress. After collaborative learning, participants reflected on the learning process and group products through reflective questions. All respondents reported similar information, indicating that metacognitive scaffolding was very useful for reminding them to think about their cognitive processes and outcomes. For example, one student stated that “The hints of setting goals and making plans were very useful for us because I did not know how to set goals and make plans initially. In addition, I reflected on the strengths and weakness of our plan after we finished the first draft.”

With the aid of GMS, the interviewees reported that collaborative learning became smoother and more interactive. With respect to how to use the planning scaffolding, some interviewees explained that planning scaffolding was very useful for productive collaborative learning.

“Before, I never set goals or made plans when I conducted collaborative learning. I just followed the teachers' instructions and completed the task. But with the help of planning scaffolding, I considered what the group goals were and how to achieve these goals by making appropriate plans.” (Interviewee 1).

“When our group did not know how to set goals and make plans, we just clicked the hints to help us set goals and make plans. The hints were really helpful because they provided guidelines and stimulated metacognition at a group level.” (Interviewee 2).

“I believe planning scaffolding can promote communication among group members, and help with orientating group goals. Before, I did not know how to initiate collaborative learning and complete the tasks. But with the aid of the planning scaffolding, I wanted to communicate with other group members about task requirements, task standards, group goals and plans.” (Interviewee 4).

Regarding monitoring scaffolding, the interviewees mentioned that they became aware of other group members' progress, problems, and latest status.

“When I checked the latest status of our group, I was able to click the latest progress module and check the emotional status, strategy use, and acquired knowledge of other members. This was pretty useful for us during collaborative learning.” (Interviewee 3).

“I believe that monitoring scaffolding was very efficient and effective for promoting in-depth discussion. For example, the question reminded me to consider how far it is from the target.” (Interviewee 5).

“When I had no ideas and felt anxious, the monitoring scaffolding reminded me “Don't be anxious. Take it easy.” This was automatically embedded in the system. I really liked it.” (Interviewee 2).

Regarding evaluation and reflection scaffolding, interviewees revealed that they reflected on the advantages and disadvantages of group products through scaffolding.

“We collectively reflected on the whole collaborative learning process and final instructional plans after collaborative learning. The evaluation and reflection scaffolding guided us to reflect on the problems and experiences of our group.” (Interviewee 3).

“The evaluation and reflection scaffolding was really useful because it helped our group to revise our instructional plan. Before, I never reflected on the collaborative process and outcomes. This time I was so impressed with the evaluation and reflection scaffolding.” (Interviewee 2).

Regarding improvements in group performance, students reported that metacognitive scaffolding was very useful for promoting knowledge building and refining group product by monitoring learning processes and reflecting on group products. One interviewee reported “Before, we never reflected or revised group products after submitting them. But with the help of metacognitive scaffolding, our group members continually co-constructed knowledge about instructional design and revised the instructional plan until we achieved the expected goals.” Overall, all interviewees reported that GMS was effective for facilitating online collaborative learning.

5. Discussion and conclusions
5.1. The effects of group metacognitive scaffolding on group performance
The current results indicated that students who learned with GMS significantly outperformed those without metacognitive scaffolding in terms of knowledge building level and group product achievement. There are several possible explanations for this finding, as discussed below.

First, students in the experimental group set group goals and made plans with the help of planning scaffolding, which stimulated them to link new information with prior knowledge to build new knowledge. A previous study reported that learners had difficulties setting goals and making plans, and they required new information about shared task perceptions as well as each group members' goal and planning perceptions to achieve shared goals and plans (Hadwin, Bakhtiar, & Miller, 2018). Group metacognitive scaffolding in this study provided new information to stimulate group members to co-construct knowledge.

Second, group members were able to monitor knowledge progress as well as evaluate and reflect collective knowledge with the help of group metacognitive scaffolding. Group metacognitive scaffolding demonstrated the common knowledge of the whole group as well as knowledge advancement, which also provided evidence of the metacognitive aspects of knowledge building. This result also corroborated the findings of a previous study reporting that metacognition is required for knowledge building (Lee, Chan, & van Aalst, 2006). Scardamalia (2002) proposed that metacognition was closely associated with the “rise above” principle during knowledge building. Group members developed metacognitive understanding of their own, and promoted the whole group's knowledge building progress through GMS. Consequently, the group's level of knowledge building and group achievements improved.

Third, all group members jointly reflected on the instructional plans after collaboration with the help of evaluation and reflection scaffolding, which promoted the improvement of group products. This reflective assessment promoted individual and collective knowledge advancement in CSCL (Lei & Chan, 2018). Taken together, these factors may explain why the experimental group achieved better group performance than the control group.

5.2. The effects of group metacognitive scaffolding on metacognitive behaviors and cognitive load
The current findings also indicated that GMS stimulated group members to orient their goals, make plans, enact strategies, monitor and control collaborative learning processes, evaluate and reflect, as well as to adapt their metacognition. Thus, GMS may have stimulated the occurrence and transition of metacognitive behavior through guidelines, prompts, hints, and questions. These functions can activate metacognition and facilitate metacognitive behavioral transition at the group level. Therefore, the experimental group demonstrated more metacognitive behaviors. In addition, it was found that behaviors involving the enacting of strategies, monitoring and controlling, as well as evaluating and reflecting were crucial behaviors leading to better group performance in the experimental group. Haataja, Malmberg, and Järvelä (2018) reported that monitoring learning progress played an important role in productive collaborative learning. Evaluation and reflection can also improve group performance by aiding adaptation and revising group products in collaborative learning (Phielix, Prins, Kirschner, Erkens, & Jaspers, 2011).

The results also suggested that metacognitive scaffolding did not increase cognitive load for students in the experimental group. Students in the experimental group did not report feeling anxious or stressed when metacognitive scaffolding was provided to support online collaborative learning. This may be because learners in the experimental group only used planning scaffolding when required. Monitoring scaffolding can reduce cognitive load by presenting latest progress and automating the generation of statistics. Evaluation and reflection scaffolding was also helpful for decreasing cognitive load by internalizing metacognitive knowledge and skills. This result was expected, because students in the two groups learned using the same learning materials and completed the same learning tasks. Hence, it is clear that GMS is an effective strategy for activating metacognitive behaviors, decreasing cognitive load, and improving group performance.

5.3. Implications
Collaborative learning may not always result in the anticipated outcomes (Kirschner, Paas, & Kirschner, 2009), and researchers have adopted different strategies and interventions to overcome its limitations. A number of previous studies have examined technologies that have the potential to support collaborative learning to enrich students' learning experiences and achieve desirable outcomes (Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016; Resta & Laferrière, 2007; Rienties et al., 2012). The current study developed a technology-based GMS system to facilitate online collaborative learning. The current findings shed light on the use of GMS to facilitate collaborative learning processes and improve group performance. There are several implications for designers, teachers, and practitioners in the field of CSCL.

First, GMS is useful and effective as a means for improving group performance. GMS aided whole groups in setting goals and making plans before collaboration, monitoring and controlling collaborative learning processes as well as evaluating and reflecting after collaboration. These functions can be delivered by scripts, hints, prompts, guidelines, and questions, which serve as metacognitive scaffolding to improve knowledge building level and metacognition. GMS can be integrated into online collaborative learning environments to provide guidance for learners.

Second, the monitoring scaffolding in the present study was effective because it provided a kind of data-driven scaffolding. The monitoring scaffolding changed based on the collected data. For example, when learners sent different types of negative emoticons, different prompts were presented to motivate learners to be more positive. We propose that design data-driven scaffolding based on the results of learning analytics should be used to optimize collaborative learning performance in future.

Third, the present study suggested that teachers should pay more attention to the whole group's metacognitive knowledge and skills. The increase of a group's metacognitive knowledge and skills can help improve their knowledge-building level and group performance. Previous studies also indicated that metacognitive training can enable learners to make progress and solve problems (Pennequin, Sorel, Nanty, & Fontaine, 2010). Therefore, teachers can implement direct instruction and guide students to develop metacognitive knowledge and skills at the group level before collaborative learning.

5.4. Conclusions
The present study provided a new approach for examining the effects of GMS on group metacognitive behavior, group performance, and cognitive load in an online collaborative learning context. The findings revealed that GMS had significant impacts on group metacognitive behavior and group performance. The main contribution of the current study was to propose a GMS approach and validate its effectiveness for metacognitive behavioral transition and group performance in an online collaborative learning environment.

The present study involved several limitations that should be considered. First, the sample size was relatively small. Future studies should test larger samples to examine the effects of GMS in more depth. Second, the duration of online collaborative learning in the current study was relatively short owing to the conditions of the research. In future, longitudinal studies should be conducted to investigate how group metacognitive skills evolve over time. Finally, the collaborative learning task was restricted to only one learning domain. Future studies should engage participants in collaborative learning tasks involving multiple domains.