While blended learning in higher education is valued for various reasons such as addressing students' needs for flexibility, blended learning implementation remains a challenging process. Because the teacher lies at the heart of any educational change process, the current qualitative study investigates crucial teacher attributes for blended learning implementation from the perspective of experts. Experts can analyze deep structures of complex organizational problems and hold process knowledge that can generate practical effect. Twelve expert interviews are conducted and reveal two groups of blended learning teacher attributes: seven adaptive attributes such as realizing a pedagogical need for change or creatively connecting technologies to learning processes, and four maladaptive attributes such as a need for a clear understanding of blended learning or feeling anxious about (the implications of) technology. This study utilizes a holistic approach to identify related teacher attributes that critically influence the implementation of blended learning in higher education.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Blended learning

Expert interviews

Higher education

Teacher attributes

Teacher change

1. Introduction
“Teachers are likely to reject new ideas that conflict with their current ideas unless, as part of the professional learning, their existing understandings are engaged.”

Timperley et al. (2008, p. 17)
One of the many challenges for higher education concerns the implementation and deliberate application of blended learning (Becker et al., 2017). Blended learning has been valued and implemented for various reasons in higher education such as addressing a need for more flexible and personalized curricula (Jonker, März, & Voogt, 2018), responding to students diversity by using differentiated instruction (Boelens, Voet, & De Wever, 2018), or improving students' engagement with learning materials (Mestan, 2019). A variety of factors that influence the implementation process of blended learning are examined in previous research. For example, Adekola, Dale, and Gardiner (2017) investigated institutional transitions towards implementation of blended learning, while Graham, Woodfield, and Harrison (2013) researched how organizational policies and strategies, structural issues and support for teachers influence adoption of blended learning. Much research focuses on studying the design of blended learning (e.g. Owston & York, 2018; Tsankov & Damyanov, 2017), or on the student perspective and context (e.g. Vanslambrouck, Zhu, Lombaerts, Philipsen, & Tondeur, 2018). Yet, in any process of educational change, the teacher has a significant influence (Fullan & Hargreaves, 1992; Guskey, 2002). The teacher journey to blended learning implementation requires more than simple acquisition of new skills or changing pedagogical roles (Philipsen, Tondeur, Roblin, Vanslambrouck, & Zhu, 2019). Addressing teachers' beliefs about technology and pedagogy, for example, is also crucial (Gerbic, 2011; Philipsen et al., 2019). Moreover, transferring new instructional processes into teachers' practice is inseparable from their emotions such as feeling less confident (Howard & Mozejko, 2015; Saunders, 2013). It can be concluded that teachers face many challenges when implementing blended learning such as new teaching and technological skills, dealing with changing pedagogical roles, or coping with risks associated to delivering courses in a blended format (Vaughan, 2010). All of these factors influence teachers' decisions and courses of action (Timperley et al., 2008), including decisions regarding the implementation and design of blended learning. On the one hand, many university teachers respond positively to the concept of blended learning and redesign their courses successfully (Alammary, Sheard, & Carbone, 2014; Ellis, Steed, & Applebee, 2006). On the other hand, despite good intentions, university teachers fail to adopt blended learning due to internal or external influences such as lack of time or increased instructional workload (Brown, 2016; Owston, Wideman, Murphy, & Lupshenyuk, 2008). Hence, an in-depth investigation of teacher qualities and characteristics that affect the implementation process both ways is crucial for establishing sustainable anchoring of blended learning pedagogy in higher education.

2. Conceptual background
2.1. Blended learning in higher education
Over the past two decades, higher education institutions have increasingly adopted blended learning for various reasons and the pedagogical concept configures itself as the ‘new normal’ in higher education (Dziuban, Graham, Moskal, Norberg, & Sicilia, 2018; Mestan, 2019). The application of blended learning affects both students, various institutional systems and structures, and faculty members' attitudes and pedagogical beliefs (Brown, 2016; Moskal, Dziuban, & Hartman, 2013). Extensive research in education has explored the possibilities of the pedagogical concept (e.g. Garrison & Vaughan, 2013; Mestan, 2019). Although the definition of blended learning is still ambiguous (Hrastinski, 2019), the pedagogical concept of blended learning can be described as the deliberate combination of online and classroom-based instruction that activates and supports learning (Boelens, Van Laer, De Wever, & Elen, 2015). The open nature of this definition allows numerous applications and interpretations, which in turn adds importance to the way teachers approach and conceptualize blended learning (Ellis et al., 2006).

Educational institutions have adopted blended learning for various reasons such as providing more flexibility to meet students' learning needs and backgrounds (e.g. Vanslambrouck et al., 2018), or as an attempt to reduce dropout rates (López-Pérez, Pérez-López, & Rodríguez-Ariza, 2011). In finding answers for deliberate application of blended learning in higher education, many researchers address the design of blended learning. For example, Boelens, De Wever, and Voet (2017) found four key challenges for designing blended learning: incorporating flexibility, stimulating interaction, facilitating students' learning processes, and fostering an affective learning climate. Wang, Huang, and Quek (2018), on the other hand, investigated the role of synchronous videoconferencing in blended courses and acknowledged among other the importance of balanced instruction for the classroom students as well as the online students. Han and Ellis (2019) investigated the quality of discussions in blended learning and recognized the importance of explicating how online and face-to-face discussions are integrated. According to Graham et al. (2013) organizations face many contextual challenges when adopting blended learning, such as complexities regarding strategy (definition and purpose of blended learning, policies and degree of implementation), structure (technological and administrative systems, governance etc.), or support (technical and pedagogical support, faculty incentives).

The role and position of the teacher within the process of blended learning implementation has also received research attention. For example, Brown (2016) investigated empirical literature in the context of university blended learning practices, and identified six influences on the adoption of blended learning. Four external influences such as academic workload or interactions with students, and two internal influences - teachers' beliefs about technology and teaching and the quality of teachers' professional development - were identified (Brown, 2016). Lai, Hsiao, and Hsieh (2018), on the other hand, examined university teachers' points of view when implementing flipped (blended) teaching. Their study focused on 169 university teachers who had experience with flipped teaching, and a major finding was that intrinsic challenge motivation and extrinsic compensation critically influence adoption of flipped teaching (Lai et al., 2018). Likewise, Cheung and Hew (2010) examined teacher characteristics in the specific context of facilitating asynchronous online discussions in two university programs. They conclude that online facilitators show the habits of awareness of own thinking, and open-mindedness. Finally, Comas-Quinn (2011) evaluated the impact of introducing blended learning on university teachers in a distant language course, and argued that a shift towards a blended curriculum goes beyond the mere acquisition of ICT skills, but also requires addressing teachers' identities in order to understand the full potential of new media.

2.2. Teacher attributes
Generally, the tasks and roles of higher education teachers and university teaching staff are diverse. Research and pedagogy intertwine and academic staff are expected to integrate rapidly evolving educational technologies (Becker et al., 2017). To meet the many expectations, teaching staff need a wide set of knowledge, skills and attitudes - i.e. competences (Westera, 2001). However, teaching consists of more than a combination of pedagogical competences and roles. Teaching is considered an “ongoing process of integration of the personal and professional sides of becoming and being a teacher” (Beijaard, Meijer, & Verloop, 2004, p. 113). Researchers such as Beijaard et al. (2004) refer to this dynamic process as “professional identity”. They argue that addressing professional identity is useful in helping teachers to cope with educational change. According to Jonker et al. (2018, p. 120,121) professional identity consists of “routines, knowledge, skills, beliefs, attitudes about one's profession, and is based upon one's personal background and experiences”.

The term “attributes” finds its origin in the Latin word attribuere, which means “assign to”. Babbie defines attributes as “characteristics or qualities that describe an object or a person” (2013, p.15). In this sense, attributes are closely related to characteristics and can be considered as the building blocks assigned to someone's personality (Allport, 1961). Allport (1961, p. 28) defines personality as the “dynamic organization within the individual of those psychophysical systems that determine his characteristic behavior and thought”. Every word of the definition is carefully conveyed (Feist & Feist, 2008). “Dynamic organization” implies a constantly changing interrelatedness of various aspects of a person. “Psychophysical” highlights the importance of both psychological and physical aspects of one's personality. And by using the verb “determine”, Allport (1961) emphasizes the action a person takes: personality is not merely an individual's thoughts but includes a person's actions as well. Overall, every person is marked by unique thoughts and behaviors that set them apart from other people. Allport (1961) referred to these unique personal building blocks as characteristics or personal dispositions. McCrae and Costa (2003) and Zaccaro, Dubrow, and Kolze (2018) distinguish between characteristics that are relatively immune to change and characteristics that adapt quite flexible to external situations (McCrae & Costa, 2003; Zaccaro et al., 2018).

Based on Allport (1961), Babbie (2013), McCrae and Costa (2003), and Zaccaro et al. (2018), this study wields the term “teacher attributes” to empirically capture any relatively stable teacher personality characteristic – assigned to teachers by experts on blended learning in higher education - that affects the process of blended learning implementation.

3. Purpose of the study
Over the past two decades many institutions have adopted blended learning for various reasons and the pedagogical concept blended learning can be considered as the “new normal” (Dziuban et al., 2018; Jonker et al., 2018). The implementation of blended learning is influenced by many (f)actors (e.g. Porter, Graham, Bodily, & Sandberg, 2016) and educational change must at least take into account the teacher as a person (Fullan, 2014). Since experts generally are better at forward reasoning and solving complex practical problems (Bou, Sauquet, & Bonet, 2006), and possess in-depth knowledge about implementation processes, this study scrutinizes experts' insights on blended learning implementation in higher education by identifying important teacher attributes from a holistic perspective. The term “holistic” originates from the Greek word holos, which means “whole”. Holism treats evolution, ecology and personality as a process of unification of separate parts (Smuts, 1926). In teacher education research, a holistic approach attempts to find common ground between views based on different paradigms (Korthagen, 2004). As such, this study utilizes a holistic approach that allows for the emergence of relatively stable teacher attributes affecting blended learning implementation. The main research question that guided this study was: What teacher attributes are important for implementation of blended learning in higher education? To answer this research question, the following sub-questions were formulated: What teacher attributes do experts describe as positively affecting the uptake of blended learning? What teacher attributes do experts describe as hindering for the uptake of blended learning?

4. Method
4.1. Expert interviews
To investigate underlying interpretations of practitioners, qualitative approaches and indirect measures are commonly used (Miles, Huberman, Huberman, & Huberman, 1994). Van Audenhove and Donders (2019) and Bogner, Littig, and Menz (2009) suggest expert interviews as a valuable and legitimate empirical research method to reveal insider process knowledge on practical complex problems. Bogner et al. (2009, p. 221) define an expert as “someone who is responsible in some way or another for the development, implementation or monitoring of a problem, or who has privileged access to information about people or decision processes.” Although the concept of expertise is a problematic issue - e.g. what exactly constitutes an expert? - literature agrees on the following generalizations (Bogner et al., 2009; Bou et al., 2006; Brand-Gruwel, Wopereis, & Vermetten, 2005; Chi, 2006; Littig, 2011; Willingham, 2009):

•
Experts are better at selecting relevant details from large sets of information and spend more time analyzing problems qualitatively.

•
Experts understand abstract ideas better than novices because they analyze the deep structures of problems.

•
Experts are oriented towards professional practice and take more complex organizational variables into account.

•
Experts produce more logical and appropriate solutions than novices.

•
Experts transfer knowledge more easily to other domains.

•
Experts learn more from intuition, feeling and soft skills.

Moreover, experts demonstrate expertise in different knowledge areas. Bogner et al. (2009) differentiate between expertise in technical knowledge (data, facts, technical information, statistics, etc.), process knowledge (knowledge about processes, interactions and organizational aspects), and expertise in explanatory knowledge (interpretations, points of view, meanings and explanations held by the expert). Considering the general aim of this study, we focused on a selection of experts who were directly involved with implementation of blended learning in higher education, and therefore have more contextual process knowledge than teachers who apply blended learning in the particular context of their teaching department or faculty. Moreover, experts hold process knowledge that has the power to produce practical effect (Bogner et al., 2009).

4.2. Participants and data collection
Purposive sampling, and in particular intensity sampling, allows the selection of a small number of representative cases that provide insider information and knowledge of a particular phenomenon (Patton, 2002; Teddlie & Yu, 2007). All Flemish universities were included in the sampling process to ensure representativeness (Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2002) by investigating websites, LinkedIn profiles, and through the personal networks of the research team. In addition, experts from Flemish university colleges – that show similarities with university teaching - were included to improve the richness of the data. Fifteen participants were invited through email. After having been explained the nature and purpose of the study, twelve experts agreed to participate voluntarily in the interviews through a signed informed consent. All participants were considered experts on blended learning based on their certification, blended learning experience in their organization and blended learning references in their LinkedIn profiles. A discussion within our research group acknowledged the expertise of the selected participants. An overview of the experts, their background and blended learning roles is presented in Table 1.


Table 1. Experts and their blended learning role.

Experta	Background	Role
Marc	PhD Educational Sciences and Innovation	Educational advisor and designer, project leader
Luke	MSc Educational Sciences	Curriculum and instructional designer, policymaker and implementer of educational technology
Finn	MSc Communication Sciences	Advisor technology enhanced teaching and learning
Frasier	MSc Psychology and Educational Sciences	Director teacher training institute
William	MSc Educational Sciences, E-learning	Head of research on educational innovation
Charlotte	PhD Educational Sciences	Professor in e-learning design and educational technology
Alice	PhD Educational Instructional Technology	Associate lecturer and researcher in educational technology
Ferguson	Higher professional education Technology enhanced learning	Project leader E-learning in higher education
Agatha	PhD Educational Sciences	Researcher in instructional psychology and technology
Grace	PhD Educational Sciences	Project leader educational technology
Travis	MSc Computer Engineering + certificate Educational Technology	Educational advisor blended learning
Harry	MSc Instructional and Educational Sciences	Instructional developer and researcher
To initiate the interview, the experts were asked to prepare a relevant case on blended learning implementation in their organization (successful implementation or lessons learnt). The experts described a practical example of blended learning implementation at the beginning of the interview. Some experts illustrated the practical case through demonstration of a course design in the online learning environment of the organization. Elucidation of the experts' practical examples showed equivalent understanding of blended learning as defined in the conceptual background section: a deliberate combination of online and classroom-based instruction that activates and stimulates learning (Boelens et al., 2015). All participants were interviewed on independent locations by the first author. The duration of the interview varied between 39 and 86 min with an average of 62.75 min (SD = 13). To ensure a safe climate, the first author communicated that experts could talk freely and that all data would be treated anonymously. All participants were required to sign an informed consent form prior to the interview. The twelve interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim for data analysis. Since experts do not like to be confined to restricted sets of questions (Van Audenhove & Donders, 2019), a semi-structured interview guideline that leaves enough room for experts to express freely, was developed and discussed in the research team (see Appendix A). Although the experts fairly addressed contextual complexities such as providing enough organizational support, academic leadership or cultural differences between faculties, this study focused on the teacher in order to identify relevant teachers' attributes applicable across contexts. The experts' own contexts in their universities or university college were not further taken into consideration during data analysis.

4.3. Data analysis and trustworthiness
According to Van Audenhove and Donders (2019) the interviewer preferably is co-expert in the field of study. The first interviewer's professional background as a teacher, teacher educator and trainer, and experience with blended learning was considered sufficient by the research team to meet this criterium. Yet, researcher bias, for example on the concept of blended learning, is an area of researcher concern. This was addressed by being aware of the own assumptions on perceived benefits of blended learning, personal pedagogical beliefs, and teacher professional development preferences before and during the interview. During the interview, the discussion was stimulated by leaving enough room for open answers from the experts. Moreover, experts are not easily influenced and are used to defending their position (Van Audenhove & Donders, 2019), which contributed to the authenticity of experts' input during the interview.

Furthermore, to improve trustworthiness and reduce bias, data was analyzed in different phases. The first author took the lead, and co-authors and other members of the research group functioned as critical friends through discussion and reviewing of the interpretations and conclusions drawn from the data. Initially the transcripts were read through several times to allow first categories to emerge by means of open and inductive coding in NVivo 12 (Thomas, 2006). This phase led to a first set of emerging themes and categories. After an introduction to the theoretical concepts underpinning this study, a co-author coded three interviews inductively and parallel to the first author (Thomas, 2006). Manual comparison of the openly coded interviews showed insufficient reliability. In line with Armstrong, Gosling, Weinman, and Marteau (1997), there was agreement on general themes but both researchers “packaged” them differently. For instance, first author coded “a willingness to explore technology” while the second coder tagged this as “a capacity for exploration of technology”. Informed by discussions in the research group and through continuous comparison of the interpretations with the conceptual frameworks (Miles et al., 1994), the coding scheme was refined and finalized by the first author (see Appendix B). Next, a third researcher with expertise in the subject of the study was introduced to the theoretical background, purpose of the study and final coding scheme. To enhance reliability, the researcher independently coded four of twelve interviews in NVivo 12 based on the finalized coding scheme (Cohen et al., 2002). Inter-rater reliability (Cohen et al., 2002) was calculated through a coding comparison query in NVivo 12 and showed 97% agreement. In addition, the twelfth and last interview was conducted several months after the first interview in order to improve stability of observations and reach saturation (Cohen et al., 2002). Finally, member checks – which are actually not a verification strategy and more often a threat to validity (Morse, Barrett, Mayan, Olson, & Spiers, 2002) – were not performed since the final coding scheme and study results have been decontextualized and abstracted.

5. Results
All experts discuss to a greater or lesser extent two sides of blended learning implementation: teachers who adopt blended learning in their practice and teachers who show resistance or even reject the pedagogical concept. Both sets of attributes are discussed in this section.

5.1. Adaptive attributes
According to the experts, seven adaptive attributes contribute positively to blended learning implementation in higher education. Table 2 gives an overview of the adaptive attributes, grouped per expert, followed by substantiating the findings.


Table 2. Overview adaptive attributes.

Expert	Adaptive attributes
Teaching and education at the center	Student-centered pedagogical beliefs at the heart of the matter	Realizing a need for change: the pedagogical wake-up call	Daring to experiment (and fail)	Daring to speak out: sharing needs and concerns	Being able to critically self-reflect as a teacher	Connecting technologies to learning processes: the creative professional
Marc	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓
Luke			✓		✓		✓
Finn	✓	✓	✓			✓	✓
Frasier			✓	✓		✓	✓
William	✓	✓			✓	✓	
Charlotte	✓	✓	✓			✓	✓
Alice		✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓
Ferguson	✓		✓	✓		✓	
Agatha	✓			✓	✓	✓	✓
Grace	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
Travis	✓		✓	✓	✓		✓
Harry		✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓
5.1.1. Teaching and education at the center
According to more than half of the experts the belief that education and teaching are important for higher education essentially contributed to the adoption of blended learning. For example, expert William said that teachers “who generally have a drive to deliver good education adopt blended learning more easily”. Agatha described this attribute as follows: “Understanding that education is important, seeing education as an important part of the job, that's what matters.” Or as Grace put it: “teachers who like to teach are actually the good ones to go to blended learning.” Marc agreed in saying that “those teachers [that apply blended learning] are convinced of the importance of education, they see the relevance of education, and that they [the teachers themselves] will benefit from it in their careers.”

5.1.2. Student-centered pedagogical beliefs at the heart of the matter
More than half of the experts gave nuance to the general belief that education and teaching are important from the perspective of the student. They mentioned the voice of the student explicitly. As Grace put it:

And also, wanting to coach students matters. If you don't feel like coaching more, guiding more, well yes, then it does not work. That [guiding and coaching more] is actually the most important driver I notice among teachers to do blended learning.

William acknowledged addressing the students' perspective by stating that those teachers “want to be more contemporary, want to activate students more, and want to do it in a different way.” Alice mentioned this attribute from a constructivist perspective: “Those teachers [who implement blended learning] have a kind of deeply felt constructivist attitude towards education and teaching”. Additionally, Charlotte summarized attribute 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 when being asked what is important for blended learning adoption:

The first aspect, you can call it educational beliefs or what they see as ‘good education’, and then in fact you always need to have a new interpretation of what ‘student-centered’ means. The second aspect is also listening to students, listening to students' voices.

5.1.3. Realizing a need for change: The pedagogical wake-up call
The starting point of the blended learning implementation process was, according to the majority of the experts, becoming aware of a pedagogical need for change. Simply having an educational belief as described in the previous section, was not enough for successful implementation of blended learning. For example, Ferguson stated: “That particular teacher [who adopted blended learning] realized through student feedback that something needed to change. ‘I lost my students somehow and I wanted to change that’ said a blended learning teacher, and with that question he came to our department.” As Finn declared: “Those teachers [who adopt blended learning] come to us and say ‘You see, I have a problem - I have too many students, I have many large groups - and how can I activate those large groups more?’” Frasier concluded by describing “that type of teacher who adopts blended learning is a teacher who actually collides with a number of boundaries, for example there must be in-class differentiation, and says ‘I think we should find other ways to solve these problems here.’” Ferguson agreed as follows: “Yes, that teacher had sensed himself that something had to change, yes, he really realized that something had to happen, and he himself had the idea of trying something else, and thinking about ‘how can I realize that’?”

A more detailed analysis of this attitude revealed insights in diverse pedagogical needs that act as triggers for teachers to implement blended learning. Most experts described becoming aware of student-oriented pedagogical needs for blended learning such as activating students in large groups, dealing with diversity in heterogenous student groups, addressing problematic subjects that many students struggle with, as main drivers for change. Another need to implement blended learning was addressing the context and needs of international or working students. For example, Finn stated: “We have a lot of subjects with many variations in student population and big differences in students' prior cognitive abilities.”

5.1.4. Daring to experiment (and fail)
According to the majority of the experts, blended learning implementation was undeniably linked to the pedagogical use of technology. An important attitude concerning the use of technology for blended learning was described by more than half of the experts. This attitude is summarized as ‘daring to experiment (and fail)’. As Frasier described it: “You have those teachers who have an interest in everything that is new and fancy, who are driven by innovation and always wanting to learn new things themselves.” In the words of Alice: “Those teachers have a willingness, well yes, a curiosity to explore the affordances of technology for the learning process.”

According to the experts, experimenting with technologies in function of the learning process also involved handling failure or perfectionism. For example Grace said that “What matters is a healthy kind of urge to experiment, but also, when failing once in a while, or students complain, do not panic immediately. Maybe perfectionism is not a good attribute to have to facilitate blended learning.” Agatha touched upon vulnerability when experimenting:

Yes, actually, it is about allowing a risk. A teacher pointed out there was a risk involved but did not give in. Other teachers could have said ‘I don't ever do that again’ after failing. It is about openness to trying new things.

Harry summarized the attribute of daring to experiment and fail as follows: “I think a relevant attribute for blended learning is wanting, or daring to experiment with tools, trying out new things. And being able to cope with it if something does not work the first time.”

5.1.5. Daring to speak out: Sharing needs and concerns
Another attribute described by more than half of the experts concerned communication. Agatha stated: “I think communicating is very important, knowing from each other what happens. Yes, also in relation to the people who have a supportive role. Transparency, what happens where?” William expressed the importance of open communication: “We really appreciate when teachers come to us and dare to say ‘This example in your blended learning rubric, we cannot do that yet.’ That is exactly what we want to hear.” Grace agreed by stating:

Open communication, especially that. Because when someone says ‘I don't agree with for example using modules or online assignments, I think that is nonsense’, then you have to be open about it. The discussion between those three teachers [who adopted blended learning] would not have happened if they did not feel the openness to communicate about it.

Although most experts mainly talked about communication with colleagues and, or (project)leaders, Alice also mentioned the communication with students and mutual understanding of different student perspectives:

In the end, the bottom line for e-learning and blended learning is whether or not you can establish that communication. And it is not about ‘I am for or against this or that’. But that you have a kind of respect for other perspectives, and also for the fact that you might not understand a certain perspective online. Sometimes, that [establishing communication] is harder online.

5.1.6. Being able to critically self-reflect as a teacher
Critical reflection on the own teaching practice was generally described as an important attribute by almost all experts. For instance, Alice stated: “Teachers are able to ask themselves ‘why do I react this way, what is my pedagogical intention here?’, there is a kind of pedagogical reasoning aspect involved.” Finn also said:

That teacher [who adopted blended learning] took a student evaluation as a starting point where students said, ‘we are not prepared well enough for the exam’. Based on that he realized that his teaching style did not prepare the students enough, and started to implement two-weekly exercises that students had to prepare online and were discussed in real life contact sessions.

Marc explicitly identifies “being able to self-criticize and adjust your teaching methods if you notice something is not working” as one of the most important teacher attributes for the adoption of blended learning. Alice confirmed this competence by describing it as: “Teachers who are able to ask themselves ‘why do I react this way, what is my pedagogical intention here?’, there is a kind of pedagogical reasoning aspect involved.” And Harry concluded:

Yes, I strongly believe that teachers who implement blended learning should be able and willing to reflect on their own practice, being able to critically investigate their practice. Perhaps it's not so easy for everyone to let go of their assumptions, but I do think that you can get everyone to take small steps in that process.

5.1.7. Connecting technology to learning processes: The creative professional
A relevant competence in relation to technology and blended learning is described by more than half of the experts as “being able to connect those shiny or non-shiny tools to learning processes” (Alice). The experts described a capacity to creatively connect ICT tools to learning processes. Luke and Marc for instance, describe teachers who use the tool ‘Padlet’ to enhance discussions. Both emphasize that the tool as such is not the most important. What matters most is the deliberate choice and the constructive alignment between learning outcomes, pedagogical choices and creative use of the technology. This is shown in the following quote of Marc:

Padlet, what is that? How can we use that to enhance interaction and discussion? Where is the added value? Those teachers are able to integrate that tool in a meaningful way, so that it can have added value. If they eventually choose Padlet, or GoogleDrive, or something else, that is not essential, it is essential that they think about what the added value is.

Marc emphasized creativity in relation to tools and pedagogy as a very important for teachers: “Yes, they [teachers who adopt blended learning] see the added value of technology and realize that creativity is important for the organization of your blended learning lesson.” Charlotte described this attribute by saying that: “How do they see technology and a how do they know how technology can serve for educational purposes. I would not say that technology has a dominant role, but more how technology can play a facilitating role.” Finally, Travis described pedagogical creativity with ICT tools in terms of a blended learning ‘stream’:

I notice with successful blended learning teachers, that they have a pedagogical stream, a flow of learning activities with technology. They mix the right elements and the right tools to a stream of activities they can easily follow. Some have a stream of interaction with the students, they have a kind of story. Others choose for a series of online assignments growing in complexity.

5.2. Maladaptive attributes
Four maladaptive attributes are perceived as hindering for the adoption of blended learning by the experts. Table 3 presents an overview of the maladaptive attributes, grouped per expert, followed by substantiating the findings.


Table 3. Overview maladaptive attributes.

Expert	Maladaptive attributes
Prioritizing other tasks over teaching	The teacher at the epicenter	Blended or blurred learning: in need for a clear understanding	Feeling anxious about (the implications of) technology
Marc	✓	✓	✓	
Luke		✓		
Finn	✓			✓
Frasier			✓	✓
William		✓		
Charlotte			✓	
Alice	✓	✓	✓	✓
Ferguson			✓	✓
Agatha	✓		✓	✓
Grace				✓
Travis			✓	
Harry	✓	✓	✓	✓
5.2.1. Prioritizing other tasks over teaching
Teaching in higher education and especially in universities includes many different tasks and teacher roles. According to half of the experts - who were solely active in university contexts at the time of the interview, the implementation process in universities is hindered by holding a belief that education and teaching is less important than other job related tasks such as projects or doing research. Expert Marc stated:

You simply have a lot of teachers, professors who give priority to other job tasks that deliver more immediate return such as projects, some even think teaching is a waste of time, something that you unfortunately do in a hurry and in between other tasks.

Finn confirmed with a nuance on prioritizing research: “Teaching comes in second place, in comparison to research. So it is publications, publications, publications. Seating in commissions etc. that is perceived as priority, while teaching is not per se included in those activities, research comes first.” Also Agatha stated: “Someone who believes that research is most important, and teaching is just something that comes along, yes, such a person will not invest in blended learning.” Finally, Harry added a nuance of uncertainty: “You have teachers who simply say ‘we do research first’”, and they even don't feel so certain about their teaching, especially when letting go of typical ex-cathedra teaching methods are involved.”

5.2.2. The teacher at the epicenter
Half of the experts referred to the pedagogical belief that teaching is mainly considered as teacher-centered as hindering for the adoption of blended learning. In other words, the implementation of blended learning is hindered when teachers believe that teaching is mainly distributing content, a kind of one-way traffic from teacher to students. As Harry said: “Some [teachers] are purely focused on distributing content, very factual, while you have other teachers [that implement blended learning] who are going to look more at the results they want to achieve with students.” According to William, teachers “prefer mainly explaining content by using PowerPoint presentations.” And Alice emphasized:

A type of teacher that thinks ‘When I have handled the content and I have showed that [the learning content] in class, the students simply have to accept that [and do the learning by themselves]’. Now, in blended learning settings, it does not quite work like that, by saying ‘If I distribute this, then they must have understood it.’

5.2.3. Blended or blurred learning: In need for a clear understanding
More than half of the experts reported insufficient teacher knowledge and insights of the pedagogical concept blended learning as a main barrier to successfully implement blended learning. Frasier and Travis commented on discussions with teachers on the clarity of the concept of blended learning: “And then the discussion starts, ‘but what do you mean by blended learning? And what do I have to do exactly?’. Those are often heard questions.” In the words of Ferguson: “In the beginning there was a lot of uncertainty about those concepts.” Charlotte stated: “They don't know how easy or how difficult it is to apply blended learning, or stimulate learning online, or what technical solutions are in the learning environment. So that is certainly one aspect [that plays a hindering role].” Alice confirmed with a link to a broader vision on blended learning:

I see teachers who often actually don't know what it [blended learning] means. While we know what the concept is, they [teachers] often don't know what it is, and what its complexities are. I have never seen a decent definition of it in policies of organizations [of blended learning].

According to the experts, the consequence is that teachers jump to conclusions or choose a wrongly informed course of action. Marc stated:

Because yes, a wrong perception that I hear a lot is that people think that blended learning is about integrating as many ICT tools as possible. I especially notice that when people talk about blended learning, that they think it just involves placing learning content online. Or they say ‘Oh, blended learning? Then you will video record my two-hour lectures?’

Harry said:

There are those teachers who record their web lectures, put them online, and only say to students ‘Go ahead now’. Obviously, that does not work, and then they say that students don't come to lectures anymore and exams are worse than before.

Finally, experts conclude that often teachers have more pragmatic reasons for adoption such as creating more time for other tasks and projects (Marc). Or according to Harry: “Teachers are confronted with a decrease in [teaching] time, so they decide to do it [the entire course] blended. Then it will take less [teaching] time.” In William's words: “Teachers think they have to teach less when applying blended learning, so in that way, they try to create more time for projects.”

5.2.4. Feeling anxious about (the implications of) technology
Implementation of blended learning obviously involves the use of numerous possible technologies, ranging from online learning environments to many external tools or social media. According to more than half of the experts, adoption of blended learning is hindered by a general anxiety towards technology, a fear of failing, and feelings of uncertainty. According to Finn: “Some teachers do not want certain things to be placed somewhere on a medium that they don't know how long it will stay online. There is also a kind of anxiety of how they come across on screen.”. Ferguson agreed:

Teachers may also be afraid of failure, I think that has something to do with it. Teachers still find the technical threshold to join too big. They then say ‘I can try something, but if something goes wrong, well, then I am the one in front of the class, I do not want to be embarrassed in front of my students’.

In Grace's words: “I have the feeling that people are afraid to open up their materials, are afraid of not realizing their goals, afraid of not being able to handle all their content if they switch to blended learning.” Harry and Agatha talked about uncertainty: “Of course, you never have certainty, you can have anxiety that something might go wrong. It is actually about allowing that uncertainty.” Frasier and Alice, on the other hand, referred to the implications of technology towards central services or students. Frasier stated: “Central services had developed a long blended learning checklist, and that scared people. Being faced with a three page checklist that the course must meet, the enthusiasm was already sinking a lot.” Alice said:

So, some are more anxious online, more anxious to fail someone or not to honor their agreements. Suppose someone [a student] put something important online, and you missed it? You didn't do anything about it? Of course, something can always happen face-to-face as well, but then you can solve it more easily.”

6. Discussion
This study utilizes a holistic approach to identify related teacher attributes that contribute to or hinder the implementation of blended learning. As Little's (2012) appeal for micro-process research on how practice is meaningfully constructed, this study offers insights and in-depth knowledge from experts about important teacher qualities and characteristics for blended learning implementation. Two sets of related attributes emerged from the interviews. During analysis of the data, relationships between the (sets of) attributes discerned. This section therefore discusses the main findings from a relational perspective.

6.1. Relationships between adaptive and maladaptive attributes
Firstly, both the adaptive and maladaptive attributes in this study contain two distinctions in teachers' pedagogical beliefs. According to Tondeur, van Braak, Ertmer, and Ottenbreit-Leftwich (2017), Kim, Kim, Lee, Spector, and DeMeester (2013), and Brown (2016), pedagogical beliefs critically inform teachers' practices and influence the integration of technology in education. The first two adaptive attributes in this study, namely putting teaching and education at the center, and holding a student-centered view on teaching, acknowledge the findings of Tondeur et al. (2017), Kim et al. (2013) and Brown (2016) in the specific context of blended learning implementation in higher education. Since blended learning provides teachers with opportunities to experiment with new teaching strategies and tools that engage students more (Vaughan, 2010), the first two adaptive attributes endorse the importance of a student-centered pedagogical belief when implementing blended learning.

In contrast, according to the experts in this study, the first two maladaptive attributes (prioritizing other tasks such as research or projects, and holding a teacher-centered pedagogical belief) hinder adoption of blended learning. Studies such as Jonker, März, & Voogt, 2020 have argued that teacher-centered teacher educators adopt technology less cohesively and therefore need extra support. The results in this study extend the research of Jonker, März, & Voogt, 2020 to other departments and faculties in higher education. It is worthwhile noting that all experts who were solely active in a university teaching context at the time of the interviews acknowledged the first maladaptive attribute “prioritizing other tasks over teaching”. It can be concluded that in the area of pedagogical beliefs, adaptive and maladaptive attributes mirror one other and can be regarded as two sides of the same coin.

Secondly, implementing blended learning requires a clear understanding and sufficient knowledge of the pedagogical concept (Ellis et al., 2006; Jonker, März, & Voogt, 2020). Surprisingly, a clear understanding of blended learning was not expressed explicitly by the experts as an adaptive attribute. Yet, this was mentioned as an important maladaptive attribute. It can be assumed that experts automatically include a thorough understanding of the concept in the adaptive attribute “being able to creatively connect tools to learning processes”. On the other hand, the experts clearly perceive “having unclear view of blended learning” as a barrier to implement blended learning. For example, Lai et al. (2018) state that blended learning often includes the use of video and knowledge clips. Therefore, teachers may have the unclear view that when integrating a video in their course, they implement blended learning. This is not necessarily the case. An insufficient understanding of the concept of blended learning can lead to jumping to conclusions.

Thirdly, a major finding of this study addresses teachers' self-reflective competence as teachers. This adaptive attribute relates to the attitude of “realizing a pedagogical need”. Realizing a pedagogical need for change agrees with the findings of Westbroek, de Vries, Walraven, Handelzalts, and McKenney (2019) who investigated peer-reviewed articles on teachers as co-designers during a curriculum innovation. Although the authors focus on collaborative curriculum design they state that “what ultimately motivated teachers to re-design their context was not a new scientific insight on how to do things, but a deeply felt and experienced problem in their teaching practice” (Westbroek et al., 2019, p. 43). Teacher reflection is particularly in line with Kearns (2016) who investigated the impact of online teaching on faculty innovation, and acknowledged the importance of reflection on practice in the process from moving face-to-face courses to online learning environments. While Philipsen et al. (2019) state that being able to self-reflect is important for every teacher, the experts in the current study accentuated that teacher reflection is more critical when implementing an innovation such as blended learning. The experts argued that applying blended learning to meet diverse students' needs and demands provokes self-reflection as a teacher more prominently. The attribute “being able to creatively connect tools to learning processes” could be regarded as a competence that overarches all other adaptive attributes in this study: building upon two distinctions in student-centered beliefs, three growth-oriented attitudes, and a capacity for self-reflection, this competence comprises the other adaptive attributes.

Fourthly, the adaptive attribute “daring to experiment and fail” and “daring to speak out” relate to the maladaptive attribute “being anxious about (the implications of) technology”. “Daring to experiment and fail” is in line with the research of Martin, Ritzhaupt, Kumar, and Budhrani (2019) who associate the willingness to experiment with award-winning online faculty teaching practices. Furthermore, “daring to speak out” involves the courage to open up and is in line with Jonker, März, and Voogt (2019) who investigated teacher design collaboration and endorsed open communication as a condition for teacher collaboration. The aforementioned two adaptive attributes are mirrored by the maladaptive attribute of having anxiety towards (the implications of) technology. A teacher who dares to experiment with technology and does not give up after failing, has lower anxiety and is more likely to be confident using technology (Howard, 2013). The maladaptive attribute of being anxious about technology and its implications is confirmed by Johnson, Wisniewski, Kuhlemeyer, Isaacs, and Krzykowski (2012) who adverted that technical anxiety can plague faculty throughout blending. Also, Howard (2013) acknowledged that decisions to integrate technology are influenced by negative emotions about technology.

6.2. Limitations and future research
This study also has its limitations. A first limitation concerns the methodological choice of expert interviews. Although expert interviews are considered a valid empirical method to reveal insider practical knowledge (Bogner et al., 2009; Bou et al., 2006; Van Audenhove & Donders, 2019), the main weakness of this method is that the experts express the perceptions of others. Firsthand information of teachers themselves were not included in the data. Consequently, it can be argued that the knowledge obtained from experts is not neutral. However, Van Audenhove and Donders (2019) assume that experts' knowledge can be generated reliably by using interviews when carefully approached methodologically. Furthermore, experts tend to be confident and open in their knowledge and opinions, when interviewed in an atmosphere of trust (Bogner et al., 2009; Van Audenhove & Donders, 2019). The first author carefully addressed these issues in a neutral way in order to improve reliability of the results. Yet, further research could add strength to these findings by means of firsthand teacher data. Investigation of teachers' blended learning practices through stimulated recall interviews for example, can validate or give nuance to the findings in this study.

Secondly, the teaching context and the culture of teaching impact teacher change (Fullan, 2014). Although the experts acknowledged the importance of context, these results were not included in this study. The context of the experts was examined during the sampling phase, but was not further addressed, nor included during data analysis. Moreover, the sample was limited to higher education in Flanders, Belgium, so the transfer of the results to higher education in other countries must be approached with caution. Future research could focus more on the relation between contextual or cultural complexities and the attributes from this study.

Next, the precise mental mechanisms behind the attribute “daring to experiment and fail” could be another possible area for future research. Intrinsic motivation might also play an important role, but how motivation relates to these attributes remains to be elucidated. This would clearly need further investigation, for example how the results of this study relate to the psychological needs for competence, autonomy and relatedness (Ryan & Deci, 2000).

Future investigations could focus on the practical implications of these attributes for teacher professional development initiatives. Questions such as “How can these results be translated into professional development initiatives so that practice benefits from it?” or “What approaches can contribute to help teachers shift from a general anxiety towards technology to a more experimental teacher behavior?” could need further investigation.

6.3. Implications
Holistically, the findings of this study have a number of implications for practice. Since the current study provides insights into important teacher attributes when implementing blended learning, organizations and practitioners concerned with the implementation of blended learning can benefit from the results in this study. Table 4 gives an overview of possible recommendations for practice with the attributes clustered.


Table 4. Summary of findings and recommendations for practice.

Teacher attributes	Recommendation
Teaching and education at the center
Student-centered pedagogical beliefs at the heart of the matter
Prioritizing other tasks over teaching
The teacher at the epicenter	Address pedagogical beliefs when organizing professional development initiatives by including reflection questions on teachers' pedagogical beliefs and convictions. Stimulate experimenting with new technologies and organize reflection sessions after having applied a new blended learning approach.
Realizing a need for change: the pedagogical wake-up call	Encourage teachers to evaluate courses from a student perspective in order to become aware of pedagogical needs for which blended learning might offer solutions.
Daring to experiment (and fail)
Being anxious about (the implications of) technology	Stimulate an organizational culture in which experimenting (and failing) with technology is allowed. For example, organize events where teachers can experiment with new technologies, guided by experts (innovation labs, future classroom setup, blended learning bootcamps etc.).
Daring to speak out: sharing needs and concerns	Invest in an organizational culture that builds on trust. Promote sharing experiences in a safe environment.
Being able to critically self-reflect as a teacher	Deliberately include teacher reflection activities during the implementation process (by using guidelines for reflection and reflection templates for example). Organize collegial consultation sessions to share experiences and practices.
Connecting technology to learning processes: the creative professional	Invest in sharing best practices and blended learning toolkits that demonstrate how technology deliberately contributes to learning processes.
Blended or blurred learning: in need for a clear understanding	Invest in teacher professional development initiatives that enhance insights in the multifaceted concept of blended learning, including paying attention to practical examples (for example a knowledgebase with best practices)
7. Conclusion
The implementation of blended learning is a challenging process and is influenced by many (f)actors. In any process of educational change, the teacher plays a pivotal role. This study was conducted with the aim of investigating teacher attributes that contribute to, or hinder the implementation of blended learning. Since experts are able to analyze deep structures of complex practical problems and have more contextual process knowledge than teachers who apply blended learning, a qualitative method of expert interviews was chosen. Twelve Flemish blended learning experts in higher education perceived seven teacher attributes as key for adoption of blended learning: (1) putting teaching and education at the center, (2) holding a student-centered pedagogical belief, (3) realizing a pedagogical need for change, (4) daring to experiment (and fail), (5) sharing needs and concerns, (6) being able to critically self-reflect as a teacher, and (7) being able to connect technologies to learning processes. According to the experts, four teacher attributes hinder adoption of blended learning: (1) prioritizing other tasks over teaching, (2) holding a teacher-centered pedagogical belief, (3) having an unclear view on blended learning, and (4) feeling anxious towards (the implications of) technology. Moreover, the relationship between the adaptive and the maladaptive is an interesting result that provides insights into how teachers can “shift” from rejection of blended learning to adoption. For example, overcoming anxiety for (the implications of) technology is a prerequisite to develop a capacity of connecting online technologies to learning processes. Or, discussing the orientation of a pedagogical belief with colleagues can stimulate becoming aware of a pedagogical need to implement blended learning.

Appendix A. Interview guideline
Date: October 2018–April 2019, between 39 and 86 min. p.p.

Materials: recording equipment + notebook.

Instruction beforehand through e-mail: You have experience with the implementation of blended learning. Can you describe a practical situation that has been successful (or unsuccessful) for you in the field of blended learning in higher education? We can then use that as a starting point for the interview. What was the need? How many teachers and department(s) were involved? How did teachers approach and handle the process of implementation? What was your role in the practical example?

Introduction: Interviewer shortly frames the main aim of the study and why we rely on their expertise. Signing of the informed consent.

Can you briefly tell who you are, what background and/or expertise you have in blended learning? As a preparation for this interview I asked you to shortly think about a successful (or not) case of blended learning implementation. Were you able to think of such a case? Can you describe it?

Guiding questions (Focus on leaving enough room for the experts to express freely and formulate longer answers. Experts do not like to be confined to restricted sets of questions.)

What made this case successful?

How important was the role of the teacher in your case?

How did you notice the success of this case in the teachers' practice?

What exactly made those teachers successful in the blended learning course? And not a few others?

Which traits do you see with those teachers?

Were there also teachers who refused to accept blended learning? Why?

How did you pull the over the line? How did you solve that?

What specific knowledge did they need to improve?

Which attitudes are typical for those teachers?

How do you ensure that teachers' attitudes change positively?

Which characteristics hinder implementation of blended learning?

What excuses do teachers sometimes make for not having to blend?

What role do teachers' beliefs play in implementing blended learning in their teaching practice?

Closure: The interview recordings will be transcribed and analyzed, of course anonymously. Did you have the feeling that you could describe everything as you wanted? Do you want to add or nuance something?

Thank you very much for your time and cooperation. We will inform you on the results.

Appendix B. Final coding scheme


Table 5. Final coding scheme.

Main category	Code	Description
Adaptive attributes	ADAPT_EduTeachCenter	Experts express that having belief that education and teaching are important for higher education and universities. Being concerned with education, teaching and learning.
ADAPT_StudCenteredBelief	Experts express as important: academic staff believes that coaching students, meeting students, listening to and respecting their voices, etc. is important.
ADAPT_Needforchange	Realizing a need for change; predisposition to start acting with blended learning. Can be student-centered, or more practically oriented reasons.
ADAPT_DaringToExp	Willingness to investigate and experiment with technology. Daring to experiment with technology. This also involves handling failure, continuing when sometimes it doesn't work the first time.
ADAPT_SharingNeedsConcerns	Having an open attitude to dare talk about educational practice.
ADAPT_Reflection	Teachers are able to reflect on their teaching practice and act upon it.
Having the capacity to reflect on own teaching practice with attention to relevant pedagogical knowledge. Being able to reflect on ‘what means good education’ for my students. Pedagogical reasoning on blended learning.
ADAPT_PedCreativityBL	Capacity to connect technology and learning processes, in function of blended learning (both F2F and online, connecting the two) and thus being able to recognize/find the added value of blended learning. Being creative in technology usage in a clear and coherent project.
Maladaptive attributes	MALADAPT_PrioritizingOther	Education and/or teaching are less important than other professional tasks such as projects/research etc.
MALADAPT_TeacherCentered	Holding the pedagogical belief that teaching is less active, mainly lecturing, distributing knowledge, “just giving” PowerPoints etc.
MALADAPT_UnclearViewBL	The concept of blended learning is unclear, teaching staff doesn't have a fine distinction of what the concept is. What follows is jumping to conclusions.
MALADAPT_Anxiety	General anxiety towards blended learning, failing with technology, feelings of uncertainty, perfectionistic, fear of failing.
