Previous studies have compared student performance for the same or similar classes delivered in both online and face-to-face learning environments, however, few studies have explored the effects of change of learning environment play in the student's ability to transfer knowledge gained in prerequisite courses to follow-on, or post-requisite courses. The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of the prerequisite course learning environment on student performance in post-requisite coursework. This study focused on undergraduate accounting, and employed a mixed methods approach to answer two main research questions. First, does student performance in post-requisite undergraduate accounting education vary based on the learning environment of the prerequisite course? Second, how do the learning environments of prerequisite and post-requisite courses influence student perceptions of the undergraduate accounting course sequence?

The results of this study indicate that student academic performance in the post-requisite course does not vary based on the learning environment of the prerequisite course. Additionally, while all students report encountering challenges, face-to-face students rely on self-study, collaboration with peers, and tutoring to overcome these challenges. Conversely, online students rely primarily on self-study to resolve similar challenges. The findings of this study suggest administrators should consider offering online prerequisite courses before, or in conjunction with their associated post-requisites, and provide similar access to external resources to assist with student learning challenges irrespective of learning environment.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Prerequisite learning

Knowledge transfer

Learning environments

1. Introduction
Knowledge transfer is broadly defined as the ability to extend what has been learned in one context to new contexts (Perkins & Salomon, 2012). The context, or environment in which knowledge is first acquired, is a key factor in understanding how the process of knowledge transfer works. Within higher education, the once universal face-to-face classroom environment is rapidly being replaced or supplemented with online learning and its many variants (Allen & Seaman, 2014). In fact, online learning is seen as a solution to the capacity constraints growing enrollments place on the current academic infrastructure (Howell, Williams, & Lindsay, 2003). Students are subsequently no longer just choosing which courses to enroll in, but are also making decisions about which learning environment they prefer for a particular course. While the topics and learning objectives of the various enrollment options for a given course may remain stable, the learning environment may vary greatly. It is unclear whether knowledge gained in one learning environment is as easily transferred when the student moves to another learning environment. Therefore, there is a need to develop a better understanding of how the learning environment of a prerequisite course influences academic performance in post-requisite courses.

2. Problem statement
Due to both the escalating costs in tuition at post-secondary universities, and the desire on the part of students for anytime, anywhere learning, many business schools are offering online courses to supplement traditional face-to-face instruction (Allen & Seaman, 2012). In 2013, > 7 million college students enrolled in online courses in the United States (Allen & Seaman, 2014). Today, administrative decisions regarding which courses are offered online are driven primarily by economic factors with little or no consideration given to the impact on student learning (Wegner, Holloway, & Garton, 1999). Online courses offer a more cost-effective way to teach more students with fewer physical assets than the equivalent campus-based course (Figlio et al., 2013, Lundberg et al., 2008). As stated by Bowen, Chingos, Lack, and Nygren (2014), “the time may finally be at hand when advances in information technology will permit, under the right circumstances, increases in productivity that can be translated into reductions in the cost of instruction” (p. 95). The authors also suggest that increases in online instruction may allow institutions to expand enrollment without a commensurate increase in space, representing significant cost avoidance relative to what institutions would likely need to spend should they choose to stay with a traditional model of instruction. Although business schools have embraced online delivery of individual courses, close to 40% of institutions have yet to offer fully online programs (Allen & Seaman, 2013). As a result, many students are required to complete a mix of both online and face-to-face courses. In fact, over 30% of all higher education students are now taking at least one online course in support of their degree requirements (Allen & Seaman, 2014). Students now have the option to complete entry level, or gateway courses, either online or face-to-face. However, these gateway courses often serve as prerequisite courses for more advanced coursework, which may or may not be offered online. Thus, it has become increasingly more common for students to complete prerequisite and the corresponding required post-requisite courses in different learning environments.

In a comprehensive research bibliography, Russell (1999) documented 355 research reports that found no significant difference (NSD) in student outcomes between alternate modes of education delivery. However, most of the studies Russell examined failed to take into account the cumulative effect of learning, and instead focused on comparisons between a single course offered both online and face-to-face. As a result, Phipps and Merisotis (1999) have called for further research on the impact of online learning over the course of an entire program or series of courses. This study responded directly to Phipps & Merisotis' original call by examining the impact of learning environment in an accounting course sequence.

3. Purpose of the study
Given the situation described above, the purpose of this study was to explore the extent to which the learning environment of prerequisite coursework impacts student performance in subsequent required, or post-requisite, coursework. Specifically, the researchers aimed to answer two research questions. First, does student performance in post-requisite undergraduate education vary based on the learning environment of the prerequisite course? Second, how do the learning environments of prerequisite and post-requisite business courses influence student perceptions of the undergraduate business course sequence?

The findings of this study are intended to help instructors better understand the challenges students may face in subsequent coursework based on the learning environment of completed prerequisites, and may serve as a basis for helping administrators in making choices regarding course offerings in online and face-to-face environments by establishing additional criteria beyond simply economic factors.

4. Literature review
4.1. Prerequisite learning effectiveness
Drennan and Rohde (2002) investigated the determinants of success in an advanced management accounting course. The authors found that students who had completed prerequisite accounting courses outperformed their exempted colleagues, and that prior knowledge of accounting was the most significant factor in determining students' results in advanced accounting subjects. This claim was supported by several additional studies that found a students' performance in high school accounting subjects had a positive and significant effect on their results in introductory collegiate accounting courses (Auyeung and Sands, 1993, Rohde and Kavanagh, 1996). Johnson and Kuennen (2006) provided further evidence of the positive influence of prerequisite knowledge. In administering a 15-question multiple-choice basic math skills quiz to 292 students, the authors found a students' score was positively and significantly related to the students' performance in an introductory statistics course, even when controlling for instructor.

Despite the richness of our understanding of the online learning environments, several gaps remain regarding the effectiveness of this learning format that require further investigation. One such gap, cited by Phipps and Merisotis (1999), is the need to study the impact of online learning over the course of an entire program or series of courses. To date, much of our understanding has been a result of emphasizing student outcomes based upon the format of individual courses. Many experimental studies have concluded that students participating in online courses perform as well as their counterparts in a traditional classroom setting (Neuhauser, 2002, Shelley et al., 2008, Van Ness et al., 2000, Wegner et al., 1999), yet little is known about the cumulative effect of knowledge and skill building over time.

In order to apply knowledge gained in a prerequisite course to an academic performance in a post-requisite course, students must first retain the prerequisite knowledge (Royer, 1979). In one of the first studies that considered the relationship between mode of delivery and knowledge retention, Cosgrove and Olitsky (2015) found that while there was no significant difference in student learning across face-to-face, web-enhanced face-to-face, and blended economics courses, on average students in the strict face-to-face learning environment retained more course knowledge than students in the blended environment. The authors offered two possible explanations for their findings. First, face-to-face environments may encourage greater incentive to actively listen in class, and second, face-to-face students demonstrated greater willingness to seek assistance of the instructor outside of the class than students in blended learning environment.

4.2. Comparing online and classroom learning
In 1983, Richard E. Clark published the results of a meta-analysis that examined the influence of media on learning and concluded that media does not influence learning under any circumstances (Clark, 1983). He argued that the medium is nothing more than a vehicle whereby instruction is delivered, and has no influence on the instruction itself. Clark's position is best articulated through his own analogy: “The best current evidence is that media are mere vehicles that deliver instruction but do not influence student achievement any more than the truck that delivers our groceries causes changes in our nutrition” (p. 445). Clark believed only the instructional method was capable of influencing learning, and the only factors that affected the choice of media were simply practical ones such as cost avoidance or convenience. He concluded by suggesting that any benefit that comes from the use of media is passed off as essentially wishful thinking, and “based on this consistent evidence, it seems reasonable to advise strongly against future media comparison research” (p. 450).

Richard Kozma responded to Clark's original work, and in the process triggered a rather visible debate in the literature (Clark, 1994, Kozma, 1994). After reviewing much of the same literature as Clark, Kozma concluded that various media have distinct symbol systems and processing capabilities that can complement those of the learner and produce a unique learning experience (Kozma, 1991). Kozma's contention that medium and method should have a more integral relationship led to a proposal that instructional theory need not depend on necessary conditions of learning, but rather, should describe the synergy between media, content, and learning interactions as a mechanism for focusing on establishing conditions that are sufficient to bring about learning.

The technology available today to assist student learning is vastly different than it was three decades ago during the initial effectiveness of media debate headlined by Clark and Kozma. In order to understand the strengths and limitations of modern day educational technologies, scholars have focused on research that compares online learning to traditional classroom learning. The most commonly studied comparison is with respect to learning outcomes between these two environments. Kleinman and Entin (2002) compared two sections of an introductory computer science course, and found no significant differences between online and classroom learning outcomes. Daymont and Blau (2008) completed a similar study for undergraduate management courses, and when they controlled for factors such as class, major, and cumulative GPA, found that students in online courses did as well in objective measures of student performance such as final course grade and average quiz scores as students in face-to-face classrooms. Numerous additional authors have also failed to detect a statistically significant difference in student learning between the two environments, (Neuhauser, 2002, Shelley et al., 2008, Van Ness et al., 2000, Wegner et al., 1999). These findings were consistent with the majority of current literature comparing traditional and online classes, namely that there is largely no difference between the two approaches to learning. In a comprehensive literature review, Russell (1999) analyzed dozens of studies that compared these two learning environments. The findings indicated no difference in student learning, and motivated his book entitled, The No Significant Difference Phenomenon.

A major report released by the U.S. Department of Education on June 26, 2009 contained a meta-analysis of more than a thousand empirical studies of online learning from 1996 through 2008. The meta-analysis found that, on average, students in online learning environments performed modestly better than those in face-to-face environments (Means, Toyama, Murphy, Bakia, & Jones, 2009). It is important to note, however, that the authors did not claim that online environments are superior as a medium, rather, they pointed to the potential of expanded learning in online environments that were not constrained by class time in the same way as face-to-face classrooms.

Student satisfaction has often been investigated along with learning outcomes. Although dropout or incomplete outcomes have been somewhat more prevalent for online students (Hiltz, 1997), overall course satisfaction ratings by students appear equal to, or superior to those for traditional classroom courses. While broad measures of course satisfaction may be similar between both environments, Shelley, Swartz, and Cole (2008) found classroom students to be statistically more satisfied with the instructor and overall course structure when comparing the online and classroom versions of the same business law course. An explanation for this difference was offered by Johnson, Aragon, and Shaik (2000), who surmised student ratings of instructor quality may tend to be higher when the student is able to build a personal connection through face-to-face classroom meetings. In instances where students reported less satisfaction with the comparative online course, the most frequently cited reasons related to the technical environment and lack of engaging course materials as compared to the face-to-face course (Vamosi, Pierce, & Slotkin, 2004).

The demographic composition of online and classroom students has also been examined in the scholarly literature. Kleinman and Entin (2002) found that online students tended to be older than their in-class counterparts. Wojciechowski and Palmer (2005) pointed out that while cumulative GPA and attendance at orientation sessions tend to be the best predictors of student success, students who are older are also more likely to be successful in online business courses. Over a series of studies, however, which began in 2000 and concluded in 2005, Dutton and Dutton (2005) discovered that online students in a business statistics course began resembling traditional classroom students on a number of important demographic dimensions, including age, enrollment status, and employment status. This fact may well indicate the increasing importance of online education for full-time campus students. It appears the informal boundaries between online and classroom learning environments are beginning to blur, and traditional classroom students are enrolling in online courses to provide flexibility in completing their degree requirements.

Student preference for the learning environment; online or classroom, has also been investigated extensively. Kolb and Kolb (2005) defined learning mode preference as the “description of individual differences in learning based on the learner's predisposition for employing different phases of the learning process” (p. 194). According to Sherry (1995), student preference for a learning mode is an important determinant of the effectiveness of learning. If true, this finding provides additional support for Kozma and others in arguing that environment does influence learning. Given that online courses experience a higher withdrawal rate, it would be beneficial for students to be enrolled in course formats that are most conducive to their learning preference. While Kleinman and Entin (2002) found that online students prefer written communications and find more value in textual descriptions of learning material, Neuhauser (2002) found no significant differences between the two groups on measures of learning preferences in an undergraduate management course.

Finally, the criteria students use to make enrollment decisions has also been compared between online and classroom learning environments. Kleinman and Entin (2002) viewed flexibility in scheduling to be paramount with online students. Beyond just flexibility, however, Roblyer (1999) suggested that control over the pace and timing of learning was of most importance to online students. Similarly, Ward and Newlands (1998) found the most important perceived student advantage of online learning was greater freedom of when to study. On the contrary, face-to-face students indicated that interaction with the instructor and other students was the primary factor influencing their choice. However, Terry, Owens, and Macy (2000) highlighted that acceptance of the perceived drawbacks of this lack of interaction in exchange for the benefits bestowed by the accessibility and convenience offered by online learning is a tradeoff many students were willing to make. In fact, O'Malley and McCraw (1999) surveyed 128 business students and found that although these students preferred traditional courses, they wanted their school to offer more classes online. This could either signify the students' optimism with the improvement of online course delivery, or could serve to highlight the students desire to prioritize convenience and flexibility over anticipated learning outcomes for knowledge they perceive to be less critical. In a study including 4789 students from 46 different universities in the United States, Wuensch, Aziz, Ozan, Kishore, and Tabrizi (2008) also found that students rated online courses as being greatly superior to face-to-face courses in terms of convenience and pacing. However, students rated face-to-face courses more favorably in terms of facilitating communication with other students, and aiding the learning of complex material. Given these findings, it is reasonable to assume that students will continue to choose to enroll in prerequisite courses offered online to take advantage of convenience and self-pacing benefits, while reserving face-to-face instruction for more advanced coursework where the perceived benefits of greater interaction with their peers and the instructor may aid in the learning of more complex knowledge.

5. Method
5.1. Research design
A mixed methods research design was used to investigate the research questions raised in this study. The central premise of mixed methods research is that the use of both quantitative and qualitative approaches, in combination, provides a better understanding of research problems than either approach alone (Creswell & Clark, 2007). This approach allows the researcher to triangulate the methods by directly comparing statistical results with qualitative findings for “corroboration and validation purposes” (Creswell & Clark, 2011). In this study, quantitative assessment of student grades was analyzed concurrently with data obtained from both closed and open-ended student survey items and instructor syllabi.

5.2. Research site
Schools of Business at six campuses of a large public university in the Midwestern United States served as the data collection site. Each school had the same admissions criteria for students, and often shared faculty across campuses to teach the required business courses. Each campus offered both current and historical course bulletins to identify prerequisite and post-requisite course offerings. Additionally, each campus offered prerequisite and post-requisite courses in online and face-to-face formats. Focusing on course pre- and post-requisite pairs represented a key delimitation for this study because such pairing represents an intentional curricular alignment that in turn allows for the study of knowledge transfer. Given this delimitation, it was necessary to identify what is thought of as valid course pairs, in that it is possible for the appearance that two courses are linked in an intentional manner, but instead these simply represent similar naming conventions with no intentioned knowledge transfer from one to the next.

5.2.1. Identifying course pairs
In order to identify a valid prerequisite and post-requisite course pair, a review of all six campus bulletins between the fall of 2011 and the fall of 2014 was conducted within each School of Business. Fifteen post-requisite courses with multiple prerequisites were eliminated from consideration in order to provide a single source of required student knowledge transfer. Post-requisite courses with a singular prerequisite were also eliminated if the prerequisite was not identified in each version of the campus bulletin published between the fall of 2011 and the fall of 2014 semesters. These criteria yielded a total of 205 unique prerequisite/post-requisite pairs (see Table 1).


Table 1. Frequencies of prerequisite/post-requisite pairs across campuses.

Campus	Prerequisite/post-requisite pairs - n
Campus 1	19
Campus 2	42
Campus 3	44
Campus 4	42
Campus 5	29
Campus 6	29
Total	205
In order to select a specific course pair to yield the target sample, each of the 205 course pairs were compared with the institutions' student enrollment records to identify approximate numbers of students enrolled in each course between the periods of the fall of 2011 and the fall of 2014. In order to maximize the sample size, course pairs were excluded if < 30 students had enrolled in all of the four desired learning environment course sequence scenarios (online – online, online – face-to-face, face-to-face – online, face-to-face – face-to-face). These criteria yielded one unique prerequisite/post-requisite pair: Financial Accounting (prerequisite) and Managerial Accounting (post-requisite), which was offered at all six campuses.

Therefore, the target sample for this study was defined as any college student who had enrolled and completed both introductory accounting courses either online or face-to-face between the fall of 2011 and the fall of 2014 semesters. These criteria yielded a sample of 2324 participants who had enrolled and completed both accounting courses at the targeted schools across the six campuses (see Table 2).


Table 2. Number of enrolled students by campus.

Course/Environment	Campus 1 - n	Campus 2 - n	Campus 3 - n	Campus 4 - n	Campus 5 - n	Campus 6 - n	Total n
Financial	Managerial	
Accounting	Accounting	
Online	Online	0	1	0	13	141	0	155
Online	Classroom	0	22	0	5	11	2	40
Classroom	Online	4	8	17	57	38	30	154
Classroom	Classroom	849	425	373	151	61	116	1975
Total	853	456	390	226	251	148	2324
5.3. Procedure
5.3.1. Academic census file
A census file was retrieved from the institution's repository containing student academic performance data in the accounting courses. A complete descriptive record for an individual student and their academic performance, included the following student attributes:

•
Prerequisite term – identified the academic term in which the student enrolled and completed the prerequisite financial accounting course.

•
Post-requisite term – identified the academic term in which the student enrolled and completed the post-requisite managerial accounting course.

•
Prerequisite grade – identified the course letter grade the student achieved in the prerequisite financial accounting course.

•
Prerequisite grade points – a continuous variable ranging from 0 to 4 that identified the numerical grade points used to calculate cumulative GPA associated with the student achieved letter grade in the prerequisite financial accounting course.

•
Prerequisite course average grade – identified the mean letter grade for the prerequisite financial accounting course section in which the student was enrolled.

•
Prerequisite course average grade points – a continuous variable ranging from 0 to 4 that identified the mean numerical grade points associated with the average letter grade for the prerequisite financial accounting course section in which the student was enrolled.

•
Post-requisite grade – identified the course letter grade the student achieved in the post-requisite managerial accounting course.

•
Post-requisite grade points – a continuous variable ranging from 0 to 4 that identified the numerical grade points used to calculate cumulative GPA associated with the student achieved letter grade in the post-requisite managerial accounting course.

•
Post-requisite course average grade - identified the mean letter grade for the post-requisite managerial accounting course section in which the student was enrolled.

•
Post-requisite course average grade points – a continuous variable ranging from 0 to 4 that identified the mean numerical grade points associated with the average letter grade for the post-requisite managerial accounting course section in which the student was enrolled.

5.3.2. Online survey design and administration
An online survey was used to collect student reflective data on their experience in both the financial accounting and managerial accounting courses (see Appendix A). Students were asked to reflect on their experience prior to, during, and after completing the courses. Specifically, they were asked what their motivation was for enrolling in either the face-to-face or online version of the course. Response options, which aligned with the findings on student selection criteria identified by Rydzewski, Eastman, and Bocchi (2010) included course pacing, instructor reputation, course format, fit with schedule, course related expenses, connection with peers, amount of independent learning, and amount of course interactivity. Students were also asked to identify both the instructional methods (e.g., lecture, discussion, practice problem review, etc.) used in the course and types of learning assignments they completed (e.g., exams, group projects, presentations). In addition, students were asked if they experienced any challenges with the learning environment. For students who indicated they did encounter learning environment challenges, a follow-up question asked them to specify at least two challenges they faced in the course, and how they overcame these challenges. Finally, students were asked to indicate their satisfaction with the following aspects of the course: course pacing, instruction, course format, course related expenses, connections with peers, amount of independent learning, amount of course interactivity, interactions with classmates, their learning, their grade, and their overall experience.

5.3.3. Instructor course syllabi
Course syllabi were requested from all instructors who taught either financial or managerial accounting at any of the six campuses included in the study. The syllabi were used to inspect the consistency of course content and materials across both courses. Data related to the following course components were inspected: learning outcomes, duration of course, duration of class meetings, learning assignments, course materials, and lecture topics. Instructors were asked to provide each version of the syllabus used for each course, and were advised as to the nature of its use in conjunction with this research study.

5.3.4. Data analyses
A mixed design repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was performed to answer the first research question. This test compared the students' standard scores in each of the four learning environment scenarios (both face-to-face, face-to-face followed by online, online followed by face-to-face, and both online) using the following null hypothesis:

H0 : μF − F = μF − O = μO − F = μO − O

To test for homogeneity, box plots were produced to graphically identify any outliers in student z scores. These box plots revealed two pre-requisite z scores and eight post-requisite z scores were outliers. It was confirmed that the outliers were not due to data entry or measurement errors. Given the total number of outliers represented 0.43% of the total sample, and it was believed the result would not be materially affected, the decision was made to include the outliers in the ANOVA test. Additionally, the distribution of the dependent variable in the four related learning environment groups was checked for normality using Normal Q-Q Plots. An analysis of plots revealed the concentration of both pre-requisite and post-requisite course z scores to be normally distributed.

Constant comparative analysis of student surveys and instructor course syllabi was performed to answer the second research question. First, open coding was used to examine each group of syllabi to identify commonality and differences. Next, an iterative sorting of the categories was used to define a mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive list of themes to describe these data. Finally, the themes that emerged from the sorting activity were compared to individual syllabi grouped by learning environment.

Constant comparative procedures were also followed for analysis of the student surveys. Open coding of student surveys was conducted to create a categorical list of the challenges identified by students with the learning environment associated with their experiences in the prerequisite and post-requisite course. Next, an iterative sorting of the categories was used to define a mutually exhaustive and collectively exhaustive list of themes to describe the student learning environment challenges. Finally, the themes that emerged from the sorting activity were compared by learning environment to determine the frequency and possible change in identified challenges by environment.

Along with analysis of student responses pertaining to learning environment challenges, descriptive statistics including frequencies, mean, and mode values were calculated for all closed-ended items included in the student survey.

6. Results
6.1. Course syllabi analysis
A total of 41 syllabi were collected from 27 instructors who taught either A201 or A202 between fall 2011 and fall 2014. Eight of these syllabi were from online courses, while 33 were from face-to-face classes. Analysis of the stated learning outcomes in A201 – Introduction to Financial Accounting syllabi revealed general agreement across campus and learning environment. All A201 syllabi identified that upon completion of the course students should be able to prepare the four basic financial statements: the balance sheet, income statement, statement of owner's equity, and statement of cash flows.

Agreement was also found across syllabi with respect to the learning assignments in both the prerequisite and post-requisite course. All forty-one syllabi analyzed included exams and/or quizzes as a measure of student performance. The most common course configuration included two interim exams evenly spread across the sixteen week course schedule, followed by a comprehensive final examination administered at the end of the course. In all cases, the source of the homework assignment was the end of chapter problems provided by the course assigned textbook. The dominance of exams and practice problem assignments in both courses irrespective of environment was confirmed by student survey responses.

A point of divergence between face-to-face and online accounting courses emerged with respect to class attendance. In online courses, where opportunities for synchronous classroom interaction may or may not have existed, class attendance was not assessed by the instructor. However, in approximately 30% of the face-to-face classes (29.41% for the prerequisite and 31.25% for the post-requisite), class attendance was taken and considered a component of the student's academic performance. Additionally, analysis shows that discussion contributions were more frequently assessed in online courses than in face-to-face courses. While seven of eight online syllabi included discussion contribution towards the student's academic performance, only 12 of 33 (approximately 36%) face-to-face classes included an assessment of student participation. This result was consistent with survey responses, in which only 7.5% of face-to-face students referenced discussion contributions as a learning assignment, compared to 22% of online students.

Another point of divergence between face-to-face and online accounting courses emerged with respect to class projects. Three-quarters of all online syllabi examined referred to a project, whereas only 30% of face-to-face syllabi included this learning assignment. Student survey responses, analyzed in order to better understand the nature of the project assignments, revealed that more than half of online students reported working on an independent project (48% in the prerequisite course, 61% in the post-requisite course), while less than a quarter reported working on a group project (25% in the prerequisite course, 19% in the post-requisite course).

6.2. Research question 1: Does student performance in post-requisite undergraduate business education vary based on the learning environment of the prerequisite course?
The mean academic performance standard score, standard deviation, and sample size for each course by learning environment sequence is provided in Table 3.


Table 3. Academic performance in prerequisite and post-requisite courses.

Learning environment sequence	A201 mean z score	A201 standard deviation	A202 mean z score	A202 standard deviation	n
Online – online	0.50	0.472	0.22	0.854	155
Online – classroom	0.33	0.762	0.11	0.952	41
Classroom – online	0.26	0.670	0.01	0.935	154
Classroom – classroom	0.35	0.746	0.09	0.939	1974
Total	0.35	0.727	0.09	0.934	2324
The repeated measures ANOVA test revealed significant changes in student academic performance between the prerequisite and post-requisite course, F (1, 2324) = 39.474, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.017. Academic performance decreased from the prerequisite course (M = 0.3518, SD = 0.727 standard course points) to post-requisite course (M = 0.0924, SD = 0.934 standard course points). These results indicate that students achieved approximately 0.259 standard deviations higher academic performance in A201 – Introduction to Financial Accounting than in A202 – Introduction to Managerial Accounting irrespective of the learning environment, and that 1.7% of the between subjects variance in academic performance is accounted for by the change in course. These results are consistent with the fact that students were required to pass A201 before enrolling in A202, and as a result, no failing grades were reflected in the A201 performance data.

There was no statistically significant difference between students' achieved academic performance in the prerequisite and post-requisite courses across the four learning environment pairings, and therefore we could not reject the null hypothesis. This result indicated that academic performance in the prerequisite and post-requisite courses were in general the same across all four learning environment scenarios, F (3, 2324) = 0.091, p = 0.965, partial η2 = 0. The average standard course scores, standard error, and confidence intervals for all four learning environment scenarios are described in Table 4.


Table 4. Average course standard scores by environment sequence.

Learning environment sequence	Mean course z score	Standard error	95% Confidence interval
Lower bound	Upper bound
Online – online	0.357	0.059	0.243	0.472
Online – classroom	0.219	0.114	-0.004	0.442
Classroom – online	0.132	0.059	0.017	0.247
Classroom – classroom	0.219	0.016	0.186	0.251
6.3. Research question 2: How do the learning environments of prerequisite and post-requisite courses influence student perceptions of the undergraduate business course sequence?
A total of 479 students responded to the survey. Provided in Table 5 is a summary of the number of student respondents by course sequence learning environment scenario.


Table 5. Survey respondents by course sequence learning environment scenario.

A201 environment	A202 environment	Number of student respondents - n	Response rate
Online	Online	31	0.20
Online	Classroom	6	0.17
Classroom	Online	32	0.21
Classroom	Classroom	410	0.21
Total	479	0.21
Students were asked to describe their motivations for enrolling in a particular version of both the prerequisite and post-requisite course. For both online and face-to-face students, the most frequently referenced enrollment motivation was fit with the student's schedule. This finding is consistent with the work of Ognjanovic, Gasevic, & Dawson (2016), who found that course scheduling time was considered by students to be the most important factor in student enrollment decisions. Approximately 23.5% of face-to-face students referenced instructor reputation as a motivating factor, while only 7% of online students were motivated by this factor. Additionally, face-to-face students more frequently identified the amount of course interaction (26.5%) and connection with their peers (18%) as motivating factors for enrollment than did online students (9.5% and 1.5% respectively). Conversely, online students identified the amount of independent learning as a motivating factor (13.5%) more frequently than face-to-face students (8.5%). Neither face-to-face, nor online students appeared to be motivated to enroll by course related expenses. Examination of open-ended responses referenced the requirement to complete the course for their specified degree, and/or the inability to choose another format based on limited course offerings as significant motivating factors for enrollment.

Students were asked if they were satisfied with both the prerequisite and post-requisite course experiences. Face-to-face students reported feeling satisfied with the connections they were able to make with their peers (35%) more frequently than online students (19%), as well as with their interactions with peers (32.5% face-to-face, 19% online). However, more online students reported feeling satisfied with the amount of independent learning (46%) than face-to-face students (26.5%). Additionally, more online students reported feeling satisfied with their grade (69%), learning (63.5%), and overall experience (52.5%) than face-to-face students (56%, 51.5%, and 42.5% respectively).

Students were also asked whether or not they encountered any challenges with the learning environment. While 40% of face-to-face students indicated challenges with the prerequisite learning environment, only 28% of online students indicated experiencing challenges. As noted earlier, a majority of the face-to-face classes utilized online accounting software specifically for graded homework assignments. Approximately 11% of face-to-face students reported challenges related to the software. As one student stated:

“One challenge was in regards to software. Because there was no training offered to me to learn the software, I felt like I had to study the material and study how to actually turn in my homework.”

For students who completed the prerequisite course online, the three most commonly reported challenges were technology (30%), instructor behavior (20%), and classmate behavior (17%). With respect to technology challenges, students often referred to either browser incompatibility issues, or frustrations with needing to answer comprehension questions before being permitted to navigate to required end of chapter quizzes. The most commonly referenced instructor behavior was a perceived lack of responsiveness. Referring to challenges with classmates, one online student remarked:

“Group projects were difficult especially when people in the group did not contribute as promised.”

For the face-to-face students who encountered challenges in the prerequisite learning environment, 72% indicated they were able to successfully overcome their challenges. This data suggested 12% of the face-to-face students surveyed faced challenges in the prerequisite learning environment that they were not able to overcome. Conversely, 100% of the online students who encountered challenges reported being able to overcome these challenges. Over half of all students (50.4% face-to-face, 55.5% online) indicated being able to overcome the challenges they faced through additional self-study. Additionally, 16.8% of face-to-face students and 11.1% of online students turned to classmates for assistance to overcome challenges. Tutoring, mentioned by 10.8% of face-to-face students, was not referred to at all by online students. Approximately 10% of both face-to-face and online students resorted to retaking the class in order to overcome their learning challenges. Of the students who retook the class, one online student referred to switching to the face-to-face environment. This student, in particular, commented on the decision to switch learning environments:

“The online version was the only online course that I've ever had trouble with, however I will take responsibility for most of the issues. My work responsibilities pulled me from my course work often, and ultimately during test day. As a result, I decided to retake the course in the classroom setting to force accountability.”

This student's comment supports the finding of You (2016), who demonstrated the significant effects of self-regulated learning for online students and the benefits of regularly accessing course material to keep pace with the syllabus schedule.

While 29% of face-to-face students indicated challenges with the post-requisite learning environment, 28% of online students indicated experiencing challenges. The most common challenge reported by face-to-face students was the difficulty level of the subject matter (26.8%), followed by the pace of the course (19.5%), and teaching method (14.6%). Illustrating the connection between the difficult subject matter and teaching method, one student provided the following comment:

“I struggled with the material more than I did in A201. I thought it was much harder to grasp the concept and the math confused me in a way that I couldn't understand in class. My professor taught in a way that made the class very difficult by not connecting the conceptual with the hands on methods of accounting.”

For students who completed the post-requisite course online, the most commonly reported challenges were technology (25%), and classmate behavior (25%). Referring to the technology challenges, one student remarked:

“The website was not very good. Always crashed and didn't work.”

Online students encountered similar challenges with classmates, yet several seemed to indicate the challenge may have been more easily overcome in a face-to-face learning environment. One online student commented on the challenge directly:

“Group projects are difficult to do in an online setting. Some group members did not do their part as promised. I think it is easier to discuss issues with group members face to face rather than in an online format.”

For the face-to-face students who encountered challenges in the post-requisite learning environment, 74% indicated they were able to successfully overcome these challenges. This data suggested 8% of the face-to-face students faced challenges in the post-requisite learning environment that they were not able to overcome. Similarly, 70% of the online students who encountered challenges reported being able to overcome them, suggesting 8% of the online students faced challenges in the post-requisite learning environment that they were not able to overcome. Similar to the prerequisite course, both face-to-face and online students most frequently pointed to self-study (57.5% face-to-face, 42.8% online) as the way they overcame the challenges they faced in the post-requisite course. While 27% of face-to-face students also relied on peers to help them overcome challenges, no online students referenced this type of collaboration with classmates to resolve challenges.

7. Discussion
7.1. Overall results
The research questions in this study were focused on trying to determine if learning environment affects knowledge transfer and the subsequent achievement of academic performance. Analysis of variance between student academic performance in a prerequisite and post-requisite accounting course confirmed that learning environment did not impact student academic performance. This result suggests that students' ability to transfer knowledge from prerequisite to post-requisite courses is not impacted by the learning environment of either course. Therefore, findings of this study offer further empirical evidence that online learning environments are capable of producing learning outcomes equal to those of more traditional face-to-face environments.

In spite of similarities, there were two interesting differences between the online and face-to-face prerequisite and post-requisite courses. First, the findings of the present study suggest that while online instructors consistently include participation in their evaluation of student performance, face-to-face instructors are less likely to evaluate participation, and instead focus on attendance in the classroom. Given that nearly 25% of face-to-face students reported course interactivity to be an important motivation for enrolling in the face-to-face course, this finding may help to explain why nearly 70% of face-to-students were not satisfied with both the amount of course interactivity and the interaction with their peers in the course. Second, the findings of the present study indicate that online classes in the accounting course sequence were more likely to include project assignments than face-to-face classes. In so far as projects provide students' with the ability to apply learning from the instruction in a simulated or real accounting situation, this finding may indicate a missed opportunity on the part of face-to-face instructors in facilitating student knowledge transfer. However, the majority of these project assignments tended to be completed individually, perhaps an attempt on the part of the instructor to avoid the complexities of coordinating group work in an online course. Given that both online and face-to-face students reported similar challenges with group work, this may be an area of unnecessary instructor accommodation for perceived limitations with online learning.

Regarding student motivations for enrolling in specific classes for the accounting course sequence, both online and face-to-face students most frequently identified fit with schedule and format of the class as motivating criteria. However, online students more frequently identified both the level of independent learning, as well as the anticipated pace of the course than did face-to-face students. On the contrary, it appears face-to-face students were more frequently motivated by the anticipated connection with peers, amount of course interactivity, and the reputation of the instructor. These findings are consistent with the prior work of Ward and Newlands (1998), who found the most important perceived student advantage of online learning was greater freedom of when to study, whereas face-to-face students indicated that interaction with the instructor and other students was the primary factor influencing their choice. These results lead to greater insight, however, when compared to student's perceived satisfaction with the course sequence. While 42 (65%) of online students were satisfied with the amount of independent learning and pace of the prerequisite and post-requisite course, only 28 (36%) of face-to-face students were satisfied with the amount of course interactivity and peer connections. Given the importance of these aspects of the learning environments to each group of respective students, these results indicate greater engagement on the part of the online students, and may help to provide a partial explanation as to why online students in both the prerequisite (55%) and post-requisite (50%) courses were more satisfied with their overall experience than face-to-face students (42% and 43% respectively).

Both face-to-face and online students reported encountering challenges with the learning environment in the accounting course sequence. While face-to-face students most commonly referenced instructor behavior, course pace, and misalignment between course topics and examinations, online students focused more on technology issues and classmate behavior. There was overlap however, as both groups students reported challenges with software used for homework assignments and challenges with instructor responsiveness. Both groups of students also reported challenges with group projects, indicating that both groups of students identified interactions with classmates as a learning environment challenge. These findings suggest that not only do technology challenges remain relevant for online learning, but that the incorporation of technology in face-to-face learning environments may also require additional student support than currently provided. Additionally, these findings suggest that interaction with peers in support of group work may be just as challenging for face-to-face students as it is for online students.

In order to overcome the environment challenges identified above, both face-to-face and online students reported relying upon self-study techniques. However, face-to-face students reported the ability to also rely upon their peers and campus provided tutors with greater frequency than online students. These findings suggest that either face-to-face students may have access to a wider array of resources to resolve learning challenges by virtue of being on campus, or online students may just not be aware that these resources exist.

Although this study did not find a learning environment impact on student academic performance, some aspects of the study regarding online learning are worth noting. First, the present study is among the first to examine the transfer of knowledge between prerequisite and post-requisite online courses. Second, this study is among the first to compare student academic performance between online and face-to-face learning environments over a prerequisite and post-requisite course sequence. Given the abundance of previous research which suggests no significant difference in learning outcomes between online and face-to-face environments (Neuhauser, 2002, Russell, 1999, Shelley et al., 2008, Van Ness et al., 2000, Wegner et al., 1999), it may be tempting to abandon the study of the learning environment's role in the transfer of knowledge between courses. However, given that students who followed up their face-to-face prerequisite experience with the online version of the post-requisite performed lower than those who completed both courses online (see Table 4), it may be premature to declare the study of the transfer of knowledge between learning environments sufficiently resolved. Revisiting the phenomenon of knowledge transfer, while focusing specifically on the face-to-face to online learning scenario, may yield more clarifying results.

7.2. Implications
The findings of this study offer modest explanations as to how the transfer effects of prior knowledge on academic performance may be influenced by the learning environment, some implications for instructors can be drawn from the results. Instructors of both face-to-face and online accounting courses should devote class time to orient the learner to the various electronic resources to be used throughout the course. Instructors should also continually monitor the pace of the course and revise student assessments to align closely with topics covered throughout the course instruction. Specifically for prerequisite courses, instructors should take advantage of opportunities to preview post-requisite learning outcomes and explicitly identify how the learning outcomes of the prerequisite provide knowledge required for more advanced coursework. Finally, instructors should be prepared to provide more support to students who are enrolled part-time, and/or who have completed a limited number of previous courses.

In addition, the findings of this study offer important implications for program administrators regarding how to enable online learning throughout a program of study. First, administrators should consider developing standard technology training materials for both online and face-to-face students to not only reduce individual instructor course development time in the learning environment, but also increase the consistency of environment usage across the program of study. Second, administrators should work to provide the same or similar access to external resources to assist with online student learning challenges as are currently provided for face-to-face students. Finally, administrators should move beyond economic considerations, and focus on student learning and instructional design and development resources when making learning environment decisions for courses.

7.3. Limitations
This study has the following limitations. First, the use of convenience sampling decreases the generalizability of results. The data came from six campuses of a large public university in the Midwest and were limited to undergraduate students taking sequential accounting courses offered by their respective schools of business. Future studies should include course pairs in other schools or colleges such as arts and sciences or education to validate that findings apply in other disciplines. Second, the time lapse between prerequisite and post-requisite course completion was not controlled for in this study, potentially impacting the knowledge retention and measurement of transfer in support of academic performance. Finally, the transfer of skills and knowledge from the prerequisite to the post-requisite course was not measured directly, rather inferred through analysis of student academic performance in the respective courses. Not only was the degree to which prior knowledge of prerequisite material important in achieving academic performance in the post-requisite course likely to vary across classes, so to was the likely existence of other variables affecting the student's academic performance.

7.4. Future research
In light of the findings of this study, there is need for future research in order to validate the findings in different contexts, to improve the precision of measured variables, and to address limitations regarding the current design. This study should be replicated across other academic disciplines to validate the findings in other business areas. Given that Arbaugh (2005) found a difference in learning outcomes and student satisfaction between quantitative and qualitative courses, of particular interest would be to replicate the study in less quantitative oriented disciplines such as management. Additionally, replicating this study using explicit pre-and post-tests of prerequisite course learning outcomes may improve the precision of transfer measurement. Further, pairing the results of these tests with an instrument that accurately measures factors affecting the transfer of learning such as Holton, Bates, and Ruona's (2000) Learning Transfer System Inventory (LTSI) may help not only more accurately assess student's ability to transfer knowledge in various learning environment scenarios, but may also may help to explain any observed differences in student transfer performance across these scenarios. Finally, in order to increase the rigor of determining whether a cause-effect relation exists between learning environment scenario and academic performance, future studies should use a randomized control trial design to control for systematic differences, or student bias, in the enrollment for each learning environment scenario. To the researcher's knowledge, there are only two published studies (Figlio et al., 2013, Bowen et al., 2014) and one working paper (Alpert, Couch, & Harmon, 2015) that use a random design to explore the impact of learning environment on learning outcomes in higher education.

In conclusion, although student ability to transfer prerequisite knowledge in support of post-requisite academic performance is not effected by the learning environment, as first reported by Arbaugh (2004), there continues to be a meaningful learning curve for students new to the online environment. Therefore, the question about online learning should no longer be whether or not students' can achieve similar outcomes as traditional face-to-face classrooms. Rather, research should focus on what interventions can be developed to decrease the amount of time it takes students to become functional in the online environment.

Appendix A. Appendix: Student survey instrument
Section 1: Experience in A201 – Introduction to financial accounting
1.
Through which campus were you enrolled in A201 – Introduction to financial accounting?

Campus 1

Campus 2

Campus 3

Campus 4

Campus 5

Campus 6

2.
In which learning environment did you complete A201 – Introduction to financial accounting?

Online

Face-to-Face

3.
Why did you enroll in the (online or face-to-face) version of A201 – Introduction to financial accounting? (check all that apply)

Course pacing

Instructor reputation

Course format

Fit with my schedule

Course related expenses

Connection with my peers

Amount of independent learning

Amount of course interactivity

Other ____________________.

4.
What instructional methods were used in A201? (check all that apply)

Lecture

Discussion

Demonstration

Guest speakers

Practice problem review

Other ____________________.

5.
What types of assignments did you complete in A201? (check all that apply)

Textbook readings

Practice problems

Independent projects

Group projects

Exams

Analysis papers

Discussion contributions

Presentations

Other ____________________.

6.
Did you encounter any challenges with the learning environment for A201? (consider factors such as course materials, learning assignments, technology, the instructor, classmate interaction, etc.)

Yes

No

7.
[Note: only asked if student selected ‘Yes’ for Question 8] Please explain at least two learning environment challenges you faced in A201.

8.
[Note: only asked if student selected ‘Yes’ for Question 8] Were you able to overcome these challenges?

Yes

No

9.
[Note: only asked if student selected ‘Yes’ for Question 10] Please explain how you were able to overcome these challenges.

10.
Please select the elements of A201 you were satisfied with. (check all that apply)

Course pacing

Instruction

Course format

Course related expenses

Connections I made with my peers

Amount of independent learning

Amount of course interactivity

Interactions with my classmates

My learning

My grade

My overall experience

Section 2: Experience in A202 – Introduction to managerial accounting
11.
Through which campus were you enrolled in A202 – Introduction to managerial accounting?

Campus 1

Campus 2

Campus 3

Campus 4

Campus 5

Campus 6

12.
In which learning environment did you complete A202 – Introduction to managerial accounting?

Online

Face-to-Face

13.
Why did you enroll in the (online or face-to-face) version of A202 – Introduction to managerial accounting?

Course pacing

Instructor reputation

Course format

Fit with my schedule

Course related expenses

Connection with my peers

Amount of independent learning

Amount of course interactivity

Other ____________________.

14.
What instructional methods were used in A202? (check all that apply)

Lecture

Discussio

Demonstration

Guest speakers

Practice problem review

Other ____________________.

15.
What types of assignments did you complete in A202? (check all that apply)

Textbook readings

Practice problems

Independent projects

Group projects

Exams

Analysis papers

Discussion contributions

Presentations

Other ____________________.

16.
Did you encounter any challenges with the learning environment for A202? (consider factors such as course materials, learning assignments, technology, the instructor, classmate interaction, etc.)

Yes

No

17.
[Note: only asked if student selected ‘Yes’ for Question 24] Please explain at least two learning environment challenges you faced in A202.

18.
[Note: only asked if student selected ‘Yes’ for Question 24] Were you able to overcome these challenges?

Yes

No

19.
[Note: only asked if student selected ‘Yes’ for Question 26] Please explain how you were able to overcome these challenges.

20.
Please select the elements of A202 you were satisfied with. (check all that apply)

Course pacing

Instruction

Course format

Course related expenses

Connections I made with my peers

Amount of independent learning

Amount of course interactivity

Interactions with my classmates

My learning

My grade

My overall experience