Outcomes in a blended course in business and economic statistics are assessed within the context of students' previous experience with online and blended courses. Experience with class formats that rely heavily upon online materials may translate into improved outcomes in subsequent blended courses. We explore whether any significant gains accrue to students due to previous experience. When outcomes were analyzed using the full sample of students, no effects on outcomes from having previous experience versus having none were found. However, when the transfer status of students and ranges of grade point averages were considered, it was found that online and blended experience provided a positive marginal effect on outcomes for high-achieving transfer students. The effect was one-third to two-thirds of a letter grade depending on the amount of experience.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Blended learning

Experience levels

Native students

Transfer students

Student outcomes

Marginal effects

1. Introduction
The most recent Condition of Education report from the U.S. Department of Education (McFarland et al., 2019) shows that 32.9% of all undergraduate students enrolled in U.S. degree-granting institutions took at least one distance education course in 2017. The 2019 report also highlights that 13.3% of all undergraduate students enrolled in those institutions participated exclusively in distance education. The surge in distance education offerings at postsecondary institutions has generated an equally impressive increase in the interest of researchers across many academic disciplines to study questions related to all aspects of online learning. The blended learning format, a natural offshoot of online learning, has also spread rapidly through postsecondary education. Representative summaries of studies from the blended learning movement are available in Arbaugh et al. (2009), Arbaugh (2014), Boelens, De Wever, and Voet (2017), Halverson, Graham, Spring, Drysdale, and Henrie (2014), and O'Flaherty and Phillips (2015). Although the blended format offers more opportunities for synchronous classroom activities, it shares common ground with the purely online format in that both rely on online delivery of course content. How students interact with online materials is an issue, and challenge, that is ever present in both the online and blended formats.

One group of students particularly prone to experiencing online education is transfer students (Community College Research Center (CCRC), 2013; Shapiro, Dundar, Wakhungu, Yuan, & Harrell, 2015). According to a report published by the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) Research Center (Shapiro et al., 2015) approximately one third of students enrolled in college transfer to a different higher education institution at least once. Additionally, when compared to other age groups, mobility between institutions is particularly pronounced for students 20 years of age or younger (NSC Research Center, 2016). Transfer students can experience vertical mobility (moving from two-year to four-year institutions), reverse mobility (moving from four-year to two-year institutions), and lateral mobility (e.g., moving from a four-year to another four-year institution) (Dongbin, Saatcioglu, & Neufeld, 2012; Dougherty & Kienzl, 2006; Goldrick-Rab & Pfeffer, 2009). Regardless of the “mobility” path followed by these students, many of them will experience online learning during their academic careers since online courses are offered in most higher education institution and in almost every community college in the United States (Community College Research Center (CCRC), 2013; Instructional Technology Council (ITC), 2018). These courses typically attract non-traditional students with a strong academic background, which in turn has been found to be positively associated with the number of credits accepted by receiving institutions (Simone, 2014). For the purpose of this study, we use the comprehensive definition of transfer students provided by Shapiro et al., (2015, p.3), which includes any change in a student's institution of enrollment irrespective of the timing, direction, or location of the move. Additionally, our definition is inclusive of all students that transfer hours from other institutions. Students that do not have transfer hours on their transcript will be referred to as “native students” in what follows.

A recent study by Ivins, Copenhaver, and Koclanes (2017) provides an extensive literature review focused on transitional theory and the transfer shock in higher education. The authors define a transition as a period in-between moments of stability, initiated by the move between two socio-cultural systems, and in which a person is aware of changes in their environment that cause an internal re-adjustment (p. 245). A core issue concerning transfer students is whether they perform better or worse that their native counterparts after transitioning to a new institution of higher education. Most studies have shown the presence of a transfer shock, or a decline in student performance after transferring to a new institution, as well as an increase in attrition rates (Knoell & Medsker, 1965; Rhine, Nelson, & Milligan, 2000; Schmidt & Wartick, 2014; Thurmond, 2007). In addition, several studies have identified the grade point average of transferring students as a factor positively correlated with student transfer success (Ditchkoff, Laband, & Hanby, 2003; Townsend, McNerny, & Arnold, 1993).

Our study contributes to the limited literature examining the effect that experience with online and blended courses has on the outcomes for students enrolled in subsequent blended courses. After examining the demographic and ability characteristics, as well as the online and blended course experience of the students in our sample, we investigate student outcomes according to their level of experience. Prospective differences in outcomes for transfer and native students are examined given the prospect of transfer shock and the differing patterns of previous exposure to online and blended courses exhibited by these two groups of students. Finally, because grade point averages play an important role during transitions in higher education, prospective effects of experience are examined across ranges of grade point averages for native and transfer students.

1.1. Research questions
Our goal is to discover evidence concerning the effect that experience with online and blended courses may or may not have on student outcomes in a blended course. The research questions are:

•
Does experience with online and blended courses have an effect on student outcomes in subsequent blended courses?

•
Does the prospective effect of experience with online and blended courses differ between transfer and native students?

•
Does the prospective effect of experience with online and blended courses differ across ranges of grade point averages?

2. Literature review
Several studies have summarized the different factors that contribute to online, blended, and flipped learning. Arbaugh et al. (2009) conducted a comprehensive literature review of research in online and blended learning in the areas of management, finance, accounting, marketing, information systems, operations/supply chain management, and economics. In management, for example, one of three key themes identified included studies on the perceptions (e.g., Koohang, 2004), attitudes (e.g., Walker & Jeurissen, 2003), and behaviors (e.g., Hwang & Arbaugh, 2006) of students engaged in online and blended courses. In a separate review, conducted by Brown (2016) on instructors' use of online resources in face-to-face courses, students' experiences, perspectives, and outcomes (p. 1) were identified as the topics most examined in empirical studies of blended learning. In a more recent study reviewing the literature on flipped classrooms, Akçayı and Akcayır (2018) provide examples of empirical works identifying the advantages and disadvantages of flipped classrooms on learner outcomes (e.g., knowledge and retention changes). The three comprehensive studies identified above show that the literature addressing the issue of outcomes in online, blended, and flipped courses is extensive. Yet, there is a very limited number of research studies investigating the effect that online and blended experience has on the performance of students enrolled in subsequent online and blended courses. In fact, the majority of studies examining previous experience have focused on its effect on student satisfaction, course completion, perceived student learning, and perceived course quality. For example, using 30 course sections offered in the disciplines of tourism administration, project management, and health sciences, Sher (2009) studied whether or not having experience with an online course was a significant determinant of a student's perceived learning at a private university in the United States. Examples of other research studies examining the effect of online experience on course completion, student satisfaction, and perceived learning outcomes and course quality include Dupin-Bryant (2004), Rodriguez, Ooms, and Montañez (2008), Haverila (2011), and Hixon, Barczyk, Ralston-Berg, and Buckenmeyer (2016).

Cheung and Kan (2002) are credited with being the first researchers to study how online experience affects outcomes in online courses by examining the records of 169 students enrolled in a business communication course offered at the Open University of Hong Kong (OUHK). Success in a subsequent online course was defined as simply passing that particular course. The authors categorized the number of online courses completed at OUHK into four categories: new to OUHK, 1–3, 4–6, and 7 or more courses. Using two-way cross-tabulation analysis, they found that the more experience students had completing online courses the more likely they were to pass other online classes. Cheung and Kan concluded their work by suggesting that familiarity with the online learning environment offered at OUHK could be one of the potential reasons for this finding.

Hachey, Wladis, and Conway (2012) examined the effect that having experience with online courses had on the subsequent success of students taking an online course. The data used in the study came from 962 students enrolled in a variety of upper and lower division courses offered at an urban community college in the United States. The authors define an online course as being one where at least 80% of the course's content is delivered online. They also define student “success” as completing a course with a “C” letter grade or better. The authors find that students who successfully complete an online course have significantly higher success rates in subsequent online courses than students who are not successful in completing a previous online class. Based on this finding, they suggest that students who are unsuccessful in completing online courses should receive additional support services, and that students who successfully complete online courses should be encouraged to take other online courses in the future.

Hachey, Wladis, and Conway (2015) furthered their previous research by focusing on online course experience as a predictor of outcomes in online STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) courses, while also controlling for the grade point average of students. In this study, the authors examined the performance of 1,566 students enrolled in STEM classes offered at a large urban U.S. community college for a period of eight years. They categorized a student's experience with online courses into four categories: “no prior online experience;” “successful” if a student completed all online courses with a “C-” letter grade or better; “mixed success” if a student completed some of the online courses with a “C-” letter grade or better; and “unsuccessful” if a student completed all online courses with a “D+” letter grade or worse. Using binary logistic regression, the authors found that students who had completed all online courses with a “C-” letter grade or better had better chances of successfully completing subsequent online courses, irrespective of their grade point average, than students who had mixed success with online education or were fully unsuccessful in completing previous online courses. As a result, the authors suggest that student outcomes in online courses should be examined while simultaneously controlling for grade point averages in order to provide more accurate predictors of student success in subsequent online courses.

Finally, a recent study by Wisneski, Ozogul, and Bichelmeyer (2017) investigated the effect that different learning environments have on student outcomes in a sequence of introductory undergraduate accounting courses. The authors used the overall course outcomes of 2,324 students first enrolled in Financial Accounting (prerequisite course) and later enrolled in Managerial Accounting (post-requisite course). These students were taught by 27 different instructors, between Fall 2011 and Fall 2014, in six campuses of a large public institution in the Midwest. The authors found no statistically significant difference in the performance of students in the prerequisite course and the post-requisite course across the four different sequence scenarios: prerequisite online – post-requisite online; prerequisite online – post-requisite classroom; prerequisite classroom – post-requisite online; prerequisite classroom – post-requisite classroom. While blended courses were not a part of their work, the sequencing involving online courses provided results that are relevant to the sequencing questions explored in our study.

The four studies discussed above do not provide a consistent picture of the influence that experience with online and blended courses may have on the subsequent performance of students completing other blended or online courses, thus signaling to a gap in the literature. Besides the limited number of studies available, the heterogeneous nature of the institutions examined in the literature may be to blame for the inconsistent findings. One study focused on a non-U.S. based Open University, while the other three studies examined student outcomes in two different types of U.S. institutions, a community college and a large four-year public university. Additionally, none of the studies above examined whether course outcomes of transfer students are affected by previous online and blended exposure or whether prospective effects might differ between native and transfer students. Clearly, more research is needed to close the gap currently present in the literature exploring whether online and blended exposure influences student outcomes in subsequent blended courses.

3. Method
3.1. Context of the study
The course examined in this study is a blended introductory course in business and economic statistics, offered at a four-year U.S. public university and taught by a single instructor. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the course. The course was offered in a flipped learning environment that allowed students flexibility in their choices of how frequently they attended class meetings without incurring point penalties. This type of flipped and flexible learning environment provides students with a wide range of learning options. At one end of the spectrum, students could receive a double dose of instruction by accessing all online materials and attending all semi-weekly, 75-minute face-to-face class meetings. At the other end, students had the option of making the course an online-only experience by not attending class meetings. As shown in a later section, the mean attendance was found to lie about half-way between the two extremes, suggesting that students chose to balance their online and in-class learning.


Table 1. Characteristics of the blended course.

Class frequency and time	Semi-weekly, 75 min per session
Prerequisites	27 Credit hours
Business calculus and computer proficiency
Number of sections	6
Number of students	509
Online resources	Narrated lecture slides
In-class activities	Demonstrations
Practice exercises
Collaborative work
Question-answer exchanges
Required assessments	Four in-class exams
Computer-based homework
There were four modules available in the course, each concluding with an in-class exam. Exams were similar in terms of format and coverage across sections, and accounted for 90% of a student's final course grade. Computer-based homework exercises were also required and accounted for 10% of student's final course grade. While each student received randomized data sets for these exercises, collaboration among students was encouraged by the instructor. Since homework points were not earned in a controlled environment, our outcomes measure will only include the sum of course points earned by students on the four exams (each exam was worth 40 points for a maximum of 160 points).

3.2. Participants
Six blended sections, involving a total of 509 students, provided data for the study. Student selection bias was not an issue since no advance information about the format of the course was available to students in the registration materials. Formal lectures, available only online and consisting of narrated slides, aligned closely with the structure of the course's textbook and served the purpose of introducing students to course materials. The online lectures were to be accessed before class meetings and were augmented with a number of classroom activities including demonstrations of applications, solving of practice problems, and collaborative work. The course followed a progress schedule, giving priority to in-class activities that aligned with the most current topics covered in the online narrated lectures.

3.3. Online and blended experience
Students were asked to report the number of online and blended courses that they had previously taken. Response choices were limited to none, one, and two or more. Two factors led to the decision to limit the choices and not offer students the option of responding with specific numbers above two. First, the prospect of detecting marginal effects on course points from movements between two and three courses, three and four courses, etc., is remote. Second, some students would likely have had a difficult time remembering the precise formats of all their previous courses to a degree that would translate into precise counts of online and blended formats beyond two courses of those types.

Students were provided with the following definitions of online and blended courses.

a)
Online course – All materials and activities that may include lectures, homework, group work, case studies, etc., are only available or conducted online. No regularly scheduled class meetings are held. Exams are taken online in either a proctored environment (e.g., a testing center) or in a non-proctored environment (e.g., on your computer).

b)
Blended course – A substantial portion of the traditional face-to-face instruction (in-class lectures or recitation section) is replaced by web-based online learning. Lectures and the majority of other course materials are available online. Class meetings are held but the number of them may be reduced or attendance may be optional. Class meetings are used for activities other than face-to-face lectures (examples: applications, topic demonstrations, group work, case studies, etc.) A traditional face-to-face lecture course that uses an online homework system or posts recordings of face-to-face lectures after they have been delivered in class does not qualify as a blended course. Rather, such a course is called “web enhanced.”

3.4. Framework for analyzing student outcomes
A variety of factors can contribute to student outcomes in blended courses. Grade point average, a reflection of current academic standing, has been used on numerous occasions as the cornerstone in models of student outcomes. Examples of studies that have relied upon grade point average are Baepler, Walker, and Driessen (2014), Brown and Liedholm (2002), Delialioglu and Yildirim (2008), Gratton-Lavoie and Stanley (2009), Palocsay and Stevens (2008), and Utts, Sommer, Acredolo, Maher, and Matthews (2003). We follow this tradition and use grade point average as the primary control variable in our models.

Several other factors that can be measured have the capability of influencing student outcomes. To assess general aptitude in the subject matter, a mandatory quiz in basic mathematics was given in the classroom at the beginning of the course. The 16-question quiz was based on that of Johnson and Kuennen (2006) and assessed math skills that are of use in successfully completing an introductory statistics course. The number of credit hours being taken in a semester may also influence student outcomes (Dowling, Godfrey, & Gyles, 2003) and will be included in our models. Higher credit hour loads may signal increasing demands on students' schedules and greater competition among the students' courses for their attention.

We also consider the effects of student engagement. First, we follow Riffell and Sibley (2005) by using class attendance as a control variable. We also use a second measure of student engagement, usage of online course materials, defined as the percent of online lectures accessed. The lectures were emphasized and promoted as being a key resource for success in the course. At the end of the course, students were asked to report the percent of the lectures that they had viewed. Ranges were provided for their responses: 0–25%; 26–50%; 51–75%; 76–100%. The midpoint of the range selected by the student was used as the point estimate of the student's percent. Usage of online course materials has been identified in the literature as a significant factor associated with student outcomes (Baugher, Varanelli, & Weisbord, 2003; Biktimirov & Klassen, 2008; You, 2016).

There is an extensive literature concerning the characteristics, experiences, and academic records of transfer students. Examples include Asarta, Fuess Jr., and Perumal (2013), Best and Gehring (1993), Buhagiar and Potter (2014), Friedl, Pittenger, and Sherman (2012), Johnson (2005), Jones, Kouliavtsev, and Ethridge (2013), Tobolowsky and Cox (2012), and Xueli (2009). Keller, Jassell, Webber, and Johnson (2009) represent transfer students with an indicator variable in a model of student outcomes from a principles of managerial accounting course. An indicator variable relegates all transfer students to be treated the same. However, prospective effects from transfer status may vary according to the number of credit hours that a student has transferred. Linear and quadratic terms involving transfer credit hours will be used in our model. In this way, the effects from transfer status are allowed to vary across transfer students.

Student levels of experience with online and blended courses will be represented by indicator variables in our models. We are flexible in judging how detailed the status of experience with online and blended courses can be measured and represented in a model. The prospective effect of experience may only be detectable by using a relatively coarse measure limited to the simple dichotomy of the student having had any experience versus none. Or it may be possible to use categories defined by levels of experience, thereby moving to a more diverse representation of the role that experience might play. We pursue both of the above directions, starting with a model that contains only the coarse measure of an indicator variable for having any experience, then moving to a specification that involves two levels of experience: only one course, and two or more courses. Interactions of the transfer credit hour variables and the experience variable(s) are also included.

3.5. Procedure
The basic model for course points in the business and economic statistics blended course is as follows:(1) 
 where CPBi represents the course points accumulated by student i in the blended course; GPAi is student i's grade point average at the beginning of the course; SMQi represents student i's score in the math quiz; TCHi is the total number of credit hours attempted by student i during the semester; PTCi represents the percent of total non-exam class meetings attended by student i; PTOi is the percent of the total online materials accessed by student i; TRHi is the number of transfer credit hours for student i; EOBi is an indicator variable taking the value of 1 if student i had experience with at least one previous online or blended course; ε - is the model error term. The model allows the effect from experience on course points to vary according to transfer status and transfer credit hours.

After replacing the single experience variable with indicator variables for the experience categories of only one course and two or more courses, and creating interactions of transfer credit hours and the two experience categories, the basic model expands to:(2) 
 where the indicator variables are: EOB1i - only one previous online or blended course; EOB2i - two or more previous online or blended courses. Model (2) allows for course points earned by native students and transfer students to be affected differently by the students' levels of online and blended experience.

3.6. Marginal effects of online and blended experience
A useful approach for framing the scale and significance of effects within models such as (1) and (2) is to determine the marginal effects stemming from characteristics of interest. A marginal effect is a measurement of the incremental effect from changing a variable while holding all other variables in the model constant. Table 2 contains a listing of marginal effects, based on the parameters in model (2), that are available among native students, among transfer students, and among all students. For example, among native students, the marginal effect on course points from having experience with only one online or blended course versus no experience is β9. Among transfer students, the marginal effect on course points from having experience with only one course versus no experience is β9 + β11 TRHi + β12 TRHi2. Marginal effects between native and transfer students are also available. For example, the marginal effect on course points from being a transfer student with experience with two or more courses versus a native student with no experience is β10 + (β7 + β13) TRHi + (β8 + β14) TRHi2. All of the marginal effects shown in Table 2 will be estimated and the results will be shown in a later section. The estimates will be the basis for answering the three research questions posed earlier: (1) whether or not experience with online and blended courses has an effect on outcomes in subsequent blended courses; (2) whether or not the prospective effects differ between transfer and native students; and (3) whether or not the prospective effects differ across ranges of grade point averages.


Table 2. Marginal effects on course points from online and blended experience.

Student group and experience level	Marginal effect
Among native students
One course	β9
Two or more courses	β10

Among transfer students
One course	β9 + β11 TRHi + β12 TRHi2
Two or more courses	β10 + β13 TRHi + β14 TRHi2

Among all students
Transfer and one course	β9 + (β7 + β11) TRHi + (β8 + β12) TRHi2
Transfer and two or more courses	β10 + (β7 + β13) TRHi + (β8 + β14) TRHi2
4. Results
The research questions recounted above involve effects on outcomes in blended courses from students having had experience with online and blended courses. Also involved in the research questions are possible differences in effects with respect to native versus transfer students, and possible differences in effects across ranges of grade point averages. Accordingly, it is important to report the patterns of online and blended experience that correspond to the inquiries posed in the research questions. A traditional summary of the sample's broad characteristics is useful as well. Sample means, standard deviations, and proportions reported in the tables below are descriptive only and were not used for formal statistical tests. Those types of inferential tasks were conducted in the more complete contexts afforded by models (1) and (2), where control variables were included.

The first table in the section provides summary statistics and extremes for the entire sample. It is followed by two tables that show breakdowns of (1) online and blended experience levels for native and transfer students and (2) course outcomes by ranges of grade point average and levels of online and blended experience, respectively. The tables reveal patterns that support suspicions of a native-transfer student dichotomy and of differences in outcomes according to grade point averages. Thus, the patterns in the tables support the specifications of models (1) and (2).

4.1. Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics for the characteristics of the 509 students in the sample are given in Table 3. Data from the university's archival system was retrieved and provided by the institutional research office of the university. Mean age, as calculated at the beginning of the course, was close to 20 years. Many students take the course in their sophomore or junior year because it serves as a prerequisite for a wide variety of upper-level courses. The mean of total credit hours, 45.4, reflects the general position of the course within the time flow of many of the students' baccalaureate programs. However, the relatively high standard deviation of total credit hours is an indicator of the course's broad constituency that ranges from undergraduates on standard curriculum tracks to students who take the course toward the end of their degree programs.


Table 3. Sample characteristics, n = 509.

Characteristic	Mean	Standard dev.	Minimum	Maximum
Age (years)	19.7	1.3	18	30
Total hours (credits)	45.4	18.0	11	134
 Native studentsa	39.1	14.3	11	101
 Transfer studentsa	50.8	19.1	19	134
Transfer hours (credits)	15.3	12.0	2	103
Semester hours (credits)	14.4	1.7	10	20
Grade point average (points)	3.31	0.4	2.40	4.00
Math quiz score (points)	11.6	2.7	2	16
Attendance (percent)	55.0	28.4	4.5	100
Lectures accessed (percent)	62.4	28.9	0	88
Course points	119.9	20.1	72	156
a
Sample sizes: native - 236; transfer - 273.

Transfer students represent the majority portion of students in the sample, with approximately 54% of all students in the sample (273 of 509) having transferred hours into their programs. Transfer students had a higher mean of credit hours, 50.8, than did native students, 39.1. The mean number of credit hours transferred was 15.3, about 30% of the mean for total credit hours earned prior to the course. The standard deviation of transfer credit hours is high compared to the mean, indicating that the definition of transfer student covers a broad spectrum, anywhere from transferring just one course to transferring a substantial number of credit hours. As concerns the present study, the higher mean of total credit hours for transfer students suggests that they may have had more opportunities to select online and blended courses than did native students. Or, transfer students may have had more instances, versus native students, where they took courses that were only offered in online and blended formats. Either of the above circumstances could translate into the transfer students in our sample having more experience than native students with online and blended courses. Because of this prospect, we will investigate the dichotomy of native and transfer students thoroughly as it relates to experience with online and blended courses, and the effects that such experience might have had on outcomes in our blended course.

Grade point average, recorded as of the beginning of the course, reflects current academic standing and was reasonably high in our sample of students at 3.31 on the typical 4.00 scale. The mean score on the math quiz, a measure of quantitative aptitude, was 11.6 out of 16 points. The mean percent for attendance was 55.0%. True to the blended nature of our course, students chose to reduce their attendance in response to the flexibility that was provided to them. Student behavior in accessing lectures showed wide variability around the mean of 62.4%.

Our measure of student outcomes, course points, is the final entry in Table 3 and shows a mean of 119.9 points out of 160 possible points. There is substantial variation in course points among students as shown by the standard deviation, variation that we attempt to explain with the models described previously.

4.2. Patterns of online and blended experience
The extent of online and blended experience across students is reported in Table 4. All else equal, transfer students may have had more opportunities to take online and blended classes since they had, on average, higher credit hours than native students as shown in Table 3. We organize Table 4 to show the breakdown of experience according to native and transfer students. For all students, 44.8% (28.1% + 16.7%) of them had taken at least one online or blended course, with 16.7% having taken two or more such courses.


Table 4. Proportions of students with online and blended experience.

None	One course	Two or more courses	All
Native studentsa	0.279	0.130	0.055	0.464
Transfer studentsa	0.273	0.151	0.112	0.536
Total	0.552	0.281	0.167	1.000
a
Sample sizes: native - 236; transfer - 273.

Of all transfer students, the percent having taken two or more courses was (0.112/0.536) × 100 = 20.9% whereas for native students, the percent was (0.055/0.464) × 100 = 11.9%. The difference between native and transfer categories was not as pronounced for students who had taken only one online or blended course. For native students, the percent having taken only one course was (0.130/0.464) × 100 = 28.0% while for transfer students the percent was (0.151/0.536) × 100 = 28.2%. Overall, transfer students were more likely to have taken at least one online or blended course, ((0.151 + 0.112)/0.536) × 100 = 49.1%, than were native students, ((0.130 + 0.005)/0.464) × 100 = 39.9%, but transfer students were much more likely to have taken two or more such courses. Because of these differences between native and transfer students, we will continue to document student characteristics and course outcomes for both categories of students.

4.3. Ranges of grade point averages
The mean values in Table 5 are intended to provide general impressions of the prospective relationship between course points and grade point average, and the role that experience with online and blended courses might play. Grade point averages were segmented into three ranges and the means of course points are presented for native and transfer students according to their experience levels with online and blended courses. In the far-right column of the table, the mean of course points advanced upward through the three grade point average ranges in the native and transfer student groups, suggesting a strong positive relationship between grade point average and course points. The upward advancement of the mean of course points through the grade point average ranges also occurred within each experience level for native and transfer students alike.


Table 5. Course points (of 160) by ranges of grade point averages and online and blended experience, means.

Ranges of grade point averages	None	One course	Two or more courses	All
Native studentsa
All	121.0	122.6	119.3	121.3
Below 3.00	105.4	103.3	102.3	104.4
3.00–3.50	117.4	118.9	120.3	118.1
Above 3.50	134.3	137.8	135.6	135.5

Transfer studentsa
All	119.3	120.5	114.9	118.7
Below 3.00	100.5	99.2	102.6	100.7
3.00–3.50	115.4	117.7	110.1	114.9
Above 3.50	133.7	137.8	139.8	135.8
a
Sample sizes: native - 236; transfer - 273.

For all native students, the mean of course points rose slightly when moving from having no experience to the experience level of only one course, from 121.0 to 122.6 (out of 160), but declined to 119.3 for the experience level of two or more courses. However, when ranges of grade point averages were considered, three distinct patterns were uncovered. Only in the middle range of 3.00–3.50 did we observe a pattern that suggests a positive relationship between course points and experience level. In the bottom range (below 3.00), the mean of course points declined as experience levels increased. In the top range (above 3.50), the mean of course points rose for students with an experience level of only one course, but then declined when moving to students that had taken two or more courses. Even so, the mean of course points for students in the top range with two or more courses was slightly higher at 135.6 than the mean of 134.3 points for students in the top range with no online or blended experience. Overall, there was a lack of consistent and sizeable movement in course points as experience increased among native students.

For transfer students, three distinct patterns in the progression of course point means through experience levels are present in Table 5, but the three patterns are not the same as those in the corresponding grade point average ranges for native students. In the bottom range, the mean of course points declined when moving from no experience to only one course, then increased with experience with two or more courses to finish at 102.6 points. That value is higher than the mean of 100.5 points for students in the bottom range with no experience. In the middle range, we observed a pattern that was similar to that of native students when moving from no experience to having experience with only one course, but then a decline in the mean of course points to 110.1 occurred when moving onward to the experience level of two or more courses. In contrast, native students in the middle range with two or more courses of experience achieved a higher mean of 120.3 points.

Turning to the top range of grade point averages for transfer students, the mean of course points proceeded upward in a relatively consistent manner as the level of experience increased, finishing at 139.8 points for transfer students with two or more courses; it was the highest mean across all of the categories in Table 5. The mean for native students in the corresponding category was 135.6 points. Overall, the two largest differences in means between native and transfer students occurred in the middle range (120.3 vs. 110.1) and top range (135.6 vs. 139.8) of grade point averages within the experience level of two or more courses. At that experience level, native students scored higher than transfer students in the middle range, but transfer students scored higher than native students in the top range. The upward progression of course points as experience increased in the top range of grade point averages suggests a positive relationship between experience and course points. However, conclusions must be delayed until results from estimating models (1) and (2) are considered.

4.4. Results for student outcomes
The first two research questions of the study ask (1) whether or not experience with online and blended courses has an effect on student outcomes in subsequent blended courses, and (2) whether or not the prospective effect from experience differs between transfer and native students. Models (1) and (2) were estimated to obtain evidence about the presence, or lack thereof, of effects from experience. The first column of results in Table 6 were obtained from estimating model (1) with the full sample of student observations. Determination of the statistical significance of coefficients in Table 6 was based upon the t-statistics reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. Significance levels for the t-tests are shown in the notes section under the table. Before evaluating the results pertaining to effects from experience, results associated with other variables in the models will be noted. Among the other variables, grade point average and the math quiz score were statistically significant determinants of student outcomes. The partial effect from a one-point increase in grade point average was 32.373 course points, a very strong effect considering that the mean grade point average was 3.31 and the mean of course points was approximately 120 out of a possible 160. The partial effect of a one-point increase in the math quiz score (recall that 16 was the maximum score) on course points was 0.790. At the mean of the math quiz score, 11.6 points, the contribution to course points was 9.2 (0.790 × 11.6). Previous academic achievement, as revealed through grade point average, and aptitude in the subject matter, as revealed through the math quiz, were by far the dominant determinants of course points in the model.


Table 6. Course points - estimation results.

Variables	Coefficientsa
All students	All students	GPAs above 3.50	GPAs above 3.50
Grade point average	32.373 (21.21)b	32.356 (21.12)b	31.378 (7.21)b	31.477 (7.06)b
Math quiz score	0.790 (3.19)b	0.793 (3.21)b	1.264 (3.75)b	1.229 (3.62)b
Semester hours	0.001 (0.01)	0.021 (0.05)	0.152 (0.34)	0.170 (0.38)
Attendance	1.723 (0.78)	1.708 (0.78)	0.958 (0.37)	0.052 (0.02)
Lectures accessed	0.014 (0.68)	0.014 (0.64)	0.009 (0.41)	0.009 (0.41)
Transfer hours	−0.004 (−0.03)	−0.003 (−0.03)	0.044 (0.34)	0.049 (0.38)
Transfer hours2	−0.0003 (−0.22)	−0.0003 (−0.23)	−0.001 (−0.73)	−0.001 (−0.78)
Previous experience	1.959 (1.25)		2.389 (1.32)	
Previous experience and transfer hours	−0.057 (−0.30)		0.557 (2.33)b	
Previous experience and transfer hours2	−0.0002 (−0.08)		−0.017 (−3.82)b	
One course		2.696 (1.52)		2.873 (1.29)
Two or more courses		0.269 (0.12)		0.218 (0.11)
One course and transfer hours		−0.092 (−0.38)		0.624 (1.66)c
One course and transfer hours2		−0.001 (0.21)		−0.026 (−2.58)b
Two or more courses and transfer hours		0.095 (0.35)		0.989 (3.96)b
Two or more courses and transfer hours2		−0.002 (−0.42)		−0.022 (−5.68)b
Constant	1.320 (0.20)	1.105 (0.17)	−3.142 (−0.18)	−2.760 (−0.16)
R2	0.541	0.543	0.467	0.479
Bold typeface indicates statistically significant coefficients.

a
t-statistics are in parentheses.

b
Significance level - 0.05.

c
Significance level - 0.10.

Semester credit hours did not provide a significant effect on course points. As such, competing demands for the students' time and attention from other courses did not seem to have an effect on students' outcomes. Attendance percent and percent of online lectures accessed were not significant, although the sign on both coefficients was positive. The lack of significance for attendance and accesses may reflect the wide variety of ways that students can choose to operate in the blended environment. For example, a low attendance percent need not translate into a low course point total if the students have been productive in working with the online materials, text, and ancillaries on their own. Conversely, a high attendance percent need not translate into a high course point total if the students have not done the out-of-class work of reading, practicing, and working with online materials.

Being a transfer student was not a significant factor in determining course points. Recall that this direction of inquiry was prompted by the contrasting results between native and transfer students with respect to the likelihoods of having taken previous online and blended courses and the differences in course points. However, neither the level of transfer credit hours nor the quadratic term involving those hours proved significant. There is not a significant distinction to be made between native and transfer students based on results from estimating model (1) with the full set of student observations.

Previous experience, as represented by an indicator variable for the student having any online or blended course experience, had a positive effect on course points but was not significant. The interactions between previous experience and the transfer status variables were not significant, thereby closing the final avenue that transfer status might have had to affect course points in the context of model (1). If there were significant effects from experience or its interaction with transfer status lurking in the background, they were not revealed through the coarse measure of whether the student had any experience or not with online or blended learning.

The second column of results presented in Table 6 was obtained from estimating model (2). The single indicator variable of previous experience is replaced by a pair of indicator variables, the first for an experience level of only one course and the second for an experience level of two or more courses. The two indicator variables are mutually exclusive, that is, the indicator variable for the experience level of only one course takes on a unit value for students that had taken only one previous online or blended course. Thus, the coefficients on the two indicator variables are separate partial effects with respect to having no experience with online and blended courses. Interactions between the indicator variables and the transfer credit hour variables are also present in the model. Within this entire group of indicator and interaction variables, none provided significant effects on course points. Based on the full sample of students, the answers to our first two research questions are both no, that is, experience with online and blended courses had no significant effect on either native or transfer student outcomes in the subsequent blended course.

4.5. Results for ranges of grade point averages
Having answered the first two research questions in the negative based on the full sample of students, attention turns to the third research question. Does the prospective effect of online and blended experience on student outcomes in subsequent blended courses differ across ranges of grade point averages? The inconsistency of patterns in mean course points across the ranges in Table 5 suggests that an inquiry should be made within each range. Models (1) and (2) were estimated using only the observations from the three ranges, respectively: bottom (below 3.00); middle (3.00–3.50); and top (above 3.50). The results for the bottom and middle ranges are not reported since they were very similar in character to the results for the full sample of observations shown in columns one and two of Table 6. Previous experience with online and blended courses and interactions of experience with transfer status provided no significant influences on course points for students in the bottom and middle ranges of grade point averages.

Turning to the top range, grade point average and the math quiz score continued to provide significant positive effects on course points. Column 3 of Table 6 contains the coefficient estimates of model (1) for the top range. More diversity in the effects on course points emerged as compared to results from the full set, bottom range, and middle range of observations. Interactions of previous experience with each of the transfer credit hour variables were significant. In contrast, the coefficients on previous experience and transfer credit hour variables, in isolation of each other, were insignificant. Thus, there was no effect on course points from being a transfer student without consideration of experience level, and no effect on course points from having previous experience without consideration of transfer status. For native students, having previous online and blended experience did not provide a significant effect on course points.

Coefficient estimates of model (2) for the top range of grade point averages are presented in column 4 of Table 6. Interactions between the pair of indicator variables for levels of previous experience and the transfer credit hour variables were significant, similar to the findings from model (1) for the top range (column 3). Course points of native students were not significantly affected by levels of previous experience while course points of transfer students were significantly affected.

4.6. Estimates of marginal effects
Estimates of the marginal effects on course points from online and blended experience levels within the native student group, transfer student group, and all students are shown in Table 7. The formulas shown in Table 2 were used in conjunction with the coefficient estimates of model (2) from columns 2 and 4 of Table 6 and the means of transfer hours. Among native students, there were no significant effects from any level of experience with online and blended courses, either in the full set of observations or in the top range of grade point averages. Among transfer students in the top range, the marginal effect from having experience with only one course was positive and significant at 6.383 course points. Among those same transfer students, the marginal effect from having experience with two or more courses was positive and significant at 10.210 course points.


Table 7. Estimated marginal effects of online and blended experience on course points.

Student group and experience level	All studentsa	GPAs above 3.50a
Among native students
One course	2.696 (1.53)	2.874 (1.29)
Two or more courses	0.269 (0.12)	0.218 (0.11)

Among transfer students
One course	1.008 (0.46)	6.383 (2.38)b
Two or more courses	1.333 (0.52)	10.210 (4.87)b

Among all students
One course and transfer	0.895 (0.43)	6.898 (2.71)b
Two or more courses and transfer	1.221 (0.49)	10.724 (5.36)b
a
t-statistics are in parentheses.

b
Significance level - 0.05.

To provide numerical context for the marginal effects, recall that the total of available course points was 160 and, from Table 5, the mean of course points earned by transfer students in the top range was 135.8. Among all students in the top range of grade point averages, the marginal effect from being a transfer student with experience with only one course was positive and significant at 6.898. Among those same students, the marginal effect from being a transfer student with experience with two or more courses was positive and significant at 10.724 course points. Within the letter grade scale of the course, an extra six to ten points would move a transfer student in the top range upward by one-third to two-thirds of a letter grade, for example from B+ to either A- or A.

Marginal effects in the bottom and middle ranges of grade point averages are not reported in Table 7 since they were similar in character to the results for the full set of observations shown in the first column. Previous experience with online and blended courses did not provide any significant marginal effects on course points in the bottom and middle ranges of grade point averages. With respect to the third research question of the study, the answer is yes, but just for transfer students in the top range of grade point averages. Only in that group did experience with online and blended courses have a positive and significant effect on outcomes in the subsequent blended course.

5. Discussion and conclusions
We have explored the question of whether experience gained in online and blended courses is associated with student outcomes in subsequent blended courses. The answer would seem to be relatively obvious: experience gained in fully or partially self-directed course environments, and skills developed by having to work with online materials, would seem to translate into an advantage in subsequent encounters with similar formats. However, our results do not support a general conclusion that experience is a determinant of outcomes in subsequent courses. Instead, we have found that various groups of students need to be recognized and taken into consideration when analyzing prospective effects from previous experience. By doing so, we have shown that the level of experience was related to outcomes, but only for a particular group of students.

Our investigation included the consideration of student groups after recognizing that a dichotomy of native (non-transfer) and transfer students might exist with respect to levels of previous experience with online and blended courses. The suspected dichotomy of native and transfer students was confirmed in our sample after documenting their respective levels of previous experience. Transfer students were more likely than native students to have had previous experience. Furthermore, transfer students were almost twice as likely to have had previous experience with two or more courses.

For the full group of native students (all grade point averages), no level of previous experience with online and blended learning yielded marginal benefits to course points, that is, the marginal effect on course points from being a native student with previous experience versus being a native student with no experience was not significant. When the full group of transfer students was considered, results similar to those for the group of all native students were found. Once again, marginal effects on course points from being a transfer student with previous experience versus having no experience were not significant. We also investigated whether the combination of having previous experience and being a transfer student would provide a marginal effect on course points versus being a native student with no experience. The effect was not significant. Analyzing the full groups of native and transfer students failed to reveal any significant effects on course points from previous experience with online and blended courses. Our suspicion of differential effects on course points from previous experience, either within the full groups of native or transfer students, or across them, was not confirmed by the estimation results.

The second phase of considering student groups involved segmenting the full sample of students into ranges of grade point averages while continuing to recognize the possibility of differences in outcomes between native and transfer students. For native students, no level of previous experience with online and blended courses yielded marginal effects on course points within any of the three ranges of grade point averages. A similar absence of effects from previous experience was found for transfer students in the bottom and middle ranges of grade point averages. However, among transfer students in the top range of grade point averages, experience with only one online or blended course provided a significant marginal effect on course points. Specifically, the marginal effect on course points from having experience with only one online or blended course versus not having any experience was significant. The size of the marginal effect increased and remained significant among transfer students in the top range of grade point averages when the experience level moved up to two or more courses. Expanding the scope to all students in the top range of grade point averages, the combination of experience level and being a transfer student provided significant marginal effects on course points versus native students with no experience. Here, too, the size of the marginal effect increased and remained significant when the experience level increased to two or more courses. For transfer students in the top range of grade point averages, the sizes of the marginal effects translate into movements of one-third to two-thirds of a letter grade for the experience levels of only one course and two or more courses, respectively.

In this study, only high-achieving transfer students managed to parlay their experience with online and blended courses into a significant effect on outcomes in our blended course. Given that the significant effect from experience applies only to one group, it is important to also interpret our results with the focus placed on students without experience. From an instructor perspective, the adaptability of students encountering the blended format for the first time could be an element of concern for those who routinely use the blended format or are initiating a move to the blended format. From the student perspective, those enrolling in the blended format for the first time may be concerned that their lack of experience constitutes a disadvantage with respect to all of their classmates that have experience.

Among native students, the lack of significant effects from experience on outcomes indicates that those without experience performed just as well as if they had experience. The implication is that native students without experience adapted quickly in their first encounter with the blended format and attained a similar comfort level with the format as did their fellow native students with experience. Thus, among native students, the adage of “no experience required” applies with respect to their initial encounter with the blended environment. Previous experience bestowed no added benefit to course outcomes. Furthermore, the absence of a benefit from experience was not dependent upon the academic standing of the native students. Within each of the three ranges of grade point averages, native students without experience in online and blended courses performed at the same general levels as native students with experience. Recall that our conclusions are based upon results obtained while controlling for influences such as aptitude in the subject matter and student engagement in the course.

For transfer students, experience provided a significant effect on outcomes but only for the group in the top range of grade point averages. The added benefit (one-third to two-thirds of a letter grade) from experience was with respect to other students, native and transfer, in the top range of grade point averages. Like their native student counterparts, transfer students without experience and with grade point averages in the low and middle ranges performed just as well as if they had experience. Our findings are heartening for the blended format and perhaps contrary to expectations. It might be feared that native and transfer students in the low and middle ranges of grade point averages could struggle with the blended format and that experience would serve as an added benefit within these groups. Our findings show otherwise, instead implying that native and transfer students in the low and middle levels of academic standing quickly reach the comfort levels of their more experienced classmates.

Overall, the added benefit from online and blended experience to outcomes in the blended course was not as pervasive as might be expected. Are there other areas in collegiate curriculums where online and blended experience might provide added benefits to student outcomes, and to greater and broader extents than found for the type of course used in the present study? And is the native/transfer distinction in the student body of any importance in those other curriculum areas? Further research could involve inquiries in those directions.