Although Open Educational Resources (OER) may have financial benefits for students, there are few empirical research studies that investigate whether students recognize the financial value of OER or if they believe that traditional course materials better support their learning. Students and instructors at seven different colleges in a public university system in the Northeast United States participated in a study where OER were implemented as replacement for traditional course materials. Students and instructors were surveyed at the end of each course and reported a general, positive view of the impact OER had on learning outcomes. However, many students and faculty still rated traditional course materials to have greater financial value than OER. Suggestions, based on this finding, are offered for institutions looking to pursue OER programs on their campuses.

Previous
1. Introduction
Most higher-education instructors expect that students review syllabi at the beginning of a course to discover what course materials must be purchased (Richard, Cleavenger, & Storey, 2014), most likely because of the belief that students focus on the accumulating cost of course materials. The National Association of College Stores (2018) claims for 2016–2017, the average student spends $579 on textbooks annually. Given how students must consider all financial costs when attending college (Fike & Fike, 2008; Perna, 2015), it is reasonable to expect that students review syllabi to determine the cost of the required course materials.

A college student may not be able or know how to plan for the cost of course materials (Hoxby & Turner, 2015) and therefore avoid a course for financial reasons, regardless of how the course may benefit their learning goals. Or if a student must enroll in a specific course but cannot afford the course materials, the students might enroll but without the required materials the instructor believes is necessary to complete course objectives successfully (Skinner & Howes, 2013). The issue of course material cost is further compounded by types of financial aid that are designed to cover tuition costs but can be used to supplement course materials expenses (e.g., Pell Grants). By using financial aid money earmarked for tuition, a student may reach financial aid limits before degree completion, causing them to incur more educational loans (i.e., debt) to cover their expenses.

Serendipitously, there is a growing interest among colleges in lowering cost of attendance in order to address the growing expense of higher education (Ehrenberg, 2012; Webber, 2016). To combat the negative impact of course material costs, community colleges and other publically funded state colleges are using open education resources (OER) to reduce or eliminate the cost of course materials for students (de los Arcos, Farrow, Perryman, Pitt, & Weller, 2014; Wiley, Hilton III, Ellington, & Hall, 2012;). Because OER are free to acquire, instructors can design courses to use OER rather than traditional textbooks and eliminate the need for a student to determine if the cost of the course materials are prohibitive of taking the course (Bliss, Robinson, Hilton, & Wiley, 2013). In addition, OER use also represents additional financial savings to the instructor or college by permitting reuse and alteration of the course materials without any licensing charges. Consequently, the cost savings from using OER are consistently cited as a prevailing benefit (Cannon & Brickman, 2015; Hatzipanagos & Gregson, 2015; Hilton III, Gaudet, Clark, Robinson, & Wiley, 2013; Okamoto, 2013).

But despite the financial benefits of using OER, there remain barriers to its widespread use. Consumers of any product will often use price as a measure of quality, especially if they do not have access to other measures of quality (Zeithaml, 1988). Despite two products being of similar or even exact quality, consumers may choose to pay for something rather than accept a free version. There is also a related, consumer belief that anything that is low cost or free is of inferior quality (Ariely, Loewenstein, & Prelec, 2006). Because students and instructors are consumers of educational resources, they might believe that free OER are inferior to traditional, costly course materials. While there may be a belief that OER are sufficient for learning, students and teachers might also believe that course materials that have financial costs are inherently superior. Consequently, a learning opportunity based on OER might have a stigma of inferiority compared to learning opportunities that use costly course materials.

To investigate if beliefs about the inferiority of free products apply to OER, we surveyed students and instructors who use OER and asked them about their perceptions of the financial value of OER compared to traditional course materials. Additionally, we asked both groups to evaluate the educative value of the OER compared to traditional course materials. Finally, we asked both students and instructors to identify what attributes of OER were of valuable or needed, compared to experiences with traditional course materials.

2. Theoretical framework
Course materials (e.g., instructor-defined, required texts or software that support students in accomplishing a course's learning objectives) are an integral part of any formal learning opportunity (Clump, Bauer, & Bradley, 2004; Gurung & Martin, 2011). For example, textbooks are used to furnish students with access to authoritative information of a particular subject by providing insights to established scholarship and theories in a particular field (Richardson, 2004). Free, high-quality course materials would seem to be an obvious improvement over traditional, costly course materials. Logically, the potential benefit of free course materials has driven adoption of OER. However, OER cannot be only defined as free resources.

2.1. Defining OER
OER are teaching and learning resources such as textbooks, multimedia, tests, software, and assessments that reside in the public domain or have been released under an intellectual property license, such as a Creative Commons license that permit the free use and repurposing of the resources by others (Hilton, 2016). Educators create OER with the intention of allowing all teachers and instructors to edit, combine resources, and create new content free of any copyright violations. Categorizing OER as only free, online learning resources ignores the additional value inherent in an OER, namely the permission to adapt the resource.

If an educational resource is to be widely applicable to different learning contexts, then an instructor must be able to adapt it for specific learner and the educational setting (Judith & Bull, 2016). Unfortunately, draconic licensing schemes can prevent this adaptation or even lead to legal action penalizing an educator or their organization, despite whether the resource needs to be altered in order to be educationally effective. Examples of the danger of using resources with restrictive licensing include educator websites being forced offline (“Publishing Co. sues TPS over copyright,” 2012) or public school districts (Milliard, 2013) and universities being sued (Loriggio, 2017). OER addresses copyright issues by applying licenses such as the Creative Commons, a licensing scheme that grants use of the resource to all in perpetuity (Liu, Lin, Deng, Wu, & Tsai, 2014). Not only can an OER be used for any educational purpose, there is never a concern about whether its use or alteration will be prevented or revoked going forward, when appropriately licensed.

A prototypical example of OER is an open textbook. An open textbook is often structured nearly identical to a traditional textbook. It may have a title page, chapters, and used to provide a visual example to accompany a textual description. Open textbooks are almost always created digitally in either HTML or PDF file format. Similar to traditional textbooks, open textbooks go through a review process, either via peer review or through a community rating system (Rodriguez-Solano, Sánchez-Alonso, & Sicilia, 2015). Some open textbooks may also go through a copy-editing process. Printed copies of open textbooks may be available but with the expenses (e.g., ordering from a printer) most likely being supplied by the eventual reader.

2.2. Challenges to OER adoption
Recent research suggests that an individual's perception of cost can impact their motivation to learn (Flake, Barron, Hulleman, McCoach, & Welsh, 2015). Consumers of a product may use price as a measure of quality (Zeithaml, 1988), which could be detrimental to OER adoption given its zero price. In the absence of other measures (e.g., brand name awareness, sample chapters, authors), an instructor or student might rely on price as an indicator of whether the textbook is worth using. They might believe that a publisher could only charge a high price for a textbook if that textbook was essential to learning or ‘worth it’.

There is also the related, consumer belief that anything that is low cost or free is of inferior quality (Shampanier, Mazar, & Ariely, 2007). For example, many people may prefer an expensive cup of coffee compared to a free one. This could be especially true for durable goods, where an individual might expect that a cheaper or free textbook is meant to be disposable (e.g., only used for the learning opportunity) while a textbook with a high price has reuse. An instructor or student investing in their education, might believe that a textbook with a high price might be worth purchasing since it will have use after their course ends. It is important to note that beliefs about free goods may not be logical, despite leading to strong conclusions.

Instructors may also have a negative perception of OER because while OER have both no inherent price and a copyright that permits sharing, those same qualities may also cause instructors to believe that most OER are of inferior quality. Instructors often take part in sharing educational resources with each other (Maloney, Moss, Keating, Kotsanas, & Morgan, 2013; Seonghee & Boryung, 2008) but can have complex heuristics for determining whether they are reluctant to share resources because of a sense of ownership from purchasing (Belk, 2010). In many cases, instructors may only share resources that are free. But if instructors believe that course materials, even ones that are shared, can be judged based on price then they may automatically discount OER as a shareable but inferior resource. Again, this belief may not be logical, but could still exist among instructors.

Of course, other factors may supersede price in determining OER use. The cost savings of OER could be a benefit appreciated by many students but it is not necessarily the most important quality when a student determines the value of course materials. Chulkov and Vanalstine (2013) discovered that students varied in their preference of print over digital, and preferred to have platform options when purchasing course materials. Rockinson-Szapkiw, Wendt, and Lunde (2013) surveyed students regarding textbook platform choice and discovered that students who chose print versions of course materials claimed that their familiarity with the format influenced their decision. This implies that some students would prefer a costly, print version over a free, digital version; the latter being the most common format of OER. There is also the possibility of consumer brand loyalty (Yang & Peterson, 2004) to education materials, and that students may avoid free alternatives because of this.

The potential student preference for print materials presents a challenge to OER acceptance. OER are normally created and exist digitally to facilitate distribution and sharing. While there can be options available for providing printed copies of an OER, there would also be associated costs (e.g., paper, printing devices, delivery). A student may prefer a printed version of course materials over a digital OER, which then would increase the price of even a free but printed resource. The result might be the act of using a printed resource over a digital one conveys additional value.

3. Research questions and methods
In order to study student and instructor perception of the financial value of OER compared to traditional course materials, we surveyed students and instructors after completion of 11 different college courses (i.e., semester-long) using OER. Students and instructors complete the survey at the end of the semester, before final grades were issued. The survey was issued through each course's learning management system with paper copies of the survey used when requested by the class instructor.

Our research questions were:

A.
Do the majority of students and instructors believe that OER can support learning, similarly to traditional course materials?

Our first research question is to establish whether students or instructors believe that OER are of similar quality to traditional course materials. We use this finding as a baseline for analyzing the financial value of a course resource; if students felt that an OER did not support their learning then they would logically believe that the financial value of the OER was low.

B.
What are college instructors and students' perceptions of the financial value of OER compared to traditional course materials?

Our second research question addresses the primary investigation of this study in determining what students and instructors believe is the financial value of OER and whether that adheres to or conflicts with beliefs about free goods. By addressing this question, we address a potential disconnect in the argument that students will universally endorse using OER since it will save them money. If students save money but believe they have received an inferior educational resource, even if they believe that OER contributed to their learning, then they may not accept using OER.

C.
What format of OER do students and instructors prefer?

Our third research question seeks to determine what format, if any, of OER could impact student or faculty perceptions of financial value. We focused our format of OER based on prior, anecdotal feedback from students that suggested that online only course materials may be perceived negatively. If this was the case in our study, it would potentially explain any negative perceptions of OER.

A total of 35 college instructors and 662 students from 11 different courses participated in our study. Student participants were recruited over the course of one full academic year (e.g., fall, winter, and spring semesters) and came from seven different colleges: five community colleges and two comprehensive colleges. Each college was provided $2500 to use for incentives for participating instructors, although the funds could only be used for professional development activities. Students in the study did not receive any incentive for participating in the study.

Each participating instructor agreed to adopt OER for a minimum of one of their courses. The topic of the courses varied and included two first-year college experience courses, an introductory psychology course, two introductory writing courses, two introductory chemistry courses, an advanced history course, two advanced business courses, and an advanced teacher education course. Each participating course replaced previously used traditional course materials with OER. Instructors averaged 12.7 years of experience as teachers and reported a somewhat or higher level of comfort with technology. Students' prior experiences ranged from first-year, first-semester to final-year, final-semester. Once the instructors at each college were recruited, librarians and instructional designers from each campus worked with the instructors to identify open content and assist the instructors in any course redesign necessitated by the OER. While there was a variety of OER used (e.g., videos, presentations) the vast majority of instructors (94%) used OER textbooks. Consequently, the decision was made to focus the study on OER textbooks because of their widespread use among participants and that OER textbooks became the center-point of instruction that had previously relied on traditional textbooks.

At the end of the semester and in each course, an 11-question survey was administered to students and a 13-question survey was administered to instructors. The survey tool was a mixture of Likert-like questions (i.e., a 5-point scale), multiple choice, and free response. The grant that funded this research designated three initial investigators, a library director and two librarians, each who had led separate OER awareness campaigns on their campus. This original team created the initial set of survey questions based on their prior experiences with OER. Midway through the grant, a fourth investigator (a learning scientist) was added to improve the reliability and validity of the survey design by rewording questions that were initially, awkwardly constructed. After the surveys were collected, the data was compounded in SPSS and analyzed by the investigators, looking for commonalities and trends in the responses from the participants.

4. Findings
4.1. Student and instructor belief on OER support for learning goals
For many students, using OER was a new experience. 41% were not at all aware of OER prior to their course and 23% were only slightly aware of OER. Instructors did express some knowledge of OER prior to their participation in the study with 43% claiming familiarity with OER. However, no instructors claimed expertise on OER and 31% only had heard something about OER prior to participating.

Despite OER being new to students, most indicated an overall positive viewpoint of OER in terms of supporting their learning goals in their respective courses. The majority of students responded that the OER they used in the study helped them meet the course objectives frequently (40%) or almost every time (30%), with only 6% of students indicating the course materials rarely or never helped. Only 14% of students rated OER as either a little less useful or much less useful than course materials from other courses. 64% of students noted that the OER were easy to use and appreciated that the OER could be accessed by digital devices.

Confirming student beliefs about OER helping to meet course objectives, participating instructors also indicated a positive viewpoint that OER helped students meet the learning goals of respective courses. The majority of instructor respondents believed that the OER they used in their course helped their students achieve course objectives either frequently (59%) or almost every time (14%). As a secondary check on their opinions, instructors were asked to compare the OER that they used to materials from other courses that they taught. Almost every instructor rated the OER to be equal to materials they have used in other, a little more useful, or much more useful (40%, 23%, and 34% respectively).

These findings add to the growing base of research that suggests that OER can both be excellent course materials and interpreted as so by both students and faculty. This is important in that there is no general consensus yet as to whether OER are a viable alternative to traditional educational resources. But our findings, in addition to other research, could eventually establish the consistent educational potential of OER. However, we caution that our findings only apply to the specific OER used in our study and cannot be generalized to other OER. Generalizable conclusions about the educational value will most likely need to come from meta-analyses of OER research.

4.2. Student belief on the financial value of traditional course materials and OER
70% of surveyed students noted that they liked the low cost of OER. However, despite this preference and the majority of students reporting that the OER helped them meet their respective course objectives, only 48% of students noted that they would be willing to pay the same for the OER as what they would pay for materials in other courses, while 31% of students would only be willing to pay a little less, and 12% of students would pay nothing for the OER. The pattern of students not willing to pay much or anything for OER despite their perceived educational value in meeting course objectives was verified by the weak correlation between the two survey questions, r(648) = 0.174, p < .01, suggesting that there was only a marginal positive relationship between students who felt the OER helped them complete the course objectives and their view of the financial value of the OER.

Students were also asked if the cost of course materials impacts their decision to take a course, with approximately half of the students indicating that it never (31%) or rarely (23%) was an influence. Given that some students might not be willing to pay for an OER if the cost of course materials regularly influences their decision to select a course (e.g., “I can't afford to pay for something that is free!”), we reran our analyses only for students that indicated the cost of course materials never or rarely influenced their course selection. Students who claim they are not influenced by the price of course materials may be less resistant to paying for course materials that helped them meet their course objectives. Among these students (n = 354), 69% indicated that the OER help them meet their course objectives frequently or almost every time. But even among students who were less or not influenced by the cost of course materials when selecting a course (i.e., students who don't care much if at all about what they pay for course materials), only 26% were willing to pay a little less for the OER than traditional course materials and 11% of students would not be willing to pay anything for the OER. Again, the pattern of students not willing to pay much or anything for OER despite their perceived educational value in meeting course objectives was verified by the weak correlation between the two variables representing financial value and educational value, even for students who were not as influenced by the cost of course materials, r(347) = 0.232, p < .01.

4.3. Student and instructor OER format preferences
When asked to select from a list what they did not like about OER, 46% of students chose not to answer the question. We interpret this as not finding anything to dislike about the OER, especially since the lowest response rate among all other questions was only 2% and 10% of students chose to enter specific criticisms of OER. However, 41% of students noted a preference for printed course materials over digital while only 24% of students indicated a preference for digital materials. The student preference for printed materials was despite a claimed comfort with technology. Only 11% of students noted that they were either not comfortable with technology or a little comfortable with technology; 40% of students noted they were very comfortable with technology and 31% clamed extreme comfort with technology.

5. Discussion
Despite the majority of students claiming that the OER they used in their respective courses were as useful or better than traditional course materials, almost half of the surveyed students thought that OER were of less financial value than traditional course materials. While this finding cannot conclusively prove that some students believe that OER are inferior because they are free (i.e., you get what you pay for), it does imply that OER's primary purpose to function as course materials is not always enough to offset a negative financial perception. Regardless of how well an OER can help students reach their learning goals in a course, some students may still believe that OER are inferior because they are free.

This is an especially important finding for any organization implementing OER based on financial savings. An instructor or college administration may try to implement OER in the belief that students will welcome the use of OER since it will save them spending money on course materials. But if some students believe that OER is fundamentally worth less than traditional course materials, then they might resent any required use of OER. In other words, students may not want the least costly option when it comes to different parts of their college experience. Our findings do not suggest that either conclusion is universally true, that students either welcome or resent the no-cost of OER, but do suggest that further research is merited to determine if perceived cost of OER is a factor in willingness to use OER.

Advocates of OER may take solace in that most students, despite having little to no prior knowledge of OER, viewed OER positively at the end of their course and believed that the OER helped them meet their course objectives. This suggests that colleges can impress upon students that OER are legitimate learning resources. While we already noted that approximately half of the surveyed students thought OER were not as financially valuable as traditional course materials, the inverse is also true that half of the surveyed students viewed OER as financially valuable as traditional course materials. This was also true of the 264 students who reported not knowing anything about OER prior to their course; 59% of those students would be willing pay for OER the same or more compared to traditional course materials. This suggests that students' prior knowledge of what OER are is not a predictor of their view of the financial value of OER, especially when they use an OER in a course.

The complexity of student opinion of OER also manifests in the desire for printed course materials. Minimally, this finding suggests that if colleges and universities want to facilitate OER use on their campuses, then they may want to provide a process for students to secure a print copy. This finding also suggests that there are qualities of OER that may contribute to the complex heuristic that students use when evaluating course materials. Price might not be a primary factor in choosing a textbook if the student or instructor believes that the price comes with additional benefit, such as printed text.

5.1. Limitations
A primary limitation to this study was a firm limit to the number of survey items. Concerned about survey fatigue for students and themselves, instructors demanded that the survey be brief and limited to 10 questions. Eventually, the survey was finally negotiated to 11 questions for student and 13 questions for faculty. Because of the small number of questions, we note that the survey needs additional development to address potential issues of reliability and validity. However, with the number of participants, we still believe that the survey data reflects patterns from the theoretical framework.

Another limitation to this study may be based on how many of the courses in the study were designed for students in their early college years where students may have little to no experience in purchasing traditional course materials. Consequently, student opinion on the financial value of OER at the time of the survey might not reflect their future opinion once they have more experience with the cost of course materials. This limitation, the lack of experience of new college students, could also impact whether students would choose a course based on the cost of the associated materials. It is possible that new students, with little student debt, might be more willing to choose classes independent of course materials. But even if the findings from this study only apply to new college students, this still represents a significant and important population that can impact adoption of OER.

We also do not know if student or instructor opinion of OER was based solely on the use of the OER as course material or was also a factor of associated course redesign. It is possible that students and instructors had a positive perception of OER because it was more aligned with the course than prior course materials. We view this limitation as unavoidable since it would be unethical to restrict instructors from adapting new course materials; modifying instruction is good pedagogical practice (Yinger, 1980). We also note that if the OER prompted enough course redesign to result in improved student and faculty perception of the OER, then student and faculty positive opinion is still correctly applied in that it is directed toward the instigating factor that possibly led to the positive experience.

We also acknowledge that while we were able to report on student and instructor perception of course material prices, we can only report on general opinions (i.e., more or less financial value). Future study of this topic should ask students and faculty to report exact dollar amounts based on their opinions. This way we can make a determination as to the validity of perceptions on price. For example, if new college students only expect to spend $10 per course for traditional course materials, it would explain why they would not be willing to pay more for an OER; they might believe course materials are an irrelevant cost.

6. Conclusions
The majority of students believed that OER were equal or better than traditional course content, especially in helping students reach course learning objectives. This finding is important since there is no general consensus yet on the educational value of OER. Regarding the educational value of OER, the primary conclusion from our findings is that the majority of students and instructors believe that OER can meet their educational needs.

However, approximately half of the surveyed students, believed that OER were worth less money that traditional course materials. Our findings also contribute evidence that some people may believe that a free OER will be of less value than traditional course materials, possibly due to the non-cost of an OER. While advocates of OER may find this conclusion nebulous, that is because some people's perceptions of OER may also be nebulous. If the findings in this study are reproducible, any organization implementing OER might consider that adoption of OER among users (e.g., students, instructors) cannot be solely based on an appeal to financial savings but must also consider more complex heuristics for determining value.

However, future research is necessary to determine what heuristics students and instructors use to determine the financial value of OER. It is possible that positive student perceptions of OER far outweigh any potential negative perceptions based on financial value. Free resources are not always considered inferior. Until there is research that can more full address the heuristics of student adoption of OER, including interaction between the many variables that could influence OER related choices, we suggest that touting the financial value of an OER might not solely be a convincing argument for students or instructors independent of their educational use. OER advocates should consider that students who use OER may actually believe they are receiving an inferior product only because it has no cost. This may not be logical or expected, but there is both prior research that suggests this is worth investigating and our findings, which suggest that some students may judge OER based on financial cost independent of educational value.

Additional research is also necessary to determine what are the heuristics for students or instructors in determining financial value of an OER. The findings in this study provide some evidence that OER adoption can potentially pass the barrier of cost based bias since, if OER can save students money, are rated equal or better than traditional course content, and are not viewed as educationally inferior to traditional course materials, then OER might be a viable replacement for traditional course content. But because some students might still not believe that OER are valuable, future studies must continue to unpack how students perceive OER and the heuristics used when deciding to purchase course materials. For example, there is no current research that examine the degree to which course materials impact course selection, nor do we fully know the degree to which irrationality (Ariely, 2008) or other psychological factors predict choice in using OER.

Finally, educational organizations designing OER implementations should also consider how to provide students access to printed OER materials. A preference for printed OER in this study should not be interpreted as students preferring one platform over the other since it's possible for students to want both digital and print versions of the same OER. However, access to a print version of an OER may increase valuation of OER among students and instructors. Additionally, to determine the impact that printed materials may have on perceptions of OER, future research should compare student beliefs about a digital, non-OER to that of an OER as well as comparing a digital non-OER to that of an OER that has been printed.