Social constructivist based course designs in online learning are emphasized in higher education as a way to highlight and capitalize on the benefits of interpersonal interaction. Course designers have generally taken a “more is better” approach to interpersonal interaction; however, some evidence points to a point of diminishing returns for interpersonal interaction. Purposeful interpersonal interaction (PII) is a framework for identifying high quality interpersonal interactions which are demonstrated to lead to better student outcomes. This study attempted to shed insight on how PII relates to student satisfaction and perceived learning in asynchronous environments by comparing courses in two graduate business programs. Results demonstrated that greater PII does generally lead to greater student satisfaction and perceived learning. Comparison of the programs also revealed that similar levels of satisfaction and learning can be achieved despite lesser levels of PII, giving evidence of a point of diminishing returns.

Previous
Keywords
Online learning

Instructional design

Purposeful interpersonal interaction

Interaction equivalency theory

1. Introduction
This research attempts to shed insights on how purposeful interpersonal interaction (PII), discussed in Mehall (2020), relates to student satisfaction and perceived learning in asynchronous OL environments. PII is defined as any high quality, organic, and valid communication exchanges between two or more participants of the learning process that directly relate to the achievement of established learning outcomes or to the building of social relationships (Mehall, 2020). The results of this study intended to examine the importance of PII as well as provide further validation for online course models rooted in Vygotsky's (1997) social constructivist theory and Bandura's (1971) social learning theory for graduate learners. Support for alternative OL learning models that sacrifice interpersonal interaction in favor of scalability is also discussed. Results are aimed to add to best practices for educational practitioners such as instructional designers and university faculty who design OL educational experiences for graduate learners. In addition, this study attempted to compare how PII related to satisfaction and learning between cohort based and non-cohort based graduate programs. Results related to program differences may help inform graduate program design in order to maximize retention and academic success for graduate learners.

Although it is well-established that interaction is an essential component of successful OL environments, and each of Moore's (1989) three types of interaction lead to important student outcomes (Arbaugh & Benbunan-Fich, 2007; Bernard et al., 2009; Swan, 2002) modern learning management systems (LMS) present tremendous opportunities for building stronger student-content interaction than ever before. Based on interaction equivalency theory (Anderson, 2003), interaction types may be substituted for others without degradation of the educational experience. This implies that OL environments which forgo student-student and student-instructor interaction in favor of strong student-content interaction and scalability may achieve similar student experiences compared to social constructivist-based OL designs. Although the topic of interaction in asynchronous OL environments has been extensively researched, it was important to provide more current research considering the highly robust LMS offerings available today, as well as the potential for viable substitutes like self-paced online courses (SPOCs), massive open online courses (MOOCs), and open educational resources (OERs) to graduate learners.

In addition, despite support that interaction is related to higher student satisfaction and perceived learning, a study conducted by Long, Marchetti, and Fasse (2011) did not find that greater satisfaction or learning in courses with greater interaction. Some researchers argue there is still a general lack of empirical evidence to support the notion that interaction directly impacts the quality and effectiveness of learning in OL environments (Battalio, 2007; Berge, 1999). There may also be a point of diminishing returns (Castano-Munoz, Sancho-Vinuesa, & Duart, 2013) where the benefits of interpersonal interaction reach a saturation point and additional interactions are not beneficial or even become detrimental to the learning experience. Finding evidence of a point of diminishing returns may allow future researchers to determine ideal amounts of PII that best supports student outcomes, while pursuing a more cost-effective course design.

Evidence that increased PII is related to greater satisfaction and perceived learning for graduate students in this study would potentially infer that additional resources in terms of training, software tools, or other resources are warranted to offer to faculty added ability to increase the quality of asynchronous OL courses. On the contrary, if evidence for increased PII relating to greater satisfaction and perceived learning were not found, it may support the need for further research into course designs that are strong in student-content interaction that can enable more learner-pacing, scalability, flexibility, and require little to no interaction among human participants. If PII does not have appear to have a significant positive relationship with student satisfaction and perceived learning, it may be appropriate for administrators to investigate interaction equivalency theory as a method of cost and/or time savings. Lastly, differences in student perceptions relating to PII may inform graduate program design.

2. Background
The number of online course offerings and the role of online learning in the landscape of higher education has grown tremendously in the past decade (Huss, Sela, & Eastep, 2015). The removal of constraints (i.e., time and place), as well as the demand for convenience among an expanding adult student population, has made online education increasingly popular (Sher, 2009). As most higher education institutions have transitioned to offering some form of online education to their students, it is critical to identify the best practices in this course delivery method. A multitude of studies have determined that, in large-part, online learning (OL) is at least equivalent to face-to-face (F2F) instruction (Abrami, Bernard, Bures, Borokhovski, & Tamim, 2011; Arbaugh & Benbunan-Fich, 2007; Lapsley, Kulik, Moody, & Arbaugh, 2008; Muilenburg & Berge, 2005; Tu & Corry, 2003; Wanstreet, 2006; Zirkin & Sumler, 1995). According to the Online Report Card (Allen & Seaman, 2016), 71% of academic leaders rated OL outcomes as equivalent or superior to F2F learning. A meta-analysis of 232 studies conducted by Bernard et al. (2004) found almost no overall differences in student achievement (measured through standardized tests and/or teacher-made tests that assessed whether students achieved the learning objectives of the course), attitude, or retention between F2F and distance education groups.

Bernard et al.'s (2004) analysis revealed instances of F2F groups outperforming distance education groups and instances of distance education groups outperforming F2F groups. This meta-analysis allowed the researchers to conclude that the quality of the course design and pedagogy are more important than the choice of instructional environment, although results of any meta-analysis may suffer from publication bias (Thornton & Lee, 2000). Additionally, there is evidence that students do not perceive OL and F2F courses as equivalent, yet they do not perceive OL courses as less rigorous (Platt, Raile, & Yu, 2014). Clearly, there is a heterogeneity of potential outcomes in OL that may be influenced by the design of the course, the capability of the instructor, the type of course, the characteristics of the learners, and the quality and quantity of interaction in the course. Bernard et al. (2004) recommend opportunities for interpersonal interaction in distance education as a consideration as these interactions seem to benefit students.

2.1. Interpersonal interaction
Interaction has been a key research area in online learning and has been determined to be an important and often indispensable component for a successful course (Anderson, 2003; Berge, 1999; Bouhnik & Marcus, 2006; Chao, Hwu, & Chang, 2011; Cole, Shelley, & Swartz, 2014; Fung, 2004; Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005; Huss et al., 2015; Mbwesa, 2014; Picciano, 2002; Robyler & Wiencke, 2003; Wang, 2010; York & Richardson, 2012). Interaction in any learning environment exists to minimize the effects of what Moore (1993) calls transactional distance. This distance is not geographical, but rather a relative psychological and pedagogical distance that deeply affects participants in the learning process. Moore's (1989) three types of interaction (learner-content interaction, learner-learner interaction, and learner-instructor interaction) are readily cited as methods for overcoming transactional distance in online learning (Sher, 2009). All three of these types of interaction have been demonstrated to be important for student satisfaction, learning, and achievement (Bernard et al., 2009; Sher, 2009; Swan, 2002). Increased quantity and quality of interaction generally leads to increased satisfaction for both students and instructors in OL environments (Picciano, 2002). According to Berge (1999), learning takes place in a course only after a student interacts intrapersonally and interpersonally, describing intrapersonal interaction as interactions within a learner where content is cognitively processed, and reflection occurs. Soo and Bonk (1998) support this notion and refer to intrapersonal interaction as learner-self interaction.

Interpersonal interaction includes both learner-learner interaction and learner-instructor interaction. Mehall (2020) outlines many of benefits of interpersonal interaction established in the literature, including increased perceived learning (Richardson & Swan, 2003; Sher, 2009; Swan, 2002) and higher levels of student satisfaction with the course (Cole et al., 2014; Fedynich, Bradley, & Bradley, 2015; Khalid & Quick, 2016; Richardson & Swan, 2003; Sher, 2009; Swan, 2002). In addition, students are critical of some online courses, particularly those that lack interpersonal interaction (Cole et al., 2014; Muuro, Wagacha, Oboko, & Kihoro, 2014). Clearly, interpersonal interaction is both desired and often lacking in many OL courses. As a result, many institutions have focused their efforts on promoting interpersonal interaction in OL courses through social constructivist (Vygotsky, 1997) based course designs.

2.1.1. Quality interaction
Some literature has identified a need for evaluating interaction in OL environments not just on volume, but on quality as well. For example, York and Richardson (2012) state, “Effective interaction is not necessarily more interaction; rather, it is interaction resulting in learners thinking in new and profound ways” (p. 84). Additionally, Bernard et al. (2009) state, “Increasing the quantity of interaction may lead to enhanced learning and satisfaction, but increasing the quality of such interactions, especially in terms of cognitive engagement and meaningfulness, may be of greater importance” (p. 1266).

2.1.2. Online graduate programs
Given that various studies have demonstrated that learners may have different preferences when it comes to interaction (Battalio, 2007; Watson, 2010), the consideration of learning level similarly must not be ignored. Learners with differing experience levels may have different expectations for interaction (Sims, 2003). Literature on adult learners has emphasized the importance of self-directed, self-regulated, autonomous learning, but this largely is directed towards older students (Abrami et al., 2011). Additionally, graduate students may find difficulty fitting interactions with their peers into their daily schedule. Alternatively, graduate learners may have more robust life and career experiences and thus can share more valuable information with their peers. Battalio (2007) reports that some graduate courses are often more theoretical than undergraduate courses and thus may require more student-student interaction as a way to make meaning of abstract concepts. Given these differences, graduate level students may have a different propensity for interpersonal interaction (Croxton, 2014).

2.1.3. Cohort based learning
Educational cohorts are groups of students who enroll in an educational program at the same time and progress through the program as a group (Barnett & Muse, 1993). Cohorts “are characterized by strong social bonds among members” (Watts, 2013, p. 3) and “provide students with an opportunity to belong to a supportive community of like-minded people” (Mandzuk, Hasinoff, & Seifert, 2003, p. 169). In recent years, cohort models have been employed in many graduate programs in order to capitalize on their theorized abilities to provide meaningful peer interactions, support, and a feeling of community. It is the hopes of educators that the use of cohort models will improve retention and completion of programs (Pemberton & Akkary, 2010).

Cohort based learning has demonstrated key benefits, including increased academic performance (Barnett & Muse, 1993); support, trust, increased knowledge, and reduced loneliness (Norris & Barnett, 1994); greater participation and quality in discussions, increased inclination to express one's point of view (Beck & Kosnik, 2001); camaraderie (Pemberton & Akkary, 2010); and satisfaction and cohesiveness (Greenlee & Karanxha, 2010).

On the other hand, research has attributed some drawbacks to cohort based learning. Barnett, Basom, Yerkes, and Norris (2000) identified some downsides of cohort based learning, including a greater demand placed on instructors than other educational models, academic competition and comparing, rigid program design, and groupthink. Important interactive drawbacks of cohort based learning include negative peer interactions like formations of cliques, dominant personalities, and hyperbonding (Mandzuk et al., 2003; Watts, 2013).

Cohort based learning, like other educational models, has advantages and disadvantages. A bulk of the literature on the cohort educational model looks at students in mostly F2F environments, while less research has been conducted to examine whether these advantages and disadvantages hold true for OL cohort groups (Kata, 2009). Watts (2013) explains that additional research on hyperbonding is needed to determine whether it occurs in all learning environments. OL cohorts might not suffer from this drawback or benefit as strongly from many of the advantages attributed to mostly F2F cohort interactions. It remains to be demonstrated if students enrolled in OL cohorts perceive, value, and benefit from interpersonal interaction in the same way as non-cohort students.

Given that members of a cohort are already benefitting from increased peer interaction, it may be the case that they hold greater value for interpersonal interaction, as demonstrated by cohort students' increased satisfaction in collaborative learning techniques compared to non-cohort students in Doolen's (2014) study. Conversely, in the study comparing cohort and non-cohort students conducted by Greenlee and Karanxha (2010), non-cohort students participated in discussions more than cohort students. Those students may feel that the cohort itself has formed all the interpersonal connection needed for a meaningful learning experience, and further increases of interpersonal interaction will lead to diminishing returns, or even become overwhelming.

2.2. Point of diminishing returns
Although interpersonal interaction has generally been demonstrated to lead to better student outcomes, more interaction may not always be better. Castano-Munoz et al. (2013) found evidence of a point of diminishing returns on academic achievement as a result of interpersonal interaction that existed in the OL environment which did not exist in the F2F environment. This may be attributed to students becoming overwhelmed with the interactions in OL, whether written or otherwise. Picciano (2002) mentions an example where students must monitor comments in an online discussion, and concludes that the nature of these comments makes monitoring them more extensive than discussions in F2F settings, which may lead to cognitive overload. Strang (2011) found evidence that some asynchronous discussions were counterproductive. Northrup, Lee, and Burgess (2002) support this idea by stating that there seems to be an ideal range of appropriate interaction, with an upper and lower limit. In Northrup et al.'s (2002) study, some participants reported being frustrated with an overwhelming number of interactive assignments within a weekly module. Downing, Lam, Kwong, Downing, and Chan (2007) recommend that interaction in OL environments be sustained only as long as there is an educational benefit in doing so. The authors theorized that students may disengage from interaction once they have the information needed to complete tasks. These studies give some evidence that increasing interpersonal interaction beyond a saturation point may not only not add any benefit to students, but it may actually be detrimental to their educational experience. Conversely, Wolff and Dosdall (2010) found no evidence that supports the notion that high levels of participation in an asynchronous discussion have any negative impact on student learning.

2.3. Interaction equivalency theory
Anderson's (2003) interaction equivalency theory (IEQT) proposes that a course with strong levels of one of Moore's three interaction types can minimize or exclude the other two types of interaction entirely without diminishing a student's educational experience. Because modern learning management systems (LMS) allow opportunities for instructors to easily create student-content interaction, this theory presents important implications for OL course models. Considering the availability of alternative online learning opportunities, IEQT presents attractive options for transforming traditional online course models to a more cost-effective format without lessening the student's educational experience.

Fig. 1 details the two main theses of IEQT. IEQT proposes:

1.
Deep and meaningful formal learning is supported as long as one of the three forms of interaction (student-instructor; student-student, student-content) is at a high level. The other two may be offered at minimal levels, or even eliminated, without degrading the educational experience. (p. 3).

2.
High levels of more than one of these three modes will likely provide a more satisfying educational experience, though these experiences may not be as cost- or time-effective as less interactive learning sequences. (p. 3).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (412KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Interaction equivalency theorem.

Reprinted from Interaction Equivalency Theorem: The 64 Interaction Design Model and Its Significance to Online Teaching (p. 2), by Miyazoe & Anderson, 2012, The 26th Annual Conference of Asian Association of Open Universities Proceedings. Reprinted with permission.
According to Rhode (2009), this theory suggests that an interaction mode may be substituted by another without negative consequences to the learning experience. Consistent with IEQT, Rhode's (2009) study of learners in a self-paced environment demonstrates that students may view interactions with other students as helpful but unnecessary to the online learning experience. Padilla Rodriguez and Armellini (2014) found that learners in a corporate setting had similar satisfaction, learning, and return on expectations irrespective of the dominant interaction type. In addition, Miyazoe and Anderson (2010) provide empirical evidence that students change their preferred interaction type depending on learning modes and subjects. A study conducted by Meri (2015) on the interaction between learners and tools in OL learning environments demonstrated that when learning tools are well-designed, students can interact with online resources in a way that suggests it can replace interactions with tutors.

2.4. Purposeful interpersonal interaction
Purposeful interpersonal interaction (PII) is defined as any high quality, organic, and valid communication exchanges between two or more participants of the learning process that directly relate to the achievement of established learning outcomes or to the building of social relationships (Mehall, 2020). This framework contains three components of interpersonal interaction: instructional interaction (PIII), purposeful social interaction (PSI), and supportive interaction (SI), as displayed in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (224KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Three components of purposeful interpersonal interaction in online learning.

Reprinted from Article Name Omitted. By Mehall (2020). Journal Name Omitted.
Interactions such as timely feedback (Dennen, Darabi, & Smith, 2007), reviewing previously learned skills (Berge, 1999), and collaborative learning (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2000) are examples of interactions which qualify as PIII. This is the most obvious form of PII as it focuses on interactions that relate directly to the achievement of learning outcomes and the learning content of the course. The building of social relationships (Jung, Choi, Lim, & Leem, 2002), and immediacy behaviors (Swan, 2002; Tu & McIsaac, 2002) are examples of interactions which are categorized as PSI, and are often viewed as prerequisites for meaningful learning to occur (Garrison et al., 2000; Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005; Tu, 2000; Woods Jr. & Baker, 2004). Lack of social interaction is an often cited barrier to quality OL learning (Muilenburg & Berge, 2005). Lastly, SI includes interactions which facilitate support for learners in the OL environment, where transactional distance must be overcome. Interface and navigation support (Caliskan, 2009; Hillman, Willis, & Gunawardena, 1994; Northrup, 2002) include any interactions which are deployed in order to facilitate their understanding of learning management systems, technology tools, or various other resources not directly related to the learning outcomes of the course. Without these interactions, meaningful instructional or social interaction are unlikely to occur for some learners. Categorizing interpersonal interactions as purposeful or not is an important distinction, as not all interpersonal interactions provide students benefit. For example, it is widely accepted that an “I agree” discussion board post provides little benefit to learners in any of these three categories. Therefore, it may be correct to classify it as “non-purposeful interaction”.

3. Research questions
PII in online learning includes interpersonal interactions demonstrated to lead to important student benefits, yet research into the relationship of different levels of PII and student benefits in an online course are lacking. This study attempted to shed insight into how PII relates to student satisfaction and perceived learning in two asynchronous graduate business programs.

1.
How does enrollment in courses having different perceived levels of PII, as measured by the total score on the Rubric for Assessing Interactive Qualities of Distance Courses (RAIQDC), relate to

a.
student satisfaction with the online course, as measured by Arbaugh's six item scale; and/or,

b.
perceived learning in the course, as measured by Hiltz's six item scale?

2.
What differences in students' perceived level of PII, satisfaction, and perceived learning exist between the two programs?

4. Materials and methods
The purpose of the study was to examine the differences between courses regarding students' perceived PII, student satisfaction, and perceived learning in a graduate asynchronous OL environment. Doing so provided insight in order to further shape best practices in OL pedagogy. Data were collected from student samples in fully online Master of Business Administration (MBA) and Master of Fraud and Forensics (MFF) courses. Students completed three instruments: (a) the RAIQDC (Robyler & Wiencke, 2003) to measure PII, (b) Arbaugh's (2000b) six-item scale to measure student satisfaction, and (c) Hiltz's (1994) six-item scale to measure perceived learning. Through the use of the three different instruments, this study sampled 146 students across two graduate programs and used a comparative design to determine if enrollment in courses having different levels of students' perceived PII impacts satisfaction and perceived learning.

After each course in the study ended, the first three instruments were distributed to students using QuestionPro via a link embedded in each course. The PII measurement instrument (Appendix A), student satisfaction instrument (Appendix B) and the perceived learning instrument (Appendix C) were available for students to complete with prompting from their instructors. A course update (Appendix E) message to complete the instruments was sent out by the instructors at the conclusion of the course, and a reminder email (Appendix E) was sent by the program directors three days later. The program directors were reminded to send out this information by the researcher at the conclusion of each class.

4.1. Target population
A total of 146 responses (66.36% response rate) were recorded from the target population of this study, which included a potential 220 graduate students in two different programs at Carlow University, located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The two programs of interest were the Master of Business Administration (MBA) program and the Master of Fraud and Forensics (MFF) program. The major differences between the two programs are highlighted below.

4.1.1. MBA program
The Master of Business Administration (MBA) program at Carlow University has approximately 150 students enrolled at any given time. The program is offered in both fully online and F2F formats, and students are welcome to mix and match between the two based on their preferences and schedule.

4.1.2. MFF program
The Master of Fraud and Forensics (MFF) program at Carlow University is a one year, cohort-based graduate program that ordinarily has a cap of 40 students split into two cohorts. The students enroll in the program in August of any particular year and finish the program by the following August. The program is a fully online graduate program and is not offered F2F.

4.2. Participant selection method
Students enrolled in fully online courses in the MBA and MFF program during the summer 2017 semester were the non-random, purposive sample in this study. Many of the students in the study were enrolled in multiple courses over the summer, but their responses were collected as separate instances because they were in different courses and their perceptions may differ in each course. The approximate total number of student responses possible was 139 for the MBA program and 81 for the MFF program, but the number of actual students in the study is lower for both programs as many students were enrolled in multiple courses in their respective program over the duration of the study. Each student gained access to the three instruments at the conclusion of each course. The instruments were conveniently provided through a link embedded directly within the LMS course shell. The final sample includes only students who completed the instruments.

4.3. Measurement instruments
4.3.1. Rubric for assessing interactive qualities of distance courses
The RAIQDC (Robyler & Wiencke, 2003) (Appendix A), which focuses on the level of interaction perceived by participants in an online course, was administered to students. This instrument was identified as a reliable and valid measure of interaction in distance courses (Robyler and Wiencke, 2003, Robyler and Wiencke, 2004). The five elements which make up the different sections of the RAIQDC are used to assess various types of quality interaction in the OL environment. The five elements are Social/Rapport-Building Designs for Interaction, Instructional Designs for Interaction, Interactivity of Technology Resources, Evidence of Learner Engagement, and Evidence of Instructor Engagement. Each of the five elements either directly incorporates components of PII or facilitates PII to occur, as outlined in extensively in Mehall (2020). The internal consistency of the instrument has been determined to be reliable with a coefficient alpha of 0.91. The RAIQDC is one method for measuring PII in an OL course. The range of RAIQDC total score is from 5 to 25.

4.3.2. Six-item scale for student satisfaction
The second instrument administered in the study was a six-item survey focusing on student satisfaction with the online course developed by Arbaugh and adapted by Sher (2009) that can be seen in Appendix B. This Likert-style survey also measures perceived quality of the course and students' interest in taking another course in the same format or at the same institution (Arbaugh, 2000b; Sher, 2009). The internal consistency of the instrument has been determined to be reliable with a coefficient alpha of 0.95. Arbaugh (2000b) established validity using factor analysis on his original 12-item scale, with an eigenvalue of 8.17, a minimum item loading of 0.62, and 11 of the 12 items loading at 0.75 or higher. The possible range of mean satisfaction is 1–5.

4.3.3. Hiltz's six-item scale for perceived learning
The third instrument in the study was a six item student survey focusing on perceived learning developed by Hiltz's (1994), which can be seen in Appendix C. This scale has been used by various studies to investigate students' perceptions of learning in OL environments (Arbaugh & Hornik, 2006; Sher, 2009). The internal consistency of the instrument has been determined to be reliable with a coefficient alpha of 0.96. Factor analysis revealed that all items loaded onto a single common factor at 0.81 or higher (Arbaugh, 2000a). The possible range of mean perceived learning is 1–5.

4.4. Data collection
4.4.1. Data collection methods
Approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) was acquired for both the researcher's institution and the institution where the data was collected. Respondents received the instruments directly within their online courses and received a prompt via course update (Appendix E) from their instructor. Three days after the update, respondents received an email reminder (Appendix E) from the program director. Data were inputted in SPSS in order to conduct analysis.

5. Results
5.1. Descriptive statistics
146 out of a possible of 220 respondents completed all three instruments of the study for a response rate of 66.36%. 190 started the survey, representing a completion rate of 76.84%. Of the 146 students who responded to all items on the survey after completing their course, 90 (61.64% of responses) were MBA students and 56 (38.36% of responses) were MFF students. The breakdown of respondents by course and instructor in the MBA and MFF programs are displayed in Table 1. In addition, the RAIQDC total score, RAIQDC classification level, mean student satisfaction, and mean perceived learning for each MBA and MFF courses are displayed in Table 1. The mean satisfaction and mean perceived learning scores represent the average participant response score for each course in the study. The RAIQDC total score is calculated by adding the scores for all five elements of the rubrics. This score is then used to classify courses into different levels of interaction. Scores of 9 or less fall into the low interaction category; scores of 10 to 17 fall into the moderate interaction category; and scores of 18 to 25 fall into the high category.

RQ1

How does PII relate to student satisfaction and perceived learning?


Table 1. RAIQDC, satisfaction, and perceived learning by course.

Course code	Course title	Instructor	Number of responses	RAIQDC total score	RAIQDC level classification	Mean satisfaction	Mean perceived learning
MBA 735	Project Management – Body of Knowledge	MBA Instructor 1	10	21.00 (3.71)	High	3.93 (0.71)	4.30 (0.86)
MBA 738	Global Business	MBA Instructor 2	9	21.67 (3.35)	High	4.50 (0.52)	4.52 (0.50)
MBA 742 - GB	Economics	MBA Instructor 3	14	19.93 (5.47)	High	4.20 (0.67)	4.30 (0.61)
MBA 742 - GC	Economics	MBA Instructor 3	14	16.86 (5.61)	Moderate	4.31 (0.72)	4.39 (0.53)
MBA 754 - GB	Marketing Management	MBA Instructor 4	16	18.31 (4.39)	High	3.79 (1.12)	3.97 (0.87)
MBA 754 - GC	Marketing Management	MBA Instructor 4	5	21.20 (4.55)	High	4.77 (0.37)	4.57 (0.60)
MBA 754 - GD	Marketing Management	MBA Instructor 4	10	22.60 (3.44)	High	4.40 (0.68)	4.47 (0.67)
MBA 761	Capstone Experience – Project Mgmt	MBA Instructor 5	5	17.80 (3.56)	Moderate	3.67 (0.77)	4.07 (0.48)
MBA 779	Capstone Experience – HR Mgmt	MBA Instructor 6	7	16.00 (7.66)	Moderate	4.12 (0.66)	4.29 (0.50)
MFF 730–10	Cybercrime	MFF Instructor 1	4	23.50 (2.38)	High	4.46 (0.55)	4.54 (0.60)
MFF 730–11	Cybercrime	MFF Instructor 1	4	22.25 (2.75)	High	4.63 (0.48)	4.54 (0.42)
MFF 731–20	Technology Tools – Fraud	MFF Instructor 2	13	18.79 (6.14)	High	3.88 (1.18)	4.17 (0.86)
MFF 731–21	Technology Tools – Fraud	MFF Instructor 2	12	18.83 (4.39)	High	3.76 (0.93)	3.96 (0.87)
MFF 733–30	Capstone – Comp. Fraud Investigation	MFF Instructor 3	12	24.42 (1.08)	High	4.50 (0.51)	4.60 (0.42)
MFF 733–31	Capstone – Comp. Fraud Investigation	MFF Instructor 4	11	23.42 (2.71)	High	4.46 (0.81)	4.61 (0.55)
Note. The range for RAIQDC Total Score = 5–25, for Mean Satisfaction = 1–5, and for Mean Perceived Learning = 1–5.

5.2. Correlational analysis
In order to examine the relationship between PII, student satisfaction, and perceived learning across all students in the study, a correlational analysis was performed. Scattergrams in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5 reveal the correlations between the mean total scores on all three instruments across all courses. The analysis revealed that relationships between all three instruments were significantly positively correlated (p < .01). The relationship between PII and student satisfaction (r = 0.609), as well as PII and perceived learning (r = 0.631) are moderate (Dancey & Reidy, 2007). The relationship between student satisfaction and perceived learning (0.863) is strong. The three correlates (r = 0.609, r = 0.631, and r = 0.863) demonstrate the relationships between PII, student satisfaction, and perceived learning are positive and at moderate or strong.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (58KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Scattergram of RAIQDC total score and student satisfaction total score (r = 0.609, p = .000).

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (132KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Scattergram of RAIQDC total score and perceived learning total score (r = 0.631, p = .000).

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (116KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Scattergram of student satisfaction total score and perceived learning total score (r = 0.863, p = .000).

5.2.1. Correlations of RAIQDC elements
The correlations among all five of the individual RAIQDC elements, mean satisfaction, and mean perceived learning were significantly positive (p < .01). These correlations represent the relationship between each of the five elements on the RAIQDC, which were justified in Mehall (2020) as important elements in OL environments based on prior interaction research, and the student satisfaction and perceived learning scales. The lowest correlation was 0.459, while the highest was 0.575, giving evidence that all five elements are similarly correlated with satisfaction and perceived learning. The correlations are displayed in Table 2.


Table 2. Correlations of RAIQDC elements, student satisfaction, and perceived learning.

RAIQDC element	Student satisfaction correlation	Perceived learning correlation
Element 1 (Social/Rapport Building Designs for Interaction)	0.575	0.563
Element 2 (Instructional Designs for Interaction)	0.505	0.569
Element 3 (Interactivity of Technology Resources)	0.459	0.484
Element 4 (Evidence of Learner Engagement)	0.559	0.529
Element 5 (Evidence of Instructor Engagement)	0.515	0.551
5.3. Regression analyses
A simple linear regression was calculated to predict the mean student satisfaction total score based on the mean RAIQDC total score for each course in the study in order to examine course level relationships between interactivity and student satisfaction. A significant regression equation was found (F(1,13) = 9.17, p < .0098), with an R2 of 0.41. Total satisfaction increased 0.52 points for each point of RAIQDC total score. The results of the regression analysis are displayed in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (122KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Regression scattergram of RAIQDC total score and student satisfaction total score.

In addition, a simple linear regression was calculated to predict the mean perceived learning total score based on the mean RAIQDC total score for each course in the study in order to examine course level relationships between interactivity and perceived learning. A significant regression equation was found (F(1,13) = 14.32, p < .0023), with an R2 of 0.52. Total perceived learning increased 0.38 points for each point of RAIQDC total score. The results of the regression analysis are displayed in Fig. 7.

RQ2

Differences between programs.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (115KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Regression scattergram of RAIQDC total score and student satisfaction total score.

5.4. Independent samples t-test
An independent samples t-test was conducted to analyze the differences between students' perceived PII based on the RAIQDC score, student satisfaction, and perceived learning between the two programs. To conduct this test, courses were organized into groups based on whether they were part of the MBA or MFF program. The results of all three t-tests are displayed in Table 3.


Table 3. Independent samples t-tests of MBA and MFF courses.

Scale	Program	n	Mean scale score	Standard deviation	T	Degrees of freedom	Significance (2-tailed)
Mean RAIQDC	MBA	90	3.88	1.01	−2.534	146	0.012
MFF	58	4.30	0.91
Mean Satisfaction	MBA	90	4.16	0.79	−2.231	146	0.818
MFF	58	4.20	0.90
Mean Perceived Learning	MBA	90	4.30	0.67	−0.497	144	0.620
MFF	58	4.35	0.71
The results of the RAIQDC t-test demonstrate that there was a significant difference in the mean perceived PII score between the MBA (M = 3.88, SD = 1.01) and MFF programs (M = 4.30, SD = 0.91) conditions; t(146) = −2.534, p = .012. The results of the satisfaction t-test demonstrate that there was not a significant difference in the mean student satisfaction score between the MBA (M = 4.16, SD = 0.79) and MFF programs (M = 4.20, SD = 0.90) conditions; t(146) = −0.231, p = .0818. In addition, the results of the perceived learning t-test demonstrate that there was not a significant difference in the mean perceived learning score between the MBA (M = 4.30, SD = 0.67) and MFF programs (M = 4.35, SD = 0.71) conditions; t(144) = −0.497, p = .620.

6. Discussion
6.1. Greater interaction relates to greater satisfaction and learning
Both PII and student satisfaction (r = 0.609) and PII and perceived learning (r = 0.631) were moderately strong relationships. Based on these correlations, it can be concluded that students who are enrolled in courses with higher levels of PII are more likely to be satisfied with their course and perceive higher levels of learning than courses with lower levels of PII. These findings directly support social constructivist-based pedagogy and course design for graduate learners in the asynchronous OL environment. The importance of various forms of interpersonal interaction that constitute PII and are measured through the five elements on the RAIQDC are apparent as they appear to significantly impact student satisfaction and perceived learning, as suggested (Mehall, 2020).

6.2. Relationship of RAIQDC elements
Correlating scores of individual RAIQDC elements with mean student satisfaction and mean perceived learning reveals which elements are most closely related to these two important course outcomes. Element One (Social/Rapport Building Designs for Interaction) investigates, in part, the amount of PSI in each course. It was the highest correlated element with mean student satisfaction and the second highest with mean perceived learning. Despite this type of interaction (PSI) not being focused directly on the course content, it appears to be the most important form of interaction. This is consistent with researchers who have suggested that establishing social interaction and social presence are key precursors for meaningful learning to occur (Garrison et al., 2000; Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005; Tu, 2000; Woods Jr. & Baker, 2004). In addition, Element Four (Evidence of Learner Engagement) also investigates other aspects of PSI in a course in the form of student-student interaction (Moore, 1993). It was the second highest correlated element with student satisfaction and the second lowest correlated element with perceived learning and also relates to PSI. This element refers to interactions where learners are engaging in messages with their peers, consistent with Bandura's (1971) theory. These correlations give evidence that interaction among learners in the course are more likely to lead to greater student satisfaction than greater perceived learning, although the differences are minimal. It is likely that a certain level of interaction among learners in the course, separate from interaction with the instructor, can lead to a more satisfying course experience.

Element Two (Instructional Design for Interaction) was the lowest correlated element with student satisfaction, yet the highest correlated element with perceived learning. This validates the importance of purposeful interpersonal instructional interaction (PIII) for perceived learning. Element Two appears to have a weaker relationship with student satisfaction than perceived learning, suggesting that increased PIII through robust instructional designs for interaction is more likely to increase perceived learning than student satisfaction, although the correlations are not tremendously different. The relationship to satisfaction and learning is consistent with Northrup's (2002) findings related to instructional content interaction. Lastly, Element Three (Interactivity for Technology Resources) related to SI and was the lowest correlated element for both student satisfaction and perceiving learning, suggesting that the actual use of technology tools to facilitate PII are less important than PII itself. Instructors may not need the latest technology tools to enhance student satisfaction and learning; however, the correlations are still significantly positive. Thus, the technology tools utilized may have some impact on satisfaction and perceived learning, presumably through decreasing the level of transactional distance (Moore, 1993). It may be the case that sufficient supportive interaction largely goes unnoticed by learners, but a lack of supportive interaction would not. A learner may not value a tutorial on how to navigate an LMS if it is intuitive to them, whereas a different learner who struggles to navigate the same LMS may derive tremendous value from the same tutorial.

6.3. Greater PII, but comparable satisfaction and learning between programs
The MBA and MFF programs were reviewed highly on the interactive scale. The MFF program had significantly greater mean perceived PII scores (M = 4.30, SD = 0.91) than students in the MBA program (M = 3.88, SD = 1.01). These results may be attributable to a few structural differences between the programs. First, the MFF program is an intensive, one-year program while the MBA program allows students to complete the requirements in the timeframe they are comfortable with by allowing students to vary how many courses they take per term. The MFF program format may attract students who are already more motivated to interact with their peers and the instructors. In addition, the MFF courses in the study are five-week courses, compared to the eight-week MBA courses. These shorter courses may cause students to perceive higher levels of interaction, since they are compressed in comparison to the MBA courses. The inherent social bonds built by the cohort structure might have an impact on how much interaction occurs in the MFF courses, or how much interaction is perceived by the students, as hypothesized by Watts (2013).

Given the MFF program having significantly greater perceived PII than the MBA program, results demonstrating higher student satisfaction and perceived learning in the MFF program than the MBA program might be expected. In reality, student satisfaction and perceived learning did not significantly differ across the two programs. Students in the cohort based learning program did not have significantly greater satisfaction than the students in the non-cohort program, countering the findings of Doolen's (2014) study. Despite the long list of proposed advantages of the cohort model, significant differences were not found in student satisfaction or perceived learning between the two programs. Conversely, negative aspects of the cohort model could have led to lower satisfaction and perceived learning despite greater PII. For example, the concept of hyperbonding (Watts, 2013) may have caused students to derive negative effects of the greater interpersonal interaction.

The results between the two programs are in direct conflict with the notion that more interpersonal interaction will lead to better student outcomes in OL environments. It is important to point out that differences between the types of students who enroll in the two different programs could have led to the different results. Another explanation for these results may be that the MBA program had stronger, more robust student-content interaction, which allowed students to have comparable satisfaction and perceptions of learning to students in the MFF program, which would be consistent with IEQT (Anderson, 2003); however, actual causes of the results of the study cannot be attributed to any one factor.

6.4. Satisfaction varies more than learning
Although the student satisfaction range for the MBA program was bigger than the MFF program, there was a smaller difference in the MBA program and MFF program ranges for perceived learning. This suggests that, given different levels of PII and/or student satisfaction in a course or program, perceived learning may not vary as dramatically. This notion makes sense, as there are a multitude of other factors that can contribute to a student's level of perceived learning, including prior knowledge (or lack thereof) of the subject matter. This can potentially be attributed to a few factors. First, the MFF program had fewer courses and fewer instructors than the MBA program, which could have led to less variability across course experiences. Additionally, the single track of the MFF program, along with the cohort model, could have contributed to less variability in satisfaction compared to the MBA program, which has multiple enrollment periods and five different concentration tracks.

6.5. Diminishing returns for interpersonal interaction
The results also give some minor evidence for a point of diminishing returns for interpersonal interaction, as theorized by various researchers (Castano-Munoz et al., 2013; Downing et al., 2007; Northrup et al., 2002; Picciano, 2002). It may be the case that although the MFF program has greater PII, students in the MBA program may have experienced sufficient PII as well and additional PII either would not have made a significant improvement on student satisfaction and/or perceived learning, or it could have potentially even decreased student satisfaction and/or perceived learning due to the interaction becoming overwhelming. Further investigation into the appropriate amount of PII is certainly warranted, and it is important to consider that this amount may vary by student level, area of study, and program type.

6.6. Limitations
The differences in PII, student satisfaction, and perceived learning across these two programs should be processed cautiously, as the students in the two cohorts progress through the program at the same time. A significant limitation of the study design is that students were often enrolled in multiple courses in the study. For that reason, each response is not truly unique, as learner backgrounds will not differ in the instances where they submitted reviews in multiple courses; however, their perceptions of the interaction, satisfaction, and perceived learning may still differ in the courses. In addition, the cohort structure of the MFF program led to this limitation being more apparent in the MFF program than the MBA program. This limitation of the research design means that the results of the differences between the two programs must be qualified, which impacts the generalizability of these findings.

6.7. Recommendations for future research
The results of this study can be used to add to the immense research on the interaction component in asynchronous OL environments. Future studies may explore courses in the undergraduate setting to determine whether the PII component differs for different learner levels. Additionally, expanding the number of courses in the study may increase the diversity of PII levels (i.e., courses that fall into the “low interactive qualities” category on the RAIQDC) to see how courses with low PII compare. Future studies can also investigate different subject areas (i.e. non-business) to determine whether PII is more or less important to student outcomes in different fields of study. This study can serve as a starting point for future studies to use PII as a lens for viewing quality interpersonal interaction in OL courses.

Although the results offer support for social constructivist-based course design, it is important to note that they do not truly offer evidence that alternative course designs based on Anderson's (2003) IEQT are not effective. Additional research into the design of courses and levels of robust student-content interaction is warranted in order to draw any conclusions as to whether alternative course designs are similarly effective. Additional studies which directly compare courses that focus on one of Moore's (1989) three forms of interaction for equivalency of effectiveness are also still warranted.

Empirical research designs which focus on the establishing a point of diminishing returns for interpersonal interaction are clearly warranted and can potentially help educators save time and costs when creating an asynchronous OL experience. Further research into the effectiveness and cost of alternative course designs compared to these designs is merited. As opportunities for various types of OL experiences are born, learners of diverse backgrounds can more effectively have their needs and expectations met. In higher education today, alternative course models may allow for educational opportunities to be more convenient and available to non-traditional learners. Further study into the effectiveness of course designs which deemphasize interpersonal interaction while enabling robust student-content interaction and/or self-pacing will be important to the deployment of these models in higher education.

7. Conclusion
In summary, the findings of this study help to inform best practices for course design and pedagogy in asynchronous OL environments. PII does appear to be an important component of the OL experience, and instructors and course designers can utilize these findings to create course designs with satisfactory levels of PII, while decreasing extraneous interactions. This is consistent with the social constructivist (Vygotsky, 1997) based course design and pedagogy that appears throughout higher education through the deployment of discussion boards, group projects, and the use of various tools that facilitate interpersonal interaction. Conversely, comparison of the two graduate programs in the study appears to demonstrate that there may be a point at which the returns (i.e. positive benefits) of interpersonal interaction in a course begins to diminish (Castano-Munoz et al., 2013; Downing et al., 2007; Northrup et al., 2002; Picciano, 2002). This suggests that there may be a saturation point for the benefits of interpersonal interaction.

Although the methodology of the study was not designed to directly compare courses with various types of interaction to determine whether they lead to similar outcomes, there is some minor evidence that supports the concepts rooted in interaction equivalency theory (Anderson, 2003). For instance, the notion that courses in the MBA program can achieve similar levels of student satisfaction and perceived learning, despite significantly lower levels of PII, may support IEQT, assuming the lack of PII is made up for by student-content interaction. Conversely, the differences in perceived PII between the two programs might have been caused by a host of other factors, including differences in the types of students enrolled in the two programs, differences in the course structure (i.e. eight-week vs. five-week), or existing social structures due to the cohort design of the MFF program.

In total, it appears that looking at the amount of quality interaction in OL environments is superior to simply counting the interactive opportunities in any course (i.e. counting discussion board posts), based on the strong relationships of the RAIQDC instrument and the student satisfaction and perceived learning instruments. The promotion of social constructivist-based course design and pedagogy continues to be worthwhile and valid.

