Proliferation of technology has provided additional means of out-of-class communication. This paper focuses on the relationship between technologically-mediated out-of-class communication (TMOCC) and variables crucial to successful instructional communication. A proposed model predicted perceived immediacy to mediate the relationship between immediacy behaviors (i.e., verbal and computer-mediated behaviors) and instructional outcomes (i.e., student state motivation and affective learning). While the proposed model was not supported, a model of best fit depicts perceived immediacy as a mediator for the relationship between verbal behaviors and motivation, which then impacts affective learning. The implications of these findings are discussed, as well as limitations and opportunities for future research.

Previous
Keywords
Technologically-mediated out-of-class communication (TMOCC)

Immediacy behaviors

Perceived immediacy

State motivation

Affective learning

“…any social arrangement that remains vitally social, or vitally shared, is educative to those who participate in it. Only when it becomes cast in a mold and runs in a routine way does it lose its educative power”

(Dewey, 1916, p. 7).
John Dewey, educational philosopher and psychologist, advocated for informal means of education. He maintained that communication was the act of transmitting knowledge, and that the informal contexts were as important as the formal. He advocated that learning and instruction was not restricted to the classroom. A century later, this notion remains true: to adapt to today's student, college classrooms have moved outside the formal and traditional brick and mortar set up. In the process, students have embraced informal means of communication and have come to expect the same from instructors (Ledbetter & Finn, 2018).

Students' access to new technologies has made them, constantly connected (Strauss & Howe, 2007). These new technologies allow for increased distance education possibilities (Kelly and Westerman, 2016) as well as other possibilities outside of the classroom as part of learning (Jucks & Brummernhenrich, 2016). While past studies have examined out-of-class communication (OCC; see Nadler & Nadler, 2000) and extra-class-communication (ECC; see Waldeck, Kearney, & Plax, 2001), they may not consider the online context in their work (see Goldman, Goodboy, & Bolkan, 2016) or may separate online and offline communication contexts (see Hoffman, 2014). Specifically, Conley and Yun (2017) note an instructor's message can affect a student's learning outcomes, and as Dewey (1916) would posit, informal communication opportunities have educational value and should not be forgotten or ignored. Thus, the current study is an exploration of technologically-mediated out-of-class communication (TMOCC) between instructors and students. The current study focuses on students' perceptions of instructors' messages by examining how immediacy behaviors used during TMOCC impact students' experiences of perceived immediacy, affective learning, and state motivation to learn, and is meant to begin a line of research into this important concept.

1. Technologically-mediated out-of-class communication (TMOCC)
Most instructors do not interact with their students only during class time. Out-of-class communication has been found to increase students' feelings of intimacy with their instructor and co-control over the course, as well as improving cognitive and affective learning (Dobransky & Frymier, 2004; Goldman et al., 2016). One important type of OCC is the use of instructors' office hours; however, students do not always make use of face-to-face office hours, doing so, at best, only when it is convenient (Griffin et al., 2014). Because of this, OCC is turning away from face-to-face interactions as current students tend to be confident with technology and their technological abilities, utilizing technologically mediated communication frequently and expecting it, in turn, from instructors (Enskat, Hunt, & Hooker, 2017; Ledbetter & Finn, 2018). In fact, electronic communication between students and instructors is generally encouraged, if not mandated, in many university-level studies (MacArthur & Villagran, 2015).

Technologically mediated outside-of-class communication (TMOCC) includes the use of electronic technologies such as e-mail, instant messaging, and social media to communicate with students outside of normal class hours. Past work on OCC has excluded online forms of communication (see Goldman et al., 2016) while others have advocated that these means of communication be seen as a distinct context (see Hoffman, 2014). With the increase in technology, and its use in ways that do not necessarily directly correlate with face-to-face communication, it is necessary to view TMOCC as conceptually different from other forms of OCC; thus, we must determine how these channels can influence instructional outcomes.

Past studies have linked individual TMOCC channels to positive instructional outcomes (MacArthur & Villagran, 2015). For example, Cifuentes and Lents (2010) found holding virtual office hours through instant messaging increased students' interactions with instructors compared to instances when no such TMOCC was available. Wang and Beasley (2006) also discovered integrating instant messaging into office hours decreased anxiety and increased the willingness of shy students to communicate with their instructors. Further, McArthur and Bostedo-Conway (2012) found instructor Twitter use to be positively correlated with immediacy, despite students' views that social media should remain private (Chromey et al., 2016).

The utility of technology in connecting students and instructors often has much to do with how it is used. For example, a positive e-mail sent from an instructor to students prior to the beginning of the semester increased student motivation and attitudes (Legg & Wilson, 2009). Students also prefer TMOCC to occur through educational media, such as school e-mail or academic internet tools, rather than social media, as students still value professionalism in education (Chromey et al., 2016). Students e-mail instructors most often to clarify information related to the course, but, at the same time, use of e-mail allows users to build closer relationships (Martin, Myers, & Mottet, 1999; Waldeck et al., 2001). As such, even though TMOCC may be more frequently used, students and instructors may be hesitant to use it if they have boundary-related concerns (Chromey et al., 2016). These findings suggest that how instructors and students communicate through technology is important to consider, and one important consideration for educational outcomes is whether instructors use immediacy behaviors in their TMOCC (Kelly, 2012).

1.1. Immediacy behaviors
As defined by Albert Mehrabian nearly 50 years ago, immediacy consists of the verbal and nonverbal communication behaviors that reduce physical and/or psychological distance between people (Zhang & Witt, 2016). Kelly, Kotowski, and Fall (2010) recommend studying instructional immediacy as a multidimensional construct, including verbal, nonverbal, and computer-mediated immediacy behaviors. Specific verbal immediacy behaviors (VIB) include use of humor, first names, self-disclosure, and inclusive terms (e.g., “our” or “we”; Gorham, 1988). Nonverbal immediacy behaviors include using eye contact, being close in proximity, and gesturing (Richmond, Gorham, & McCroskey, 1987). Computer-mediated instructional immediacy behaviors (CMIB) are communicative behaviors displayed by instructors via technologically-mediated channels (i.e., TMOCC) that decrease perceived psychological distance; these may include instructors' displaying a personality or using a students' names in their response (Kelly et al., 2010). While these CMIB are similar to nonverbal and verbal immediacy behaviors, Kelly et al. maintain they are distinct in that CMIB blend verbal- and nonverbal elements. When teachers exhibit these behaviors, student motivation and learning have been found to increase (Baker, 2010; Kelly & Fall, 2011; Zhang & Witt, 2016).

Despite the breadth of existing immediacy research, there continues to be room for further exploration. First, much of the past scholarship has conflated instructors' immediacy behaviors with students' experience of feeling immediate, but the instructors' use of such behaviors does not always lead to the students' experience of immediacy (Kelly, 2012). Although such behaviors may be related to such experience, this relationship is not perfect, and thus measuring them separately is important for establishing the usefulness of the behaviors (Hughes, 2014; Kelly, 2012; Kelly et al., 2010). Second, Witt et al. (2016) warns the effects of mediated and non-mediated messages will be different, but instructor immediacy has been primarily studied in face-to-face settings (Baker, 2010). Thus, it becomes necessary to extend these behaviors to a technologically-mediated context to determine if immediacy behaviors exhibited in TMOCC lead to perceived immediacy.

1.2. Perceived immediacy
The present study adheres to Kelly's (2012) advice to study immediacy behaviors and perceived immediacy separately. Mehrabian (1981) argued immediacy behaviors may decrease the perceived distance, but that these behaviors alone do not indicate how near a person feels (Kelly, Graham, MacDonald, & Goke, 2018). Thus, when studying immediacy behaviors, it is also necessary to study the degree of perceived closeness or distance.

Several concepts are similar to perceived immediacy: electronic propinquity (Korzenny, 1978), mediated immediacy (O'Sullivan, Hunt, & Lippert, 2004), and social presence (Biocca, Harms, & Burgoon, 2003). Electronic propinquity has been defined as a “psychological feeling of nearness” (Walther & Bazarova, 2008, p. 624) or as “electronic presence” (Korzenny, 1978, p. 7); mediated immediacy is defined as perceptions of closeness through mediated channels (O'Sullivan et al., 2004); and, social presence is the feelings of warmth, intimacy, etc., perceived when communicating with another person via technology (Lombard & Ditton, 1997). As Kelly and Westerman (2016) has suggested, all are similar if not the same general idea, as they are all related to a feeling of interpersonal connection between two people and describe the degree of realness perceived in a communicative partner.

In an online environment, this perceived closeness is performative (Kehrwald, 2008): presence is demonstrated via visible verbal behaviors (e.g., participating in discussion). And because TMOCC is conveyed primarily through verbal communication, we posit the following hypothesis:

H1

Students' perceptions of instructors' use of verbal immediacy behaviors in TMOCC will be positively related to their feelings of perceived immediacy.

Nonverbal immediacy behaviors in an online environment are more difficult, but not impossible, to study. Traditional nonverbal immediacy behaviors (e.g., eye contact, proximity) are difficult to measure as these behaviors are not afforded by every technology; instead, Kelly et al. (2010) argue instructional immediacy behaviors are relevant. CMIB include chronemics (i.e., response rate in online forums; Dixson, Greenwell, Rogers-Stacy, Weister, & Lauer, 2017) or personalization (i.e., paralinguistics in learning management system feedback; Clark-Gordon, Bowman, Watts, Banks, & Knight, 2018), which are afforded by several mediated options. Thus, studying computer-mediated immediacy behaviors (CMIB; Kelly et al., 2010) may provide more pertinent findings. To date, this is an under researched area compared to VIB. Past work (Kelly et al., 2010; Kelly & Fall, 2011) reports CMIB behave similarly to VIB. It would logically follow that the same prediction can be made as that for verbal immediacy behaviors, and thus, the next hypothesis is as follows:

H2

Students' perceptions of instructors' use of computer-mediated immediacy behaviors in TMOCC will be positively related to their feelings of perceived immediacy.

Because past OCC/ECC research has found connections to affective and cognitive learning (Goldman et al., 2016) and because TMOCC is OCC in a mediated environment, we next explore the roles of affective and state motivation as they relate to TMOCC practices.

1.3. Affective learning
Affective learning is a frequently studied outcome in instructional communication. Although debate exists on what counts as affective learning (see Hess, 2015), it is agreed that this construct deals primarily with the emotional aspects of learning. This may also be viewed as learners' attitudes and values (see Hess, 2015), and as has been reported, students have generally positive attitudes toward technology (Strauss & Howe, 2007). Therefore, it is presumed that affective learning is relevant to the study of TMOCC.

Instructors' messages have been found to impact students' affective learning both in the classroom (Goldman & Brann, 2016) and in private feedback settings (Kerssen-Griep & Witt, 2012). Waldeck (2007) noted when instructors created a more personalized learning environment or experience, students felt higher levels of affective learning. Other research has also associated immediacy behaviors with increases in affective learning (Baker, 2010). However, as argued above, Kelly (2012), Hughes (2014), and Kelly and Westerman (2016) have proposed that immediacy behaviors and the experience of perceived immediacy should not be equated. Furthermore, Baker (2010) found perceived immediacy is associated with affective learning. We can logically assume then that immediacy felt by students during TMOCC will associate with affective learning in much the same way; therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:

H3

Perceived immediacy in TMOCC between students and instructors will be positively related to affective learning.

Christophel (1990) determined instructors' immediacy behaviors could impact affective learning, but that cognitive learning was influenced via students' motivation to learn.

1.4. Student state motivation
Motivation is defined as a student being moved to do something (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Kim and Bennekin (2013) argue this may be students' reasons for taking a course or their willingness to work. When it comes to instructional communication, student motivation is widely researched (Christophel, 1990; Frymier, 2016; Frymier & Shulman, 1995; Goldman & Brann, 2016; Kerssen-Griep & Witt, 2012; Myers, Goodboy, & Members of COMM 600, 2014). Motivation is often separated as either state or trait motivation. State motivation is students' motivation at the given moment whereas trait motivation is students' intrinsic desires to learn. In studies, state motivation was related to instructor behaviors more so than trait motivation (Christophel, 1990) as state motivation pertains to more external factors (Brophy, 1987). Students' state motivation describes their intention to acquire knowledge or reach a goal; simultaneously, instructors' behaviors influence state motivation (Frymier, 2016; Myers et al., 2014). These behaviors may include TMOCC.

Motivation as an outcome in instructional communication research is impacted, often indirectly, by immediacy. Although some would suggest immediacy has lost some predictive power (see Myers et al., 2014), others reported immediacy was still present in the relationship (Comadena, Hunt, & Simonds, 2007). For instance, Waldeck (2007) suggests instructors who spend time on the affective qualities of a student-teacher relationship are often seen as creating a more personalized educational experience; Kerssen-Griep and Witt (2012) explained the interaction between immediacy and face-threat mitigation can predict student motivation; and, Goldman and Brann (2016) discovered students' perceptions of relatedness were enhanced by instructors' displays of care and verbal immediacy, which led to increased motivation. To increase students' motivation, instructors may be able to use TMOCC to personalize the relationship, to save face, and to display signs of caring; all are accomplished through instructors' immediacy behaviors.

Past research has suggested a link between immediacy and student motivation. Again, however, immediacy behaviors are separate from perceived immediacy and feelings of connectedness (Kelly and Westerman, 2016; Hughes, 2014; Kelly, 2012). Thus, consistent with the goals of the current research, the following hypothesis is offered:

H4

Perceived immediacy in TMOCC between students and instructors will be positively related to students' state motivation to learn.

Research on immediacy behaviors, affective learning, and motivation has found connections in various cultures; for instance, Zhang and Oetzel (2006) discovered an integrated model in which immediacy behaviors had a direct impact on affective learning and an indirect impact on motivation fit in Chinese classrooms. However, this was based on in-class behaviors, which Witt et al. (2016) maintain are different than online or mediated behaviors. Additionally, while Chinese classrooms may be lower in in-class communication between students-and-instructors (see Zhang, 2006), out-of-class communication is prominent. Further, the Global Education Census Report (2018) indicates smartphone penetration internationally has reached 55%; the impacts of TMOCC on students from one culture should have parallels to those from another. Therefore, we offer the following hypothesis:

H5

2. Method
To test the hypotheses of this study, a survey asking questions about the relevant variables of interest was conducted.

2.1. Participants
Participants were 545 students from an Upper Midwestern university of the United States. After unfinished responses were removed, our sample was 389; of these, 228 identified as female (58.61%), 143 identified as male (36.76%), three identified as transgender/nonbinary (0.77%), and 15 did not disclose (3.86%). Our participants reflected each academic year, with Freshmen (n = 194; 49.9%) most common; the remaining participants were 75 sophomores (19.3%), 54 juniors (13.9%), 31 seniors (8.0%), and 35 other (e.g., Graduate level; 9.0%). Ages ranged from 18 to 52 (M = 20.91, SD = 5.19), with 14 people not reporting. Students' ethnicities were 341 white/Caucasian (87.7%), 10 Asian/Pacific Islander (2.6%), 10 Latino/Hispanic (2.6%), 10 other (2.6%), five African American (1.3%), five mixed (1.3%), four Native American (1.0%), and two Middle Eastern (0.5%); two participants (0.5%) did not respond.

2.2. Procedures
Upon receiving IRB approval, data were collected using online survey software. Collection occurred at two separate times. The first was over a two-week period in March and April 2018 (N = 202) from a communication basic course; participants received course credit. The second was over 2 weeks in November and December 2018 (N = 187) from a campus-wide e-mail Listserv. To which course students referred was not collected. Mean scores for each variable were calculated per sample and compared. Only one variable (i.e., affective learning) differed across samples; it could be that those from the COMM basic course considered one consistent instructor while those from the Listserv considered a variety. However, because the other variables did not significantly differ between collection points, we combined both samples for analysis.

Participants were asked to think about a course they took in the previous semester in which they engaged in TMOCC with the instructor. They were then asked what communication technologies they used with the instructor and how often they used them. Next, participants were asked to respond about the verbal immediacy and computer-mediated immediacy behaviors their instructor used during TMOCC. Questions about the experience of electronic propinquity felt during TMOCC were next, followed by measures of participants' state motivation and affective learning about the class. Finally, participants reported their demographics.

2.3. Measures
2.3.1. Verbal immediacy behaviors
To measure students' perceptions of instructors' use of verbal immediacy behaviors during TMOCC, a modified version of Gorham's (1988) Verbal Immediacy Behavior Scale was used. Participants were asked to consider how their instructor behaved during TMOCC and responded with their agreement using a 7-point Likert type response set (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). Higher scores represented more perceived use of verbally immediate behaviors. Eleven items were used (e.g., “addresses me by name”) The measurement model fit (CFI = 0.854) somewhat poorly with a reliability (Cronbach's α) of 0.86. Removal of individual items led to a worse fit; therefore, all items were kept for further analysis.

2.3.2. Computer-mediated instructional immediacy behaviors
Behaviors assumed to be related to immediacy in online instructional contexts were measured with a five-item scale (Kelly et al., 2010). Participants were asked to consider how their instructor behaved during TMOCC and responded with their agreement to behaviors using a 7-point Likert type response set (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). Higher scores represented more perceived use of immediate behaviors. The measurement model fit (CFI = 0.950) with an alpha (Cronbach's α) of 0.65.

2.3.3. Electronic propinquity
Electronic propinquity was measured using a five-item scale (Walther & Bazarova, 2008) each with a 7-point semantic differential response set (e.g., “distant/nearby” and “close/far”). Participants were asked to consider how they felt when engaging in TMOCC with their instructor. Items were recoded such that higher scores represent greater electronic propinquity. Responses were combined into an index that fit (CFI = 0.998) after removal of one item (i.e., disconnected/connected) and had a reliability (Cronbach's α) of 0.86.

2.3.4. Affective learning
To measure affective learning, McCroskey's (1994) Affective Learning Measure was used. This eight-item scale asks people to think about the subject matter of the course and the chances of taking a course in the content area again and used a 7-point semantic differential response set (e.g., “valuable/worthless” and “possible/impossible”). Items were recoded such that higher scores meant more affective learning took place. The measurement model indicated two factors (in line with the original measure): Affect Toward Content fit (CFI = 0.987) and had a reliability (Cronbach's α) of 0.88 and Affect Toward Classes in Content fit (CFI = 0.968) and had a reliability (Cronbach's α) of 0.95.

2.3.5. State motivation
Motivation was measured using the State Motivation Scale (Christophel, 1990). Participants were asked to consider how motivated they felt in this class overall. This scale contains 12 items, each using a 7-point semantic differential response set (e.g., “inspired/uninspired” and “excited/not excited”). Items were recoded such that higher scores represent more motivation. Removal of one item (i.e., challenged/unchallenged) resulted in an index that had a model fit (CFI = 0.905) with a reliability (Cronbach's α) of 0.92. Please see Table 1 for a list of means and standard deviations for all variables.


Table 1. Means and standard deviations of variables tested.

Mean	SD	Min	Max	Α
VIB	4.54	1.05	1	7	0.86
CMIB	5.27	0.87	1	7	0.65
Perceived Immediacy	4.32	1.03	1	7	0.86
Affective Learning 1	5.64	1.17	1	7	0.88
Affective Learning 2	5.09	1.80	1	7	0.95
State Motivation	4.69	1.16	1	7	0.92
Frequency of TMOCC	3.54	1.29	1	7	N/A
3. Results
Before hypotheses were tested, some general descriptives about the use of TMOCC were examined. First, among the 389 participants who said they used technology to interact with their instructor out of the classroom, a mean score of 3.54 (SD = 1.30, scale of 1–6) was found for frequency in TMOCC. Participants reported using e-mail most (N = 382) to do so, followed by Learning Management Systems (e.g., Blackboard) with 113 users, Document Sharing Systems (e.g., Google Docs) with 45 users, Discussion Boards (e.g., Slack) with 29 users, Text Messaging with 24 users, Social Network Sites with nine users, and Video Messaging (e.g., Skype) with six reported users. Twelve participants also indicated they used some other technology to engage in TMOCC throughout the semester (Table 2).


Table 2. Correlation matrix for variables tested.

VIB	CMIB	Perceived Immediacy	State Motivation	Affective Learning 1	Affective Learning 2	Frequency of TMOCC
VIB							
CMIB	0.58⁎⁎						
Perceived Immediacy	0.33⁎⁎	0.32⁎⁎					
State Motivation	0.24⁎⁎	0.35⁎⁎	0.25⁎⁎				
Affective Learning 1	0.26⁎⁎	0.48⁎⁎	0.23⁎⁎	0.64⁎⁎			
Affective Learning 2	0.08	0.22⁎⁎	0.11⁎	0.59⁎⁎	0.52⁎⁎		
Frequency of TMOCC	0.22⁎⁎	0.14⁎	0.10⁎	0.16⁎⁎	0.04	
0.19⁎⁎	
Note.⁎p < .05 ⁎⁎p < .01.

Correlation analysis was conducted to test hypotheses 1–4. Hypothesis 1 predicted that students' perceived use of verbal immediacy behaviors (VIB) by instructors during TMOCC would be positively related to those student's experience of perceived immediacy during TMOCC. These two variables had a statistically significant correlation (r = 0.33, p < .001), and thus the data were consistent with hypothesis 1.

Hypothesis 2 predicted student's perceived use of computer-mediated immediacy behaviors (CMIB) by instructors during TMOCC would be positively related to those student's experience of perceived immediacy during TMOCC. These two variables were statistically significantly correlated (r = 0.32, p < .001), and thus the data were consistent with hypothesis 2.

Hypothesis 3 predicted students' experience of perceived immediacy would be positively related to those students' reported affective learning for the class. Because the affective learning measure showed two separate factors, correlations between perceived immediacy and each of the affective learning factors were calculated. Perceived immediacy was correlated at a statistically significant level with both affective learning 1 (r = 0.23, p < .001) and affective learning 2 (r = 0.11, p < .05), and thus the data were consistent with hypothesis 3.

Hypothesis 4 predicted students' experiences of perceived immediacy would be positively related to their reported motivation. These two variables were correlated at as statistically significant level (r = 0.25, p < .001), and thus the data were consistent with hypothesis 4.

4. Discussion
This study examined how students' perceptions of instructors' verbal and computer-mediated immediacy behaviors during TMOCC impacted their feelings of perceived immediacy. How these feelings are related to educational outcomes of affective learning and state motivation in the class were also explored. Results and implications will be discussed, as will limitations and directions for future research.

Initial analysis explored the relationships between immediacy behaviors and perceived immediacy, as guided by the notion that the behaviors themselves are not equated with the feelings of closeness (Kelly and Westerman, 2016; Hughes, 2014; Kelly, 2012). Our data were consistent with hypotheses predicting both VIB and CMIB would be positively related to perceived immediacy during TMOCC. Respondents indicated that instructors' behaviors, such as referring to students by name or showing personality, decreased the perceptual distance. In TMOCC, this provides two significant conclusions: first, because both correlations were far from 1.0, it is important to study the behaviors and perceptions of closeness as separate; second, as guided by Witt et al. (2016), messages in face-to-face and mediated contexts will have different effects, and thus studying immediacy behaviors in TMOCC contexts is a prudent avenue of future research. Future research can and should continue to explore how the use of various types of immediacy behaviors used by instructors and/or students in TMOCC impact experiences of psychological closeness.

The impacts of perceived immediacy on learning outcomes (i.e., state motivation and affective learning) were small. Our assumptions were based on past studies that found connections between feeling connected and these outcomes (e.g., Baker, 2010; Myers et al., 2014; Waldeck, 2007). To this, there may be a few explanations: first, students were surveyed, in both instances, toward the end of the semester, when state motivation may have been low. Second, it could be that electronic propinquity (i.e., operationalization of connectedness) is not similar enough to students' perceptions of immediacy. Past definitions suggest propinquity and social presence are similar (Kelly and Westerman, 2016), at least based on some conceptualizations of social presence (Lombard & Ditton, 1997). Future scholars exploring perceived immediacy in TMOCC should work to disentangle these concepts. Third, although TMOCC is important, it is only one piece of the educational puzzle. As the use of technology expands, TMOCC may become an even more important component of the overall classroom experience (especially if office hours really are a past-but-not-present form of OCC; Griffin et al., 2014). Future research can examine OCC and TMOCC to determine the impacts each context has on students.

Additionally, the impacts of perceived immediacy on learning outcomes did not match our proposed model. Our hypotheses were based on findings from face-to-face contexts (see Goldman et al., 2016), which Witt et al. (2016) warn may be different. However, our findings do offer prevalent suggestions for TMOCC. In this case, instructors who refer to students by name or are cognizant of message response times can increase students' feelings of perceived closeness, which directly influenced students' feelings of state motivation. When students perceive they are an individual, they may feel increased levels of drive in their work. Further, when students are more motivated, they have higher affective learning. Together, this has practical implications for practicing instructors.

5. Practical implications
Because technology use has become an expectation by campuses (MacArthur & Villagran, 2015) and by students (Enskat et al., 2017; Ledbetter & Finn, 2018), understanding what instructors can do to better students' experiences is crucial to instructional research. And although it would be possible to discuss numerous high-tech options for TMOCC, e-mail was still the technology most used by students. In fact, almost every student in this sample (n = 382; 98.20%) indicated using e-mail to interact with their instructor outside of the classroom. While this seems contradictory to the rise of social networking site usage (see Perrin, 2015), this is consistent with the findings of Chromey et al. (2016): e-mail may be perceived as a more professional form of communication. Although TMOCC is vital and the experience can lead to positive outcomes, students may value a division between school/professional and personal life and, as such, rely on e-mail to communicate with professors, similar to Sheer and Fung's (2007) and Waldeck et al.'s (2001) findings. Those who branch out to other options (e.g., social networking or Skype) may have already formed a closer connection. This was further evidenced by a participant's final comment: “No one in my class texted our professor or really would use anything except email…maybe [social networking services] near the end of the semester, but probably not about school related things.”

These results clearly align with past research on instructor communication and learning outcomes: instructors can impact students' motivation and affective learning (Goldman & Brann, 2016). An action as simple as responding to an e-mail can instill some increased value in the learning situation, and informal communication between instructors and students must be seen as a learning opportunity. CMIB, such as using students' names or quick response times, can serve to motivate students and to show them their thoughts and questions are valued (see Myers et al., 2014). This can be advantageous for overall classroom learning.

Instructors should consider how they want students to perceive their e-mails. The present study demonstrates the use of VIB having positive impacts on students' state motivation and, consequently, affective learning. Christophel (1990) describes both as related to overall learning.

6. Limitations and future directions
A couple of limitations of this study are noteworthy. First, the measurement of computer-mediated immediacy behaviors could continue to be refined. This is a relatively new measure (Kelly et al., 2010) and thus has not received as much attention as other measures used in this research. Excluding CMIB from the final model may be in line with Myers et al. (2014) findings that immediacy may be intertwined with other behaviors; the use of digital behaviors may be unnoticed because it is implicit in instructor communication at this point. For a CMIB scale to be effective, it may need to be more closely tied to the affordances of the channel. TMOCC has such wide breadth, so an all-encompassing scale may not be the most effective. As new channels become available, new behaviors will inevitably emerge. Specific scales which study immediacy behaviors within specific types of TMOCC (e.g., synchronous and asynchronous channels) may be needed; we invite others to explore this area in future research.

The same could be said for the measure of verbal immediacy behaviors. The VIB scale (Gorham, 1988) has been frequently used in instructional research, and this is one of the main reasons it was used in the current study as well. However, it is not without criticism. As mentioned above, behaviors are not the same as immediacy, even though the two have often been used interchangeably (Kelly and Westerman, 2016). The current study suggests that the use of immediacy behaviors and the experience of immediacy should not be equated. The validity of the VIB scale has also been questioned in past scholarship (Zhang & Witt, 2016). The low model fit in the current study is also in line with potential validity issues of this measure. However, it is unclear exactly how low of a fit this is for the literature on VIB, especially when adapting this scale for use in TMOCC. Bollen (1989) has suggested that standards, such as the 0.90 cutoff for CFI in model testing, are gauges to be used in conjunction with the literature in an area. For example, if most studies in an area show a CFI of 0.65, and a new study found a CFI of 0.80, then that would be considered a high fit even though it is below the suggested guideline of 0.90. Therefore, the scale was still used despite the relatively low model fit to help establish a baseline for the scale in this context. Future research in the area can establish if this was a low, high, or normal fit for this measure.

Another possible issue is that affective learning (McCroskey, 1994) showed significant differences between our two data collection times. It could be that combining these two samples muted differences in affective learning that may otherwise have been identified. However, no other differences between samples were found, and, as Myers and Goodboy (in Hess, 2015) state, the conceptualization and operationalization of affective learning has been problematic. Thus, it seems more likely that the difference in scores may indicate problems with the measure, as a measure of affective learning should not be restricted to one semester. Future scholarship should work to delineate what is and what is not affective learning and refine a measure based upon this definition.

Finally, measuring state motivation may not have captured the complexity of students' motivation but does indicate motivation is present in TMOCC. This does not lower the value of state motivation as a starting point as Frymier (2016) maintains instructor behaviors can influence students' state motivation. We measured state motivation for a baseline that should serve only as a starting point. More complex understandings of motivation within TMOCC may consider the intrinsic-extrinsic-amotivation spectrum (Ryan & Deci, 2000). This spectrum may be especially relevant when TMOCC is student-initiated; future research should address this.

7. Conclusion
When Strauss and Howe (2007) predicted, over a decade ago, that college students' lives would be constantly connected, they likely had no idea the technologies that would exist in present-day classrooms; nevertheless, college students are connected, and they are beginning to expect the same from instructors. The present study looked only at the effects of immediacy behaviors and perceived immediacy but took the communication outside of the classroom and onto the web. Technologically mediated outside-of-class communication will only increase in necessity moving forward; therefore, the relationships harbored through such communication will be equally necessary to study. This research provides a step in that direction.

