The performance of students in blended and traditional versions of a collegiate course is compared within the context of students' prior academic achievement. The blended version of the course used flipped and flexible instructional modes, in which only online lectures were available, class periods were used for complementary learning activities, and there was no punitive attendance policy. Significant differences in student performance between the blended and traditional versions were found within two of three zones of grade point averages. At low grade point averages, performance was higher in the traditional version of the course. At high grade point averages, performance was higher in the blended version. No significant difference was detected in the middle zone of grade point averages. Predictive models of student performance were also prepared for the two versions of the course. Partial effects from measures of prior academic achievement upon performance in the blended version were significantly different from partial effects provided by the same measures in the traditional version of the course.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Blended course

Traditional course

Achievement

Zones

Performance differences

1. Introduction
Whether student performance in collegiate courses is diminished, enhanced, or unaffected by using online materials is an issue that continues to receive much attention (Albert and Beatty, 2014, Al-Qahtani and Higgins, 2013, Baepler et al., 2014). The traditional face-to-face lecture environment has taken the role of the baseline in attempts to determine relative gains or losses, or lack thereof, in student performance owing to the incorporation of online materials. Online materials have been included into courses across a broad spectrum of intensity. At one end of the spectrum, small bits of online materials are brought into the traditional classroom, playing only a minor role to complement the fully retained face-to-face lecture environment. Such courses are commonly labeled “web enhanced.” At the other end of the spectrum are purely online courses with no face-to-face meetings. In these courses, there might still be contact between instructor and student in virtual settings.

Between those two extremes are blended courses. These courses combine face-to-face and online instruction and offer a reduction of in-class seat time (Parsad, Lewis, & Tice, 2008). Instructional approaches are blended with the intention of creating an effective learning environment that provides advantages over traditional, web-enhanced, or online versions of a course. Garrison and Kanuka (2004), early promoters of the blended learning approach, point to several virtues of blended learning as enticements for moving a course in that direction. They describe blended learning as having the potential to transform the educational landscape by giving students more responsibility, control, and independence while also raising their capacities for critical and reflective thought. Klein, Noe, and Wang (2006) echo those attractions but warn that moves away from traditional styles toward blended learning are not necessarily smooth. In fact, Garrison and Kanuka (2004) note that combining face-to-face and online delivery methods in an effective way can be difficult. They advise that the blended environment should not be created by merely adding the delivery methods together. Rather, the delivery methods should truly be integrated to create a new environment that is more than simply the sum of old parts.

Course structures from across the blended spectrum have been the subject of a significant amount of research. Surveys of a wide variety of studies have been provided by Arbaugh et al. (2009); Arbaugh (2014); Halverson, Graham, Spring, Drysdale, and Henrie (2014), and O'Flaherty and Phillips (2015). A website well-known to educators with interests in online education, www.nosignificantdifference.org, provides a running chronicle of results from studies that have dealt with the effects of using or exclusively relying upon online delivery of course materials. The website name reflects a recurrent, though not exclusive, result from studies comparing performance in traditional and online courses: no significant difference. However, comparisons of blended course outcomes with traditional course outcomes have been less frequent than comparisons of traditional versus online. Meta analyses have also been applied to this literature, one of the most popular being a large study sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education (2010).

Positive results from using blended learning environments have fueled the adoption rate of the approach. The positive results have occurred along two broad dimensions: student opinions of the blended learning approach (e.g., Lim and Morris, 2009, Woltering et al., 2009, Castle and McGuire, 2010; Davies et al., 2013, Prober and Khan, 2013), and student performance, particularly when compared to traditional versions of courses (e.g., Riffell and Sibley, 2005, Alonso et al., 2011, Al-Qahtani and Higgins, 2013). Also of interest are student views concerning the components of a blended learning environment. Lopez-Perez, Perez-Lopez, and Rodriguez-Ariza (2011) report that while students are supportive of the online components offered in blended courses, they are even more supportive of their face-to-face elements.

Central to this study is the finding that most studies comparing student performance in blended and traditional courses have used class-wide means of exam scores, course grades, or similar measures to determine whether one delivery method is superior to the other (Larson and Sung, 2009, Lewis and Harrison, 2012, McDonough et al., 2014) However, broad comparisons of student performance between instructional modes using class-wide means may obscure performance differences that could be occurring within subgroups of students. A recent trio of studies has looked deeper into the range of student achievement and abilities as they relate to student perceptions (Owston, York, & Murtha, 2013), performance (Baepler et al., 2014), and success (Hachey, Wladis, & Conway, 2015) in blended and online learning environments. The results reported in those studies create a suspicion that performance differences between blended and traditional formats need to be more closely examined by focusing on how those differences, or lack thereof, could be dependent upon student characteristics. This study makes a unique contribution by demonstrating that performance differences between blended and traditional formats vary according to zones of prior academic achievement.

1.1. Research questions of the study
The study addresses the following research questions:

1. Do performance differences between blended and traditional courses vary according to prior academic achievement, aptitude in the subject matter, and performance in a prerequisite skills course?

2. Do the determinants of student performance differ between blended and traditional courses?

3. Do differences in the effect of prior academic achievement upon performance change along the range of prior academic achievement?

1.2. Literature review
The group of studies reviewed below provide examples of results associated with inquiries into performance differences between traditional and blended formats. A variety of analytical frameworks are represented in the group, with all of them attempting to provide evidence about the superiority or lack thereof of one format versus the other. The frameworks range from comparing class-wide means of common performance measures, such as exam scores, to more elaborate specifications of predictive models that incorporate measures of student characteristics as control variables (covariates) and indicator variables to represent the presence of a blended format.

Table 1 presents a list of representative studies dealing with the issue of performance differences and organized into three groups: studies that found the blended format to be superior; studies that found no significant difference between formats; and studies that found the traditional format to be superior. It is worth noting that comparing class-wide means is the most prevalent analytical framework in the studies. Seven of the studies in Table 1 used a predictive modeling approach involving control variables, but only three (Utts et al., 2003, Riffell and Sibley, 2005, Delialioglu and Yildirim, 2008) allowed for interactions between the presence of the blended format and the control variables.


Table 1. Comparisons of student performance in blended and traditional courses.

Study	Course type with significantly higher performance	Course subject	Performance measure	Basis of comparison	Controls or covariates
Albert and Beatty (2014)	Blended (in two of three exams)	Management	Exam scores	Means	None
Alonso et al. (2011)	Blended	Computing	Course grade	Means	None
Al-Qahtani and Higgins (2013)	Blended	Culture	Post-test score	Means	None
Baepler et al. (2014)	Blended (in one of two sections)	Chemistry	Exam score	Means; indicator variable in regression	ACT, GPA, age, gender, science major, ethnicity
Dowling, Godfrey, and Gyles (2003)	Blended	Accounting	Course grade	Indicator variable in regression	Age, gender, full time student, grade in prerequisites
Lewis and Harrison (2012)	Blended	Social Science	Course point total	Means	None
McFarlin (2008)	Blended	Physiology	Course point total	Means	None
Melton, Graf, and Chopak-Foss (2009)	Blended	Health	Course grade	Means	None
Pereira et al. (2007)	Blended	Anatomy	Exam scores	Means	None
Riffell and Sibley (2005)	Blended	Biology	Post-test score	Indicator variables in regression	Pre-test score, gender, attendance, class standing, online experience, commuter student
Ashby, Sadera, and McNary (2011)	Neither	Mathematics	Course average	Means	Age, gender
Bergtrom (2011)	Neither	Cell Biology	Exam average	Means	None
Cybinski and Selvanathan (2005)	Neither	Statistics	Final exam	Means	None
Delialioglu and Yildirim (2008)	Neither	Computing	Post-test score	Means (in ANCOVA)b	GPA, pre-test score
Keller, Jassell, Webber, and Johnson (2009)	Neither	Accounting	Course grade	Indicator variable in regression	Grade in prerequisite course, gender, transfer student, SAT
Larson and Sung (2009)	Neither	MISa	Course grade	Means	None
Reasons, Valadares, and Slavkin (2005)	Neither	Ed. Psych. and Health Care	Course grade	Means	None
Utts et al. (2003)	Neither	Statistics	Pre-test, post-test, final exam	Means (in ANCOVA)b	GPA, class standing
Ward (2004)	Neither	Statistics	Course grade	Means	None
McDonough et al. (2014)	Traditional	Psychology	Exam average	Means	None
Senn (2008)	Traditional	Technology	Course grade	Means	None
a
MIS – management information systems.

b
ANCOVA – analysis of covariance.

Riffell and Sibley (2005) studied the performance of students enrolled in traditional and blended versions of an introductory environmental biology course. The authors found that only upperclassmen performed significantly better in the blended course than in the traditional course. However, the authors did not address, or control for, the influence of students' prior academic achievement or aptitude at the beginning of the courses. This was also the case for Reasons et al. (2005), who studied the performance of students enrolled in two different introductory courses, one in educational psychology and the other in health care delivery systems, offered in traditional, blended, and online formats. Based upon class-wide means of final course grades, students in the blended sections did not perform significantly better or worse than those in traditional learning environments. However, students in fully online sections performed significantly better than those in the other two types of delivery modes.

Several studies have controlled for the influence of students' prior academic achievement or aptitude when examining their performance in blended and traditional courses. Utts et al. (2003) found that student ability, as measured by grade point average, was strikingly similar between a blended section and a traditional section of their college elementary statistics course. A suite of pre-test, post-test, and final exam scores was used as the measure of student performance. Differences in the class-wide means were not statistically significant. Additionally, the analysis of covariance method, with grade point average and class standing serving as control variables, was also used in an attempt to detect performance differences, but none were found. Similar results were also found by Keller et al. (2009). The authors controlled for several ability variables including the grade in a prerequisite course (a measure of prior academic achievement) and SAT score (an aptitude measure). Overall, students in the blended section did not perform differently than students in the traditional section, but SAT scores were a significant predictor of course grade in both delivery modes.

Melton et al. (2009) compared the performance of students in a traditional section to that of students enrolled in three blended sections of a general health course. Prior student ability was captured by a pre-test administered to all students. While students in the blended section performed significantly better than students in the traditional section on the second exam, this finding was reversed on the fourth exam. Unlike Utts et al. (2003), the comparison of class-wide means of final course grades showed that students in the blended section significantly outperformed their traditional counterparts. This finding may be the result of students in the blended sections being able to accumulate more points for attendance and homework than those in the traditional section. The authors, however, did not examine the performance of students based on different ability thresholds from the pre-test.

To our knowledge, a study by Baepler et al. (2014) is the only one to compare the performance of students in blended and traditional courses based on different ability thresholds. Students were enrolled in one traditional and two blended sections of a general chemistry course. The study compared exam performance in each blended section to the single traditional section by using class-wide means, followed by a more advanced analysis in which identical regression models were specified for the pairings. The partial effect upon exam score from the indicator variable of course style was positive and significant for one of the two blended sections, indicating that performance in the blended section was higher than in the single traditional section. Recognizing that the use of technology could affect students of different ability levels differently, the authors categorized students by grade point average quartiles and compared the within-quartile means of exam scores for the two modes of instruction. Since each of the two blended sections was being compared to the single traditional section, there were a total of eight within-quartile comparisons. Means of exam scores were larger in the blended format in seven of the eight comparisons, but none of the within-quartile differences in means were statistically significant. Despite the lack of significance, the authors did point the way for more exploration of whether differences between blended and traditional performances vary across the range of prior academic achievement.

2. Research setting and methods
The course examined in this study is an introductory course in business and economic statistics offered at a four-year public university in the United States. Data for the study came from 347 students enrolled in four blended sections and 257 students enrolled in three traditional sections. The research protocol and collection of student data from the blended and traditional sections were approved by the institutional review board of the university. All sections were daytime sections. All were taught by the same instructor, so confounding influences due to multiple instructors were not issues in this study. The course carried prerequisites of 27 credit hours or above (roughly sophomore standing) as well as the completion of courses in calculus (three credit hours) and computer proficiency (one credit hour).

2.1. The blended course
The blended version of the course had characteristics that are common in flipped classrooms and in “flexible” course environments where students have varying degrees of flexibility with regard to class attendance and/or in-person participation. The selection of features from flipped and flexible course environments created a blended course structure that can be referred to as “flip-flex.”

The blended course had the characteristics listed below.

1. No formal lectures were delivered during the class meetings. Lectures were only available online in the form of slides accompanied by audio narrations. Topics in the online lectures were organized in a manner similar to the breakdown of chapters into sections found in the course textbook. Students could quickly find topics that aligned with section numbers within textbook chapters, making it easy to navigate to specific slides and narrations that pertained to the topic being sought.

2. Class meetings were 75  minutes in length and held twice per week. There was no attendance policy. Students were free to choose whether to attend class without risk of penalty for absences. Activities during the class meetings included question-and-answer exchanges, solving of exercises, demonstrations of topics, and applications in which students actively participated. Students were given a progress schedule at the beginning of the course showing the pace that was to be followed. The schedule specified the online lectures to be viewed and complementary text exercises to be practiced before each class meeting. Demonstrations, applications, discussions, and questions and answers based on the most current topics according to the progress schedule were given first priority during the class meetings. Questions pertaining to earlier topics were addressed only after priority questions were answered and other priority activities finished.

3. The course was divided into four successive modules. An exam worth 40 points was given during the concluding class meeting of each module. Exams were similar in terms of format and coverage across all sections, whether traditional or blended. There was no comprehensive final exam. Several computer homework assignments were required. Students received randomized data sets for the homework. Collaboration among students was encouraged although no students had the same answers for the homework because of the randomization. The course grade was determined using the following weights: exams 90%, and homework 10%. The 10% weight from homework was not included in the data for this study because it was not generated in a controlled environment. Student performance was measured as the sum of points earned on the four exams (160 maximum) and will be referred to as “course points.”

4. No information about the format of the blended version of the course was available to students prior to the beginning of the course. Advance registration materials did not identify sections of the course that would be using the blended format. In this way, there should not have been any selection bias into sections based on prior information about the format to be followed. Evidence that selection bias was avoided will be shown in a later section where descriptive statistics of student characteristics are presented.

5. A quiz to assess aptitude in basic mathematics was administered in the classroom at the beginning of the course. The quiz was patterned after that used by Johnson and Kuennen (2006) and assesses students' math skills of the type likely to be encountered in an introductory statistics course.

The blended format outlined above gave students a great deal of choice in how they took the course. At one extreme, students could choose not to attend any non-exam class meetings, thereby creating an online course for themselves. At the other extreme, students could create an approximation to a traditional face-to-face course by regularly attending class meetings. It was even possible for students to double the instruction they received by working with the online lectures in a conscientious way and then regularly attending class meetings.

2.2. The traditional course
 Traditional sections of the course held class meetings twice per week for 75 minutes each. Face-to-face lectures were delivered in the class meetings but were not recorded for later online viewing. The traditional sections used the same text, lists of suggested exercises, and assessment system that were used in the blended sections. Exams in the traditional sections were similar in format and coverage to those in the blended sections. Additionally, the traditional and blended sections shared the same computer homework tasks and math quiz (multiple versions). The point system for exams and homework was identical to that used in the blended sections. Assessments were graded using the same rubrics as used in the blended sections. As in the blended sections, there was no attendance policy in the traditional sections. Absences were not penalized.

2.3. Establishing zones of prior academic achievement
Many of the studies listed in Table 1 rely upon class-wide means to support conclusions about differences or lack thereof in student performance in blended versus traditional formats. However, there may be more variety in student performances beneath the class-wide level. This section describes a method for determining differences between means of course points across ranges of three variables. Those variables are grade point average, math quiz score, and grade in a calculus class that is a prerequisite for the course. Grade point average is a broad measure of the students' prior academic achievement. Mean credit hours taken by students prior to the beginning of the course was approximately 40 for both the blended and traditional versions. Those means represent 30% of the credit hour total required for baccalaureate graduation, so a student's academic ranking has begun to take shape by that juncture in their undergraduate program. The math quiz score is a measure of general aptitude in basic mathematics. Grade in the prerequisite calculus class is a more narrow measure of prior academic achievement, being confined to a specific skill set that has been judged to be essential for success in the course. Significant differences in student performance between the blended and traditional courses could be present in specific zones within the ranges of one or more of the three measures.

A search process involving hypothesis tests was used to determine the zones of grade point averages. The process begins in the lower portion of the grade point average distribution. Starting with students having a grade point average of less than a low threshold value (2.60), the hypothesis of equal means of course points in the blended and traditional courses was tested. If the hypothesis was rejected, the threshold of grade point average was increased in increments of 0.05 until the hypothesis of equality could not be rejected. The last threshold at which the hypothesis of equality was rejected became the high end of the bottom zone.

Next, the same process, but in reverse direction, was applied to the top portion of the distribution of grade point averages. Starting with students having a grade point average of more than a high threshold value (3.80), the hypothesis of equal means of course points in the blended and traditional versions was tested. If the hypothesis was rejected, the threshold of grade point average was decreased in increments of 0.05 until the hypothesis of equality could not be rejected. The last threshold in the downward progression at which the hypothesis of equality was rejected became the low end of the top zone.

After establishing the bottom and top zones, attention turned to the intermediate range of grade point averages lying between the established zones. There might have been just one remaining zone or perhaps multiple zones in that range. A prospective zone in the intermediate range was created using the high end of the bottom zone plus 0.20 to create an initial threshold. The hypothesis of equal course point means in that zone for the blended and traditional versions was tested. If the hypothesis was rejected, the threshold of grade point average was increased in increments of 0.05 until the hypothesis of equality could not be rejected. The last threshold at which the hypothesis of equality was rejected became the high end of the second zone. However, it was possible that the hypothesis of equality would have not been rejected within any of the zones used in the progression upward through the intermediate range. In that case, a middle zone would emerge in which there are no significant differences between the means of course points in the blended and traditional courses. A result of this type is reported in a later section. While the above discussion focused upon grade point average, similar search processes were applied across the ranges of math quiz scores and calculus grades in an attempt to define zones for those measures.

2.4. Models of student performance
The second research question concerns possible differences in the determinants of student performance between blended and traditional courses. To address the question, separate predictive models (shown later in the section) were specified for course points in the blended and traditional courses. This approach is an extension of the use of interaction terms that was noted in several of the studies appearing in Table 1 (Utts et al., 2003, Riffell and Sibley, 2005, Delialioglu and Yildirim, 2008). By specifying separate models, none of the effects from predictor variables were restricted to be the same in the traditional and blended courses.

Previous studies provided guidance when considering model specifications for student performance. Palocsay and Stevens (2008) found that grades in an introductory business statistics course were positively related to grade points averages. The statistics grades were also correlated, although to a minor degree, with grades from introductory calculus courses. However, the relationship vanished when the calculus grade and other predictor variables were used in a multivariate model for the statistics grades. Grade point average has been found to be an influence upon subsequent course performance in other studies involving blended courses. Brown and Liedholm (2002) and Gratton-Lavoie and Stanley (2009) showed that grade point average had a strong positive effect upon test scores in blended principles of microeconomics courses. Johnson and Kuennen (2006) found that student performance was significantly related to the score on their math quiz, so the math quiz score was included in the predictive models.

Students have competing academic demands for their time. That competition was taken into account in the predictive models by allowing for an effect from credit-hour load upon performance. This approach builds upon the one used by Dowling et al. (2003) to control for the course loads of students enrolled in their blended and traditional accounting courses. As concerns other factors that might affect performance, Riffell and Sibley (2005) used class attendance as a control variable in a predictive model of student test scores. In the traditional course of the present study, class attendance was the only way to experience the instructor's lectures and any supplemental materials (examples, cases, demonstrations) that were incorporated into the classroom experience. No lecture captures or recordings of the traditional class meetings were available to students. Observations on class attendance were available for the traditional course. In the blended course, observations on two dimensions of student activity were available: class attendance and a measure of online materials usage called “consistency” (Baugher, Varanelli, & Weisbord, 2003).

The consistency measure is based upon student accesses of online materials occurring between adjacent class periods. A value of 1 is recorded if the student accessed at least one lecture during the time between two adjacent class periods. There were 26 pairs of adjacent class periods between which students could have accessed lectures. Note that the consistency measure has no connection with the timing of topic coverage as the course moves along. Whether the lecture being accessed is current or “tardy” in terms of course flow does not factor into the measure. An access to any lecture between adjacent class periods would contribute a value of 1 to the consistency measure even if that lecture was covering a topic from a much earlier time on the course calendar. However, an addition of 1 to the consistency measure indicates that the student accessed online lectures in the interim between two class periods; it therefore serves as an indicator of the degree of continuity in the student's contact with the online materials of the blended course.

Pursuing time-based measures of online materials usage was not possible because the course management system did not have the capability to record lengths of time that online materials were open. Even if duration data had been available, it is uncertain whether a usage measure based on that data would be preferable to the consistency measure. The traditional version of the course sets the standard in this regard. Class attendance can be a count or it can be translated into a percent of total class meetings, and it doesn't have a time dimension. To be compatible, the measure of online materials usage should be a count or percent such as the consistency measure.

The model for student performance in the blended course, expressed for student i, is(1)where the variables are CP - course points; GPA - grade point average (at the beginning of the course); MQS - math quiz score (administered at the beginning of the course); CG - grade in the calculus prerequisite class (measured according to the scale shown in Table 2); SCH - semester credit hours; ATP - attendance as a percent of total non-exam class meetings; ACC - consistency of accessing online materials; ε - model error term. For the traditional course, the model is(2)


Table 2. Student characteristics, means.

Characteristic	Blendeda	Traditionala	Difference	t-statistic	p-value
Age	20.01	20.02	–0.01	–0.07	0.94
Total credit hours	39.86	40.22	–0.36	–0.28	0.78
Semester credit hours	13.57	13.74	–0.17	–0.90	0.37
Transfer credit hours	19.41	21.84	–2.43	–1.36	0.17
Grade point average	3.28	3.28	0.00	0.00	1.00
Math quiz score (of 16)	11.78	11.54	0.24	1.08	0.28
Calculus gradeb	9.10	8.93	0.17	0.80	0.43
ACT math score	25.38	25.33	0.05	0.15	0.88
ACT composite score	25.27	24.95	0.32	1.00	0.32
Course points (of 160)	118.86	117.81	1.05	0.63	0.53
Attendance percent	46.2	87.9	–41.7	–22.55c	≈ 0.00
a
Sample sizes: blended 347; traditional 257.

b
To calculate means, letter grades were converted to numeric values: F = 1; D– = 2; D = 3; D+  = 4;...;A+ = 13.

c
Significance level - 0.01.

3. Results
3.1. Student characteristics
The sample means of a variety of student characteristics for the blended and traditional courses are given in Table 2. Differences of the means and the test statistic for assessing the statistical significance of the differences are also given. The last column reports p-values for the hypothesis test of equal means. Mean age was very close to 20 years in both versions, as would be expected since students are advised to take the course in their sophomore year or at the beginning of their junior year. Total credit hours completed and credit hours taken in the semester were very close in the two courses. Transfer credit hours differed by 2.43 hours but the difference is not significant.

Beginning with grade point average, the next five characteristics reflect prior academic achievement, aptitude in the general subject area of the course, general aptitude, and preparation in the subject area. Grade point average was identical (through the two decimals shown) in the two versions. The math quiz score and the ACT math and composite scores were very close between the two versions, and none of the differences were statistically significant. Letter grades in calculus were converted to a numeric scale (shown at the bottom of the table) to calculate the calculus mean grade. The difference between those mean grades in the blended and traditional versions of the course was not significant. The lack of significant differences in any of the student characteristics at the beginning of the courses is evidence that selection bias into course versions was avoided.

Course points in the blended version were higher by approximately 1 point, but the difference was not significant. The only characteristic in Table 2 that was significantly different between the two versions was attendance percent of total non-exam class meetings, a result that was expected. Students in the blended version chose to reduce seat time by roughly one-half of the class meetings versus the traditional attendance percent. As concerns usage of online materials, the average of the consistency measure was 14 out of the 26 adjacent class periods.

3.2. Course performance by zone
Three zones of grade point averages were determined by applying the search process described in a previous section: below 2.80, 2.80–3.34, and 3.35–4.00. When the search process was applied to both the math quiz score and the calculus grade, only a single zone consisting of the entire range emerged. So for those two variables, the hypothesis of equal means of course points was never rejected in any of the zones that were evaluated by the search process. Table 3 contains means of course points for the blended and traditional courses in the three zones of grade point averages. For illustrative purposes, Table 3 also contains results for three example zones of math quiz scores and calculus scores that were evaluated in the search processes.


Table 3. Course point means and student numbers by zones of predictor variables.

Variables and zones	Course point means	Diff.	t-stat	p-value	Students
Blended	Traditional	Blended	Traditional
Grade point average							
 Below 2.80	97.2	104.9	–7.7	–2.24a	0.027	66	48
 2.80–3.34	111.9	108.1	3.8	1.57	0.117	122	87
 3.35–4.00	133.2	129.8	3.4	2.04a	0.042	159	122
 All	118.9	117.8	1.1	0.66	0.511	347	257
Math quiz score							
 Below 9	102.2	97.8	4.4	1.15	0.255	45	30
 9–12	116.2	113.9	2.3	1.00	0.320	149	124
 13–16	126.3	128.4	–2.1	–0.93	0.354	153	103
Calculus gradeb							
 Below 7	101.1	105.8	–4.7	–1.44	0.153	71	55
 7–9	116.3	112.9	3.4	1.42	0.157	127	94
 10–13	129.5	128.2	1.3	0.58	0.564	149	108
a
Significance level - 0.05.

b
To calculate means and standard deviations, letter grades were converted to numeric values: F = 1; D– = 2; D = 3; D+ = 4;…; A+ = 13.

The mean of course points (of 160 possible) in the blended course was significantly smaller, by 7.7 points, than the mean in the traditional course for students in the bottom zone of grade point averages. There was no significant difference between means of course points for students in the middle zone of grade point averages. In the top zone of grade point averages, the mean of course points in the blended course was significantly larger than in the traditional course. Low-achieving students, defined as those in the bottom zone of grade point averages, performed better in the traditional environment. High-achieving students, defined as those in the top zone of grade point averages, performed better in the blended environment.

Having determined the differences in the levels of student performance, attention turns to the variation of course points in the two learning environments. Table 4 contains standard deviations of course points by the zones of grade point averages, math quiz score, and calculus grade. Included in the portion of the table for grade point average are the overall standard deviations of course points in the blended and traditional courses. The purpose of the table is to explore whether variation in student performance is different within zones of each variable or between modes of instruction. The F-statistic is the test for equal variances of course points. Standard deviations are reported rather than variances so as to retain the original units of measurement of course points.


Table 4. Standard deviations of course points by zones of predictor variables.

Variables and zones	Blendeda	Traditionala	F-statisticc	p-value
Grade point average				
 Below 2.80	17.9	18.3	1.045	0.430
 2.80–3.34	18.0	16.6	1.176	0.213
 3.35–4.00	13.3	14.2	1.140	0.219
 All	21.4	19.5	1.204e	0.057
Math quiz score				
 Below 9	19.4	13.8	1.976d	0.028
 9–12	20.2	17.9	1.273e	0.083
 13–16	19.8	16.2	1.494d	0.015
Calculus gradeb				
 Below 7	20.1	16.6	1.466e	0.072
 7–9	18.1	17.2	1.107	0.303
 10–13	18.2	17.5	1.082	0.335
a
Sample sizes: blended 347; traditional 257.

b
To calculate standard deviations, letter grades were converted to numeric values: F = 1; D– = 2; D = 3; D+ = 4;…; A+ = 13.

c
F-statistic for the test of equality of variances.

d
Significance level - 0.05.

e
Significance level - 0.10.

The variation of course points was higher in the blended course, with a standard deviation of 21.4 points versus 19.5 points in the traditional course. But within each zone of grade point averages, there was no significant difference in variation of course points between the blended and traditional versions. When variability was assessed within zones of the math quiz score, course points in the blended course had significantly larger variances than in the traditional course. When variability was assessed within zones of the calculus grade, course points in the blended version showed higher variability only in the bottom zone, that being for students with calculus grades of C or less. Variability of course points in the blended and traditional versions showed no differences at calculus grades of C+ and higher. The patterns of significance in Table 4 point to students with low math quiz scores and low calculus grades. It is the group of low-achieving students who show higher variability of performance in the blended course versus the traditional.

The results in Table 3 showed that there are no significant differences between means of blended and traditional courses in any zone of math quiz score or calculus grade. So when focusing upon students with low math aptitude and poor performance in the math prerequisite course, the difference between blended and traditional formats comes through the variability in performance between the formats, not through the means of performance.

3.3. Model results
Estimates of the predictive models for course points are shown in Table 5. Grade point average, math quiz score, and calculus grade provide positive and significant effects in the blended and traditional versions of the course. Semester credit hours did not provide significant effects, so the competition for students' attention from other courses being taken concurrently did not adversely affect performance in either the blended or traditional versions.


Table 5. Models for course points.

Variables	Coefficients	Difference	p-value
Blended	Traditional
Grade point average	26.217 (10.73)a, b	18.375 (7.24)b	7.842 (2.23)b	0.026
Math quiz score	1.123 (3.68)b	2.383 (6.81)b	–1.260 (− 2.71)b	0.007
Calculus grade	1.260 (3.15)b	1.227 (3.06)b	0.033 (0.06)	0.953
Semester hours	0.243 (0.63)	–0.418 (− 1.00)	0.661 (1.16)	0.248
Attendance percent	0.099 (3.64)b	0.010 (0.16)		
Access consistency	0.031 (0.19)			
Constant	0.123 (0.02)	24.158 (2.93)b	–24.035 (− 2.29)b	0.022
R2	0.562	0.533		
a
t-statistics are in parentheses.

b
Significance level - 0.05.

Attendance had a strong positive effect upon course points in the blended version but did not have a significant effect in the traditional version. The latter result was not surprising. Average attendance in the traditional version was 88% and, although not shown in Table 2, the standard deviation of the attendance was 16%. Thus, attendance behavior was relatively compressed in the higher end of the range. In contrast, the variation of attendance percent relative to the average was much higher in the blended version. Average attendance in the blended version was 46% and the standard deviation 29%. As such, a wide spectrum of attendance behavior was able to align with the wide range of student performance. Lastly, consistency of accessing online materials was not a significant determinant of course points in the blended version. This finding may reflect the correlation that consistency had with grade point average. High-achieving students may be more likely to establish a consistent record of accessing online materials, thereby diminishing the capacity of the consistency measure to emerge as a separate and significant effect upon course points.

Table 5 shows the differences between coefficients in the models of the blended and traditional courses, as well as significance tests for the differences. First, consider grade point average. In the blended course, the coefficient on grade point average had the largest t-statistic among the model's variables and therefore the largest partial correlation with course points. The partial effect from a unit change in grade point average was 26 course points. That partial effect was substantial considering that the average of course points in the blended version was approximately 119 out of a possible 160. The coefficient was significantly larger than the corresponding coefficient in the traditional version, which was 18. Thus, prior academic achievement as measured by grade point average provided a stronger influence upon student performance in the blended version than in the traditional version.

The math quiz score in the traditional course provided a significantly larger effect upon course points than in the blended course. Thus, mathematics aptitude was a more important ingredient for success in the traditional course. The partial effect of a unit increase in the math quiz score (recall that 16 was the maximum score) upon course points was roughly twice the size in the traditional course at approximately 2.4. At the means of the math quiz scores, the contribution to course points was 27.5 in the traditional course but only 13.2 in the blended course. The combination of mathematics aptitude and face-to-face delivery of lectures provided a stronger effect than the combination of mathematics aptitude and online delivery of lectures. This finding for the role of mathematics aptitude stands in contrast to the role of prior academic achievement for which grade point average provided a stronger effect within the format of online delivery of lectures versus face-to-face.

Prior achievement in mathematics, as measured by the grade in a calculus prerequisite course, was a significant positive factor in determining student performance in the blended and traditional courses. The coefficients in the two versions were very close, with no significant difference between them. The measurement scales for the calculus grade, 1 through 13 (F through A+), and the math quiz score, 1 through 16, are similar enough that a comparison of coefficients on the two variables can be pursued. In the traditional course, the coefficients on the calculus grade and math quiz score were close. Although not reported in Table 5, the slight difference between them is not statistically significant. However, in the traditional course the coefficient on the math quiz score was significantly larger than the coefficient on the calculus grade. Prior achievement and aptitude in mathematics were roughly of equal importance to student performance in the blended course, whereas mathematics aptitude was more important than prior achievement in the traditional course. The interplay of mathematics aptitude and the environment of face-to-face lectures created a stronger positive influence in the traditional course than did the combination of aptitude and online delivery of lectures in the blended course.

Lastly, consider the constant terms in the models. The constant was not significant in the blended course but was significant in the traditional course, and the difference between the two constants was significant. The difference is particularly important when considering student performance at the lower end of the grade scale. Since the constant was not significant in the blended course, effectively there was no baseline of course points for students with low-valued observations on grade point average, the math quiz score, the calculus grade, and attendance. The blended course environment provided no baseline of course points prior to considering the additive effects stemming from the predictor variables. In contrast, the traditional course did have a significant positive constant, signaling that there was a baseline of course points for traditional students who had low-valued observations on the predictor variables. The environment of face-to-face lectures in the traditional course provided the baseline of course points. Students in the blended version were not provided with such a baseline. Rather, their performance was more responsive to grade point average than was the case for students in the traditional version.

3.4. Varying coefficients by zone
The third research question concerns possible differences in the effects of prior academic achievement upon performance at varying locations within the ranges of achievement measures. In an earlier section, three zones of grade point averages were identified, for which the differences between means of course points in the blended and traditional courses were either significant or insignificant. The differences were significant in the bottom zone (grade point averages less than 2.80) and in the top zone (grade point averages of 3.35 or greater). Similar searches across the ranges of the math quiz scores or calculus grades did not reveal any zones of the type found for grade point average.

Since there were significant differences between means according to grade point average, it is natural to suspect that grade point average may affect course points in different ways across the three zones. To explore that possibility, the model in (1) was expanded to become a piecewise regression model that allowed for variation in the response of course points to grade point average across the three zones. The expanded model for the blended version of the course is(3)where GPA1 - grade point average in the bottom zone (below 2.80), GPA2 - grade point average in the middle zone (2.80–3.34), GPA3 - grade point average in the top zone (3.35–4.00), and all other variables remain as before. For the traditional course, the model in (2) is expanded to be(4)

Estimation results for the varying coefficients models are shown in Table 6. In assessing those results, it is helpful to recall that estimates of the models in (1) and (2) in Table 5 showed that the effects from grade point average upon course points differed between the blended and traditional courses, as did the constant term. In Table 6, the effects from grade point average still differed between the courses but only in the bottom zone (below 2.80). Grade point average provided no significant effect in the traditional version within the bottom zone but provided a positive and significant effect in the blended version. As shown in Table 6, the difference in the effects was significant at the 0.05 level.


Table 6. Varying coefficients models for course points.

Variables	Coefficients	Difference	p-value
Blended	Traditional
Grade point average				
 Bottom zone	31.694 (2.22)a, b	–7.917 (–0.58)	39.611 (2.01)b	0.045
 Middle zone	29.395 (5.85)b	20.449 (3.74)b	8.946 (1.20)	0.229
 Top zone	19.637 (4.04)b	22.863 (4.14)b	–3.226 (− 0.44)	0.661
 Math quiz score	1.191 (4.21)b	2.409 (7.42)b	–1.218 (− 2.83)b	0.005
 Calculus grade	1.354 (3.67)b	1.019 (2.64)b	0.335 (0.63)	0.527
 Semester hours	0.211 (0.60)	–0.390 (− 1.02)	0.601 (1.16)	0.245
 Attendance percent	0.099 (4.02)b	0.001 (0.18)		
 Access consistency	0.073 (0.48)			
Constant				
 Bottom zone	–17.306 (− 0.45)	96.693 (2.64)b	–113.999 (− 2.15)b	0.032
 Middle zone	–10.869 (− 0.68)	17.269 (0.96)	–28.138 (− 1.16)	0.245
 Top zone	49.138 (1.32)	2.423 (0.06)	46.714 (0.81)	0.417
 R2	0.565	0.541		
a
t-statistics are in parentheses.

b
Significance level - 0.05.

If grade point average provided no contribution to course points in the bottom zone of the traditional course, what was the primary source of course points for students in that zone? The constant term for traditional students in the bottom zone was approximately 97 (out of the maximum of 160) and served as a baseline of course points for students with grade point averages in the zone. The face-to-face lecture environment of the traditional course created a baseline of performance for students with low grade point averages. No such baseline was established for students with low grade point averages in the blended version; their performance was instead tied to prior academic achievement as measured by grade point average.

Alternative forms of the models were evaluated. When the alternative aptitude measures of math ACT or composite ACT scores were substituted for the math quiz score, the coefficient of determination (R2) declined and neither score provided a significant effect upon student performance. Possible gender differences were explored but were not significant. Also explored was the prospect that interactions of grade point average with attendance and the consistency measure of online accesses might significantly affect student performance. Interaction terms for all three pairwise combinations of the variables and an interaction term involving all three variables were not significant.

4. Discussion
Differences in student performance need to be documented as part of the process of moving from one instructional format to another. For the present study, the move was from a traditional course with a full schedule of face-to-face lectures to a blended course that falls toward the higher end of the blended spectrum by virtue of flipped and flexible features. The results demonstrate that a comparison of class-wide performance means between traditional and blended versions of a course may not give an accurate indication of differences or lack thereof.

If the analysis had been restricted to the level of class-wide means, the overall finding would have been the classic “no significant difference” (e.g., Utts et al., 2003, Ashby et al., 2011). However, a more precise set of findings emerged by considering differences in performance means within bottom, middle, and top zones of grade point averages. At low grade point averages, performance was significantly higher in the traditional version of the course. At high grade point averages, performance was significantly higher in the blended version of the course. No significant difference in performance was detected in the middle zone of grade point averages.

Predictive models of student performance were estimated and revealed the influences of prior academic achievement, aptitude in the general subject area of the course, and preparation in the subject area. Specification of the variables for the models was consistent with factors mentioned in other studies concerning blended and traditional courses. Two of the determining factors of student performance—grade point average and math quiz score—were shown to provide effects that differed between the blended and traditional courses.

Also, the constant or baseline of course points prior to effects from the various factors differed between courses. Grade point average was a more powerful determinant of student performance in the blended course, but the baseline of performance was higher in the traditional course. The most glaring difference between the characteristics of the blended and traditional courses lies in the lectures. In the blended course, lectures were exclusively online. In the traditional course, lectures were exclusively face-to-face without captures or recordings that could be viewed at the students' convenience. All other course content was identical in the two courses.

The structured environment of the dependable face-to-face lectures created a baseline of performance in the traditional course. Conversely, the blended learning environment placed a greater premium upon prior academic achievement for success than did the traditional environment. The traditional learning environment compensated by establishing a performance baseline through the face-to-face lectures. This pattern was most pronounced in the bottom zone of grade point averages. In that zone, the effect from grade point average upon performance in the traditional course disappeared, and the baseline of performance provided by the face-to-face lecture environment increased to compensate. Face-to-face lectures contributed to the understanding of course materials for low-achieving students to a greater degree than for high-achieving students. Prior academic achievement as revealed through grade point average was not as critical an element for success in the traditional course because the dependable face-to-face delivery of course content served as a substitute for it.

What suggestions can be offered that might lead to improvements in the performance of low-achieving students in blended courses? First, the early identification of low-achieving students is critically important. A recent innovation in publishing may assist instructors with the identification process. Textbook publishers have begun to offer online tools designed to determine the level of student engagement with online materials. These tools assess engagement by measuring, among other things, the frequency of accesses and the rate of assignment submission. They provide instructors with a list of students who are not engaging sufficiently with the materials. Instructors then have the option of contacting these students via email directly from the publisher's online platform. These types of tools proactively identify students who may struggle early in the educational process and may be key in providing students with the additional help needed to succeed in courses that include substantial online components. An example of digital course materials that include such online tools is Asarta and Butters (2016). Junco and Clem (2015) propose that an early warning system to identify students at risk can be based upon monitoring the usage levels of digital materials. After the identification phase, action plans are needed. McKenzie et al. (2013) present evidence that creating customized learning modules for students can raise performance levels on exams. The modules provide personalized study plans based on the results of a pre-test in the course subject matter, a study enhancement that might have significant benefits when used by low-achieving students.

Offering a peer-learning program is another way in which low-achieving students could be supported in blended courses. A recent study by Broadbent and Poon (2015) provided a systematic review of the literature identifying strategies and factors associated with success in online learning environments. The authors were able to identify peer learning, or the process of working with other learners to improve one's learning, as a consistent determinant of academic achievement in online educational settings (ChanLin, 2012, Johnson et al., 2009, Michinov et al., 2011, Puzziferro, 2008). One potential way to implement a peer-learning program to help the low-achieving students identified in this study would be to match them with experienced students who previously had earned high marks in the blended course. Given the flexibility afforded by blended environments, the peer-learning process could occur in a physical setting (e.g., classroom, student learning center, etc.) or virtual setting (e.g., video conferencing).

Yet another suggestion aimed at supporting low-achieving students is based on recent research findings by Zacharis (2015). It entails increasing the level of student engagement in blended courses by encouraging students to read and post messages on forum boards, chat rooms, and via email. Reading and posting messages allows peer mentoring and support to take place; it also could create a stronger sense of community for students. The importance of this sense of community on student learning in blended environments was recently examined by Bower, Dalgarno, Kennedy, Lee, and Kenney (2015).

Finally, offering periodic mandatory assignments (e.g., graded quizzes) has been shown to help faculty identify at-risk students (Macfadyen & Dawson, 2010). The key to helping those students may be as simple as offering those same types of assignments in a low/no stakes environment. As noted by Zacharis (2015), this “safe” learning environment can increase student engagement and generate better student learning outcomes.

In addition to the above suggestions, the results from Table 5, Table 6 point to another strategy that might improve performance in flip-flex versions of blended courses. Attendance in the blended course was optional but still had a positive, although small, effect upon performance. Incentives to attend class could be offered by a policy that rewards students (for example, with extra credit) for attendance records that are stellar. This policy would promote attendance, and performance might be positively affected without compromising the spirit of the flip-flex course structure that keeps attendance optional.

By using one or more of the ideas and suggestions presented above, it may be possible to adopt features and mechanisms that will help students make a successful transition from traditional to blended courses.

4.1. Limitations and future research
The findings of this study might be specific to the discipline of introductory business and economic statistics, which can be viewed as a limitation of the study but also an opportunity for additional research. Zones of prior academic achievement may be important in assessing performance differences between instructional formats in other subject areas. This study employed predictive models of student performance. As documented in Table 1, predictive models have previously been applied in comparisons of blended and traditional courses. However, the integration of zones of prior academic achievement into predictive models represents an extension that could be applied in other subject areas. Upper-level courses, versus introductory-level courses such as the one examined here, provide even more venues for applying the approaches used in this study.

Efforts in the above directions would be helpful in either validating the modeling approach used here or in creating new analytical directions for discovering differences in the determinants of student performance between blended and traditional formats. An additional line of research would involve breaking down courses into modules and exploring whether performance differences between blended and traditional formats occur in some modules but not others. Finally, another path for future research involves focusing upon low-achieving students and evaluating strategies for improving their experience and performance in blended courses.

5. Conclusion
The findings in this study show that moves from traditional to blended courses do not have the same relative effects upon students across all levels of prior academic achievement. In particular, students with low levels of prior academic achievement do not necessarily prosper in the moves. This study has determined that there are thresholds of prior academic achievement at which the superiority of course formats switch. Findings that are this specific about the contrast in student performance between blended and traditional courses are unique and set a standard for future investigations of performance differences between blended and traditional formats