It has become commonplace in higher education for instructors to use social technologies to motivate and challenge their students and to support learning objectives. In some instances, social technologies are used to make students' assessable work visible to other people, such as peers and external audiences. This study investigates university students' responses to the requirement to make their assessable work visible online to others. Using the lens of the community of practice framework and the notion of a virtual panopticon, we analysed data from focus group discussions with 20 university students. Our findings reveal that students experienced benefits, such as being part of a cohesive learning community, but also felt conflicted about how much of their work and themselves they wanted to share. Our study highlights the importance of lecturer-student negotiation in the management of online visibility, especially regarding student privacy and identity performance.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online learning

Social media

Student visibility

Virtual panopticon

Community of practice

Wenger

1. Introduction
In online environments, social media is typically used to create and share content that is visible to an audience. Social technologies – such as blogs, wikis, social networking sites, and others – are now commonly used in higher education to foster and assess learning. While there has been much interest in the visibility of content online, and how it shapes the way we use social media to construct and perform identity (e.g., Baym and Boyd, 2012, Besley, 2010, Davis, 2012, Kimmons, 2014, Schwartz and Halegoua, 2015, van Dijck, 2013), there is limited understanding of how this visibility affects students when they are required to use social web technologies as part of a university assignment. Research on the use of social media in education tends to focus on their value for supporting social learning, with less exploration of how students feel about making their assessable work visible to persons other than the lecturer.

In this study we examined students' experiences of using social web technologies for university assessment tasks. Rather than focusing on the learning effects of particular social web technologies (which can vary by platform and activity among other variables: for an example, see Sun & Gao, 2017), we explored how students feel about making their assessable work visible to others. Our study addresses the following questions: what are students' experiences of making their work – and, by extension, themselves – visible on social media? How does this visibility shape – and how is it shaped by – students' participation in their learning communities? Our analysis is informed by notions of surveillance and performance outlined in Foucault's (1975) theories of the all-seeing prison structure known as the panopticon, and by key concepts from Wenger's (1998) communities of practice framework.

1.1. Social media in higher education
In this paper we use the term ‘social media’ broadly to include any web-based technologies that involve creating, publishing, and sharing content (Manca & Ranieri, 2016). We use ‘social media’ interchangeably with ‘social web technologies’ to include not only Facebook and Twitter, but blogging sites, collaborative wikis, and photo-sharing sites, realising that all of these have their own particular characteristics and are used in higher education for different purposes. In the past decade, there has been great interest in the use of these technologies to support student learning, particularly in university settings (e.g., Alexander, 2006; Bennett et al., 2012, Hamid et al., 2014, McLoughlin and Lee, 2008). Studies have reported evaluations of assignments where students use, for example, blogs as reflective journals (Farmer, Yu, & Brooks, 2008), collaborative wikis for group writing tasks (Judd, Kennedy, & Cropper, 2010; Thompson & Absalom, 2011), and social networking sites for language learning (Kabilan, Ahman, & Abidin, 2010). By sharing content, reviewing each other's work, and collaboratively producing online material, students engage in peer learning which can create supportive learning environments (Dalsgaard & Paulsen, 2009).

There are, however, a number of challenges associated with introducing social web technologies to students in higher education (Bennett et al., 2012, Dohn, 2009, Schroeder et al., 2010). Social media can be distracting and can blur the boundaries between students' learning and social lives (Smith, 2016). This blurring of traditional boundaries, which has been variously referred to as ‘context collapse’ (Marwick and Boyd, 2010, Vitak et al., 2012) and ‘convergence’ (Rambe, 2013), raises questions of textual ownership and issues concerning authentic self-expression. Assessment tasks where students review and interact with other students' work and co-create content, whether pictorial or linguistic, can become sites of tension, as students struggle to create and present authentic and consistent online identities (Dohn, 2009, Kimmons, 2014). This can result in what Foucault (1997) has referred to as the problem of the ‘author function’ where there may be no clear authorial identity associated with an individual student's work. It also creates a ‘virtual panopticon (Rayner, 2012), potentially exposing students to the constant scrutiny of others.

1.2. The virtual panopticon
The notion of the panopticon originates from the work of Jeremy Bentham, the 18th century British philosopher and social theorist. He conceived of the panopticon as an ideal prison structure consisting of a tower in the middle of a circle of prison cells which would enable guards to observe prisoner activity at all times without being visible to the inmates. Although the guards could not, in reality, observe every prisoner's activity at all times, prisoners would not know if, or when, they were being watched. Drawing on the work of Bentham, Foucault (1975) theorised that this would result in an automatic functioning of power and control since prisoners' awareness of a possible audience in the panopticon would drive their actions, resulting in the creation of behavior that would always be self-regulated and performative (i.e., oriented toward a given audience). Similarly, activities on social media are always viewable by others, and so social media participants are always aware of a possible audience for their online activities. It is this that drives the performance of identity that is commonly observed in social media research (Baym and Boyd, 2012, Schwartz and Halegoua, 2015).1

For Rayner (2012), the online world is a kind of virtual panopticon, where users co-exist in asymmetrical power relationships in a virtual and visible area of confinement. The key point is that people do not always know who is watching their online activities, nor when, or indeed if, their activities are being viewed. When people post status updates on Facebook, upload YouTube videos, or contribute to a blog, the sense of being observed is an ever-present mediating force that impacts on how people construct and perform their identities online. As Schwartz and Halegoua (2015) state, it is ‘through images, video, status updates, profiles, friend lists, visible conversations, tastes and interests, and comments that appear within their profile, [that] social media participants present a highly curated version of themselves’ (p. 3, emphasis added).

To understand students' experiences of this virtual panopticon we use Wenger's (1998) theory of social learning and his concept of ‘communities of practice’. This provides a useful lens for understanding how students' experiences of visibility shape, and are shaped by, their participation in a learning community.

1.3. Communities of practice
Over the past two decades, elements of Wenger's (1998) communities of practice framework (Fig. 1) have been used extensively to understand and explore social learning and the processes by which people come to belong to, and participate in, a learning or workplace community (Smith, Hayes, & Shea, 2017). We accept, with Wenger, that a community of practice can be distinguished by a shared domain or common focus; shared activities with joint discussions; and common practice arising from shared experience, tools and resources. His framework offers a dense conceptual and empirically based account of how connections are made between members of a community who are united by common objectives, activities and practices. Although it predates social media, the concept of communities of practice has been used to examine and explain behavior and learning in both online and offline communities (e.g., Barab, MaKinster, & Scheckler, 2003). For a review of this body of work, see Smith et al. (2017). The framework suggests that group work practices emerge and evolve over time, and that the process of learning changes who we are and influences who we become. This provides a useful lens for understanding how changes within the learning environment – such as making students' work visible to others online – affect the practices within a community.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (171KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Wenger's (1998) components of a social theory of learning.

Wenger (1998) argues that communities of practice evolve through the work of four co-present and dynamic dualities, or modes of belonging: participation and reification; designed and emergent; the local and global; and identification and negotiability. Fig. 2 shows how these dualities work together to drive learning within a community of practice.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (159KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Wenger's (1998) four dualities.

Participation/reification, refers on the one hand to the relations within the group and the processes which shape both group and individual experiences, and on the other, to the resulting product. In our context reification is achieved through the social media artifacts that students produce. These artifacts constitute what Wenger terms ‘boundary objects’ around which group members organise their interconnections. For Wenger, the co-presence of participation and reification is essential to the negotiation of meaning in a learning task.

The second duality, designed/emergent, reflects Wenger's view that learning can only be designed for (it cannot be designed), and is in a constant state of flux, adapting to change and responding to inputs. These inputs may originate from institutional or participant activity, and create complex boundary interactions, tensions and practices. In the current study, ‘blended’ learning communities comprising face-to-face and online interactions are set up institutionally where the participants, including instructors, generate learning processes and products dynamically (see Gruba & Hinkleman, 2012, for an explanation of blended learning).

The third duality, local/global, highlights the tensions between the inherently local nature of the practices in which members of a community engage, and the broader constellations of practices to which they also simultaneously belong. Practices occur in a local context – i.e., in relation to the people and established practices of the immediate community – but may resonate differently within a wider context.

Finally, as Wenger explains, the process of defining, adapting and interpreting designs for learning ‘does not inherently entail the privileging of certain perspectives at the expense of others, but such privileging is rarely completely avoidable’ (1998, p. 235). There may be, consequently, threats to individuals' identification with and within the group: some voices may be valued over others in the eyes of different community members, including those of the assessors, as all participants engage in the struggle for control and ownership of meaning. Not all group members will be endowed with sufficient power of negotiability to participate meaningfully, which may result in some group members feeling disempowered.

Wenger's (1998) four dualities provide a useful lens for interpreting students' experiences of making their assessable work visible to others. As we describe below, Wenger's framework offers insight into the impact that assessment tasks using social web technologies can have on students' participation and identification within a learning community.

2. Research design and methodology
In this study we examined students' experiences of making assessable work visible on social media, and investigated how this visibility shaped – and was shaped by – students' participation in their learning community. We conducted focus group discussions with 20 students, who were enrolled in different courses across three Australian universities. The focus group sessions were conducted as part of a larger project, completed in 2011, that examined the use of social web technologies for university assessment (Gray et al, 2012). The project involved several case studies, which each examined how a particular assignment, in which students used social web technologies, was implemented and assessed. The case studies deliberately covered multiple disciplines, institutions, and technologies, with the aim of uncovering opportunities and challenges associated with social technologies used for student assessment across learning and teaching contexts. In the focus group discussions, students were asked to reflect on their experiences using social web technologies in the assignment that was the focus of the case study. All case studies focused on assignments implemented in face-to-face teaching settings; they were therefore part of a blended learning approach rather than a fully online course.

2.1. Focus group discussions
Table 1 provides a summary of the focus group participants and the social web technologies they used in their university assignments. Most focus group sessions involved a mix of students representing different case studies: students who were enrolled in different subjects and had completed different assignments, although Focus Group 4 included students who had all completed the same assignment and Focus Group 5 was an interview with one student. These variations were due to practical reasons (the time and location of the focus group session did not suit all students). Most of the assignments discussed were part of a university course offered at undergraduate level. Therefore, most focus group participants were in the typical undergraduate university age range (late teens to early twenties). One subject – Document Management – was part of a Masters-level course. Four of the focus group participants enrolled in this subject were mature-age students (aged in their late 20s, 30s, or 40s).


Table 1. Focus group participants.

Focus group (FG)	Name (all pseudonyms)	Gender	University subject	Social web technology used
1	Anna	Female	Chinese	Second Life
Benita	Female	Japanese	Bebo (Japanese social networking tool)
Charles	Male	Photography	Flickr
Danielle	Female	Document management	Blog and various social web technologies
2	Elena	Female	Financial Analysis	Wiki
Fiona	Female	Financial Analysis	Wiki
Greta	Female	Chinese	Second Life
Hannah	Female	Screen Cultures	Blog
Ingrid	Female	Screen Cultures	Blog
3	Julian	Male	Chinese	Second Life
Kris	Male	Chinese	Second Life
Lewis	Male	Japanese	Bebo
4	Monique	Female	Document Management	Blog and various social web technologies
Natalie	Female	Document Management	Blog and various social web technologies
Ollie	Male	Document Management	Blog and various social web technologies
Penny	Female	Document Management	Blog and various social web technologies
5	Quinton	Male	Photography	Flickr
6	Ritchie	Male	Screen Cultures	Blog
Shaun	Male	Financial Analysis	Wiki
Theresa	Female	Screen Cultures	Blog
Although the project was completed some time ago, students' experiences of visibility remain highly relevant, given the increasing prevalence of social technologies in higher education. We therefore chose to reanalyse the data for the purposes of this follow-up study. This study focuses on students' answers to a subset of focus group questions that asked what was good and what was less successful about the way the assignment used: 1) open publishing; 2) different communication styles and texts; 3) personal identity and experience; 4) co-creation, collaboration, crowd-sourcing; and 5) content management. These aligned with the key features of social web technologies for higher education that we identified early in the project through discussions with university teaching and management staff (Waycott et al, 2010, Waycott et al., 2010).

2.2. Data analysis
All focus group discussions were transcribed, resulting in 122 pages of transcripts. Each author examined the transcripts to identify key themes, which we discussed as a team until we reached consensus about the core themes that required further exploration. This process of thematic analysis (Ayres, 2008, Braun and Clarke, 2006) underwent several iterations as we examined the transcripts, separately and together, and considered different theoretical perspectives that could apply in our interpretation of the data. We drew on Wenger's (1998) ‘communities of practice’ and in particular his four-dimensional framework of co-present dualities (see Fig. 2 above), to interpret students' experiences of the challenges and benefits of making their work visible to others in a virtual panopticon.

3. Findings
The data analysis identified four overarching themes, which we aligned with the dualities in Wenger's framework: (1) Boundaries of visibility (designed and emergent); (2) audience (local and global); (3) creation of learning artifacts (participation and reification); and (4) learning community (identification and negotiability).

3.1. Boundaries of visibility: designed and emergent
‘Boundaries of visibility’ refers to how widely students shared their work. In most cases (as shown in Table 2), the boundaries were set by the lecturer in the design of the assignment which determined whether students were expected to make their work visible to a small, closed peer group, to all other students enrolled in the subject, or to a wider, public audience. In some cases, students had the freedom to choose whether or not to make their work public, while some students took it upon themselves to manage the boundaries by carefully selecting content they deemed suitable to share with others. This theme reflects Wenger's duality of designed and emergent: students worked within the boundaries of the designed learning environment, while also developing their own emergent practices that shaped the visibility of their work.


Table 2. Assignment description and degrees of student visibility.

Assignment	Students	Visibility of student work
Financial analysis – group wiki	FG2-Elena, Fiona, FG6-Shaun	Group assignment; initially only visible to students in group but shared with other students for peer assessment
Document management – various social technologies	FG1-Danielle, FG4-Monique, Natalie, Ollie, Penny	Group assignment; blogs had to be visible to other students in the group, but could be shared more widely; students' use of other tools (e.g., Twitter) was sometimes publicly visible
Chinese - Second Life for language learning	FG1-Anna, FG2-Greta, FG3-Julian, Kris	Group assignment; interactions in Second Life were visible to all other students enrolled in the subject, though the students may not always have been identifiable.
Japanese – Bebo social networking tool for language learning	FG1-Benita, FG3-LewisLewis	Students chose who was connected to them on the social networking site
Photography – Flickr used as a repository for students' photographs	FG1-Charles, FG5-Quinton	Students were expected to make their work visible to all other students in that subject and to comment on other students' work; students could choose to make their work visible to the public
Screen cultures - Blogging	FG2-Hannah, Ingrid, FG6-Ritchie, Theresa	Students wrote weekly blog posts that were visible to all other students enrolled in the subject; students were expected to comment on other students' blogs
For all students, a minimum requirement for the assignment was that their work should be visible to their peer work group. In two assignments (photography and screen cultures) students' work had to be visible to the whole cohort of students enrolled in that subject, meaning that students had to share their work with approximately 200 others. In some cases, students were able to choose whether they wanted to make their work visible to a broader audience, which created some uncertainty in students' discussions about privacy and exposure. For instance, students undertaking the document management assignment (Danielle, Monique, Natalie, Ollie, and Penny) experienced a degree of ambiguity around the boundaries set. These students belonged to two different tutorial classes and it appears they had received different advice:

I raised the issue with my tutor about privacy. There would be reasons why people do not want to participate in public blogs and we were not given any instruction for that, and we were not given an opportunity to object to it, and I think that puts people in a very difficult situation. (FG4-Penny).

We were asked by the teachers to make our blogs private to everyone but our group members and the lecturer. It was good because, for privacy, I don't want my name to come up in a google search too much. (FG1-Danielle).

The first comment suggests that Penny felt she was powerless to negotiate a level of public exposure with which she felt comfortable, whereas Danielle suggests clear boundaries were imposed by lecturers around visibility or sharing of work. The ambiguity may have arisen because, in addition to recording their reflections in a blog, students were required to try out a number of other social web technologies for the assignment. This involved either using existing personal accounts or creating new accounts on a range of popular social media sites. For some students, using personal accounts stretched the boundaries of what they considered to be appropriate for a university assignment. They therefore created new accounts and profiles, demonstrating how students could engage in emergent practices, negotiating their participation in the community of practice. For instance, Ollie described his careful decision to not use his Twitter account in this assignment, while Danielle expressed regret that she had provided a link to her personal Twitter account:

I have a Twitter account and I discussed Twitter in-depth [in the assignment], but I didn't want to put mine [personal account] up there. I mean you know, I sometimes talk about personal issues on that, and just that I think issues like for example sexuality or something like that is extremely private and you don't want that just flying around everywhere. (FG4-Ollie).

I had to link my blog to a Twitter account and I couldn't really be bothered making another Twitter and I already had one […] I guess my Twitter wasn't in hindsight that uni appropriate. There's all these links to rude new articles that I′ve found, [and] silly YouTube videos. (FG1-Danielle).

Ollie's personal Twitter profile (which included not only tweets he had posted but also information about who he followed on Twitter) revealed aspects of his identity (such as sexuality) that he did not want to share with other students. By using a separate account for the assignment, Ollie created his own boundaries of visibility, demonstrating that the practices of the learning community are both emergent (that is, emerging through learners' decisions and behaviours) and designed by the lecturers. This aligns with evidence from other students who adopted a careful and considered approach to limit public access to their private selves:

I really like to distance myself – my private life and my uni life or whatever, my online life as well. I just want to keep them all separate. I don't want people from uni understanding or knowing anything about me unless I tell them myself face-to-face. (FG1-Charles).

I didn't put any photos of myself or my family or anything on there. I kept it all very sort of generic. Even the little photo that you can put next to your – your profile picture, it wasn't a photo of me. It was a photo of something else. (FG4-Monique).

3.2. Audience: local and global
Making students' work visible to others inevitably extends the audience that students would normally have for their work from a local to a potentially more global level. Unsurprisingly, awareness of audience emerged as a strong theme in our analysis, with 10 (out of 20) students commenting on this across multiple focus group sessions. For some students, this awareness made them want to spend more time on the assignment to ensure their visible work would be of high quality. Lecturers might see this as a positive outcome (Waycott, Sheard, Thompson & Clerehan, 2013), but students sometimes expressed anxiety about the audience as a ‘motivator’ for their performance, especially when ‘rough’ or early work was made visible to others:

Because other people could see it you were sort of more motivated to make sure it was good work. […] It made me worried, it made me probably spend more time on that subject than I would on another subject […] With other subjects you obviously want your final product to be great but you know, your initial workings are quite rough, whereas on this straightaway, your work is, you know, for the world to see. (FG5-Quinton).

Audience awareness, of course, can be present when students create any assessable work, but the public nature of social web technologies creates a virtual panopticon, making students acutely aware of a need to ‘perform’ their identity and create work that a broader, possibly global audience – not just the (local) assessor – will engage with. As Theresa noted: ‘You're always sort of conscious of an audience. So you don't want to make it too boring’ (FG6-Theresa). Monique explained:

I was very mindful of what I was saying, because I knew other people were going to read it. If it was just me writing for my assessor I would probably have done it differently. I was always mindful that even though I had my privacy settings to such and such and I didn't have the search engines able to access it, I knew this was going on the internet and people were going to see it. So I was always aware of that. (FG4-Monique).

Some of the assignments, such as reflective blogs, had a strong personal element, with students sharing information that they would not normally include in a university assignment:

Everything that you blog is personal experience. And not only were you required to blog, but you also had to create a sort of mini-profile that people could view so yeah, things about what you liked, where you've been, what you've done, what you enjoy doing, your dreams, and future aspirations, so there was a lot of identity in the profile. (FG1-Benita).

The personal and visual nature of these forms of communication made students feel vulnerable to criticism from others. None of the students we spoke to said they had experienced this criticism but they seemed alert to its possibility, suggesting that students did, at times, feel as though they were in a virtual panopticon. In assignments that required (public) self-reflection, students were unconfident of their ability to shape acceptable meanings, worried that they might create an excessively narcissistic impression: ‘That's the thing about blogging, you never know when the limit is because you don't want to keep talking about yourself even though that's the intention of a blog.’ (FG1-Benita). Danielle, who was touring with her band while completing her studies, elaborated:

I have quite a different life to a lot of my fellow students […] Because I had to divulge a little bit of myself [on the blog] it kind of separated myself a bit from the other people and I didn't want that but it had to happen […] I get afraid that people are going to think that I′m all like ‘me, me, me.’ (FG1-Danielle).

Having an audience for their work – even an audience of peers – created conflict for students like Danielle who wanted to maintain some distance between their personal and professional (student) lives. This can be likened to the tensions Wenger (1998) describes between local and global practices. For students, the local audience of peers was part of a global context in which narcissism is frowned upon and identity management requires careful curation. Having an audience for their work meant students felt as though they were sharing aspects of themselves with their peers and they felt this needed to be approached with caution for fear of creating an unfavorable impression.

3.3. Creation of learning artifacts: participation and reification
Since students were acutely aware that the work they created in these assignments would be shared with a local and possibly more global audience, the learning artifacts they created included an element of performance. They engaged in a form of curated participation, reifying this experience by carefully crafting each element of the assignment. Many students (13 out of 20) commented on this aspect of the assignment. Students sometimes experimented with a more informal tone of voice, which seemed to be warranted for an assignment that made use of social web technologies. Others chose to foster an academic identity, while remaining aware of the different forms of reification afforded by blogs and social media:

Most blogs I read the tone was very relaxed and much more, you know, like how you speak in a tutorial, you're trying to say things that are meaningful and interesting, but you can just say them without having to couch them in academic terms. I mean you didn't want to just be talking rubbish but you didn't have to use a new tone. A formal tone. (FG2-Hannah).

I′ve seen some of my friends' blogs and some of them, they drift to a more informal or casual style of writing, but for me, personally, I prefer to stay on a more formal, academic style but it shouldn't matter, as long as the points of argument are still there. Blogging does give that flexibility, whereas if there was a print [version] of that assignment, it's fixed. (FG6-Ritchie).

In contrast, one student (Natalie) spoke of the tensions that arose when trying to participate in a learning task that seemed to require students to be honest and reflective, and at the same time academic in their approach to writing. In Wenger's terms, Natalie struggled to combine in a meaningful way her experience of participation in the process of learning with her notion of the artifact that she needed to create as a reified product:

My last few blogs I struggled with because they asked for our opinion on the assignment in our final analysis of the wrap up. And I felt I was reasonably honest without going overboard. I tried to balance between the good and bad things, but I think I may have projected a slightly negative viewpoint at various times, when that was just the frustration that I felt in a particular week. And it was kind of like if you ask for certain opinions don't be surprised if you get them […] I guess I did filter a little bit just for privacy issues as well, and probably wasn't, you know, as harsh in my language as I might have liked to have been sometimes. (FG4-Natalie).

Natalie described her efforts to maintain a neutral identity on her blog, but ultimately felt exposed as a result of the reified persona she believed the tutor would be left with:

Overall the tutor will have gotten a more personal perspective of me than she would have had it just been academic writing that I was handing in. If you have the same tutor the next semester that can be a little bit interesting […] It was only in hindsight that I thought, ‘hang on, this is giving a personal picture of me as opposed to just a [student]. (FG4-Natalie).

Natalie's example shows that in some cases students experienced conflict between their expected participation in the learning community and their desire to carefully curate reified learning artifacts. This desire to curate arose because students wanted to avoid, or manage, the sense of exposure that emerged when their work was made visible to others. For Natalie, writing and sharing a reflective blog for a university assignment was akin to being in a virtual panopticon, leading to tensions in her response to the assignment. There were also, however, positive responses to this visibility, as it created a feeling of belonging to a more cohesive learning community.

3.4. Learning community: identification and negotiability
In these social web assignments, students both had an audience for their work and were an audience for other students' work. This dual role of identification – having an audience and being an audience – led to comparison with peers, which contributed to students' negotiation of identity within the learning community, a factor commented on by 13 of our student participants. Being able to compare their own work with that of their peers sometimes produced anxiety and an incapacity for students to negotiate the value of their work, but at other times resulted in students intensifying their efforts to produce high quality work:

Halfway through I started perusing other people's blogs, and I was like ‘oh my goodness, they have done so much’… I felt like mine wasn't as good as other people's, especially halfway in once I realized the standard of everyone else's. (FG4-Natalie).

Being able to see other students' work – sometimes that was quite motivating because you'd see how amazing some of their work was and you'd be like, you know, ‘I need to lift my game’. (FG5-Quinton).

Viewing other students' work stimulated students to respond to, and participate in, the kind of ongoing negotiation and construction of meanings that emerges from an interactive community of practice. As Theresa commented:

I thought a lot of people did write with a lot of personality and I was thinking, ‘Oh, is this academically allowed?’ Like other people's work does obviously influence your voice as well, what, you know, blog writing should be. (FG6-Theresa).

By viewing each other's assignments, students got to know other students' interests and backgrounds. This was particularly the case in assignments that involved personal reflective blogs, which gave students freedom to draw on aspects of their own sense of identity and personal interests: ‘You got to share common interests and that was how you found out if someone was going to comment on [your blog] if they had similar interests’ (FG1-Benita). Hannah explained that:

It was one of the only times I′ve really felt like being part of a learning group because people blog on things that are their own interest […] People are talking about things that they care about, which is really nice, as opposed to reading someone else's reading of the text that you read. (FG2-Hannah).

Our focus group discussions revealed that some students reacted positively toward peer review, or being an audience, whereas others focused more on the kinds of threats this could expose (‘am I good enough?’). By being an audience, students were both the subjects and viewers in the virtual panopticon, creating a tension in the process of identification and negotiability within the learning community.

4. Discussion
In this analysis, Wenger's (1998) four dualities of learning (or modes of belonging) are used to highlight the tensions and negotiations that students engage in when a new practice – making students' work visible to others – is introduced into the learning community. As Wenger (1998) emphasises, we cannot design learning; we can only design for learning. In curricula that advocate social learning, designing for learning may involve introducing social web technologies into the learning community. Our findings suggest that this needs to be done with caution. On the one hand, students sometimes described experiences that aligned with previous research that has emphasised the motivational benefits of social web technologies. When students' assessable work is made visible to others, students create work for a ‘real’ audience, helping to develop their skills in communicating for a broad audience (Rifkin et al., 2009, Waycott et al, 2010).

On the other hand, for our participants, the audience – even if only an audience of peers –created a sense of being in a virtual panopticon, making students feel exposed and vulnerable to criticism. Students were sharing not only their work, but also themselves. They were acutely aware of a need to curate their identities in order to perform carefully crafted versions of themselves through their online assignments. The complexities of students' experiences of visibility tells us that lecturers need to be mindful not only of the motivation and creativity social technologies can unleash, but also of the potential hazards of participation in online environments such as those posed by unsolicited internet trolling, for example.

When creating their online work, students chose to use a particular voice or to include specific details about themselves while excluding others. The primary motivation for this appeared to be students' desire to maintain boundaries between different kinds of information sharing; that is, to resist the forces of ‘convergence’ (Rambe, 2013) and ‘context collapse’ (Marwick and Boyd, 2010, Vitak et al., 2012). Students were reflective and articulate about separating their personal and professional (or student) identities. Compared with the popular depiction of students as willing to share everything about themselves online, our findings suggest alternative and more nuanced ways of understanding the information-sharing practices of university students. This aligns with other research that demonstrates that students can be quite discerning when choosing how they use social media (Smith, 2016, Waycott et al, 2010).

Previous research has demonstrated the peer learning benefits that can emerge when students review and respond to each other's work (see, for example, Boud, Cohen, & Sampson, 2014). Although we did not examine the learning impact of social web technologies, students in our study appeared to benefit from being able to review other students' work. For some students, peer review was a formal component of the assignment; for others, it was an informal expectation that emerged when students' work was made visible to other students. Both formal and informal peer review offered benefits. Being able to see other students' work motivated students to strive to improve their own work and contributed to a sense of belonging as full participants in a community of learners. The flipside to this benefit is that being able to review other students' work can, and did, produce anxiety in students who were worried about how their own work compared with that of their peers.

A number of limitations need to be considered when drawing conclusions from this study. Firstly, our focus group data were collected from a small sample; further stimulating findings will no doubt become known as the practice of assessing students' online work using social web technologies becomes more widespread across more varied contexts. Secondly, the students we spoke to were enrolled in different courses, across disciplines and institutions. In some focus group sessions, students discussed assignments that varied in terms of: a) the technologies used; b) the learning objectives; c) the assignment instructions; and d) instructional style of the lecturer, among other factors. These differences need to be acknowledged as characteristic of this research, and do not therefore equip us to draw conclusions about particular social web technologies used for specific learning and teaching goals. However, there is benefit to be gained from analyzing student experiences across a variety of learning and teaching contexts; the insights presented here are likely to be relevant in any university setting where students are asked to make their assessable work visible to others. Furthermore, this approach extends the more typical single case study research design that has, to date, dominated studies on social web technologies in higher education (e.g. Barwell et al., 2011, Yu-Hui and Yu-Chang, 2011).

Thirdly, all assignments discussed were part of a university course delivered face-to-face; none of the students we spoke to were enrolled in a fully online subject. Therefore, although our findings provide insights into the opportunities and challenges associated with using social web technologies to foster learning communities, our study has not been designed to produce specific guidelines on how to use social technologies to enhance a sense of community within a wholly online learning environment.

Finally, the research reported here is based on data collected over five years ago, but the issues of visibility that our students spoke of are still highly relevant (if not more relevant) in today's social media landscape. The issues raised are more fundamental than the specific technology and have implications for appropriate design of pedagogical environments to protect the fundamental right of students to manage their own levels of visibility on the web. To ensure the ongoing relevance of these findings, however, we recommend that further research be conducted to examine current university students' experiences with social web technologies (see Delahunty, Verenikina, & Jones, 2014).

Furthermore, further research could usefully extend the study of student experience using Wenger's community of practice framework (Smith et al., 2017). As Smith et al. (2017) argue, the communities of practice framework ‘continues to have potential for shedding light on how individuals learn within [online/blended learning environments]’ (p. 224), but more work is needed to fully exploit the theory. In this study we have demonstrated that the community of practice framework can be usefully applied beyond an analysis of learning to an analysis of how students approach the task of visibly participating in a learning community. We therefore go 'beyond theory verification' to open up new ways of using the Wenger framework, as advocated by Smith et al. (p. 219). A valuable complement to this study could include a close analysis of the process of co-construction in which students engage to create the final versions of the work they produce for assessment.

5. Conclusion
Wenger's (1998) communities of practice framework help us to understand how students come to participate in and belong to a learning community, and how a learning community evolves or emerges over time. The dualities provide a lens through which we have interpreted how students' experiences of making their assessable work visible to others shaped their participation in the learning community. This visibility certainly appeared to affect how students participated in their learning communities, as well as shaping the artifacts they created, reflecting Wenger's duality of participation and reification.

Our findings support the argument that making students' assessable work visible on the social web can be likened to introducing a virtual panopticon into a community of practice. When using social web technologies for university assignments, students may feel as though they are constantly under surveillance by authority figures (i.e., teachers), peers, and unknown ‘others’. We conclude that sharing students' assessable work in this way can have both positive and negative consequences. It can be motivating and beneficial for the development of a cohesive learning community, but can also introduce anxiety for students who worry about how their work and, thus, their participation and performance of identity, is viewed by others. Students responded to the designed learning activities, but with their own preferences for how much information about themselves they wanted to share with other students. When given the opportunity, students were adept at crafting their work in line with the identity they were prepared to share. However, some students expressed concern about the reified persona the lecturer might be left with at the end of these assignments, which involved not only sharing students' work, but also in some cases engaging in personal (yet public) reflections.

Our study highlights a number of potential tensions that are important for lecturers to address when designing learning activities that involve using social web technologies to share students' work online. Students need to have a clear understanding of who the intended audiences will be for the work they produce. They need to know what kind of practices and parameters determine who has access to their online assignments. They require guidelines on what constitutes appropriate and inappropriate feedback in online environments. Finally, students need to be able to discuss any concerns they may have regarding online privacy settings both with their peers and with their lecturers. In short, lecturers need to be able to build a community of practice together with their students where degrees of visibility can be negotiated so that fears of exposure can be offset by feelings of group belonging and trust.

