Blended learning (B-learning) is a common practice in higher education, and various principles, characteristics, models, and strategies have been widely studied to improve B-learning performance. However, crucial differences in student–group interactions have not been explored between online and face-to-face sessions, the two key components of B-learning. This study applied social network analysis and thematic analysis to investigate the nature and differences of group interactions in these learning components of a B-learning course. A total of 53 respondents participated in this study and Baidu Post Bar was used as a tool to facilitate group interactions. A total of 604 dialogues comprising 5090 posts were analyzed to identify the differences in group characteristics and interactions. A strong “group-controlling” pattern was found in the online learning component, whereas an “individual-controlling” pattern was found in the face-to-face mode. The depth of the interactions among students increased from the beginning to the middle of the class and reached a relatively stable state from the middle to the end of the class. The interaction in the classroom was more in-depth than that in the online learning mode. The dialogue clusters of students were stronger when the interactions focused on their real lives and were related to the subject of the course. Through the findings of this study, course designers and instructors of B-learning can gain better understanding of these interactions and further enhance student engagement and learning.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Blended learning

Group interactions

Interaction characteristic

Interaction difference

1. Introduction
Technological innovation is transforming the whole world at an astonishing speed while expanding the range of possible solutions on teaching and learning (Chen, Li, Huang, Li, & Wang, 2016; Gu, Cai, & Wang, 2014). Due to the integration of online and offline teaching models, the teaching of various integrated courses has become common practice (Zhang, Wang, & Zhang, 2012). Under the blended learning (B-learning) approach, learners interact using different online and offline tools. To support these needs, various forms of convergence between technology-based environments and traditional settings have been proposed, including virtual laboratories (De Jong, Linn, & Zacharia, 2013) and flipped classrooms (Gilboy, Heinerichs, & Pazzaglia, 2015), among others. These blended approaches foster both independent learning and collaboration (Lim & Wang, 2015) and provide more channels of communication among students and instructors.

B-learning combines both online and face-to-face modalities to create a cohesive learning experience and offer learners the advantage of flexibility in shifting time and space, among other benefits (Olakanmi, 2017). Drawing from the best practices in online and face-to-face methods, B-learning has enjoyed rising popularity at universities and colleges. Current studies on B-learning mainly focus on the learning performance (Means, Toyama, Murphy, & Baki, 2013), achievement (Bernard, Borokhovski, Schmid, Tamim, & Abrami, 2014), motivation, interest, problem-solving skills (Rowe, Frantz, & Bozalek, 2012), critical thinking, and interactions (Çardak & Selvi, 2016). For example, Gross, Pietri, Anderson, Moyano-Camihort, and Graham (2015) tracked the learning outcomes and performance of 489 students during 2007–2013. The conclusion showed that students were more likely to perform better in a blended environment with a large number of cycles of timely preparation and improved interactions. A meta-analysis of 674 articles centered on B-learning indicated that different interaction treatments can enhance student achievement (Bernard et al., 2014). An action research project with 30 pre-service teachers revealed several indicators pointing to an increase in interactions and levels of learning among students during the B-learning process (Çardak & Selvi, 2016). A main goal of implementing B-learning practices is to cultivate productive technology-based teaching and learning (USC, 2013).

Educational experiences are complex and diverse: models consist of many different learning contexts and learning activities. An important research question in this field has to do with the differences in interactions within these diverse environments (Ginns & Ellis, 2007). However, most existing studies have yet to investigate this topic, such that the interaction effect remains unaddressed in the literature (Ginns & Ellis, 2007; Jaggars & Bailey, 2010; Olakanmi, 2017; Siemens, Gašević, & Dawson, 2015). Thus, in the present study, the nature and differences in the group interactions of B-learning were analyzed.

2. Literature review
B-learning represents a real opportunity to create learning experiences that, in turn, has potential to provide the right learning at the right time and in the right place for each individual. It can bring about a redefining process of higher education: one that is learning-centered and thus facilitating a higher learning experience (Lim & Wang, 2015).

2.1. B-learning with social software
In recent years, social software, such as blogs, Facebook, Twitter, and wikis, have been integrated into the educational process (Kassens-Noor, 2012). Social technologies enable desirable practices, such as collaborative content creation, peer assessment, formative evaluation of student work, individual and group reflection on learning experiences, and the updating of information regarding changes in collaborative spaces, all of which can be used in the development of authentic learning tasks. Therefore, more researchers have attempted to design blended courses by integrating social software into the course content. Shiu, Fong, and Lam (2010) studied how people use Facebook for teaching and learning and provided recommendations based on their findings. In their study, Facebook was used as an excellent supplementary tool that can replace certain features of classroom teaching, other than providing online resources and support timely interactions, it was also used to automatic record learning activities. Kabilan, Ahmad, and Abidin (2010) carried out a survey and found that students believed that Facebook can be utilized as an online environment to facilitate English language learning. Veletsianos (2012) reported that Twitter has a positive influence on the processes of sharing information and resources, requesting assistance from and offering suggestions to others, and making connections with others. Karasavvidis (2010) took the wiki as a learning tool in a university course to investigate students' perspectives on its usage. Mayrberger and Linke (2014) pointed out that social networks could change classroom participation, while also producing marginalized groups with low participation. All of the abovementioned studies were conducted in blended environments. In summary, we can conclude that various types of social software have a significant role in the conduct of B-leaning.

In the study reported here Social network analysis (SNA) was broadly used to understand the nature of interaction within a group, by measuring the internal attributes and quantifying the structure of the group. The size, density, tolerance, average degree and diameter indicators of a social network are used to understand the characteristics of the entire population of the network (Liebowitz, 2006; Wey, Blumstein, Shen, & Jordán, 2008), while the interaction, reciprocity, connectivity, transitivity, and efficiency indicators are used to understand the characteristics of the group. Meanwhile, the internal power structure and hierarchy of members were calculated to understand the division of roles and responsibilities in the group (Cho, Gay, Davidson, & Ingraffea, 2007). With all these indicators the overall nature of a group can be well depicted.

2.2. Role of interaction in B-learning
Social interaction has long been identified as a defining and critical component of the educational process. Hudson (2002) argued that the very basis of thinking is rooted in dialogue, drawing on a socially constructed context to endow ideas with meaning. Interactivity in learning is a necessary condition to acquire knowledge and develop cognitive skills (Barker, 1994). The core issue of the argument for B-learning is the quality and quantity of the interactivity achieved through the effective integration of the Internet communication technology (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004).

In many studies, researchers have been concerned with how to use interactive variables to explain student learning changes in B-learning. One report posited that some of the academic gains can be attributed to variables such as higher volume of instructional content and learner collaboration (Siemens et al., 2015). B-learning tends to encourage interaction among learners, which can serve as a confounding variable explaining why its conditions had a significantly higher effect on achievement gains (Jaggars & Bailey, 2010). One study devoted to exploring the role of structure, patterns, and people in B-learning reported that B-learning had added value only when facilitated by educators with high interpersonal skills and accompanied by reliable and user-friendly technology (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004). There seems to be much evidence in the literature that, with the proliferation of Internet-based teaching and learning, researchers, theoreticians, and pedagogues have come to recognize the necessity of students interacting with one another and with their environment to ensure an educationally viable environment (Donnelly, 2010).

2.3. Purpose of the study and research questions
Currently, numerous studies have compared online vs. face-to-face instruction (Broadbent, 2017; Callister & Love, 2016; Ganesh, Paswan, & Sun, 2015). However, few studies have focused on the differences in interactions between diverse settings (Prohorets & Plekhanova, 2015).

Moreover, there exists a need to better understand various instructional activities by looking at their effects in both modes. The purpose of this study is to determine the differences between student–group interactions in both the online and face-to-face modes in a B-learning course. Three research questions are specified as follows:

1)
What are the characteristics of student–group interactions in B-learning in terms of property (size, density, tolerance, average degree, and diameter), connectivity (reciprocity, connectivity, transitivity, and efficiency), power structure, and hierarchy?

2)
What are the differences between online and face-to-face learning and teaching in terms of interaction patterns and the depth and contents of interaction?

3)
Do different interaction patterns produce different results?

3. Method
3.1. Participants
A class of 51 year-3 undergraduate students, one teacher, and one assistant (an Educational Technology major) from a university in China voluntarily participated in this study. Their undergraduate experience had not included any blended course prior to the present intervention. The B-learning course they participated in, “New Media Research,” is a compulsory course. Consistent with the theme of the course, social media was used as its online learning tool.

3.2. B-learning design
The online component of the course was designed using Baidu Post Bar (http://tieba.baidu.com/), a popular online space where people can exchange information, knowledge, ideas, and emotions. Two units were included in this course, namely, “New Media Technology” and “Social Learning.” To ensure that the participants can fully interact with one another, weekly tasks and related topics for discussion were designed, such as “The advantages and disadvantages of new media.” Weekly discussion topics were posted by the assistant and the teacher on the platform, and students were required to search the related resources, elaborate their understanding of the concepts involved, and present relevant links and media on the platform. These weekly discussion topics were broad and open ended, with the purpose of directing students to which sub topics they could pursue. Under the umbrella of the weekly topics, students were encouraged to bring in any sub topics, search for the related resources, build their arguments and provide the references for these arguments. Then, others could reply with comments to initiate learning interactions. In this way, discussion threads were produced all by the students under the weekly topics.

In addition, weekly face-to-face sessions were held and featured presentations and on-ground discussions. The in-class discussions were usually adapted in online discussions. A variety of activities were designed to promote engagement among students, such as group theme reports, theme debates, and brainstorming. The lectures were based on problems encountered by students online as well as in the classroom.

3.3. Procedure
Each unit continued for one month. The entire course contained ten-week online learning schedules and 11 face-to-face teaching and learning sessions. During the process, learners were allowed to search for information, exchange their views, and arrange a topic for discussion. When they came to their face-to-face sessions, they accept tasks and assignments as well as interact with their peers in real time.

3.4. Data collection and analysis
The data collected in this study were the online posts and records of classroom sessions. The online data contained all the interactions generated by the students and the instructor in the platform, whereas the classroom records included presentations and face-to-face communications. A total of 5090 posts, 18 thematic groups, and 604 classroom conversations were gathered. The continuous sentences of an individual in the classroom for a certain period of time was considered as the basic unit for collecting and analyzing the classroom conversation data.

Both the online posts and the classroom records were coded. First, these data were preprocessed according to their attributes, such as the themes, the session to which they were related, and the week they were was posted. Second, referring to the studies of Wang (2014) and Zhao (2015), calculation methods as well as the coding rules were developed so that the data could be quantified (see (1), (2) and Table 1, Table 2).


Table 1. Evaluation rules of online learning.

Post-type	Evaluation category	Detailed index	Score
Thread Post	Nature	Irrelevance	0
Process	0.5
Description	1
Elaborate	2
Cognitive	3
Quality	Low	1
General	2
High	3
Form	One form	2
Various forms	3
Comment Post	Hierarchy	Irrelevant	0
shallow	0.5
Middle	1
Deep	1.5

Table 2. Evaluation rules of classroom learning.

Evaluation category	Detailed index	Score
Presentation	Bad	6
General	8
Excellent	10
Answer	Simple	2
Slightly in-depth	3
In-depth	4
Question	Simple question	2
General questions	3
Deep question	4
Query	Simple query	2
General query	3
Deep query	4
Debates	Low	2
Middle	3
Deep	4
The online learning interaction score was calculated following the practice of Wang (2014) and Zhao (2015), in which thread posts and comment posts were calculated separately and summed up. The calculation of the thread posts included the nature, quality and form of the posts, indicating the cognitive processing, overall quality, and the presentation of the posts, weighting the former two for 80% and later for 20% according to Zhao (2015). Therefore the online learning interaction was calculated with formula 1:(1)

In this formula, the nature of the thread post was coded with 3/2/1/0.5/0 according to the depth of cognitive processing it exhibited; thread post quality was coded with 3/2/1 according to the overall quality being high, medium and low; thread post form was coded with 3/2 according to the way it was presented, multiple forms or a single form. While comment posts were coded separately with a scale of 2/1/0.5/ 0 according to their overall quality (see Table 1).

The calculation of face-to-face interaction was given higher weighing according to the method of Miyazoe and Anderson (2010). Classroom report and face-to-face communication, including answer, question, query and debates, were coded and summed up with the formula 2:(2)

In this formula, classroom report was coded with a scale of 10/8/6 according to the overall degree of learning comprehension as being excellent, general and bad; four classroom communication factors were coded with a scale of 4/3/2, depending on the degree of the particular communication facet it exhibited (Table 2).

Each session was appraised according to the above calculation by two coders who needed to read the original data and quantified the score independently, then negotiating with each other to determine the final score value. In order to ensure the consistency of coding, approximately 16% of the overall data set was extracted as a pretreatment sample, and two coders independently categorized the sample after a 3-h training. The results showed that they achieved a consistency of 87% on the coding results, which was above the suggested threshold of 80% (Riffe, Lacy, & Fico, 1998). After that, the two coders independently coded the data, with an agreement alpha that reached 0.82 (Hayes & Krippendorff, 2007), indicating satisfactory agreement. Disagreements were resolved through discussion.

For data analysis, a mixed approach, including statistical analysis and social network analysis (SNA), was used to explore the characteristics of group interaction and the breadth of interaction based on the relationships among group members. In addition, content analysis and thematic analysis were employed separately to calculate the depth of interaction and visualize the interaction contents. The research tools used were Excel, UCINET (Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002), and “Tagul-Word Cloud Art” platform (https://tagul.com/).

4. Findings and discussions
4.1. Characteristics of group interaction
To understand the characteristics of group interactions in B-learning, SNA was conducted with UCINET. A total of 5090 posts and 604 classroom conversations were combined to calculate the index values of the group attributes (see Table 3).


Table 3. Attributes of group structure.

Category	Index	Size	Category	Index	Size
Group properties	Size	53	Internal connectivity	Reciprocity	0.637
Density	0.511	Connectivity	0.925
Tolerance	1	Transitivity	0.709
Average degree	26.566	Connections	1408
Diameter	3	Efficiency	0.449
Group power	Degree centrality	Outdegree centrality 0.381
Indegree centrality 0.303	Internal hierarchy	Hierarchy coefficient	0.074
Betweenness centrality	0.029	Clustering coefficient	0.815
Closeness centrality	Internal closeness centrality 0.406
External closeness centrality0.335	Average distance	1.482
Cohesion index	0.740
4.2. Group property
As indicated in the literature (e.g., Liebowitz, 2006), size, density, tolerance, average degree, and diameter are the main indexes defining the group properties. Size indicates the number of individuals in a group. Density is the degree of association between group members (Martınez, Dimitriadis, Rubia, Gómez, & De La Fuente, 2003). Tolerance refers to the proportion of all connected nodes to the whole node as well as the existence of isolated points in the population, that is, whether the population contains all the individuals (Cross, Borgatti, & Parker, 2002). The average degree is calculated with all individual nodes. The network diameter is the maximum distance between two individuals in the population (Wey et al., 2008).

As shown in Table 3, for the B-learning group, the group size is 53, whereas the density is 0.511. This result indicates that the connection between the members is biased but at a moderate level. Some individuals are not able to establish effective associations with all the members. Tolerance (100%) indicates that all members joined the group and are involved in the group interactions. The average degree value of 26.566 and indicates that the frequency of interaction between members is relatively high. The diameter of the whole group is 3, which indicates that the connection between any two members can be established by themselves. Thus, the group members are closely linked, and the interaction is active. Overall, the group is an active group.

4.3. Group internal connectivity
The indexes of reciprocity, connectivity, transitivity, and efficiency determine the internal connectivity within a group. Reciprocity refers to whether members of the group choose between each other and whether they have established contact with each other. It can usually represent the level of cohesion (Hu & Racherla, 2008). Connectivity refers to the proportion of any two individuals that can be reached. It is associated with more information-sharing and increased communication (Cunningham et al., 2012). Transitivity, which is defined as the tendency among two nodes to be connected if they share a mutual neighbor (Aghagolzadeh, Barjasteh, & Radha, 2012), is the degree to which information can form a closed line between group members. According to Burt (2009), connections refer to the number of connections that the group members generate, and the efficiency is that how many connections in the entire population is valid.

As shown in Table 3, the group connectivity is as high as 0.925 within 1408 active connections, which means that the communication among members is quite frequent. Meanwhile, group transitivity is 0.709 and the reciprocity is 0.637, which means that >63% of the links between the members are bidirectional. The group efficiency indicates that some redundant connections exist among members (efficiency = 0.449). Nevertheless, both the number of connections among members and the connectivity of the group are very high. These values indicate that the information, knowledge, and emotion transfer are very effective.

4.4. Group power
Power (or centrality) represents the position of an actor in the overall network of relations (Brandes, Borgatti, & Freeman, 2016). SNA uses the concept of “centrality” to quantify group power, which can be subdivided into three categories, namely, point-center potential, intermediary-center potential, and close-center potential, according to different measurement criteria. Learners at the core position in the group can achieve higher academic achievement in cooperative learning (Cho et al., 2007).

In this section, we selected degree of centrality, betweenness centrality, and closeness centrality to determine the group power. These three kinds of group power are shown in Table 3. On the one hand, a slight difference can be found between the indegree and outdegree (the indegree centrality is 0.381, whereas the outdegree centrality is 0.303). These values indicate that not all members connect with others directly, but they often reply or interact based on their own understanding or interest about the content (Chou, 2002). The betweenness centrality is 0.029, indicating that only a few members play the role of bridging all individual members (Brandes et al., 2016). On the other hand, a big difference can be found between internal and external closeness centrality (0.335 and 0.406, respectively), indicating that an individual wants to establish contact with more members, but this expectation has not been satisfactorily met. The two kinds of centrality also show that some of links are invalid, indicating that the members are independent to some extent. In general, the difference among the three kinds of central potential is not big, which shows that the position of the members is not very fierce, the central tendency of the whole group is low, and that the members are relatively free (Everett & Borgatti, 1999).

4.5. Group internal hierarchy
Next, we selected hierarchy coefficient, clustering coefficient, average distance, and cohesion index to depict the internal hierarchy within the group. In detail, hierarchical coefficients are the characteristics of the network layer of the whole population. The clustering coefficient is a coefficient that indicates the degree of aggregation of nodes in a group. Average distance is the average of the geodesic distance between two points (Geodesic), that is, the average distance between any pair of nodes in the group (Doreian, 1974). The cohesion index refers to the degree of unity within the whole group while interaction may be reflective of group cohesion (Woo & Reeves, 2007).

Table 3 shows that the group hierarchy coefficient is 0.074, indicating that there is a small number of subgroups within the group. All group members can easily interact with others; therefore, there is no significant small group split phenomenon. The clustering coefficient (0.815) illustrates that every individual is well aggregated into groups, and that the members are highly clustered. Average distance, which represents the shortest distance between any two points, is 1.482. The cohesion index (0.74), which is based on the distance, shows that the whole group network has high cohesion and that members have a good sense of identity and group belongingness.

4.6. Differences in terms of group interactions
The differences of group interaction were analyzed from the perspectives of controlling pattern, depth and content, and the pattern of interaction.

4.7. Differences of control patterns
4.7.1. Control patterns in online interactions
A sociogram was drawn according to the interaction data among groups, in which the node, line, and arrow direction represented the actors, the relationship between the actors, and the information flow, respectively (Yang, Li, Guo, & Li, 2015).

On the one hand, Fig. 1, indicating a group-controlling pattern, shows that teachers and students form a complex and huge interactive network throughout the B-learning course. This means that the whole network does not depend on an individual, and that the teacher and students spontaneously produce plenty of interactive behaviors without many constraints to format group knowledge (Yew, Gibson, & Teasley, 2006). This result indicates that the interaction initiative lies in the hands of students when they are learning in the online context (Wenderoth, Freeman, & O'Connor, 2007). Over 100 posts exist on a specific topic, indicating that students' understanding of certain issues always persists until they fully understand the topic. Both the teacher and students tend to interact with others unconsciously.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (363KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Sociogram of the interactions in online learning.

On the other hand, Fig. 1 also indicates that some members have had effective interactions with nearly everyone (e.g., No. 29 and 43), whereas some are the opposite (e.g., No. 1 and 58). Notably, neither teacher (“A”) nor the assistant (“a”) has many links with students, indicating that the teacher and assistants in the whole platform do not have the initiative in the online mode unlike the students have (Shu & Wang, 2016).

4.8. Control patterns in face-to-face interactions
The same process was used to analyze the interactions in face-to-face teaching. Fig. 2 shows the sociogram generated in the classroom context according to the interaction data among groups. Compared with Fig. 1, a significant difference exists between online and face-to-face interactions. Unlike in the online environment, the interactions in the classroom context present a star-shaped distribution with the teacher (A) in the center of the group. This means that the interactions in the face-to-face context show an extreme individual-controlling pattern. The teacher is not the sole center of the group and some secondary-center points exist, such as Nos. 9, 42, 43, and 11. They serve as key factors who promote classroom interaction and their significance is second only to that of the teacher who serves as the opinion leader (Song, Chi, Hino, & Tseng, 2007).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (209KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Sociogram of the interactions in classroom teaching.

Furthermore, a number of links exist between the teacher and students, indicating that the teacher still plays an important role in B-learning, because the teacher's guidance directly determines the breadth of classroom interaction (Rahikainen, Lallimo, & Hakkarainen, 2001). Although the discussion is surrounded with presentations, the topics for discussion mainly follow the teacher's design. From the sociogram of the interaction in classroom teaching, four isolators can be found, namely, Nos. 50, 39, 58, and the assistant (a). Unlike the assistant, Nos. 50, 39, and 58 do not have any direct contribution and are not the main forces behind group reporting activities, thus indicating their status as bystanders in the classroom (Woolard, 2007).

4.9. Differences of interaction depth
The analysis of the breadth of interaction is a horizontal inspection of the number of such interactions. Not every interaction in a Web-based learning environment can influence learning, because many meaningless behaviors, such as idle chatting, online surfing, or mindlessly clicking on Web pages, are unlikely to lead to substantive learning, even though learners are interacting with others (Woo & Reeves, 2007). To analyze the group interaction systematically, there must be a qualitative dimension. Therefore, in this study, each interaction was evaluated to calculate the mean score of weekly interactions. The formula is as follows: mean score = total score / quantity. Table 4 shows the final results. The average online interaction scores are 1.287 (SD = 0.20) and that for the face-to-face module is 2.087 (SD = 0.29).


Table 4. Average scores of each learning week.

Week	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	M	SD
Online Average	0.91	1.10	1.13	1.36	1.34	1.40	1.35	1.30	1.31	1.67	1.287	0.20
Classroom Average	1.68	1.68	1.74	2.09	2.24	2.05	2.32	2.48	2.26	2.33	2.087	0.29
The average online interaction score correlates with the average classroom interaction score (r = 0.753, p = 0.012). The paired sample t-test reveals significant differences between the interaction depth in these two modules (p < 0.01).

4.10. Depth of online interaction
To assess the depth of weekly interaction, the highest scores of online interaction (Week 10, 1.67) and classroom interaction (Week 8, 2.48) were taken as reference and denominator, respectively, with each week's mean score used as a molecule.

As indicated in Fig. 3, the depth of online interaction improves along the course. The first round of online interaction showed unsatisfactory results. Given that the students were not familiar with the course arrangement, most of their posts in the first week had nothing to do with learning. About 27% of their posts were mere copies of information without their own interpretations. Hence, despite the high number of interactions, the depth is very low. From the second week, with better understanding of the course, the depth of interaction improved, reaching its peak on week four and stabilizing until week 9. At the beginning of the last week, an assignment was released; it required students to upload their mind maps depicting their understanding of the entire course, comment on the works of others, and update their own works according to the comments of others. Hence, the interaction depth during this final week was the highest because students strove to make their works perfect. In this case, the online learning interaction depth change is coherent and steady and does not produce significant learning nodes in any week, indicating that the level of awareness is not disturbed by the teachers once the students have gained mastery of this form of learning.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (100KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Trend of interaction depth.

4.11. Depth of face-to-face interaction
Meanwhile, the depth of face-to-face interaction in the first week was much better than that in the online mode. Moreover, the depth of classroom interaction showed a rising trend, indicating that the students are not hovering in shallow interaction during the process of classroom interaction but interacting with one another to produce a deep discourse. Compared with online interaction, the depth of classroom interaction is generally higher, and this significant difference is possibly caused by the formality of face-to-face teaching and the straightforwardness of classroom behavior with deliberate directions, unlike the online dialogues, which are much more open.

Furthermore, two declines can be observed in weeks 6 and 9. These are most probably due to the theme and classroom organization of those two weeks. These two weeks were the wrap-up of unit one and of the entire course, respectively, so the opportunities of thematic reporting were reserved for those students who were not ideally involved in the program. They were not very well-prepared in the classroom because they basically did not like the course; hence, the classroom interaction depth for the two weeks was not ideal.

4.12. Differences in interaction contents
Interactions among teachers, students, and the content occurs in all forms of education. In the present research, the classroom teaching contents come from the online learning materials. Teachers select the focus of the students' interests on the platform, sort and reorganize the relevant materials systematically, and make a presentation in the classroom. Thus, the interactive content in the classroom can be considered as the continuation and/or the supplementary material of the content in the online platform.

4.13. Online interaction content
As shown in Fig. 4, the students' thinking can be viewed as wildly divergent. For instance, >20 students posted on the topic of “3D printing,” which covered the introduction of the topic from multiple perspectives, including definition, principle, material, and applications. Meanwhile, close relevance can be found among these posts. For instance, as shown in Fig. 6, after someone proposed the concept of “4D printing” during the discussion of “3D printing,” they discussed the connections between these two technologies. This led to the extensive discussion of “4D printing prospect,” and gave rise to discussion of the “skeleton reengineering” problem. The discussion about “3D printing application” led to topics of industrial, medical, educational, and many other applications. Students raised the issue of “maker education,” especially on the topic of educational applications. The possible reasons for this could be that the topics like “3D printing,” “m-learning,” and “QQ & WeChat” are closely related to people's daily lives. This phenomenon—occurring throughout the learning process—reflects the principle of constructing shared knowledge among interacting students (Clark & Marshall, 2002; Wang, 2014).

4.14. Face-to-face interaction content
The topics for interaction in the classroom setting were clear because classroom communication was conducted in the form of topic discussions. A total of 604 class dialogues were assigned to 18 themes. As shown in Fig. 5, comparing online themes, students did not talk about “3D printing” in the classroom but talked about “4G.” The possible reasons for this could be that topics like “4G,” “MOOC,” and “QR code” are more closely related to students' daily life than “3D printing.” As student 9 says, “As 4G entered our lives, educators use it to complete teaching tasks, video lessons, and homework correction and provide timely response to questions.”

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (216KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Summary of the face-to-face interaction contents.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (177KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Online topic indexes.

4.15. Different interaction patterns
The previous analysis shows two kinds of interactive patterns in B-learning: individual-controlling pattern and group-controlling pattern. Different control patterns occur in different environments and can bring about varying results. Specifically, the individual-controlling pattern occurs in the classroom. Fig. 2 shows that the teacher is the center of all classroom interactions. In this pattern, the teacher is leader, and students follow the teacher's arrangements. From the analysis of interaction differences, we can find that students' engagement is lower in the individual-controlling pattern than in online learning. In the classroom setting, 604 interactions were gathered, whereas 5090 were gathered in the online learning mode. However, from the analysis, the depth of interaction in the individual-controlling pattern is deeper than that in the online learning mode (M(online intearction depth) = 1.287, and M(classroom intearction depth) = 2.087). On the contrary, the group-controlling pattern mainly occurs online, where the student as the leader is highly engaged in the process of learning. The depth of interaction in the group-controlling pattern is also significantly lower than in the individual-controlling pattern. Moreover, we find that students are easily distracted from the topic of discussion, and they cannot discuss a problem in depth.

In general, B-learning is advanced in the two interaction patterns. Although we are temporarily unable to determine which pattern can better promote student learning, we have been able to highlight the fact that different patterns of interaction can be helpful in designing B-learning course for teachers.

5. Conclusion
This study investigated the nature and differences of group interaction between online and face-to-face teaching and learning in B-learning environments. By combining the methods of SNA and content analysis, we have been able to draw several conclusions.

(1)
The groups are closely linked, and the communication between them tended to be spontaneous without the control of others. This is in line with Garrison and Kanuka (2004), whose research indicated that user-friendly technology facilitated learners' interaction, such that they can form communities spontaneously and make in-depth interaction once they have a common interest.

(2)
No one monopolized the center of the whole interaction in the online learning mode. However, we identified that the “group-controlling” and “individual-controlling” patterns dominated the online learning and face-to-face teaching and learning modes, respectively. Moreover, some degree of pseudo-participation existed in the classroom spectators. This finding conforms to that reported in Mayrberger and Linke (2014).

(3)
The depth of the students' interaction increased with the progress of the teaching and reached a relatively stable state during the middle and later periods. This has been observed in both the online and face-to-face teaching and learning modes. No significant correlation existed between the depth of the interaction and the number of posts. Compared with the informal environment of online learning, classroom dialogues are more open and required deep thinking, which echoes the finding in Miyazoe and Anderson (2010).

(4)
When selecting and sharing interactive content, students always made connections among different relevant contents. They also tried to spread the entire knowledge of the network structure by searching for relevant materials. In general, they frequently clustered together those topics that are closely related to their real-life situations.

In summary, we found that in the B-learning environment based on social software, learning groups showed strong cohesion and that teachers and students shared ideas and interacted with one another to discuss established themes and promote cognitive change. The interactions presented great differences between online and face-to-face teaching and learning. The pattern of online interaction is group-controlling, whereas that in the face-to-face setting is individual-controlling. In addition, teachers and students showed different performances in terms of the breadth, depth, and contents of interactions.

The outcomes of this research can help those involved in B-learning, including students, designers, school administrators, and researchers. These research findings can be helpful in improving B-learning and may also have influence on future studies of interaction among students. First, there may be theoretical implications for researchers. The framework of interaction analysis proposed in this study, including the patterns, depth, and content of the interaction, can be used to depict cognitive engagement in the learning process, and thus can be a useful tool for researchers to further analyze B-learning. Second, there could be practical implications for curriculum designers/instructors and technical developers. Designers and instructors can more fully harness the values and benefits of both delivery mechanisms, which they can offer in a single-course setting. For example, they can design online discussion topics and face-to-face conversations respectively based on different interaction patterns, in order to fully mobilize student participation towards contributing their own ideas. With new knowledge of group interactions within a B-learning context, designers and instructors can create better B-learning courses to further enhance student engagement and learning. For technical developers, the results of this study may help to expand the educational function of social software. Although most of the social software can meet the basic needs of teaching, the irrelevant information circulating through social media might hinder learning where it is employed. Therefore, technical developers can better construct the information environment to enable students to immerse themselves in learning situations without being disturbed by incidental information. Finally, school administrators can also immediately discover students who may have a learning risk based on their learning progress so that they can provide timely intervention and guidance to such students.

However, some limitations still exist in this study. First, we cannot determine whether such differences are related to curriculum category because a control group was not considered. Second, the sample size is slightly small with only 53 participants. In the future, we plan to expand the sample and set up the control group to investigate the actual effect of curriculum categories on group interactions. In addition, the relationships between different group interaction patterns and learning achievement and engagement can be further explored in the future.

