Whilst emphasizing adult learners' characteristics as being different from traditional students, few studies have taken into account a broad personality trait, i.e. core self-evaluation (CSE), when explaining their learning performance. Additionally, existing studies confirm the vital role of adult education in the inclusion process of citizens in our contemporary society. However, questions remain unanswered as to what specific factors of the learning environment contribute to these social outcomes, except in educational programmes explicitly directed at social inclusion. Responding to this literature gap, the present study (1) investigated the effect of CSE and online interaction quality on adults' learning performance and (2) scrutinized how online interaction quality and learning performance affect their bonding and bridging social capital. Participants (N = 140) were learners from a blended learning programme in centres for adult education in Belgium. Path analyses showed that only CSE significantly predicted adults' learning performance. Online interaction quality was found to have a significant effect on learners' bonding and bridging social capital, but not learning performance. To this end, the findings highlight the importance of dispositional factors regarding adults' achievement in a blended learning environment and the potential of such programmes to enhance their social outcomes in addition to cognitive gains.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Core self-evaluation

Adult education

Online interaction

Social capital

1. Introduction
The proposition that adult education can enhance a person's social inclusion is endorsed by policy makers (Nilsson, 2010) and empirical findings (de Greef et al., 2015, Field, 2005, Field, 2012). At present, the implementation of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in adult education has become a common practice, which results in different levels of technology-based learning (Bates, 2015) and enhanced pedagogy (Laurillard, 2012). A recent study conducted by Cocquyt, Diep, Zhu, de Greef, and Vanwing (2017) revealed that learners in a blended learning environment perceive more postive changes regarding social capital compared with their counterparts in a purely online learning environment. The authors attribute the differences to the lack of learner-learner online interactions in the latter condition (Cocquyt et al., 2017) and recommended further investigations on the specific elements of the learning environment contributing to adults' social inclusion. In light of learning outcomes, Wisneski, Ozogul, and Bichelmeyer (2017) found no significant effect of learning environment on academic achievement among learners in face-to-face and online conditions. In their research, opportunities for interaction were not available for online learners, whereas collaboration and interaction with peers were present in the face-to-face condition, which can be a crucial factor (Wisneski et al., 2017). Yet, how online interaction may enhance learning in a blended environment, particularly in an adult education setting, has not been thoroughly examined.

Over three decades ago, Knowles (1984) proposed six tenets for adult educators to design instructional strategies that best suit adult learners' characteristics. While researchers mostly agree with Knowles' principles of adult teaching, they do not fully accept the characteristics pertaining uniquely to adult learners. Cercone (2008) argueed that not all adult learners are fundamentally self-regulated and intrinsically motivated. According to Labuhn, Zimmerman, and Hasselhorn (2010), self-regulation is important for academic achievement as the more self-regulated learners will have strategies to establish a plan, seek appropriate help, and motivate themselves to overcome challenges in learning. While researchers found a significant relationship between self-regulation and learning (Zhu, Au, & Yates, 2016), it is unclear why some learners in general are more self-regulated than others. Recently, some studies have focused on a rather new measure of personal traits, namely core self-evaluation (CSE) conceptualized as how the individuals view themselves (Bono & Judge, 2003), to explain learners' academic achievement and learning satisfaction. In comparison with other traits such as conscientiousness, CSE is hypothesized as the trigger of learners' self-regulation as high scorers of CSE feel more confident and positive about the outcomes of the effort invested and are more likely to be motivated and engaged in learning (Johnson, Rosen, & Levy, 2008). Thus while research on the relationship between the Big Five personality traits, namely neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness, and learning performance is multiple (Furnham et al., 2009, Komarraju et al., 2011), studying such traits as CSE will add more insights into the scholarly attempts to enhance technology-supported pedagogy. This knowledge is particularly important for adult educators given that our understanding about adults' self-directedness is inclusive as discussed.

Adult learners, especially those who are at risk of unemployment, are likely to substantially benefit from the educational programs in which they are enrolled. This means that, in addition to the new professional knowledge and skills equipped, they can develop more lasting social ties with their friends compared with those in traditional programs (Francescato, Mebane, Porcelli, Attanasio, & Pulino, 2007). The relationships maintained between the learners and their peers can be considered as either bonding social capital (close friends) or bridging social capital (among those dissimilar in their social status, age, ethnicity, and educational levels) (Putnam, 2000). While bonding social capital can help the disadvantaged groups to overcome their immediate difficulties, bridging social capital opens more access to employment and resources, and can increase integration into the community (Hawkins and Maurer, 2009, Putnam, 2000). In general, the majority of studies confirm the positive effect of the educational experience on learners' increased social networks (Field, 2005). To date, with the exception of a few educational programs focusing on social inclusion for the marginalized (de Greef, Segers, & Verté, 2012), the effect of certain elements of the learning environment and learners' related factors such as the quality of interaction with peers and academic achievement respectively have scarcely been researched. With regard to adult educational practices, in order to adapt to learners' life circumstances, blended learning has increasingly replaced distance learning and traditional face-to-face classroom instruction, so as to provide more enriched educational experiences while maintaining elements of flexibility in time and space (Bele & Rugelj, 2007). One of the distinguishing features of blended learning compared to that of face-to-face learning is the online interaction activities designed for knowledge construction. According to Graham (2006) and Laurillard (2012), blended learning allows for more interactive and reflective learning since the interactions among the students are leveraged by both instructional design and interactive technologies. Thus, online interaction quality may be the one factor that contributes to both adults' learning performance and social capital gain.

Against these backgrounds, the present study examined how CSE and online interaction with peers can contribute to adults' learning performance and enhanced social capital. More specifically, we investigated (1) how CSE and online interaction quality contribute to adults' learning performance, and (2) how online interaction quality and learning performance contribute to adult learners' perception of increased social capital.

2. Theoretical frameworks
2.1. Core self-evaluation and student performance
In order to explore the impact of dispositional factors on individuals' attitudes and behaviours, Judge, Van Vianen, and De Pater (2004) proposed the theory of core self-evaluation (CSE), defined as “fundamental premises that individuals hold about themselves and their functioning in the world” (Judge, Erez, & Bono, 1998, p.161). CSE is a latent construct, which is comprised of four sub-traits: self-esteem, generalized self-efficacy, emotional stability (neuroticism), and locus of control (Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2002). Initially, CSE was used in workplace contexts to explain employees' job performance and satisfaction. Studies show that there is a positive relationship between CSE and these two outcome variables. In academic settings, CSE demonstrates a positive link with learners' physical and psychological health functioning (Tsaousis, Nikolaou, Serdaris, & Judge, 2007). In this respect, Johnson et al. (2008) provided a pertinent account. The authors proposed that CSE should be additionally interpreted as “people's beliefs about their ability to successfully interact with their environment by altering their own behaviour as well as external events” or “beliefs about one's own self-regulatory and behavioural capacities” (p. 396). In so doing, we can further explain why CSE can be a useful construct in explaining key outcomes like coping, performance, and satisfaction (Johnson et al., 2008). This is because the four constituting traits of CSE, rooted in motivation and socio-cognitive theory (Bandura, 1997, Johnson et al., 2008), are beneficial to a person's self-regulation process. For instance, people with high CSE will feel more secure (emotional stability), experience less frustration (high self-efficacy), believe in their capacity to exert an influence (locus of control), and appreciate their efforts in relation to work-related success (high self-esteem) (Johnson et al., 2008). These positive core evaluations about a person's capacity will trigger high motivation to deal with challenges and issues, which in turn facilitates the coping process and enhances performance.

This viewpoint is supported by Kim, Oh, Chiaburu, and Brown (2012) study, in which CSE was found to have an effect on learners' motivation and academic performance after controlling for general mental ability and conscientiousness. Furthermore, by conducting a multilevel analysis on the effect of goal setting, CSE and student performance, Bipp, Kleingeld, Van Den Tooren, and Schinkel (2015) found that CSE has a positive effect on student performance. An interacting effect between goal setting and CSE on students' actual performance was also reported such that learners with high scoring on CSE were also academic high achievers. This effect can be explained by the fact that the CSE high scorers were more confident in achieving the goals and displayed more commitment to performance (Bipp et al., 2015, Chang et al., 2012). Consequently, Bipp et al. (2015) suggested that feedback on performance can be taken into account as this can influence the motivation during the learning process and their CSE. Given the fact that interaction among peers is a process whereby learners can receive external feedback on their understanding and learning (Laurillard, 2012), there is a need to research the influence of CSE and online interaction on learning performance in order to clarify the role of CSE. Thus, the first hypothesis was proposed as follows.

H1

Core self-evaluation is positively related to adults' learning performance.

2.2. Online interaction quality, student performance, and social capital
2.2.1. Online interaction quality: conceptualization
To capture the inquiry processes that facilitate the collaborative knowledge construction among the instructors and learners in online environments, Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (2001) proposed the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework to specify three essential elements characterizing a productive learning community: teaching, cognitive, and social presences. According to Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, and Fung (2010), the CoI is one framework that reflects how the collaborative constructivist principle is applied in online learning. In essence, the CoI addresses the interactions between two actors in the teaching and learning process: instructors and learners. In this model, the role of the instructors in organizing, designing, facilitating and aligning learning activities with learning goals is defined as teaching presence. Garrison et al. (2001) postulated that cognitively engaging in online discourses with peers (cognitive presence) and socially connecting to each other for a sense of collegiality (social presence) are also pivotal for the learners' knowledge construction process. In particular, cognitive presence is defined as how “learners are able to construct and confirm meaning through sustained reflection and discourse in a critical community” (Garrison et al., 2001, p.11). Thus, this element essentially captures the quality of online interaction among learners for knowledge construction purposes. Most studies employing the different dimensions of the CoI were conducted in distance and online learning contexts where face to-face interactions were limited. Therefore, learners mainly relied on the online community to have a feeling of connection with peers, being motivated, and more importantly cognitively engaging in online discourses that promote high quality learning (Reasons, Valadares, & Slavkin, 2005).

In a blended learning environment, while teaching presence and social presence can be compensated for in face-to-face sessions, cognitive presence at a higher level is more likely to be realized in online interaction among peers. In this respect, Mebane, Porcelli, Iannone, Attanasio, and Francescato (2008) pointed to the availability of resources, the archives of past discussions, the changing role of the instructors as facilitators and sufficient time devoted to replying to others' arguments as critical factors that make the online knowledge construction process more interactive and reflective. In the present study, adapting the definition of cognitive presence by Garrison et al. (2001), we used the term online interaction quality to refer to the extent to which the learners perceived that the process of engaging in constructive and reflective conversations with peers online contributed to their learning motivation and knowledge construction, with a possibility of transferring learning to contexts outside the classroom.

2.2.2. Online interaction quality and student performance
Bernard, Borokhovski, Schmid, Tamim, and Abrami (2014) concluded from their meta-analysis on the effect of different interaction treatments that learner-learner interaction outperforms learner-instructor interaction regarding students' learning outcome. Recently, Yang (2016) conducted an intervention, i.e. an online writing system bearing similar features to Wikis and Google Docs, to explore the quality of online interaction and learning outcome measured by the quality of feedback to learners' writing assignments of 14 prospective teachers in Taiwan. The results showed that the prospective teachers could construct a high cognitive level of discussions, which was attributed to the online communication system with the absence of the instructor. In other words, the more recent interactive technologies, with the capacity for discussing documentation, change tracking, observation of one's own behaviours, and reflection scaffolding, have augmented student learning. Similarly, Jaggars and Xu (2016) investigated which online course features had an effect on student performance and found that interpersonal interactions, namely, learner-learner interaction and learner-instructor interaction, had a significant correlation with learners' course grades. In subsequent interviews, the learners placed more value on learner-instructor interactions over learner-learner interactions. On the contrary, Shukor, Tasir, and Van der Meijden (2015) employed a data mining technique to document learner-learner online interaction and found that this type of interaction did not contribute to learners' performance measured by objective grades.

Thus, while there are implications that a higher level of online interaction is correlated to student learning in purely online courses, this relationship in a blended learning context should be tested to confirm the role of the element. Furthermore, while a great number of studies demonstrated the positive effect of blended learning on students' learning outcomes, which specific element of the design contributes to student learning was only investigated in a small number of studies (e.g. López-Pérez, Pérez-López, & Rodríguez-Ariza, 2011). In addition, a large body of research examined different aspects of blended learning design in relation to student satisfaction (Wu and Liu, 2013, Wu et al., 2010). On the contrary, fewer studies focused on the link between elements of the blended learning environment and student learning. Based on empirical evidence concerning the relationship between online interaction quality and learning performance so far, the following hypothesis was put forward:

H2

Online interaction quality is positively related to adults' learning performance.

2.2.3. Social capital: conceptualization
According to Putnam (2000), social capital refers to the networks, norms, and social trust that foster the collective processes and actions of members within a community for the public good. From a different standpoint, Bourdieu (1986) and Coleman (1988) (cited in Zhang & Kaufman, 2015) addressed social capital as the social networks and resources obtained by individuals through their memberships and interaction within the community. Bourdieu and Coleman's conceptualization of social capital implied that individuals can benefit from the community of their membership, whereas Putnam proposed that the community can benefit from the social capital generated through the interaction among its members (Oztok et al., 2015, Zhang and Kaufman, 2015). Despite different emphases, these authors share the idea that social capital results from the dynamic interaction among members and an increase in social capital is beneficial for individuals and the community (Oztok et al., 2015). Therefore, in this study, we adopted the definition of social capital from Zhang and Kaufman (2015), which refers to those “social resources, which are available to individuals and groups through their social connections to the communities and can be used to obtain information and assistance of various kinds” (p. 496).

In a large number of studies, researchers identified two types of social capital: bonding and bridging. Bonding social capital refers to the networks established among people of similar backgrounds and beliefs, e.g. close friends and family members, who are willing to provide practical and emotional support to each other (Williams, 2006, Zhang and Kaufman, 2015). Bridging social capital refers to weak ties between people from diverse backgrounds and outside a person's close circle, who can provide access to new information and perspectives. These connections offer benefits such as employment opportunities (Granovetter, 1973, cited in Steinfield, Ellison, & Lampe, 2008), generalized reciprocity (Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007), and help the individuals feel part of the bigger community (Williams, 2006). With regard to measurement, Williams (2006) proposed an instrument to measure bonding and bridging social capital from an outcome perspective. While previous studies focused more on the presence or quantity of networks and memberships, Williams (2006) scrutinized the outcomes generated from these relationships, e.g. emotional support, access to new information and resources, and feeling of trust and friendship. As there is a consistency between the definition of social capital adopted from Zhang and Kaufman (2015) and Williams' (2006) theoretical ground in the development of the social capital instrument, in this study, we also adapted the scale from the author in designing the instrument.

2.2.4. Online interaction and social capital
2.2.4.1. Mixed findings regarding the effect of online interaction on social capital
Wellman, Haase, Witte, and Hampton (2001) were among the first to investigate how online interaction in virtual learning communities affect a person's social capital. Differentiating online interaction into one-to-many (synchronous) and one-way (asynchronous) types, the authors found that there was an association between two types of online interaction and participatory social capital, i.e. involvement in politics and voluntary organizations. According to the authors, the Internet provides more opportunities to augment and widen a person's social networks and leads to more interpersonal and organizational involvement. However, heavy Internet users were reported to have less commitment to the community (Wellman et al., 2001). In explaining the reason for such an unfavourable finding, the authors recommended that the quality of online interaction should be examined. Wellman et al. (2001) hypothesized that exposure to negative experiences during these online interactions may reduce the motivation and commitment to a person's participation in the community.

When Web 2.0 technologies and the use of social networks such as Facebook grew in popularity, researchers directed their focus to how these interactive technologies can contribute to social capital. Steinfield et al. (2008) and Ellison et al. (2007) found that intensive use of Facebook results in more bonding and bridging social capital. Also, this relationship was moderated by self-esteem, with those with lower self-esteem perceiving more bridging social capital gain. One important finding of Steinfield et al. (2008) was that the authors used cross-lagged correlation to validate the direction of causality between social interaction and bridging capital. This means that they attempted to test a reverse relationship, i.e. those with greater networks will interact more actively on Facebook, by comparing the strengths of two correlations at two different time points. The result indicates a stronger association between online interaction and bridging social capital, which confirms that the direction of correlation is plausibly from online interaction to social capital. Steinfield et al. (2008) also acknowledged that by only measuring Facebook use intensity, the authors were unable to capture the depth and breadth of the online networking activities that took place among the participants, despite the popularity of Facebook use among undergraduates.

Mebane et al. (2008) postulated that the e-learning environment has removed the physical differences among individuals that may hinder conversation. A follow-up study by the authors reported that e-learning has helped learners to build up strong social networks and develop different kinds of social capital to an extent that is stronger than the face-to-face learning mode. Also, examining the effect of interactions in an online community, Williams (2006) and Zhong's (2011) findings are not consistent with each other. While displaying a similar positive effect on bridging social capital, online interaction among the members has a positive effect on bridging social capital in Zhong's (2011) study, but a negative effect in William's (2006) study.

2.2.4.2. Online interaction quality and social capital
Informed by previous research, recent studies have shifted the focus on the nature of online interaction and the building of social capital. Rovai (2002) proposed that social presence, i.e. “a sense of being with another in the virtual environment” (Biocca, Harms, & Burgoon, 2003, p. 460), is important for the formation and expansion of social ties. Supporting Rovai (2002), Oztok et al. (2015) found a significant relationship between social presence and social capital in which social presence has a stronger correlation with bridging than bonding social capital. In explaining the difference in the magnitude of the relationship, the authors proposed that learners in an online learning environment prefer to interact with those of different viewpoints rather than spending effort cultivating existing ties. Oztok et al. (2015) recommended that social presence should be re-conceptualized in such a way that captures the quality of relationships and dynamics of the online learning environment in future studies. This is in accordance with how the initial conceptualization of social presence was promoted by Short, Williams and Christie (1976, cited in Oztok et al., 2015). Complementing Oztok et al. (2015), Zhang and Kaufman (2015) found that enjoyment of relationships, defined as “the quality of interactions with family, real-life friends, and game friends” (p. 497), exerts the greatest effect on the building of bonding and bridging social capital compared to other factors like communication methods and network levels. In other words, how people spend time in online activities is more important than how much time they spend concerning the fostering of social capital (Zhang & Kaufman, 2015).

At present, few studies have been conducted on the relationship between online interaction quality and social capital in academic contexts, although the interactions among learners in a class community are similar to those in virtual learning communities in terms of the technologies used and specific learning goals. Lu, Yang, and Yu (2013) suggested that different types and actors of interaction, namely learner-instructor interaction, learner-learner interaction, and interaction among classmates can foster social capital in different forms. Among the three types, interactions among learners result in greater social capital gains. While Lu et al. (2013) postulated that a denser environment with more frequent interactions can result in social capital, the authors did not measure the quality aspect of online interaction, but the frequency of using the tool in interacting with peers and the instructors. Therefore, confirming the influence of online interaction quality among learners on their performance and social capital is of value to further understand what specific elements of the educational programme contribute to the learning and social outcomes. Analysing this relationship complements recent studies and contributes to the current understanding of how online interaction can be used as a tool for social capital enhancement. In the context of adult education, this knowledge is even more important as adult education institutes strive for the wider aims of social inclusion in addition to learning competence development. We proposed the following hypotheses upon the relationship between online interaction quality and social capital.

H3

Online interaction quality is positively related to learners' perception of increased bonding social capital.

H4

Online interaction quality is positively related to learners' perception of increased bridging social capital.

2.2.5. Student performance and social capital
As pedagogical practices nowadays have seen a strong shift toward collaborative learning, the degree to which a learner participates and contributes to the collaborative learning process is of great importance in explaining the development of social capital. That learning is a social activity has been well recognized in literature (Tett and Maclachlan, 2007, Wenger and Snyder, 2000). From this perspective, Falk and Kilpatrick (2000) theorized a relationship between learning and social capital. Palmer and Gasman (2008) found that the institutional support in terms of enhancing learners' social capital, such as encouragement to access college community and organizations, student support services, and internships, have contributed to their learning performance. On the contrary, the study of Neri and Ville (2008) indicated that investment to increase social capital by learners who are international students is not significantly related to their learning performance. An explanation for this unexpected finding may rely on the fact that most of the relationships built up are bonding social capital in nature (Neri & Ville, 2008).

Despite these inconsistent findings, studies researching education and social capital have provided evidence that social capital, social identity, and participation in social activities are not stable, but can be changed as a result of participation in adult education (Field, 2005, Gallacher et al., 2002, Tett and Maclachlan, 2007). This is because the latter equips the learners with the necessary skills, knowledge, information, and access to social networks that empower and enhance their capacity to take part in both individual and collective actions (Field, 2005). In the same vein, Portes (2000) questioned whether learning performance may enhance social capital. The argument is that higher educational achievement will lead to greater media exposure and use, which in turn contributes to a person's enhanced social networks (Portes, 2000). Given the lack of studies on the relationship between learning performance and social capital, it is crucial to explore such empirical evidence so as to gain more insight into the phenomenon and yield more practical implications for pedagogical practices. The two following hypotheses were put forward.

H5

Adults' learning performance is positively related to their perception of increased bonding social capital.

H6

Adults' learning performance is positively related to their perception of increased bridging social capital.

2.3. Socio-demographics as control variables
Previous studies have shown that learners' socio-demographic characteristics can contribute to their learning performance. Packham, Jones, Miller, and Thomas (2004) mentioned educational background, employment status, and age as the critical factors that differentiate between successful and unsuccessful online learners. An older age has a link with lower Internet self-efficacy (Chu & Tsai, 2009), and is likely to result in performance differences in online learning. More importantly, Kim et al. (2012) suggested that to confirm the generalizability of the effect of CSE on learning performance, studies should focus on full-time employed learners and be conducted in contexts other than higher education and workplace settings. Rovai and Baker (2005) postulated that a sense of community resulting from online interaction among learners is conducive to student learning. While the authors found a gender difference in online interaction, a subsequent study by Rovai and Barnum (2007) further confirmed that active online interaction has a positive correlation with learners' perceived learning, with female displaying higher scoring than male participants. Also, taking into account the socio-demographics when examining the effect of online interaction on Master of Business Administration (MBA) learners' perceived learning, Arbaugh (2008) discovered that gender significantly predicts learners' perceived learning together with different types of online interaction.

Thus, to separate the confounding effect of learners' socio-demographic characteristics on learning performance and social capital, we included age, gender, employment status, and educational background as control variables.

2.4. Research model
3. Methodology
3.1. Research context and design
The present study was conducted at four adult education centres (Centrum voor Volwassenenonderwijs, CVO) in Flanders (Dutch-speaking region), Belgium. The CVOs offer formal education for adult learners who would like to engage in different levels of post-secondary education. Upon completion of the programme of their choice, adult learners are granted with a formal degree.

The participants in this study were adult learners participating in the blended learning programme of Specific Teacher Training, which consisted of 60 credits including courses and an internship. The programme prepares the learners to become secondary school teachers with courses on instructional theories, didactics, and practical skills using blended learning as a teaching approach. In Flanders, the Specific Teacher Training programme is organized either by the universities or the CVOs, both of which will grant a teacher diploma upon completion. To be eligible for the former, the learners should hold a bachelor degree. At the CVOs, the learners are required to hold a secondary degree as a minimum, thus the learner profiles revealed different levels of educational attainment, including secondary and post-secondary qualifications such as higher education and graduate degrees. Therefore, the programme is registered under the post-secondary education sector. At the time of the study, the participants had finished at least one semester of the registered programme. Thus, in terms of nature, the study was of cross-sectional design such that the participants represented a heterogenous group and data were collected at one particular time (Matthews & Ross, 2010).

As the participants are adult learners who mostly have either a part-time or full-time job, they can decide whether to complete the programme in one year or follow a longer trajectory depending on their life circumstances. On average, the learners have six to eight face-to-face meetings organized bi-weekly during evenings on weekdays and the daytime on Saturdays in one semester. With regard to online learning activities, learners are required to participate in different activities in the online learning platform (Smartschool), including learning paths, online reading, self-assessments, collaborative work through Wikis, and asynchronous online discussions. The face-to-face sessions are reserved for the instructors' presentation of key theories, learners' presentation of individual or group assignments, and micro-teaching. The organization of each course differs between the courses as the instructors have the autonomy to decide the extent of the blend between face-to-face and online sessions. However, courses should be aligned with the core competences specified for teachers as designated by the Flemish Government.

3.2. Procedure
The study employed a quantitative approach to data collection. Data were collected in the months of May and June 2015 from four centres for adult education (CVOs) in Flanders, Belgium. Upon receiving permission from the coordinators and instructors of the programme, the researchers invited the adult learners to participate in the study and contacted a total number of 242 participants. The questionnaire was distributed in the classroom with the presence of the researcher and the instructors when possible and online via the institution's learning management system (LMS). The researchers followed MacKenzie and Podsakoff's (2012) guidelines so as to enhance participants' motivation to participate in the study and elicit the most accurate answers concerning each questionnaire item. In so doing, the issue of common method bias related to a self-report instrument can be minimized. Accordingly, after communicating the research objectives to the participants, the researchers stressed that learners' responses and different perspectives would be greatly appreciated. Thus, there were no absolutely right or wrong answers. In addition, learners were also informed that anonymity was guaranteed and that their participation was on a voluntary basis and the learners could withdraw at any time during the study. After removing incomplete and unengaged responses, 140 valid responses remained for analysis, i.e. the response rate of the participants contacted was 57.85%.

3.3. Participants
With regard to socio-demographics, the participants displayed diversity in terms of age, educational background and employment status with female learners (59.30%) outnumbering male learners (40.70%). The mean age of the sample was 32.33 (SD = 8.19). Regarding educational background, 4.30% of the participants held a lower secondary degree, 42.90% higher secondary, and 41.40% higher education degree. Approximately, half of the respondents reported having prior experiences with online and blended learning (54.30%) with a mean of 1.07 years, SD = 1.40. One of the dependent variables in this study, the grade point average (GPA) reported by the learners, ranged from 2 to 5 with a mean of 3.74 and a standard deviation of 0.843. Detailed information concerning learners' socio-demographics and performance can be found in Table 1.


Table 1. Descriptive statistics for socio-demographics and learning performance.

Category	Statistics	Percentage (%)
Gender	Male	57	40.70
Female	83	59.30
Age (M = 32.33; Median = 30.00; SD = 8.19)	18–24	22	15.70
25–34	68	48.60
35–44	37	26.40
45–54 +	13	9.30
Employment status	Full-time employed	83	59.30
Part-time employed	35	25.00
Full-time enrolled	13	9.30
Missing	9	6.40
Educational background	Lower secondary	6	4.30
Higher secondary	74	52.90
Higher education	58	41.40
Missing	2	1.40
Experiences with online and blended learning	Yes (M = 1.07 years, SD = 1.40)	76	54.30
No	63	45.00
Missing	1	0.70
Grade point average (GPA) (M = 3.74; Median = 4.00; SD = 0.843)	1 (less than or equal to 10)	0	0.00
2 (11 − 12)	10	7.10
3 (13–14)	42	30.00
4 (15–16)	62	44.30
5 (17–18)	26	18.60
6 (19–20)	0	0.00
3.4. Instrument
A questionnaire was developed using mostly validated scales from previous studies. For control variables, we included age, gender, educational background, and employment status. Educational background consisted of three categories: lower secondary, higher secondary, and higher education. Being either full-time employed or part-time employed and a full-time learner made up the employment status measure.

As for the predictors, CSE was adopted from Judge et al. (2004). The scale has been validated by a number of authors (Bipp et al., 2015, Miller and Nicols, 2011). The learners were asked to rate from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) how they felt about their ability to be successful in different life situations. Cronbach's alpha was 0.86 for the original scale. Online interaction quality was adapted from the cognitive presence scale by Arbaugh et al. (2008). The learners responded to 12 items measuring the extent to which online interaction with peers was helpful to their knowledge construction and knowledge transfer. The learners were informed that online interaction in this context referred to those online activities that took place via electronic means such as email, discussion board, instant message tools, video-conference (Skype), or collaborative working space such as Google Docs, Wikis, Blogs, or Dropbox. Therefore, it related to both formal online interaction in the discussion forum as required by the instructors and those interactions initiated by the learners themselves. All items were rated on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Cronbach's alpha for the original scale was 0.95.

In this study, the adults' learning outcome was measured by their grade point average (GPA), i.e. the learners were asked to provide the GPA they had achieved in the most recent semester. In case they had not received the results because of missing exams or GPA unavailability, the learners provided the grade that they expected they could have achieved (n = 28 out of 140 learners). The grading system in Flanders uses a scale from 1 to 20 with 10 being the pass rate. We asked the learners to indicate their GPA in one of six categories: being less than or equal to 10, from 11 to 12, from 13 to 14, from 15 to 16, from 17 to 18, from 19 to 20. The categories were then recoded from 1 to 6 with 1 being less than or equal to 10 and 6 being the highest GPA that can be achieved, namely 19–20. In this study, due to administrative constraints, we could not access the learners' official GPA. Previous studies have shown that self-reported GPA is highly correlated with the actual GPA obtained from academic records, e.g. the correlation of these two scores was found to be highly correlated with r = 0. 97 in Cassady (2001) and r = 0.89 in Noftle and Robins (2007). Yet, Kuncel, Credé, and Thomas' (2005) meta-analysis shows that reported GPA can be influenced by memory contraints and that low achievers reported their GPA less reliably than their high-achieving peers.

In the present study, with regard to the effect of memory, the learners recalled their most recently achieved GPA in the last semester, thus the time lag was rather short compared to a situation when learners need to recall their high school GPA after a period of more than one year. Thus, it is plausible that memory constraint is not a genuine concern. As for the latter constraint of inflated reporting of GPA, the descriptive result from Table 1 shows that learners who held a GPA lower than the median, which is 4 in this case, consituted 37.1% in comparison with 18.6% of those with a GPA higher than the median. Therefore, it can be postulated that the lower GPAs reported by the adult learners were well-presented in the sample and the issue with inflated scores is not a major concern.

Social capital, including the bonding and bridging scales, was adopted from Williams (2006). The original Cronbach's alpha was 0.89 for bonding and 0.84 for bridging. When adapting the bridging social capital scale, we combined the two items, namely “If I needed an emergency loan of $500, I know someone I can turn to” and “The people I interact with would share their last dollar with me” into one item due to semantic similarity. The new item read as “If I needed financial support, I know someone I can turn to”. For the bonding scale, we also used seven out of the ten items to ensure parsimony. The unused items are “Interacting with people makes me feel connected to the bigger picture”, “Interacting with people reminds me that everyone in the world is connected”, and “I come in contact with new people all the time”. All items were rated on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Table 2 presents the four scales with their respective number of items and sample items. To reach the target population who were Dutch-natives, the questionnaire was translated into Dutch using the back-translation technique.


Table 2. Constructs in this study: number of items measured and sample items.

Constructs	No. of items	Sample items
Core self-evaluation (Judge et al., 2004)	12	Sometimes, I do not feel in control of my work. (*reversed coded)
I am capable of coping with most of my problems
Online interaction quality (Arbaugh et al., 2008)	12	Online interaction with other classmates is valuable in helping me appreciate different perspectives
Online interaction with other classmates helps me apply the knowledge to my work or other non-class related course
Bonding social capital (Williams, 2006)	9	The people I interact with would be good job references for me
There is someone I can turn to for advice about making very important decisions
Bridging social capital (Williams, 2006)	7	Interacting with people makes me interested in what people unlike me are thinking
Interacting with people makes me feel like part of a larger community
3.5. Data analysis method
To validate the hypotheses, the Partial Least Square structural equation modelling technique (PLS-SEM) was employed as the method of data analysis, using SmartPLS 2.0 M3 (Ringle, Wende, & Will, 2005). In this study, as the independent variables were measured by reflective indicators, the sample size (N = 140) satisfied the rule of thumb for the path analysis. As shown in Fig. 1, there are two paths from the exogenous or independent variables pointing toward each endogenous variable, namely learning performance, bonding and bridging social capital. This means only a minimum of 20 cases were required for the PLS-SEM (Chin & Newsted, 1999).

In PLS-SEM, the model fit was evaluated by two procedures. First, construct validity and reliability were assessed by confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). This means the measurement model was validated to ensure scale psychometrics. Second, the structural model or path analysis was performed using PLS-algorithms and bootstrapping analysis. In the case where a certain sociodemographic variable has a potential moderating effect on the relationships among the variables as indicated in the result of the analysis of variances, the approach for testing moderation suggested by Keil et al. (2000) was applied. In this post-hoc analysis, we first estimated the parameters for each sub-group. Subsequently, standard errors (SE) obtained from bootstrapping were used in a parametric test to examine whether the parameters of each sub-group were significantly different from each other.

4. Results
4.1. Measurement validation
Consistent with previous studies, the four scales, namely CSE, online interaction quality, bonding and bridging social capital, displayed good internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha ranging from 0.86 to 0.96 and composite reliability from 0.89 to 0.97. In terms of discriminant validity, the square roots of the average variance extracted (AVE) of each latent construct (in the diagonal line) were higher than the correlations among the constructs themselves. This suggested adequate discriminant validity (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). Factor loadings from each indicator to the corresponding latent variables also suggested adequate convergent reliability with all loadings > 0.400 and one item loading on its own latent construct was higher than on the others (Gefen & Straub, 2005). Appendix 1 provides the factor loadings of the indicators on their respective latent constructs.

After construct reliability had been confirmed, a composite score was calculated for each scale. Table 3 presents the mean (M), standard deviation (SD), composite reliability and Cronbach's alpha for each scale. As can be seen, the learners score rather high on core self-evaluation with a mean of 3.5, SD = 0.58. However, the quality of online interaction was not highly rated, with the mean just above the midpoint, M = 2.87, SD = 0.92. As for social capital, the learners report a mean score of 3.46 (SD = 0.71) for bridging social capital, which is higher than their scoring for bonding social capital (M = 2.84, SD = 0.75).


Table 3. Descriptive statistics, construct reliability, and validity.

Construct	M (SD)	Composite reliability	Cronbach's alpha	Square roots of average variance extracted (AVE)
BOSC	BRSC	CSE	OIQ
Bonding social capital (BOSC)	2.84 (0.75)	0.91	0.89	0.73			
Bridging social capital (BRSC)	3.46 (0.71)	0.89	0.86	0.63	0.73		
Core self-evaluation (CSE)	3.50 (0.58)	0.89	0.88	0.12	0.27	0.63	
Online interaction quality (OIQ)	2.87 (0.92)	0.97	0.96	0.46	0.41	0.10	0.84
4.2. Controlling variables
We conducted t-tests and ANOVAs to examine if socio-demographics variables can have an effect on the dependent variables, including learning performance and bonding and bridging social capital. The t-test results showed that there is only a significant difference in learning performance between male and female participants with t (138) = − 2.35, p < 0.05. Accordingly, females have a higher GPA mean score (M = 3.88, SD = 0.82) than male counterparts (M = 3.54, SD = 0.83).

ANOVA results showed that age groups, employment status, and educational background had a non-significant effect on adults' learning performance, bonding and bridging social capital. The results can be found in Table 4.


Table 4. The ANOVA results on the effect of age groups, employment status, and educational background on learning performance, bonding and bridging social capital.

Grouping variable	Dependent variables	Dfmodel	Dferror	F	p-Value
Age group	Learning performance	1	138	3.46	0.07
Bonding social capital	1	138	1.16	0.28
Bridging social capital	1	138	3.63	0.06
Educational background	Learning performance	2	135	1.83	0.16
Bonding social capital	2	135	2.93	0.06
Bridging social capital	2	135	1.66	0.19
Employment status	Learning performance	3	136	0.04	0.99
Bonding social capital	3	136	2.20	0.09
Bridging social capital	3	136	1.68	0.17
Given the significant effect of gender on learning performance, an additional multi-group PLS analysis to compare the differences in path coefficients in the two sub-samples was conducted.

4.3. Hypothesis testing
To examine the explanatory power and path significance of the independent constructs, the PLS algorithm was conducted, with bootstrapping performed on 500 subsamples. Table 5 presents the results of the PLS-SEM, indicating the percentage of the variance explained for each dependent variable, the direct and indirect effects of the independent variables. The corresponding t-statistics for each significance test are also provided with t = 1.96, t = 2.58, and t = 3.29 representing p = 0.05, p = 0.01, and p = 0.001, respectively (Field, 2009).


Table 5. The results of the structural model analysis (N = 140).

Dependent construct	Independent construct	Standardized coefficient (β)	t-Statistics
Direct	Indirect
Learning performancea (R2 = 0.096)	Core self-evaluation	0.30		3.55⁎⁎⁎
Online interaction quality	0.07		0.72
Bonding social capital (R2 = 0.239)	Learning performance	0.16		1.48
Core self-evaluation		0.05	1.18
Online interaction quality	0.46		5.94⁎⁎⁎
Bridging social capital(R2 = 0.172)	Learning performance	0.09		0.80
Core self-evaluation		0.03	0.66
Online interaction quality	0.40		3.89⁎⁎⁎
a
Learning performance is measured by self-reported and perceived GPA

⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.001.

The structural model shows that core self-evaluation uniquely contributes to 9.6% of the variance in adults' learning performance. While core self-evaluation has a positive significant relationship with learning performance (β = 0.30, p < 0.001), online interaction quality displays a non-significant effect (β = 0.07, p > 0.05). Thus, H1 is supported but not H2.

The variance explained for bonding social capital is 23.90% and bridging social capital 17.20% as indicated by the structural model. Accordingly, online interaction quality has a significant effect on bonding social capital (β = 0.46, p < 0.001), i.e. H3 is supported. Conversely, learning performance does not prove to be a significant predictor (β = 0.16, p > 0.05); hence H5 is rejected. The model also shows that core self-evaluation has an indirect effect on bonding social capital, but this effect is not significant. The same scenario is observed for bridging social capital such that only online interaction quality significantly predicts this dependent variable (β = 0.40, p < 0.001). Therefore, H4 is supported. H6 is not supported due to the non-significant effect of learning performance on bridging social capital (β = 0.09, p > 0.05).

As learning performance was measured by both self-reported (n = 112) and perceived GPA (n = 28), we also examined if the relationships between the exogenous (independent) and the endogenous (dependent) variables were affected when removing the 28 cases of those learners for whom only perceived GPAs were available. The result shows that changes only occurred with regard to t-statistics for the path from core self-evaluation to learning performance. Accordingly, the value dropped from t = 3.55, i.e. being significant at p < 0.001 to t = 2.00, i.e. being significant at p < 0.05. Thus, H1, H3, H4 were supported in the sample in which only cases with self-reported GPA were presented. Therefore, we pooled both self-reported and perceived GPAs as a measure of learning performance in the main analysis. The result of path analysis for only self-reported GPAs can be found in Appendix 2.

4.4. Multi-group analysis: socio-demographics as moderator
As gender was the only socio-demographic variable that had a potential effect on the explained variance of learning performance (cf. Section 4.2), it was necessary to compare the research model across male and female groups. To evaluate the moderating effect of gender on the relationship between core self-evaluation and online interaction quality on adults' learning performance measured by GPA, the approach by Keil et al. (2000) was applied. First, we estimated model parameters and standard errors (SE) for the two sub-groups. Second, a parametric t-test was conducted to find out if the path coefficients from core self-evaluation and online interaction quality to learning performance were significantly different from those of the other group. The results of this process are presented in Table 6.


Table 6. The result of the multigroup moderation analysis.

Independent construct	Female (n1 = 83)	Male (n2 = 57)	t-Statistics	p-value (two-tailed)
Regression coefficient	SE	Regression coefficient	SE
CSE - > GPA	0.37⁎⁎⁎	0.06	0.35⁎⁎	0.12	0.16	0.87
OIQ - > GPA	0.02	0.08	0.19	0.09	1.35	0.18
Notes: core self-evaluation (CSE), online interaction quality (OIQ), grade point average (GPA).

⁎⁎
p < 0.01.

⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.001.

As shown, there is only a slight difference in the path coefficient from core self-evaluation to GPA between two groups, which was proved to be non-significant by t-value < 1.96. For females, the path coefficient from online interaction quality to GPA is β = 0.19, which is stronger than that of males (β = 0.02). However, t-statistics show that this difference is not significant at alpha level 0.05. Therefore, despite its significant effect on learning performance, the moderated effect of gender regarding the relationship between CSE, online interaction quality and learning performance is not supported.

5. Discussion
The present study investigated how a personal trait, namely CSE, and online interaction quality with peers contributed to the learning outcome and social capital of a particular group of lifelong learners with diversity in socio-demographics. The results revealed that CSE has a significant effect on learning performance, whereas online interaction quality is the one significant contributor to adults' explained variance in social capital. Interestingly, online interaction quality is not associated with learning performance. Likewise, the hypothesis that learning performance may enhance adult learners' social capital was also rejected in the present study's context. In the following section, we discuss in detail the findings and the practical implications and research orientations that can be drawn.

5.1. Core self-evaluation and learning performance
That CSE significantly predicts adult learners' GPA in blended learning programmes is consistent with previous findings (Bipp et al., 2015, Kim et al., 2012). While Rosopa and Schroeder (2009) only found an indirect effect of CSE on student performance via cognitive ability, the context of their study, be it traditional or blended learning, was not explicitly specified. Bipp et al. (2015) postulated that a positive self-view will be more beneficial to adult learners as it helps them to maintain motivation and actively mobilize effort and resources to overcome frustration and achieve predefined learning goals. To this end, the present study confirms this perspective in a blended learning context with a strong significant effect of CSE on learning performance. The finding also supports Shea and Bidjerano's (2010) recommendation on the extension of the CoI framework. The authors posited that the role of learner presence should be emphasized to widen our knowledge of successful online learning. Although the authors identified self-efficacy as an important element to be included in the higher-order construct of self-regulation, they suggested the exploration of other components. In this respect, CSE can be a potential alternative given that there is an ongoing discussion among researchers as to whether self-efficacy should be treated as task-specific or a trait that is stable across situations (Chen, Gully, & Eden, 2001).

5.2. Online interaction quality and learning performance
The non-significant role of online interaction quality on learners' performance is consistent with Shukor et al. (2015) and contradictory to a number of studies (Bernard et al., 2014, López-Pérez et al., 2011, Wang et al., 2014). This can be explained in light of the Interaction Equivalency Theorem proposed by Anderson (2003). Anderson postulated that substantial learning takes place if one of the three types of interaction, namely, learner-instructor interaction, learner-learner interaction, learner-content interaction, is maintained at a high level. This means that if learners have a greater preference for individual learning, i.e. high learner-content interaction being observed, peer online interaction can have a lesser contribution to their learning. Therefore, we assume that there is a possible relationship between learners' preference for different types of interactions and their academic performance. In other words, the relationship between learner-learner online interaction and learning performance can be mediated by adults' learning styles and preferences, which needs further research. In addition, while online interaction is consistently found to be significant in predicting learning performance in distance courses, the present finding recommends that its role in a blended learning context needs more justification. As Reasons et al. (2005) noted, distance learners will rely more on online interaction than blended learners because this is the only way they can interact with their peers and instructors. Therefore, online interaction can be more important to distance learners' performance. Furthermore, how online interaction affects student learning may be dependent on the different blended learning modalities implemented. While a lesser level of blending only aims at increasing access, flexibility, and interactiveness, a more advanced mode of blended learning requires more online engagement for knowledge construction on the part of the learners (Graham, 2006). Thus, the relationship between online interaction and learners' performance may be mediated by the blended learning design, which is different across studies (Borokhovski, Bernard, Tamim, Schmid, & Sokolovskaya, 2016). Future works should scrutinize the interaction effects of the three variables, namely online interaction quality, learners' preferences for online interaction, and blended learning design, to gain deeper insights into the crucial factors that contribute to learning performance.

5.3. Online interaction quality and social capital
In line with previous studies (Ellison et al., 2007, Wellman et al., 2001, Zhang and Kaufman, 2015), our finding shows a positive relationship between online interaction and both types of social capital. Finding that online interaction only relates to bridging social capital, Oztok et al. (2015) suggested that online interaction should be measured in terms of quality and expanded to “community interaction in addition to individual perceptions” (p.23) of their ability and comfort to be present online. Taking this perspective into account, our study shows that online interaction quality also predicts learners' bonding social capital. When explaining how online interaction can contribute to a person's social capital, Steinfield et al. (2008) posited that the technical support of interactive web technologies for social communication, such as the archives of contact information and efficient communication tools like instant messaging, has leveraged the process of maintaining close relationships and extending weak ties. Supporting this perspective, the present study also adds more evidence to the social outcomes that blended learning programmes can bring about to the learners. More specifically, we endorse that online interaction which takes place at a high quality level accompanied by the support of technologies can foster and boost the process of building and maintaining social capital. Thus, while the results on the effect of online interaction quality on learning performance are mixed, it is plausible to postulate that online interaction should remain a crucial element of instructional design for the social and affective outcomes resulting from these online interactive dialogues.

5.4. Learning performance and social capital
The fact that the relationship between adults' learning performance and enhanced social capital is non-significant confirms that the direction of effect is more plausibly drawn from social capital to learning performance. Thus, the result strengthens findings from Palmer and Gasman (2008). Furthermore, this non-significant effect of learning performance on social capital adds to the explanation of the lack of empirical evidence between self-directed learning and social connection in the study by de Greef et al. (2015). In this respect, it is plausible to postulate that for social capital to be enhanced, time and effort should be devoted to expanding a person's social networks and activities related to both learning and non-learning spheres. Only relying on GPA as a measure of academic performance may not help us to decide if the process that led to the achievement is more an individual effort or a synergy of collaboration with others. Thus, a better informed measure of adults' learning processes and achievement may be crucial to uncover the contribution of learning performance to learners' social capital.

6. Implications
In this study, a broad personality trait, i.e. CSE, has been found to have an effect on learners' performance in a blended learning environment. Whereas other social-demographic characteristics such as age, educational levels and employment status do not explain differences in learning performance, finding the significant effect of a dispositional factor like CSE can guide instructors' strategies directed at facilitating adults' learning. White and Selwyn (2013) positted that ICT-based learning can raise the situational barriers, i.e. factors related to socio-demographics and life circumstances, but not the dispositional barriers. In line with this proposition, our finding suggests that blended learning may cause some difficulties for those scoring low in CSE. Thus, low self-efficacy, self-esteem and less emotional stability and locus of control are still hindrances to learners' performance in a blended learning environment.

Therefore, in order for blended learning to have the most positive impact on learning performance, and not to create a digital divide (Chelliah & Clarke, 2011), the role of the instructors in helping learners to overcome uncertainty, low self-efficacy, and build up a positive self-image is equally important to effective pedagogical practices. This can be fulfilled by specific training and counselling sessions or by instructional design that helps learners to enhance their self-image awareness and bolster their personal strengths (Di Fabio & Palazzeschi, 2012).

As research indicates that CSE is linked to learners' self-regulation of the learning process, it is suggested that instructors can have strategies to identify those learners with high and low scores of CSE so as to offer immediate support to learners whose scores register at the lower end. More specifically, Bipp et al. (2015) recommended that training in learning and self-management skills can foster learners' confidence and reduce anxiety. Recently, researchers have advocated the use of co-regulation of learning as both an effective learning strategy and a scaffolding for learners who have difficulty in regulating their learning (Räisänen, Postareff, & Lindblom-Ylänne, 2016). As a social process in which learners work together to collectively monitor their cognition, behaviours, and motivation to achieve a shared learning goal (Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2011), co-regulation demonstrates that it can help to enhance the individual's self-regulation skills (DiDonato, 2013). Thus, instructors may consider integrating co-regulation in collaborative learning activities so that learners with self-regulation difficulties can learn from their peers and enhance their CSE as they become more proficient in managing their learning.

Although the quality online interaction with peers does not contribute significantly to the explained variance of learning performance, its effect on social capital has confirmed the value of a socio-constructivist learning environment with respect to social outcomes. Gains in social capital will ease more access to social support and resources, which in turn is beneficial to learners' well-being (Ellison et al., 2007) and learning (Field, 2005). Thus, online learning activities that capture authenticity, involve collaboration within the class community and external stakeholders, and emphasize learning transfer are highly recommended. As a result of taking part in these activities, learners' motivation and reflection will be more likely to be reinforced and facilitated accordingly (Laurillard, 2012). More importantly, instructional designs that offer transfer possibilities, i.e. applying the newly acquired knowledge and skills, have shown to facilitate the social inclusion process of learners by increasing their social participation and connections (de Greef et al., 2015). It is notable that while interactive technologies have augmented the collaboration process among learners, the quality and the extent to which online interaction contributes to adults' learning performance and social capital, greatly depends on the instructors. This has been confirmed in a recent meta-analysis by Borokhovski et al. (2016). The authors found that a treatment condition in which online interaction is well-structured and intentionally implemented resulted in better learning outcomes compared to one in which only the essentials for online interaction are guaranteed, but not intentionally designed.

In addition to the design of the objectives and content of online learning activities, how to organize and facilitate these will decide both the cognitive and social gains. Furthermore, Oztok et al. (2015) caution that the relative position and voice of an individual in a community will affect their participation and contribution to that community. Moreover, whereas learners' preferences should be respected, being exposed to differing opinions and socio-cultural backgrounds has proved to be conducive to both learning and social capital (Laurillard, 2012, Oztok et al., 2015). Thus, in order not to sacrifice group dynamics and diversity for individual preferences and issues relating to group cohesion, it is believed that online interaction that guarantees high cognitive quality and equal participation by learners will be more motivating. The instructors can achieve this goal by either moderating the online discussion or providing rubrics and guidelines for group formation, discussion facilitation, and evaluation (Schindler & Burkholder, 2014). In doing so, learners can achieve both academic and social outcomes as a result of their educational experiences, particularly for those having less confidence in their self-image or low CSE scorers.

7. Limitations and recommendations for future research
The sample size in the present study was not sufficiently large to detect the small effect of the independent variables. In addition, while data were collected from four different institutions, due to an unbalanced distribution, it was not feasible to conduct multilevel analyses. We suggest that a cross-sectional replicated study with a larger sample is necessary to confirm the findings. Researchers could also take into account cultural differences regarding the research context, and investigate whether social capital has a strong link with cultural beliefs and values, as well as the socio-economic status of certain ethnic groups and societies (Fukuyama, 1995).

The variance in learners' performance explained in this study is rather small. Thus, a suggestion is that CSE should be used in combination with self (co)-regulation measures to validate the hypothesized interacting relationship between the two constructs in explaining learning performance. To our knowledge, research in this regard has been limited, especially in the blended learning context and adult education setting. We believe that a more rigorous research design on how CSE and self(co)-regulation facilitate each other will yield more practical implications for educational practices.

Only focusing on one type of interaction, namely learner-learner interaction, has limited our understanding of how learner-content interaction and learner-instructor interaction may have an effect on adults' learning performance. The non-significant effect of learner-learner interaction could be due to the high levels of these two types of interaction; hence, this proposition should be validated to gain more insight into the relationship between online interaction and learning performance. It would also be worthwhile examining the influence of the three types of interaction altogether on learners' social capital, so as to better guide instructional designs aimed at social inclusion.

In addition, as the learners in this study were participating in a blended learning programme, they also had opportunities to interact offline, which has not been taken into account. In this regard, Sessions (2010) found that offline interaction among members in a virtual community may affect social capital in an unexpected way. The author found that these offline interactions were at the cost of bridging social capital, because individuals have a tendency to favour interactions with those they meet more often over other members in the community. Thus, bonding capital is sustained whereas bridging social capital is at risk because exchanges of crucial information only take place in small groups. In addition, Mebane et al. (2008) postulated that online interaction is more likely to result in deeper discussion than face-to-face meeting because the learners have more time to prepare their reasoning and formulate their arguments in written form. Thus, while the finding in the present study reveals a significant relationship between online interaction quality and both types of social capital, it is also of significant importance to investigate how face-to-face interactions may moderate the relationhsip between online interaction quality and social capital.

Furthermore, as we only measured the quality of online interaction at community level, we did not capture individuals' online participation. As de Greef et al. (2015) noted, the level of social inclusion, more particularly the expansion of social networks, may be contingent on learners' self-regulation in programmes not directed at social inclusion. Thus, it is plausible to propose that the more self-regulated learners will be more engaged in online interaction to enhance their learning, become connected with peers, reinforce strong ties (bonding social capital) and expand weak ties (bridging social capital). Future studies focusing on this individual level of online participation and social capital can contribute to our knowledge of how social capital is developed and maintained in an instructional modality, i.e. blended learning, that is becoming the new normal (Norberg, Dziuban, & Moskal, 2011).

Finally, as the instrument was translated into Dutch to ensure accurate interpretation of the questions by the participants, the instrument's reliability and validity regarding the English-speaking population should be confirmed. Thus, for a stronger generalization of the results, we highly recommend a replication of the study in an English-speaking context with participants coming first from adult education programmes, and second, from various types of learning delivery.

8. Conclusion
The present study attempted to investigate the effect of a broad personality trait, namely CSE, and peer online interaction quality on adults' learning performance and social capital. The results validate the role of CSE in an adult educational setting using blended learning as the instructional strategy. The unexpected non-significant relationship between online interaction quality and learning performance challenges current assumptions about the role of this element of instructional design, which has been prominently examined in the distance learning context. With recommendations for future research addressed in the previous section, we hope to generate more discussions on how online interaction among learners can be best designed to facilitate adults' learning taking into account their learning preferences and CSE. The present study also found a significant effect of learner-learner online interaction quality on their social capital, hence transferring previous findings on this relationship from virtual learning communities to academic settings, i.e. adult education. Capturing the quality of online interaction by a well-validated scale, namely the cognitive presence (Arbaugh et al., 2008), the study has adequately responded to the literature gaps identified by the researchers on the connections between adult education, blended learning, and social capital (e.g. Oztok et al., 2015, Zhang and Kaufman, 2015). In other words, once more nuanced indicators are used to measure online interaction quality rather than one single item of frequency, a strong relationship between online interaction quality and both bonding and bridging social capital has been discerned. The non-significant effect of learning performance on learners' social capital found in this study indicates that research on this aspect should direct its focus on the association between adults' learning process and approaches and social capital. In so doing, knowledge on the empowering role of adult education can be enhanced and the pedagogical practices can be refined to achieve both educational and societal objectives.

Conflicts of interest statement
We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all authors. We also confirm that the order of authorship has been agreed upon, and the criteria for authorship as defined in the “Author Guidelines” section of the Internet and Higher Education journal have been met.


Appendix 1. Factor loadings of the measured items onto their respective latent variables.

Measured items	(1)	(2)	(3)	(4)
There are several people I trust to help solve my problems.	0.674	–	–	–
There is someone I can turn to for advice about making very important decisions.	0.770	–	–	–
There is no one that I feel comfortable talking to about intimate personal problems.	0.793	–	–	–
When I feel lonely, there are several people I can talk to.	0.817	–	–	–
If I needed financial support, I know someone I can turn to.	0.569	–	–	–
The people I interact with would put their reputation on the line for me.	0.738	–	–	–
The people I interact with would be good job references for me.	0.643	–	–	–
I do not know people well enough to get them to do anything important.	0.778	–	–	–
The people I interact with would help me fight an injustice.	0.780	–	–	–
Interacting with people makes me interested in things that happen outside of my town.	–	0.713	–	–
Interacting with people makes me want to try new things.	–	0.700	–	–
Interacting with people makes me interested in what people unlike me are thinking.	–	0.680	–	–
Talking with people makes me curious about other places in the world.	–	0.748	–	–
Interacting with people makes me feel like part of a larger community.	–	0.808		–
I am willing to spend time to support general community activities.	–	0.795	–	–
Interacting with people gives me new people to talk to.	–	0.664	–	–
I am confident I get the success I deserve in life.			0.729	
When I try, I generally succeed.	–	–	0.665	
I complete tasks successfully.	–	–	0.561	
Overall, I am satisfied with myself.	–	–	0.757	–
I determine what will happen in my life.	–	–	0.712	–
I am capable of coping with most of my problems.	–	–	0.663	–
Sometimes I feel depressed. (r)	–	–	0.608	–
Sometimes when I fail I feel worthless. (r)	–	–	0.535	–
Sometimes, I do not feel in control of my work. (r)	–		0.451	–
I am filled with doubts about my competence. (r)	–	–	0.557	–
I do not feel in control of my success in my career, (r)	–	–	0.471	–
There are times when things look pretty bleak and hopeless to me. (r)	–	–	0.673	–
Online interaction with the classmates increases my interest in this programme.	–	–	–	0.808
Online interaction with the classmates increases my curiosity.	–	–	–	0.826
Online interaction with the classmates makes me feel motivated to explore content-related questions.	–	–	–	0.868
Online interaction with the classmates provides me with a variety of information sources to explore problems posed in this course.	–	–	–	0.840
Online interaction with the classmates helps me resolve content-related questions.	–	–	–	0.816
Online interaction with the classmates is valuable in helping me appreciate different perspectives.	–	–	–	0.849
Online interaction with the classmates helps me answer questions raised in course activities.				0.812
Online interaction with the classmates helps me construct explanations/solutions.				0.789
Online interaction with the classmates helps me understand fundamental concepts in this class.				0.826
Online interaction with the classmates helps me apply the knowledge covered in this program.				0.855
Online interaction with the classmates helps me develop solutions that can be applied in practice.				0.890
Online interaction with the classmates helps me apply the knowledge to my work or other non-class related course.				0.852
Notes:
(1)
Bonding social capital

(2)
Bridging social capital

(3)
Core self-evaluation

(4)
Online interaction quality


Appendix 2. The results of the structural model analysis (n = 112).

Dependent construct	Independent construct	Standardized coefficient (β)	t-Statistics
Direct	Indirect
Learning performancea (R2 = 0.069)	Core self-evaluation	0.26		2.00⁎
Online interaction quality	0.03		0.35
Bonding social capital (R2 = 0.268)	Learning performance	0.00		0.02
Core self-evaluation		− 0.03	0.23
Online interaction quality	0.52		7.37⁎⁎⁎
Bridging social capital (R2 = 0.147)	Learning performance	0.02		0.14
Core self-evaluation		0.00	0.11
Online interaction quality	0.38		3.45⁎⁎⁎
a
Learning performance is measured by self-reported GPA.

⁎
p < 0.05.

⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.001.