As one of the key technologies of 5G wireless communication technology, cooperative multi-access edge computing allows one device to associate multiple edge nodes simultaneously, namely multi-association, which can provide scalable communication services with characteristics of high reliability, massive connectivity and low latency for promising Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Effective association between edge nodes and devices is the prerequisite for providing high quality communication services in dense deployed IIoT networks. Most of state of art researches focus on the user association problem in single-association scenario. There are rarely no solutions presented for the considered user association problem with multi-association. In this paper, user association, power allocation and edge node deployment are jointly considered for load balance and energy efficiency under the multi-association mechanism. The problem is formulated as a nested knapsack optimization problem (NKOP) with energy efficiency and load balancing as objective functions and power and signal quality as constraints. Differential evolution with Monte Carlo and sequential quadratic programming (DMS) algorithm is proposed to solve this problem, which decouples the problem into three parts, user association, power allocation and optimizing the location of edge nodes. Numerical results show that: (1) Compared with the single-association, multi-association with power allocation can provide better signal quality and improve energy efficiency; (2) Proposed DMS algorithm is feasible and stable for optimal deployment of edge nodes. These works together provide good reference for edge node deployment of high-density IIoT application scenarios.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
5G wireless technology

Industrial Internet of Things

Multi-access edge computing

Cooperative networks

Multi-association

Load balancing

1. Introduction
The next generation of wireless communication technology, combining a series of innovative and disruptive technology advantage, is expected to achieve the interconnection of everything. 3GPP divides it into three communication scenarios, including enhanced mobile broadband, massive machine type communication and ultra-reliable low latency communication, which have become the key to defining the air interface and the transport network (Popovski et al., 2018). The innovative technologies and corresponding advantages of 5G have driven the development of many emerging applications such as smart medical (Yu et al., 2021b, Zhang et al., 2020), autonomous vehicles (Yu et al., 2020), smart cities (Tan et al., 2021), flying drones (Feng et al., 2021) and Industrial Internet of Thing (IIoT), where IIoT has attracted wide attention with the abilities to facilitate daily activities and create new business models (Zhang et al., 2021, Sisinni et al., 2018, Zhou et al., 2018, Yu et al., 2021a). The IIoT is connecting the physical world of sensors, devices and machines with the Internet and, by applying deep analytics through software, is turning massive data into powerful new insight and intelligence (Anon, 2020). The IIoT collects the information from all industrial perspectives by embedding wireless sensors and microcontrollers in industrial facilities (Li et al., 2017), and uses internet to manage smart industrial devices. This enables the optimization of production lines through better quality management, failure forecasting, product planning and resource forecasting, which can help increase productivity, reduce costs and waste throughout the industrial economy (Aazam et al., 2018). However, traditional centralized architecture based on cloud computing is not sufficient for IIoT. The massive emerging smart devices in IIoT have high requirements for low latency and security, and would generate huge amount of data, which will lead to huge unnecessary bandwidth and computing resource usage. Fortunately, multi-access edge computing (MEC) with high reliability, low delay and privacy characteristics, has emerged as a promising solution as it subsides the core network function to the edge of the network (Apostolopoulos et al., 2020, Aazam et al., 2018, Wang et al., 2017b, H. E. A. B., 2019). Through edge nodes, IIoT devices can access wireless network to store, cache and process data at the edge, thus greatly improving efficiency and reducing energy consumption. The deployment of edge nodes affects whether they can provide devices with stable and effective access services, which must be seriously considered.

The following aspects need to be considered regarding the deployment of edge nodes in IIoT. From the perspective of network architecture, due to the density of network, a device is allowed to associate with multiple edge nodes at the same time to obtain better communication quality. In case of this, it is important to associate devices with edge nodes properly to effectively use the available wireless infrastructure; From the perspective of requirements, this problem has several dimensions: (1) Energy efficiency: Energy consumption is a problem that must be considered in the practical application of IIoT (Soliman and Song, 2016, Castiglione et al., 2014, Kausar et al., 2008, Zhen et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2018). The battery capacity and energy consumption of IIoT devices largely limit the service quality of IIoT-based application. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the energy efficiency of the communication network when deploying edge nodes; (2) Quality of service (QoS): It is essential to ensure the QoS for devices when deploying edge nodes, which is measured by signal to interference plus noise ratio (SINR); (3) Load balancing: The most common user association mechanism is based on max-SINR, which may easily cause too many users to associate with a same access point, thus causing overload of the access point. This kind of load imbalance would greatly reduce the performance and efficiency of the network. Therefore, it is necessary to balance the load between edge nodes. In general, when optimizing the deployment of edge nodes, it is necessary to ensure the service quality of users, balance the load between edge nodes, and improve the energy efficiency of the network.

1.1. Related work
The application of MEC in the IIoT is introduced in Hou et al., 2019, Husain et al., 2018, Premsankar et al., 2018, Cui et al., 2020. Hou et al. (2019) introduced a novel MEC framework for 5G-enabled IIoT. Husain et al. introduced the resource slicing in MEC for IoT in Husain et al. (2018). Many IoT applications benefiting from edge computing was described in Premsankar et al. (2018). Cui et al. (2020) researched the latency and energy optimization for MEC enhanced satellite based internet of things networks. These works illustrated the feasibility of MEC in the IIoT, but there was no discussion on how devices access the network.

Optimal edge node deployment or site placement has been long-term studied from many facets for various applications (Anon, 2014, Anon, 2016, Jia et al., 2017, Bagaa et al., 2017, Santoyo González and Cervelló Pastor, 2019, Zhao et al., 2018, Martín-Pérez et al., 2019). Anon (2014) used a method based on ant colony optimization and a greedy migration mechanism to implement low-cost wireless sensor network node deployment. Anon (2016) proposed an improved deployment algorithm based on artificial bee colonies to deploy sensor nodes to achieve the goal of extending the life cycle of sensor nodes. Jia et al. (2017) studied on how and where to place cloudlets in network to optimize mobile application performance. Optimally placing relay nodes in wireless sensors network was introduced in Bagaa et al. (2017)]. Santoyo González and Cervelló Pastor (2019) formulated the edge computation node placement problem as a mixed integer linear programming constrained by delay and high reliability requirements and solve it with internal heuristic method. Zhao et al. (2018) proposed a novel three-phase deployment approach considering both traffic diversity and the wireless diversity of IoT. Martín-Pérez et al. (2019) presented an application of in-homogeneous Poisson point process with hard-core repulsion to model feasible MEC infrastructure deployments. The above literature provides good reference for how to find the deployment location of edge nodes, but all of them are about finding the optimal location of edge nodes without considering the connection between users and edge nodes.

There have been many works focusing on user association. Liu et al., 2014, Xue Chen and Hu, 2012 studied the problem of joint uplink and downlink user association, in which Liu et al. (2014) formulated the problem as a Nash bargaining problem with the goal to maximize the sum of uplink and downlink energy efficiencies. A mobile association scheme is proposed in Xue Chen and Hu (2012) to jointly optimize downlink spectrum efficiency and mobile uplink power consumption. Attiah et al. (2019) summarized that most of the current research work is to study the joint user association resource allocation, energy efficiency or load balancing. Zhou et al. (2019) transformed the joint resource allocation and user association problem into a mixed nonlinear problem, and solved it by the method of coalition game. Tong et al. (2020) studied joint user association and resource allocation in fog computing and formulated this problem as a mixed integer nonlinear programming problem. A two-part interactive optimization algorithm was proposed to solve this problem. Ghimire and Rosenberg (2013) proposed a flow-based framework to jointly optimize resource association, transmission coordination and user association to unify the three important network processes. The joint user association and power allocation for energy efficiency problem was formulated as a mixed-integer programming problem in Zhang et al. (2017) and solved by Lagrangian dual decomposition. Li et al. (2016) improved energy efficiency by jointly optimizing base station operation, user association, subcarrier assignment, and power allocation. Ye et al. (2013), Zhou et al. (2018) and Ge et al. (2018) optimized user association for load balancing. Ye et al. (2013) provide a low-complexity distributed algorithm to solve the problem of user association for load balance in heterogeneous. Zhou et al. (2018) designed two types of association scheme for load balancing with long-term rate. Ge et al. (2018) formulated joint user association and user scheduling for load balancing problem as a network-wide utility maximization problem. In these works, one user can only associate with one access point. In Wang et al. (2017a), one user was allowed to associate with different base stations. However, the load balance and energy efficiency were not considered. The comparsion of related work can be seen in Table 1.


Table 1. Comparison of related works .

Reference	Load balancing	power Allocation	Multi-association
Liu et al., 2014, Xue Chen and Hu, 2012, Zhou et al., 2019, Tong et al., 2020 and Ghimire and Rosenberg (2013)	No	No	No
Zhang et al. (2017) and Li et al. (2016)	No	Yes	No
Ye et al., 2013, Zhou et al., 2018 and Ge et al. (2018)	Yes	No	No
Wang et al. (2017a)	No	Yes	Yes
This paper	Yes	Yes	Yes
1.2. Main contributions
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

(1)
We propose a cooperative access architecture that allows one device to associate multiple edge nodes simultaneously for better service.

(2)
The joint user association, power allocation and edge node deployment problem under multi-association are formulated as a nested knapsack optimization problem (NKOP) with energy efficiency and load balancing as objective functions and power and signal quality as constraints. We propose the improved differential evolution algorithm with Monte Carlo method and sequential quadratic programming (DMS) to solve the problem by decoupling it into three parts, user association, power allocation and optimizing the location of edge nodes.

(3)
Numerical results show that our proposed DMS algorithm is feasible to optimize the deployment of edge nodes and multi-association with power allocation can achieve load balancing of edge nodes, and improve energy efficiency while ensuring the quality of service of users.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly, the cooperative access architecture and modeling assumptions with parameters are showed in Section 2, then Section 3-A formulates the problem of deploying edge nodes as a nested knapsack optimization problem. DMS algorithm is introduced to solve the proposed optimization problem in Section 3-B. Numerical results in Section 4 illustrate the advantages of multi-association of cooperative access architecture and proposed algorithm, followed by conclusion in Section 5.

2. System model and parameter setups
Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed cooperative access architecture for IIoT. It consists of information acquisition layer, access layer and a wireless cooperative access network, which connects the two layers. The notations and their definitions used in the paper are listed in Table 2.

For information acquisition layer, massive IIoT devices like wireless sensors and microcontrollers are geographically distributed, which are used to collect the information from all industrial perspectives. We let 
 indicates the set of IIoT devices. These devices are diverse and different types of devices have different requirements for communication, thus the load generated on connected edge nodes will be different. For example, the load generated by temperature sensors are not the same level compared with smart cameras. So, the set of 
 is used to represent the load level of different IIoT devices.

For access layer, there are edge nodes providing services for industrial devices, which incorporates the idea of MEC and cloud-based wireless access of 5G wireless technology. These edge nodes denoted by 
 have the functions of storage and computing, to store, analyze and process what they receive from the IIoT devices. If it is necessary, some selected important data information would also be uploaded to cloud center for storage or further analysis.

For the cooperative access network, the dotted line indicates the connection relationship between IIoT devices and edge nodes, while the red dotted line represents the multi-association mechanism, in which one device can associate with multiple edge nodes simultaneously, comparing with the blue dotted line which represents the traditional single association mechanism. Given the quantities and service demand of IIoT devices, multi-association mechanism is more suitable for IIoT, because multiple association allows higher flexibility and can produce higher throughput. In term of this, we study the joint user association, power allocation and edge node deployment problem based on the proposed cooperative access network.

The purpose of this paper is to optimize the deployment of edge nodes to achieve maximum energy efficiency and load balancing with multi-association based on the proposed cooperative access architecture. To address this issue, the main modeling assumptions are summarized as follows

(1)
IIoT devices are distributed according to predetermined spatial positions. After the distribution of these devices is determined, the location will not change during the entire communication process. This is consistent with the actual situation, devices in industrial are generally not moved frequently after being fixed. The position of 
 IIoT device is denoted by 
.

(2)
Fixed number of edge nodes are designed to optimally distributed on the limited area, such as the celling of factory. To meet the communication service requirements of IIoT, parameters of edge nodes to be determined are position denoted by 
, transmission power of 
 edge node denoted by .

(3)
The Boolean variable  is used to represent the connection between edge nodes and IIoT devices, in which  represents the 
 edge node is connected by 
 IIoT device. Since the multi-association mechanism allows a device to associate with multiple edge nodes simultaneously, there is (1)
where S indicates that a device can be associated with 1 edge nodes at least and S edge nodes at most simultaneously.

(4)
The distance between 
 device and 
 edge node can be calculated as (2)
where the height of edge node is not considered when calculating the distance between edge nodes and devices.

(5)
With the Round Robin schedule, the edge node shares its bandwidth equally among all its associated IIoT devices. Hence, we can decouple the association problem and the scheduling problem.


Table 2. Summary’s of notation and definition .

Notation	Definition
The set of IIoT devices
The number of IIoT devices
The set of edge nodes
The number of edge nodes
The load level of devices
The load of 
 edge node
Position of 
 device
The connection between 
 edge node and 
 device (0 or 1)
The maximum number of edge nodes that a device can connect simultaneously.
Transmission power of 
 edge node
Distance between 
 device and 
 edge node
The set of edge nodes that serve the 
 device
The channel gain at the reference distance of 1m
Channel gain between 
 device and 
 edge node
Effective power received by 
 device from 
 edge node
Interference power received by 
 device
White Gaussian noise variance
Achievable rate of 
 device and 
 edge node
The ratio between the data rate of 
 device and energy consumption of 
 edge node


Fig. 1. Proposed cooperative access architecture for IIoT.

3. Theoretical analysis
This chapter presents the proposed nested knapsack optimization problem (NKOP) and proposed DMS algorithm in detail.

3.1. Proposed nested knapsack optimization problem
The proposed nested knapsack optimization problem is summarized as follows (3)
 (4)
 
 
 (5)
 (6)
 (7)
 (8)
 (9)where

(1)
(3) is the main objective function which maximizes the total energy efficiency and (4) is to minimize the load difference of edge nodes so as to achieve load balancing.

(2)
The constraint (5) is to ensure the signal quality of devices, in case some devices are associated with edge nodes with poor channels for load balancing.

(3)
Eq. (6) implies that one device can associated with up to S edge nodes simultaneously but at least one. The value of S should not be too large, otherwise the gain from the collaboration will be offset by the overhead.

(4)
(7) represents the number of devices associated with each edge node, and the edge node shares its bandwidth equally among all its associated devices.

(5)
(8) indicates that the maximum transmit power of the edge node is 
. (9) implies that the value of  can only be 0 or 1.


3.2. Problem formulation
This section introduces the derivation of the above formulas one by one. When the position of IIoT devices and edge nodes are determined, the distance between IIoT devices and edge nodes can be calculated as Eq. (2). We assume that the distance between edge node and equipment is dominated by LOS channel, so the channel gain between device  and edge node  can be derived as (10)
 
where  and different values of  within the scope of 1–5 represent different spatial environments such as urban and suburban areas (Hou et al., 2019), and  denotes the channel gain at the reference distance of 1 m. Then the effective power received by 
 device at 
 edge node is (11) 
 
 where  denotes the transmission power of 
 edge node. The interference comes from all the edge nodes which do not serve themselves. However, we allow a device to connect with multiple edge nodes. We use  to indicate the set of edge nodes that serve 
 device. So, the interference power of 
 device is formulated as (12) 
 
 where 
 indicates the white Gaussian noise variance and  indicates that all edge nodes that do not serve 
 device. Then the signal to interference plus noise power ratio of devices is calculated as (13)
 

With the Round Robin schedule, the long-term achievable rate is (14)
 
 
And then we define the energy efficiency (bits per Joule) of th device when associated with th edge node, which is calculated as (15)
 
For the sake of simplicity, we only consider the transmit power as energy consumption. Then we can calculate the objective function (3), which sums up the logarithms of energy efficiency of devices at the edge nodes they associate with. We use logarithmic function as utility function because it is concave, and hence has diminishing returns, so as to preserve some fairness (Ye et al., 2013).

Another objective function is to balance load of edge nodes. The load of edge nodes is calculated as (16)
And the average load is (17)
 
 

To sum up, the problem of deploying edge nodes aims at maximizing energy efficiency and balancing load of edge nodes while ensure the QoS of devices. It is obvious that the problem is a NP-hard problem, which is difficult to solve.

3.3. Problem solving: DMS algorithm
This section decouples the nested problem. First, when the position of edge nodes is fixed, we solve the user association problem for load balancing and perform power allocation to improve energy efficiency by algorithm 1. Then, we optimize the location of edge nodes to find the maximum energy efficiency by algorithm 2.

3.3.1. User association
To achieve load balancing of edge nodes, the load on each edge node should be as close as possible by serving a certain number of devices. It is obvious that this is a nonlinear integer programming problem. Monte Carlo method is an important numerical calculation method guided by the theory of probability and statistics, which is usually used to solve problems that are too complicated to obtain analytic solutions or have no analytic solutions at all. This approximate optimization is adopted to solve the user association problem for load balancing. When the location of edge nodes and device are determined, each device first sorts edge nodes according to received signal strength and selects the first S edge nodes as candidate edge nodes. Firstly, the device randomly selects 1 to S nodes among these candidate nodes for association. After that, the load difference of edge nodes is calculated according to Eq. (16). Then the device will reselect edge nodes among the candidate nodes for association and calculates the load difference between the edge nodes. Select the scheme with least load difference. Repeat the above process until the end of the iteration. The steps to solve user association are

Step 1
Devices select the candidate edge nodes according to received signal strength.

Step 2
Each IIoT device selects 1-S edge nodes from the candidate edge nodes for association and calculate the load of edge nodes 
 with load level of devices 
.

Step 3
Go to reselect edge nodes for association and calculate the load of edge nodes 
 under this condition.

Step 4
Compare the load gap among edge nodes in step 2 and step 3 by 
 
 
, choose the smaller one and record it as 
.

Step 5
Repeat step 3 and step 4, and choose the smallest scheme of user association.

3.3.2. Power allocation
After the user association is determined, the power allocation problem is transformed into a nonlinear inequality constrained optimization problem, with (3) as objective function and (5), (8) as constrains. We decide to use sequential quadratic programming method to solve it with advantages of sequential quadratic programming (SQP) method, which are good convergence, high computational efficiency and strong boundary searching ability. The basic idea of SQP is to simplify the original nonlinear programming problem to a quadratic programming problem at some approximate solution and obtain the optimal solution. If there is one, it is considered as the optimal solution of the original nonlinear programming problem; otherwise, it will be replaced by the approximate solution to form a new quadratic programming problem and continue to iterate.

 and 
 are used to indicate the objective function (3) and constraints. The objective function can be simplified into a quadratic function and constraints are transformed into linear functions at the iteration point 
, 
 
, 
 respectively. With 
, the problem can be described as a quadratic programming problem: (18)
 
 (19)
where 
 and 
. Then, the problem can be solved as followings:

Step 1
Give initial point 
, convergence precision  and set  and 
.

Step 2
Transform the problem into a quadratic programming problem at 

Step 3
Solve the above quadratic programming problem and set 

Step 4
Perform a constrained one-dimensional search on the objection function of original problem in direction 
 to get the next iteration point 

Step 5
If the given precision termination criteria is met, 
 is optimal solution, otherwise, go to step 6.

Step 6
Revise 
 according to BFGS method and let , go to step 2.

The process of solving user association and power allocation is listed in algorithm 1.

3.3.3. Optimizing the location of edge nodes
After the user association and power allocation are determined, the next step is to find the deployment location of the edge nodes. Differential Evolution algorithm (Lee and El-Sharkawi, 2008) is a kind of population-based adaptive global optimization algorithm, which is derived from imitating biological evolution. Compared with other algorithms such as genetic algorithm and ant colony algorithm, differential evolution method has the advantages of fewer parameters and stronger optimization ability. We improve DE algorithm with K-means algorithm to find optimal location of edge nodes.

The dimension of each individual  is , and 
 is the position of edge nodes in the 
 iteration, where  is the 
 individual with  population. We set the maximum number of iterations as . At the beginning of the algorithm, each population is generated by K-means algorithm. At this time, algorithm 1 is called to solve the user association and power allocation, then the fitness  is calculated according to Eq. (3). In the 
 iteration, each population 
 mutates, two different individuals are selected to produce the mutation vector 
 in the following way (20)

Among them, 
 is the best fitness individual in the 
 iteration, and  is the scaling factor. The value of  will affect the global optimization ability of the algorithm. The larger  is, the more likely it is to jump out of the local minimum point at will, which will make the global optimization easier, but the convergence speed will be slower. 
 and 
 are two different individuals randomly selected in the gen iteration. After the occurrence of mutation, crossover is carried out in the following way (21)
  
 where  is the crossover factor. After the crossover, the differential evolution algorithm selects the individuals of the next generation population according to the greedy criterion, and the selection method is as follows (22)
  
 

In the process of mutation, if the variation exceeds the limit range, we will generate new individual by K-means. After  iterations, the approximate optimal deployment of edge nodes can be obtained. The specific algorithm process based on DE is shown in algorithm 2.

4. Performance evaluation
This chapter evaluates the performance of proposed deployment scheme for edge nodes by simulation. Three User distributions of IIoT devices are considered, that is, random distribution, single Gaussian distribution and multivariate Gaussian distribution. The parameters of improved different evaluation are set as ,  and . Table 3 shows the scenario simulated.


Table 3. Simulation parameters .

Parameter	Value
Simulation area	100  100 m
100/150/200
15
3
4.1. Optimized location of edge nodes
Fig. 2 shows the results for deployment of edge nodes by DMS algorithm compared with K-means algorithm, where  and . It can be seen that the location of edge nodes will change accordingly as the distribution of devices changes from random to centralized, which preliminarily shows the effectiveness of DMS algorithm. Moreover, there are two edge nodes (marked as 1 and 2) deployed closer to edge device in the result of DMS algorithm compared with k-means algorithm when the distribution of devices is single Gaussian distribution, so that they can provide better communication services for these edge devices. These show that

(1)
DMS algorithm can optimize the deployment of edge nodes according to the distribution of devices.

(2)
Compared with k-means algorithm, the deployment of edge nodes can better ensure the service quality of IIoT devices by DMS algorithm.

4.2. Energy efficiency
Fig. 3 compares the energy efficiency when the transmit power of edge nodes is dynamically changed and fixed. The distribution of devices is random distribution, single Gaussian distribution and multivariate Gaussian distribution, and the number of devices is 100, 150 and 200 respectively. Energy efficiency is the ratio between the data rate of devices and energy consumption. With power allocation, the energy consumption of edge nodes will be reduced on the premise of ensure signal quality. Therefore, the energy efficiency of dynamic transmit power is higher than fixed transmit power. These shows that

(1)
The different distribution of devices affects the energy efficiency of the network. The random distribution has the highest energy efficiency and the multivariate Gaussian distribution has the lowest energy efficiency.

(2)
No matter how many devices there are and how these devices are distributed, the energy efficiency of the network will be improved with power allocation compared with fixed transmit power of edge nodes.

4.3. Load of edge nodes
Fig. 4 analyzes the load of each node in the case of that devices are random distribution, single Gaussian distribution and multivariate Gaussian distribution, with and without load balance. When load balancing is not considered, the user association scheme is max-SINR, which selects the edge node with the strongest signal for connection. It shows that

(1)
When the user is randomly distributed, the standard deviation of load between edge nodes is 3.95 before load balancing and down to 1.27 after load balancing. When the user is single Gaussian, the variance decreases from 5.27 to 2.43 and is 4.69 and 1.64 for multivariate Gaussian.

(2)
The load gap between edge nodes is significantly narrowed when load balancing is considered, regardless of the devices’ distribution.

4.4. Received SINR
(1)
The SINR of most devices is between −6 dB and  dB when allowing multi-association under the condition of three kinds of devices’ distribution.

(2)
There are still many devices received the signal quality which is between −10 dB and  dB when it is single-association. This implies the advantages of multi-association mechanism based on proposed architecture, which can improve the signal quality of IIoT devices.

4.5. Scalability of proposed framework
Fig. 6 shows the comparison of energy efficiency among DMS, class genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO). The population size of DMS, PSO and GA is 10, 10 and 64 respectively. We set the crossover probability and mutation probability as 0.4 and 0.1. It shows that the DMS algorithm has the best performance compared with the other two algorithms.

Fig. 7 shows how the number of iterations required for convergence changes with the increase of network size in the case of different user distributions, where the number of devices is 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300. It can be found that the convergence rate of the algorithm does not change much after the number of devices grows exponentially. Thus, this shows the scalability of proposed framework.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, the joint user association, power allocation and edge node deployment problem based cooperative access architecture were formulated as the NKOP, which considered energy efficiency and load balancing as objective functions and power and signal quality as constraints. DMS algorithm was proposed to solve this problem. The DMS algorithm decoupled the problem into three parts, user association, power allocation and optimizing the location of edge nodes. Numerical results showed that the proposed DMS algorithm was feasible to balance the load between edge nodes and improve energy efficiency, and multi-association mechanism with power allocation could indeed significantly improve the service quality of users.