Trainings on self-regulated learning (SRL) have been shown to be effective in improving both competence of self-regulated learning and objective measures of performance. However, human trainers can reach only a limited number of people at a time. Web-based trainings (WBT) could improve efficiency, as they can be distributed to potentially unlimited numbers of participants. We developed a WBT based on the process model of SRL by Schmitz and Wiese (2006) and tested it with 211 university students in a randomized control evaluation study including additional process analyses of learning diaries. Results showed that the training had significant effects on SRL knowledge, SRL behavior measured by questionnaires and diaries, as well as on self-efficacy. Time-series analyses revealed a positive linear trend in SRL for the training group but not for the control group as well as intervention effects for each of the three WBT lessons.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Self-regulated learning

Web-based training

Training evaluation

MANOVA

Time series analysis

1. Introduction
The study of self-regulated learning (SRL) has received increasing attention over the last years (Alexander, 2008, Alonso Tapia et al., 2014, Artino and Stephens, 2009, Hadwin et al., 2011, Schmitz and Perels, 2011, Winne, 2014, Zimmerman and Kitsantas, 2014). As shown in several meta-analyses (Hattie et al., 1996, Richardson et al., 2012, Sitzmann and Ely, 2011), SRL has an important positive impact on learning success and is, therefore, highly relevant for students. Particularly online courses require high SRL competency from students (Broadbent & Poon, 2015). Fostering this competency through training interventions has been shown to be successful regarding both self-report measures and objective performance (Benz, 2010, Dignath et al., 2008).

However, one disadvantage of current SRL trainings is that a face-to-face training can only reach a limited number of participants at the same time. This is a major problem in new technology-based learning scenarios, such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC). Web-based trainings (WBT), in contrast, are conveyed via the Internet and can thus reach virtually unlimited numbers of participants. The aim of this paper is to explore the possibility of fostering SRL with the help of a WBT that we created based on traditional SRL trainings. We evaluated the training effects by means of pre-postcomparisons and time-series analyses. Key findings were that participants of the WBT improved their declarative knowledge on SRL, reported using more SRL strategies (documented not only by a retrospective questionnaire but also by a daily learning diary), and increased their self-efficacy.

1.1. Self-regulated learning
The theoretical model underlying this article is the process model of self-regulated learning developed by Zimmermann (2000) and adapted by Schmitz and Wiese (2006). The model divides the learning process into three phases (see Fig. 1).

Fig. A1
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Process model of self-regulated learning (Schmitz & Wiese, 2006).

One major aspect of this model is its cyclical orientation – i.e., the learning process contains a feedback-loop. The way in which future learning tasks are addressed depends on past learning activity. The model assumes three learning phases according to Heckhausen and Kuhl (1985), called the preaction, action, and postaction phase. In each of these phases, a learner faces different challenges, must complete different tasks, and should use different learning-strategies to achieve a good learning outcome.

In the preaction phase, learners must analyze the individual situation and respective task and then apply the appropriate filters, e.g. if the task is easy and can be solved through the use of automated strategies, no self-regulation is necessary. More complex tasks, however, require self-regulation. In this case, learners must assess the resources available to them. The specific task and situation result in a certain motivation and affect, which in turn influence the learning process. Therefore, learners must regulate their resources to utilize them effectively. In line with this, self-efficacy-beliefs represent an additional important resource. The central activities during the preaction phase include goal setting. Clearly defined goals serve as a guide throughout the learning process, helping learners to effectively allocate resources and use appropriate learning-strategies. A learning plan can be derived from specific goal setting. Note that all the variables in this phase are both affected by previous learning phases and predicative of the subsequent learning process. Because of the model's cyclical orientation, motivation, for example, may be influenced by how successful the previous learning action was.

In the action phase, the main learning occurs. The learning outcome is determined by the quality and quantity of learning (Schmitz, 2001). Learning quality is a function of volitional strategies and learning strategies. Volition (Kuhl & Fuhrmann, 1998) refers to strategies such as self-instruction and the handling of distractions. Learning strategies can be categorized into cognitive, meta-cognitive, and resource-management strategies (Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, & McKeachie, 1993). Cognitive learning strategies refer to either topic related strategies such as solving equations or strategies such as memorizing and summarizing content. Meta-cognitive strategies refer primarily to the monitoring of the learning process (Schmitz & Perels, 2011), whereas resource management includes strategies such as effort regulation and concentration management as well as environment control and help-seeking behaviors.

In the postaction phase, learners reflect on the learning process. Depending on the learning outcome, learners will experience either positive or negative affect. If the outcome does not match previously set goals, leaners may modify either their strategies or the goals of future learning activities. These modifications of future learning activities may be influenced by attribution and frame of reference. Individuals' attribution of their success and failure may be internal or external, variable or stable (Peterson et al., 1982). The frame of reference (Nagengast & Marsh, 2012) refers to comparisons that individuals make between either their own and others' achievements or between past and present achievements.

Based on this theoretical model, trainings have been developed that were shown to foster both self-regulated learning and achievement (Perels et al., 2009, Schmitz and Perels, 2011, Schmitz and Wiese, 2006). In general, the effectiveness of fostering self-regulated learning has been demonstrated in meta-analytic studies. Hattie et al. (1996) were the first to show that trainings aiming at different cognitive or metacognitive study skills could improve learning outcomes across all age groups. Especially effective were trainings embedded in a situational context, trainings fostering a high level of student activity, and interventions focusing on metacognitive awareness. Dignath and Büttner (2008) analyzed interventions focusing on primary and secondary school students and found that these approaches were effective. This was especially true when the interventions were in the subject of mathematics or conducted by a researcher rather than a teacher. Benz (2010) examined both training interventions and scaffolding approaches fostering self-regulated learning across all age groups and found both to be effective. Traditionally, most SRL interventions are designed as a classroom training held face-to-face by a real trainer (Perels et al., 2005, Schmitz and Perels, 2011, Schmitz and Wiese, 2006). These trainings equip learners with learning strategies that can be employed in different learning situations.

1.2. Fostering SRL in computer-based learning environments
Computer-based learning environments (CBLEs), including online learning environments, offer great possibilities to improve learning but at the same time pose problems for many students lacking the necessary self-regulatory competency. As Broadbent and Poon (2015), p.12) point out, “we should not assume that online learning in itself fosters SRL strategies use or development”. Therefore, researchers have developed many approaches in order to foster SRL in CBLEs. Winters, Greene, and Costich (2008) have proposed a classification of approaches by distinguishing support tools, conceptual supports, and metacognitive supports.

Support tools are defined as “affordances within a CBLE that allow learners to engage and manipulate resources and ideas in the CBLE” (Winters et al., 2008, p.436). As an example of this approach, the gStudy software (Zhou & Winne, 2012) allows users to take notes, create glossaries, highlight text, or construct concept maps (among other features). Such tools can undoubtedly support learners, but only if they know when and how to apply them, which unfortunately is not always the case (Trevors, Duffy, & Azevedo, 2014).

Conceptual support is defined as “aids inside or outside of the CBLE that guide students' understanding of content” (Winters et al., 2008, p.436). This approach can be exemplified by Schwonke et al. (2013) who provided a static conceptual scaffold in form of a cue card that encouraged participants to employ instructional resources more strategically. Although such scaffolds have been repeatedly demonstrated to be effective (Devolder, van Braak, & Tondeur, 2012), they need to be newly created for every learning context as students are not instructed how to learn.

Metacognitive support is defined as tools that “guide students' ways of thinking and reflecting on their task” (Winters et al., 2008, p.436). A typical example for this approach is prompting SRL behavior such as goal setting at the beginning of a task or reflecting at the end of it (e.g. Duffy & Azevedo, 2015). A new line of research in this field is to combine measurement and intervention within the same prompting tool (Panadero, Klug, & Järvelä, 2015). While prompting has been shown to be successful, such scaffolds can only be employed in the specific learning situation for which they were created.

1.3. Web-based training
Web-based training (WBT) could combine the advantages of classroom training (teaching general learning strategies that are applicable to most learning situations) with those of computer-based interventions (reaching virtually unlimited numbers of learners).

Web-based trainings are conveyed to participants via the Internet and represent an alternative method that can be used with different target groups, e.g., students and professionals. The development of this type of learning environment is comparatively costly; however, updates and modifications for different subjects are easier to implement. In a meta-analysis, Sitzmann, Kraiger, Stewart, and Wisher (2006) confirmed that web-based trainings and classroom instruction are equally effective in improving both declarative and procedural knowledge.

WBTs have also been successfully applied in the field of clinical psychology. Training effects were found in studies aiming to encourage health behavior in chronically ill individuals (Wantland, Portillo, Holzemer, Slaughter, & McGhee, 2004), smoking cessation (Myung, McDonnell, Kazinets, Seo, & Moskowitz, 2009), and weight loss in obese individuals (Neve, Morgan, Jones, & Collins, 2010). To the best of our knowledge, however, WBT has not been applied for fostering self-regulated learning. According to the classification by Winters et al. (2008), this approach falls into the category of metacognitive support.

1.4. Learning diaries
Learning diaries follow two concurrent objectives: 1) they encourage self-monitoring of the learning process and, thus, can serve as an intervention (Schmitz & Perels, 2011) and 2) they represent a measurement instrument that allows researchers to examine learning processes in large samples over long periods of time, resulting in rich time series data (Schmitz, 2006). Subsequent time series analyses, in turn, allow for both nomothetic and ideographic approaches (M. Schmidt, Perels, & Schmitz, 2010).

Many SRL training interventions (e.g. Leidinger and Perels, 2012, Perels et al., 2005, Perels et al., 2009, Schmitz and Wiese, 2006) include a learning diary as component in order to help participants transfer the strategies taught in the training to their daily learning routines. In the case of our new web-based training approach we expect an additional learning diary to be helpful as well.

1.5. Research question
In this study, we developed a WBT designed to equip prospective university students with SRL strategies. In a naturalistic scenario of an online preparation course, we randomly assigned participants to one of four experimental conditions: group TD (training + diary), group T (training only), group D (diary only), and group C (control). The aim of this study is to demonstrate the effectiveness of WBT on SRL knowledge, learning behavior, and performance while segregating it from the possible intervention effect of the learning diary. Process analyses based on the diary data from groups TD and D are further used to investigate the impact of each of the three lessons.

We tested three main hypotheses:

Hypothesis 1

was that the web-based training has a positive effect on the following pre-postmeasures: We expected participants' declarative knowledge about self-regulated learning to increase in the training groups T and TD but not in the control groups C and D (H1a). We further expected participants in the training groups T and TD to improve their self-regulated learning behavior more than participants in the control groups C and D (H1b). This effect was expected to manifest in both an overall SRL score, but also in the subdomains of goal setting, planning, motivation, distraction avoidance, self-instruction, learning strategies, and reflection. Participants' self-efficacy was expected to increase in the training groups T and TD more than in the control groups C and D (H1c) and participants in the training groups T and TD were expected to increase their performance in a mathematics test more than participants in the control groups C and D (H1d).

Hypothesis 2

was that the learning diary has a positive effect on pre-postmeasures of self-regulated learning behavior (overall SRL score and the subdomains of goal setting, planning, motivation, distraction avoidance, self-instruction, learning strategies, and reflection; H2a), self-efficacy (H2b), and on the mathematics test (H2c). In contrast to Hypothesis 1, we did not expect the learning diary to increase declarative knowledge about self-regulated learning.

Hypothesis 3

was that the web-based training has positive effects on process measures: We expected that the web-based training leads to a steady increase in self-regulated learning in group TD but not in group D (H3a). We further expected the three lessons of the web-based training each to have a positive impact on self-regulated learning in general (H3b) and that every lesson of the web-based training has a positive impact on its targeted behavior (Lesson 1: goal setting, planning, and process model concept; Lesson 2: distraction avoidance, procrastination avoidance, and learning strategies; Lesson 3: reflection, attribution, and motivation; H3c).

2. Method
2.1. Participants
The initial sample of the evaluation study consisted of 211 prospective students (166 male) with a mean age of 20.2 years (SD = 2.23). Participants were enrolled in an e-learning course at a technical university in Germany, in which they prepared themselves for mathematically oriented fields of study (computer science, civil engineering, mechanical engineering, or mathematics). Participants were randomly assigned to four groups in a 2 (training vs. no training) × 2 (diary vs. no diary) between-subjects design. Group TD (training plus diary) attended the web-based training and kept an online diary, whereas group T (training) attended the same training but did not keep a diary. Group D (diary) kept a diary but had no access to the WBT. Finally, group C (control) did not receive training nor did they keep a diary. When assigning participants to the experimental groups, we first divided the sample into eight subpopulations due to gender and field of study (e.g. female computer scientists). We then conducted the randomized assignment for each subpopulation separately, thereby making sure to keep the proportion of gender and field of study constant in every experimental group. As we expected differential dropout rates between experimental groups due to the different workloads required of participants, we assigned disproportionally more participants to the diary groups D and TD.

Due to dropout (n = 42) and exclusion because of extreme outliers (n = 3), the final sample for analyses included 166 participants (128 male): 49 in group TD (38 male), 34 in group T (26 male), 47 in group D (38 male), and 36 in group C (26 male).

2.2. Procedure and training
The mathematics preparation course took place in the fall during the last four weeks leading up to participants' first semester at university. Within this timeframe, participants had online access to a large learning management system containing instructions and tests covering 53 mathematics topics in six chapters (“Arithmetic”, “Powers”, “Functions”, “Higher Functions”, “Analysis” and “Vectors”). All topics followed the same structure: diagnostic pre-test, overview, introduction to the domain, information, interpretation, application, typical mistakes, exercises, and diagnostic post-test. Fig. 2 shows a screenshot from the preparation course. Purpose of the preparation course was to repeat mathematical school knowledge in order to establish a common ground for all students in mathematically oriented fields of study. Participation was voluntary, there was no graded final exam. The preparation course was conducted completely online without classroom instruction by teachers

Fig. A2
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Screenshot of online mathematics preparation course.

At the beginning of the preparation course, participants were given three days to complete the pre-test consisting of questionnaires, an SRL knowledge test, and a mathematics test. In the following four weeks, participant had access to the WBT on SRL strategies and kept the learning diary, depending on the experimental group to which they were assigned. At the end of the course, they again had a timeframe of three days to complete the post-test.

2.3. Pre- and post-test
The pre- and post-tests were conducted online in the learning management system. Both included the same measurement instruments: questionnaires on self-regulated learning and other constructs, a test on declarative knowledge of SRL, and a mathematics test on the content of the preparation course in two parallel versions. Additionally, demographic information was collected in the pre-test.

2.3.1. Self-regulated learning questionnaire
Self-regulated learning was measured with 42 items. The overall score had a Cronbach's α = 0.89. The scale contained the sub-scales goal setting (4 items, Cronbach's α = 0.71, e.g. “I write out my goals in complete detail”), planning (6 items, Cronbach's α = 0.70, e.g. “Before starting a new topic I try to get a comprehensive overview”), self-motivation (5 items, Cronbach's α = 0.74, e.g. “A boring topic gets more interesting the more I engage in it”), dealing with distractions (4 items, Cronbach's α = 0.65, e.g. “I notice when I get distracted during learning”), self-instruction (9 items, Cronbach's α = 0.74, e.g. the inverted item “I frequently don't have the strength to start working although I know what to do”), cognitive learning strategies (8 items, Cronbach's α = 0.70, e.g. “I try to find the structure of a topic so that I can memorize it better”), and reflection (6 items, Cronbach's α = 0.76, e.g. “At the end of the day I ask myself whether I am satisfied with my performance”). Items were chosen to match the content of the WBT and were either taken from the MSLQ (Pintrich et al., 1993) and the VCQ (Kuhl & Fuhrmann, 1998) or created specifically for the purpose of this study.

2.3.2. SRL knowledge test
The SRL knowledge test consisted of twenty multiple-choice items (Cronbach's α = 0.81). Each item had four possible answers – one correct answer and three distractors – resulting in a total score between 0 and 20 points. The questions covered the constructs explained in the WBT, e.g.: “According to the process model of self-regulated learning, what should you do in the preaction phase? a) set goals (right answer), b) concentrate (distractor), c) reflect (distractor), d) relax (distractor)”.

2.3.3. Mathematics test
The mathematics test evaluated the mathematical knowledge before and after the mathematics course using two parallel versions. Participants were given 30 min to solve 30 problems that were created by mathematicians responsible for the mathematics preparation course (Cronbach's α = 0.82) and represented a selection of the topics addressed in it. One point was awarded for each correct solution, resulting in a total score between 0 and 30.

2.4. Web-based training on self-regulated learning
The WBT consisted of three weekly lessons (with three to four chapters each) constructed with the learning management system Moodle (see http://docs.moodle.org). Participants were given a timeframe of two days to attend each respective session – within that timeframe participants were free to choose the exact time of their attendance.

To support training transfer, the individual lessons were created according to the three phases of learning. At the beginning of each lesson, learning goals were formulated. At the end, the most important thoughts were summarized and participants were instructed to summarize the lesson in a personal “strategy manual”. A major goal while creating the lessons was to use a variety of online-tools and methods provided by the Internet and online technology. As a result, each lesson contained various videos, presentations, self-tests, exercises, and group discussions in an online bulletin board. An animated comic-figure was used as a trainer who appeared in several videos and most presentations. The average duration of each training lesson was intended to be 90 min. After each lesson, participants filled in a short evaluation form. Questions included the actual duration of the lesson, the novelty of the content on a six-point rating scale from “already known” to “novel”, the perceived usefulness of the strategies taught on a six-point rating scale from “not useful” to “useful”, and an overall grade for the quality of the lesson using the German grading system (1 = very good; 2 = good, 3 = satisfactory, 4 = sufficient, 5 = deficient, 6 = insufficient).

The lessons' respective content was based on the process-model of self-regulated learning (Schmitz & Wiese, 2006). The content of the lessons are briefly described here, for more details and screenshots see Appendix A.

In the first lesson, “Before Learning”, the process-model was explained with a focus on the preaction phase and included the chapters goal setting, planning, and time-management. The lesson started with an animated welcome video. The process-model of self-regulated learning was then presented, comparing learning to one of three available examples (e.g. a soccer coach preparing his team for a tournament). In the course of the lesson, users were then guided to write down personal goals for the preparation course and to modify them according to the SMART technique (Doran, 1981). Creating a learning plan for the four weeks of the preparation course was the major outcome of the chapter on time management. In order to attain this, participants reflected their own activities and chores using a mind map, discussed personal issues with time management in an online forum, and derived concrete actions plans from their individual learning goals.

The second lesson, “During Learning”, focused on the action phase and included the chapters of volitional learning strategies such as dealing with distractions and avoiding procrastination as well as cognitive and meta-cognitive learning strategies. The lesson started by introducing the concept of procrastination and helped users to identify circumstances in which they might also tend to delay important tasks. Participants could then test the effect of background music on their own performance in the Stroop color word interference test (Cassidy & MacDonald, 2007) and received hints on how to deal with distractions. For the purpose of self-motivation, users developed a personal motto. In the last chapter of the lesson, cognitive (e.g. elaboration), metacognitive (e.g. monitoring), and resource-oriented learning strategies (e.g. help seeking) were explained. Exercises guided participants how to use such strategies for the preparation course.

The final lesson, “After Learning”, addressed the chapters of attribution, frame of reference and reflection in the postaction phase. The lesson started with a video demonstrating different attribution styles after situations of failure, promoting internal and unstable attribution as being most favorable. In the subsequent chapter on frame of reference, participants analyzed their time investment in the preparation course to date and tried to increase it in the remaining week of the preparation course. The concept of reflection was applied to the three time levels short- term (e.g. reflection after one particular mathematical problem), medium-term (e.g. reflection at the end of one learning day), and long-term (e.g. reflection after examination period). Afterwards, the individual learning goals formulated in Lesson 1 were presented again, with participants being instructed to reflect their goal achievement and to adjust their goal setting if necessary. The last chapter included self-motivation strategies like implementation intentions (Gollwitzer, 1999) and self-rewarding. After summarizing the whole training, the lesson ended with participants writing a letter to their future self on what they intended to change in their learning behavior.

2.5. Learning diary
The standardized learning diary was accessible for experimental groups TD and D during the whole preparation course (resulting in a maximum of 28 diary entries). Participants in these groups were asked to fill in the diary on a daily basis, but at least four times a week. It consisted of both a pre-learning and post-learning part. Each part contained open questions to foster metacognition (e.g., pre-learning: “What are your learning goals for today?”; post-learning: “What strategies do you plan to use tomorrow?”) and closed questions for measurement. For examples of answers given to the open questions see Appendix B. Twelve items, eleven for different components of SRL and one for self-efficacy, were assessed in the pre-learning diary (intended SRL strategies, e.g. “I have made a time schedule for today”) as well as in a reformulated version in the post-learning diary (accomplished SRL strategies, e.g. “I adhered to my time schedule today”). Additionally, positive and negative affect were assessed with three PANAS items (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988) in both the pre- and post-learning diaries. Finally, we assessed willingness to change in the pre-learning diary and satisfaction with learning in the post-learning diary. All items were assessed on a six-point rating scale from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”. Planned and accomplished learning time was assessed in hours.

A reliability analysis for the SRL items on goal setting, planning, motivation, procrastination avoidance, distraction avoidance, self-instruction, learning strategy, reflection, attribution, frame of reference, and process model concept indicated high intercorrelations for all but one item (frame of reference). Cronbach's α without this item was 0.85. It was therefore omitted for the calculation of the mean SRL score.

In order to analyze whether each lesson fostered specifically those SRL components that were taught in the corresponding lesson, we created three SRL subscales: “Lesson 1 components” (goal setting, planning, process model concept), “Lesson 2 components” (distraction avoidance, procrastination avoidance, learning strategies), and “Lesson 3 components” (reflection, attribution, motivation). This was done in order to evaluate the impact of each lesson not only on SRL strategies in general but also on the specific behaviors targeted in the respective lesson. For example, participants should set more goals after the first lesson, use more cognitive learning strategies after the second, and make use of an internal variable attribution style after the third.

2.6. Statistical analyses
2.6.1. Screening
Prior to data analysis, we conducted a screening procedure as suggested by Tabachnick and Fidell (2012), including checks of missing values, distribution assumptions, univariate and multivariate outliers, and multicolinearity.

2.6.2. Pre-postanalyses
To test our hypotheses concerning the training effect, we conducted two mixed effects MANOVAs (i.e., doubly multivariate profile analysis; Tabachnick & Fidell, 2012). Each mixed effects MANOVA included the same independent variables but different dependent variables. The dependent variables in the first MANOVA were math achievement, SRL overall, SRL knowledge, and self-efficacy. This MANOVA was intended as a broad test of training effects in all targeted constructs. The dependent measures in the second MANOVA were the seven SRL-subscales goal-setting, planning, motivation, distraction avoidance, self-instruction, learning-strategies, and reflection. The goal of this analysis was to differentially analyze improvements in the individual SRL components. Our three dichotomous independent variables were SRL-training (yes/no), learning diary (yes/no), and time (pre- or post-training). This resulted in a 2 × 2 × 2 design, with time being the repeated measure. A significant time × training interaction would indicate a positive training effect. The effect sizes partial η2 were calculated as suggested by Hattie et al. (1996). However, as they outline, partial η2 for MANOVAs may not be interpreted as the proportion of variance explained in all DVs. Nevertheless, it still represents a measure of relative importance of the effect.

To clarify the multivariate results and determine which variables were dominantly affected by the training, we followed up on these analyses by conducting linear discriminant analyses (LDA) as suggested by Field, Miles, and Field (2013) as well as Tabachnick and Fidell (2012). In LDA, a number of factors (or discriminant functions) are extracted from the DVs that best discriminate between groups (i.e., the IVs). As we were primarily interested in 1) change in variables 2) caused by our training (the time × training interaction), we used the post-score–pre-score difference scores of our DVs as the basis for factor extraction. As groups, we only compared training vs. no-training groups to describe their differences as accurately as possible. Therefore, we estimated only one discriminant function. To produce LDA coefficients that are not influenced by the respective scale, we standardized all pre- and post-scores based on pre-measurement statistics – e.g., we standardized the postmath score using the mean and standard deviation of the premath score. This procedure led to equally scaled post–pre-differences that reflected individual changes in pre-measurement standard deviations.

2.6.3. Time-series analyses
For time-series analyses, we included only the diary groups TD and D. We examined process aspects of SRL by calculating trend analyses and intervention analyses. To carry out trend analyses, the daily data of each participant was aggregated to a daily mean. For the resulting 27 days, a linear regression was modeled with time as the predictor and the value of the scale as the criterion. This can be done either at the individual level, which results in a trend for each person, or as a group aggregate. We chose the latter approach in order to investigate the mean training effect on group TD compared to control group D.

Intervention analyses (interrupted time series analysis) were calculated in order to examine whether an intervention has an effect on a system, how the intervention influences the system, and which other variables influence the dependent variable. The intervention effect is indicated, similar to a t-test, by the comparison of the baseline level of the dependent variable to the level after the intervention. A transfer function is used to estimate how the intervention influences the system. ARIMA models (Schmitz, 1990) serve to describe other sources of impact.

Traditionally, intervention analyses are calculated for the whole group by aggregating over persons (for a detailed description see Schmitz, 1990). This approach was not suitable for our study design because participants could choose the day on which they took part in a lesson. Aggregating over participants would therefore result in a loss of data or accuracy as some might have already completed a lesson at a given day while others might not have started yet. In cases of varying intervention onset for each individual, we propose another approach: by calculating an intervention analysis for each participant, each individual is treated as its own sample. All samples are then aggregated by means of meta-analytic methods.

This approach results in a t-value for each individual and each intervention, which can be converted to an effect size d following the formula(1)
 
with n1 and n2 referring to the number of diary entries before respectively after the intervention. This effect size represents the impact a given intervention had on a given participant. Aggregating over participants is then done with meta-analytic techniques using a random-effects model. For this purpose each effect size is weighted by the inverse of the variance to give more weight to effects based on large samples. The variance is calculated as(2)
 
 

Computation of random effects models for meta-analysis is described in detail by Raudenbush (1994). We applied this procedure for each of the three lessons separately with both the mean SRL score and the three subscales for Lesson 1 strategies, Lesson 2 strategies, and Lesson 3 strategies.

3. Results
3.1. Screening results
To improve the quality of our data, we conducted a screening procedure. Participants with missing pre- or post-measurement values were excluded from all pre-postcomparisons. Concerning distribution, we observed no severe problems. Deviations from normality were found either in only one group at one time or could be explained by intervention effects (e.g., SRL knowledge in postmeasurement indicated a small ceiling effect). Nevertheless, 2 participants in group T and 1 participant in group D were excluded due to extreme standardized scores in excess of − 3.29 or 3.29 (equaling 0.1% of the distribution) on one or more measures. After the exclusion of these univariate outliers, no multivariate outliers remained. Based on the variance inflation factor, multicolinearity was not an issue in our analyses.

3.2. Manipulation check
The short evaluation forms after each lesson were filled in by the vast majority of participants from groups T and TD, with the exception of one participant from group TD missing after Lesson 2 and four participants from group TD missing after Lesson 3 (rate of return = 97.9%). As each evaluation form was only visible after completing all parts of the corresponding lesson, noncompliance did not appear to be an issue.

Analyses revealed that the mean self-reported duration fitted well with the intended duration of 90 min each, with Lesson 3 being slightly shorter than the other two lessons (Lesson 1: M = 89.78, SD = 35.84; Lesson 2: M = 92.96, SD = 34.89; Lesson 3: M = 79.58, SD = 28.42). Participants reported the content of the lessons to be moderately novel to them (Lesson 1: M = 4.15, SD = 1.34; Lesson 2: M = 4.20, SD = 1.33; Lesson 3: M = 4.33, SD = 1.22). Usefulness of the content was perceived to be high (Lesson 1: M = 5.20, SD = 0.99; Lesson 2: M = 5.31, SD = 1.00; Lesson 3: M = 5.41, SD = 0.89). The majority of participants rated the overall quality of lessons with the grade “very good” (Lesson 1: 18.1%; Lesson 2: 25.9%; Lesson 3: 67.0%) or “good” (Lesson 1: 18.1%; Lesson 2: 62.4%; Lesson 3: 65.4%).

3.3. Evaluation of training and diary effects
The effects of training and diary (Hypothesis H1 and H2) were both analyzed in one 2 (time) × 2 (training) × 2 (diary) mixed-effects MANOVA and are therefore reported together. Because of linear dependency of the SRL overall score on its subscales, the analysis of subscales had to be separated from the SRL overall score.

First, we determined the overall effectiveness of the training and the diary concerning SRL-knowledge test, overall SRL score, self-efficacy, and performance on the mathematics test (Hypotheses H1a, H1b, H1c, H1d; Hypotheses H2a, H2b, and H2c). In the second analysis, we focused on the seven SRL-subscales of goal-setting, planning, motivation, distraction avoidance, self-instruction, learning-strategies, and reflection (Hypotheses H1b and H2a).

3.3.1. Overall effects
As described above, we first conducted a mixed-effects MANOVA, with participation in training and completing a learning diary as independent variables. Table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics, Table 2 displays the results of the MANOVA. Overall, we observed a significant main effect of time, indicating changes in the dependent variables across the entire sample. Additionally, we found a significant between-groups effect of training. These effects were qualified by a significant time × training interaction, where the training group generally showed a higher improvement over time. The between-groups effect of the diary, as well as the training × diary interaction were not significant. The same was the case for the mixed-effects interactions time × diary, and time × training × diary, indicating that the learning diaries had no additional impact on learning behavior.


Table 1. Means and standard deviations and coefficients of the linear discriminant function for the overall and SRL-focused mixed effects MANOVA.

Overall	Group C	Group D	Group T	Group TD	LDA
M (SD)	M (SD)	M (SD)	M (SD)	M (SD)	
Overall measures						
 Math test PRE	11.16 (4.16)	11.62 (3.94)	10.35 (3.90)	11.12 (4.25)	11.62 (4.51)	− 0.32
 Math test POST	14.83 (4.84)	15.44 (4.68)	14.24 (4.39)	14.53 (4.78)	15.16 (5.43)
 Self-efficacy PRE	3.24 (0.89)	3.28 (0.97)	3.34 (0.89)	3.24 (0.91)	3.13 (0.83)	0.30
 Self-efficacy POST	4.34 (0.67)	4.26 (0.66)	4.29 (0.66)	4.30 (0.65)	4.46 (0.72)
 SRL knowledge PRE	3.86 (1.57)	3.99 (1.77)	3.81 (1.45)	3.81 (1.44)	3.87 (1.63)	0.75
 SRL knowledge POST	6.21 (2.15)	4.69 (1.59)	4.55 (1.75)	7.69 (1.09)	7.89 (1.22)
 SRL questionnaire PRE	3.84 (0.65)	3.85 (0.68)	3.83 (0.61)	3.76 (0.62)	3.90 (0.68)	0.45
 SRL questionnaire POST	3.52 (0.46)	3.37 (0.50)	3.35 (0.42)	3.67 (0.41)	3.71 (0.41)
SRL measures						
 Goal setting PRE	3.79 (1.17)	3.78 (1.35)	3.65 (1.11)	3.74 (0.99)	3.96 (1.23)	0.36
 Goal setting POST	3.00 (0.72)	2.75 (0.75)	2.70 (0.69)	3.32 (0.60)	3.24 (0.62)
 Planning PRE	3.38 (0.95)	3.41 (0.99)	3.51 (0.96)	3.25 (0.93)	3.34 (0.94)	0.72
 Planning POST	4.03 (0.92)	3.76 (0.98)	3.82 (0.96)	4.10 (0.75)	4.36 (0.86)
 Motivation PRE	4.18 (1.01)	4.19 (1.11)	4.15 (0.91)	4.19 (0.98)	4.21 (1.08)	− 0.12
 Motivation POST	3.55 (0.63)	3.41 (0.78)	3.51 (0.63)	3.66 (0.46)	3.62 (0.60)
 Distraction avoidance PRE	3.75 (0.88)	3.73 (0.84)	3.84 (0.92)	3.51 (0.84)	3.86 (0.91)	0.07
 Distraction avoidance POST	3.48 (1.18)	3.69 (1.20)	3.45 (1.27)	3.53 (1.09)	3.33 (1.13)
 Self-instruction PRE	3.97 (0.82)	3.96 (0.76)	3.90 (0.84)	3.95 (0.86)	4.05 (0.84)	0.60
 Self-instruction POST	3.50 (0.64)	3.17 (0.52)	3.24 (0.58)	3.74 (0.64)	3.82 (0.57)
 Learning strategies PRE	3.92 (0.81)	3.96 (0.88)	3.94 (0.76)	3.80 (0.68)	3.95 (0.90)	0.26
 Learning strategies POST	3.85 (0.86)	3.66 (0.96)	3.59 (0.86)	4.01 (0.67)	4.14 (0.81)
 Reflection PRE	3.83 (1.03)	3.83 (1.13)	3.78 (1.04)	3.76 (1.04)	3.93 (0.98)	− 0.48
 Reflection POST	2.98 (0.64)	3.06 (0.76)	2.95 (0.62)	3.00 (0.66)	2.93 (0.57)
Note. Overall = all groups; Group C = control group, Group D = intervention group that kept a diary; Group T = intervention group that attended the training; Group TD = intervention group that kept a diary and attended the training; LDA = standardized coefficient to calculate the linear discriminant function maximizing differences between the training and no-training conditions.


Table 2. Results of the overall and SRL-focused mixed effects MANOVA.

Overall MANOVA	SRL MANOVA
Factor	F(4, 159)	p	Partial η2	F(7, 156)	p	Partial η2
Time	148.60	< 0.001	0.79	37.15	< 0.001	0.63
Training	18.42	< 0.001	0.32	5.67	< 0.001	0.20
Diary	0.13	0.97	< 0.01	0.65	0.71	0.03
Time × training	36.50	< 0.001	0.48	4.79	< 0.001	0.18
Time × diary	0.18	0.95	0.01	1.00	0.43	< 0.01
Training × diary	0.78	0.54	0.02	1.88	0.99	0.01
Time × training × diary	0.28	0.89	0.01	0.56	0.79	0.02
Note. Training, diary, and the training × diary interaction are between subject effects, time is a within subjects effect, and the time × training, time × diary, and time × training × diary interaction are mixed effects.

To illustrate the significant improvement through the training, we conducted a linear discriminant analysis predicting whether an individual participated in the training condition based on difference scores from post–premeasures. One discriminant function was estimated using the corresponding weights displayed in the last column of Table 1. Positive weights indicate that training was associated with higher post–prescores. As can be seen, the group differences are largely explained by improvements in SRL knowledge. The SRL overall score and self-efficacy also explained some group differences. In contrast, improvements in math performance were generally associated with the groups receiving no training. We did not calculate a discriminant function for the diary condition because the diary did not show a significant overall effect that would warrant this procedure.

3.3.2. Effects for SRL-variables
In the same manner as our overall-test, we also analyzed the seven specific SRL scales with a mixed-effects MANOVA. Table 1 shows the respective group and overall means, Table 2 includes the results of the MANOVA. Again, we found a significant main effect of time. However, we observed a general decrease in SRL behavior. The main effect of training was found significant as well. The decrease over time varied depending on training condition, as indicated by a significant training × time interaction. Apparently, the general decrease in SRL behavior was reduced due to training. As before, neither the between-groups effect of the diary nor the diary × training interaction were significant. The same was the case for the mixed-effects interactions where neither the time × diary nor the time × training × diary interactions were significant. This indicated that the learning diaries had no additional impact on SRL behavior.

To analyze which SRL behaviors were especially affected by training, we conducted a linear discriminant analysis predicting whether an individual participated in the training condition based on post–pre-difference scores. One discriminant function was estimated using the corresponding weights shown in the last column of Table 1. Positive weights indicate that training was associated with higher post–pre-scores. We found the greatest differences concerning training for the planning scale. Moreover, only the SRL behaviors planning and the use of learning strategies were associated with a positive post–pre-mean. In addition, higher post–pre-differences in self-instructions were strongly associated with training. In comparison, goal setting and reflection were moderately related to training, whereas this relationship was reversed in the case of reflection, as training participants showed a greater decrease in reflecting behavior. Compared to the other SRL behaviors, motivation, distraction avoidance, and learning strategies explain only little inter-group variance. As before, we did not calculate a discriminant function for the diary condition because the diary did not show a significant overall effect that would warrant this procedure.

3.4. Process data
3.4.1. Trend analysis
In order to further explain differences between the groups as well as between pre- and post-tests, various time-series analyses were conducted.

Based on the learning diaries, we calculated an overall SRL score and tested for a linear trend (Hypothesis H2a). To do so, we aggregated the daily data of each participant to a daily mean. For the resulting 27 days, we modeled a linear regression with time as the predictor and scale value as the criterion. For the diary groups, separate trends were calculated in order to compare both groups. According to our hypotheses, group TD should improve their SRL behavior, whereas group D should not show such improvements.

For group D, we observed no significant linear trend for the overall SRL score (R2 = 0.001; b0 = 4,07; b1 = − 0.001; p = 0.86). For group TD, we observed a significant positive linear trend for the overall score (R2 = 0.29; b0 = 4,10; b1 = 0.012; p < 0.01). Fig. 3 shows the aggregated SRL scores and linear trends over the course of the WBT for both diary groups. Both groups are very similar in terms of parallel peaks and minima. However, the score of group TD varies at a higher level; and the differences between the groups increase over the course of time.

Fig. A3
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Aggregated SRL score and resulting trend for the groups TD and D.

3.4.2. Intervention analysis
The trend analysis revealed that the group TD gradually developed more self-regulated behavior, whereas participants in group D did not. Thus, it is likely that the three lessons caused this increase. In order to provide additional support for this hypothesis, we conducted intervention analyses for the overall SRL score in group TD (Hypothesis H2b). The analyzed interventions were the three lessons “Before Learning”, “During Learning”, and “After Learning”.

Due to the study design with differing intervention onsets for the participants, it was not possible to conduct a traditional intervention analysis. As described above, we conducted a separate intervention analysis for each participant and for each of the three lessons. For each analysis, we calculated a single measure of effect size. Then, each of the analyses was included as a single “study” in a meta-analytic random effects model. Mean effect sizes of the intervention analyses are displayed in Table 3.


Table 3. Results of intervention analyses (group TD).

Effects on general SRL	Effects on targeted SRL components
d	cil	ciu	d	cil	ciu
Lesson 1	1.11	0.66	1.55	1.43	1.01	1.85
Lesson 2	1.01	0.68	1.33	0.56	0.29	0.82
Lesson 3	0.51	0.32	0.71	0.12	− 0.06	0.31
Note. General SRL = mean score calculated on the basis of all self-regulated learning items in the learning diary; Targeted SRL components = subscales calculated on the basis of the self-regulated learning items corresponding to the content of the respective lesson (Lesson 1: goal setting, planning, process model concept; Lesson 2: distraction avoidance, procrastination avoidance, learning strategies; Lesson 3: reflection, attribution, motivation); d = mean effect size (after meta-analytically aggregating individual effect sizes for each participant and each lesson); cil = lower bound of a 95% confidence interval; ciu = upper bound of a 95% confidence interval.

The first analyses refer to the general SRL score as measured with all items of the learning diary. For the first two lessons, we observed large significant effects. The effect of the third intervention on the general SRL score was smaller but still moderate in size and also significantly excluded zero. Therefore, it is likely that the three WBT lessons caused the positive developments in participants' self-regulated learning-behavior that we observed in this study.

In order to test the effect of each lesson on its targeted behavior, we conducted intervention analyses for each of the three SRL subscales with the corresponding lesson as intervention (Hypothesis H2c). Mean effect sizes for Lessons 1 and 2 were statistically significant, with the effect for Lesson 1 being large and the one for Lesson 2 being moderate (see Table 3). In contrast, the effect size for “Lesson 3 components” was not significantly different from zero. These findings suggest that Lessons 1 and 2 promoted the intended behavioral changes, whereas Lesson 3 did not.

4. Discussion
The current study examined the effect of two interventions in an online mathematics preparation course: a web-based training on self-regulated learning (SRL) and a learning diary – resulting in four experimental groups C (control), D (diary only), T (training only) and TD (training plus diary). The effects were assessed on an SRL knowledge test, an SRL questionnaire, a self-efficacy questionnaire, and a mathematics test. Furthermore, process data from the learning diary was analyzed for trends and intervention effects on SRL.

Comparing the four groups, results showed significant effects of the web-based training (WBT) but not the diary. The positive effect of the WBT was observed primarily for the knowledge test but also for the questionnaires on SRL and self-efficacy. A slightly negative effect was found for the mathematics test.

Based on evaluation forms after each of the three training lessons, we found the experimental manipulation check to be positive: Participants in groups T and TD reported duration of the training to be very close to the intended duration and judged the content of the training to be both novel to them and very useful. This finding was further supported by the fact that declarative knowledge concerning SRL was greatly increased in the two training groups T and TD but not in the control groups C and D. Without this finding, a training effect for the WBT could hardly be plausible, because knowledge about strategies is a prerequisite for their application. Concerning the SRL questionnaire, all groups demonstrated decreases in self-regulated learning over the course of the study, although this was significantly more pronounced in the control groups C and D. The web-based training, on the other hand, appeared to attenuate this decrease in the training groups T and TD. Self-efficacy increased in all groups during the study but was significantly greater in the two training groups. Performance in the mathematics course also improved in all groups; however, the improvement was unexpectedly less pronounced in the training groups.

Trend analyses provide additional support for the positive effect on self-regulated learning, as we found a significant positive linear trend for the training and diary group TD but not for the diary only group D. This result makes a strong case against social desirability, as it is not plausible that participants slowly and linearly increased socially desirable answers over time.

The positive trend in the diary seems to contradict the decrease in the pre-postanalysis of the SRL questionnaire. However, one must keep in mind that the questionnaire is more of a trait measurement, whereas the diary is a state measurement. We suppose that participants tended to overestimate their competence of SRL in the pre-questionnaire – perhaps due to their recent accomplishment of successfully completing their compulsory education. In the unusual setting of the online preparation course, however, where no teacher is there to advise them what to do next, many participants might have experienced a subjective lack of competence of SRL. While daily reported SRL behavior increased due to the WBT (as observed in the diary), participants might still have been disappointed in their overall performance during the course, which manifested itself in lower SRL scores in the post-questionnaire.

Taking a closer look at the subscales of the SRL questionnaire revealed that training effects were predominantly observable for planning and self-instruction. While effects on goal setting and cognitive learning strategies were less prominent, effects on self-motivation and distraction avoidance were close to zero. Surprisingly, we found a slightly negative training effect on reflection.

As the intervention analyses indicate, increasing SRL in the diary was directly linked to the onset of the three WBT lessons. The intervention effect of each training lesson was significant and moderate to large in magnitude for the overall SRL score in the diary. Taking a closer look at the specific SRL strategies that each lesson was intended to foster revealed an even greater effect for Lesson 1 “Before Learning”, a moderate effect for Lesson 2 “During Learning”, and a nonsignificant effect for Lesson 3 “After Learning”. Thus, Lesson 1 and, to a lesser degree, Lesson 2 served their intended purpose. Results regarding Lesson 3, on the other hand, indicate that modifications of this particular lesson could help improve the training effect of the WBT in general.

These findings strongly support the methodology of time series analysis – by estimating the intervention effects in this manner, we now know which lesson to focus on when revising the WBT. Because Lesson 1 already had a very strong effect on SRL, there was likely little possibility of further improving SRL through Lessons 2 and 3. Lesson 3 still had an impact on general SRL strategies, probably due to repetition of the earlier lessons, but failed to convey the specific strategies it was intended to address.

Mathematics knowledge increased in all experimental groups – this increase was especially large in the control groups. There are several possible explanations for this finding. First, participation in the WBT and the resulting SRL behavior was certainly time consuming and may have reduced the time available to participants to work on the mathematical problems. Second, as stated in the overlapping waves model by Siegler (2007), the application of new strategies often results in a short-term decrease in performance. Third, due to time constraints, it was not possible to cover all topics in the mathematics test. It is possible that the selection of items included in the test (and thereby the selection of topics) favored participants who simply worked their way through the topics in the exact order in which they were presented in the course. Participants who selected topics to work on based on their subjective importance (as was recommended in the WBT) may have chosen a different order of topics.

Nevertheless, this outcome should not be interpreted as a failure of the WBT. The intervention was specifically designed for long-term improvement that might not be observable within a four-week preparation course. A future follow-up study could investigate in depth possible long-term training effects. In the present study a follow-up measurement was not feasible due to the fact that groups C and D were permitted access to the WBT at the end of the online preparation course, virtually eliminating the differences between conditions.

4.1. Limitations
The study's main limitation is the selection of participants. The sample was recruited from prospective students in mostly technology-oriented fields: computer science, civil engineering, mechanical engineering, and mathematics. As a result, the sample is dominated by male students and is therefore not representative of prospective students in other fields. There could also be an additional selection bias within the selected fields of study. On the one hand, it is likely that those who demonstrate low self-regulated behavior might not participate in the training due to lacking motivation. On the other hand, it is just as possible that individuals with good self-regulated behavior might not feel the need to participate in the training, if they believe that the WBT does not offer them additional benefits. Another problem concerning the participants is that the training situation is somewhat paradox. The training aims to increase self-regulated learning behavior. However, at the same time, self-regulated behavior is necessary to successfully complete the WBT. Thus, individuals lacking self-regulated behavior may not comply thoroughly with the training and may therefore have less training effect. Thus, it is possible that lacking self-regulated behavior reduced the size of the training effect.

Another limitation concerns students' behavior during the lessons. In contrast to trainings in a classroom setting, we were unable to observe participants' behavior in specific situations as well as their compliance to training instructions. To further clarify the processes leading to promoted self-regulated learning, future research could observe participants during training sessions – for instance, using think-aloud protocols.

Due to the study design, it could be seen as problematic that the untrained groups did not receive placebo training. It is possible that the observed effects would have emerged when participants were trained on any content related to learning. However, we chose this approach because it would be ethically problematic to waste prospective students' time with a training that is not expected to be beneficial.

A final limitation arises as a result of the study's design. The study provides no answer to the question whether the WBT is as equally effective as a face-to-face training held by a real trainer. The study provides information regarding advantages and disadvantages of WBT but no comparison to different approaches. However, although such a comparison would be interesting, it is difficult to realize. To do so, both approaches would have to be parallelized – i.e., include the exact same content, use similar training methods, and identical measurement instruments. However, such parallel trainings are difficult to create and would neglect the unique advantages associated with each method. Face-to-face trainings, for instance, focus heavily on the interaction between participants, whereas WBTs can offer highly individualized training. Methods such as a group discussion are very different depending on whether discussion partners are physically or only virtually present. This holds true for other features, as well, such as games and materials that are available online whenever needed. Thus, it may be appropriate to view WBTs and traditional trainings not as two methods with a common purpose but rather as two methods suitable for different situations and offering different advantages that should be capitalized on to their fullest extent.

4.2. Perspectives and future research
The present study makes a strong case for time series analysis in intervention studies using learning diaries. Using this methodology, naturalistic studies can be conducted in an economical manner. Advantages are the possibility to analyze both nomothetically and ideographically as well as to differentiate partial effects when there is more than one instance of intervention.

Concerning the lack of positive effect on mathematics performance there are a number of improvements in research design that we propose: First, it seems necessary to cover all mathematical topics of the preparation course with one problem in the mathematics pre- and post-test. Although two or even more problems per topic might be eligible, but this would result in too much of a burden for participants. Adaptive testing could offer a solution for this dilemma. Second, asking participants which topics they intended to focus on would afford the possibility to investigate whether they improved their knowledge consistent with their personal learning goals. We believe that a score calculated only for the problems individually relevant to a person should reflect the result of self-regulated learning much better than an overall score including topics that a person intentionally left out. Third, a follow-up test after several weeks seems to be more realistic time frame for a change of learning behavior to translate into increased performance.

In order to increase efficiency of the WBT, shortening of content might appear to be desirable, although the current duration of three lesson with 90 min each is already more concise than comparable face-to-face trainings (e.g. Perels et al., 2005: 6 ∗ 1.5 h; Schmitz & Wiese, 2006: 4 ∗ 2 h; Werth et al., 2012: 6 ∗ 1 h). A feasible approach would be to experimentally test the effect of each lesson (or even each chapter) of the WBT separately, pruning out all parts without significant effects on performance. However, one has to bear in mind that differential effects might occur depending on the initial SRL competency: One person might lack goal setting strategies but be proficient in self-motivation, while another person might show a contrary profile. We therefore advocate a diagnostic test with individual feedback preceding the WBT. This way, contents of the training could be recommended depending on the needs of each participant.

An improvement in the training method might be a combination of WBT and traditional trainings. That is, participants could acquire the declarative knowledge of the training via WBT in their individual learning tempo and with automatized feedback on a knowledge test. At a later time, they could discuss their personal experience in a real training group and observe the trainer as a role model for self-regulated behavior.

Future developments should emphasize the intervention character of the learning diary – by exploiting the possibilities of online diaries, learning diaries can be used to implement feedback interventions (K. Schmidt et al., 2011). Automatized feedback provided by the computer could refer to SRL components reported by participants on rating scales. For example, participants with low SRL performance on a particular day could be prompted to reflect more on that day's learning experience in the post-learning diary and set ambitious goals in the pre-learning diary on the following day. Furthermore, peer feedback could be used to analyze the open questions in the diary – for example, by evaluating the formulation of learning goals.

We believe that a central advantage of fostering SRL by means of a WBT over other approaches such as scaffolding or prompting often used in CBLEs is the possible transfer of newly acquired SRL strategies to different learning tasks. Although our WBT was created in the context of the online mathematics preparation course, the SRL strategies taught are universal and students should be able to apply them in other courses as well. However, this hypothesis was not tested in this study and requires further research.

As a conclusion, we find that WBT has great potential in the training of SRL, particularly in situations where face-to-face training is not possible, e.g. due to geographical distances or when the number of participants exceeds the resources of human trainers.

Appendix A. Description of the training
A.1. Lesson 1 — Before Learning
The first lesson contains the three chapters “Introduction”, “Setting Goals”, and “Time Management”.

The chapter “Introduction” presents an overview of the whole training and establishes the relevance of self-regulated learning in general. In an animated video (created with GoAnimate, http://www.goanimate.com) the virtual trainer Tom welcomes the virtual participant Lisa and gives her a synopsis of the content of the first lesson (see Fig. A1). The following presentation (created with Prezi, http://www.prezi.com) explains the process model of self-regulated learning (Schmitz & Wiese, 2006) by means of one of three examples chosen by the user (see Fig. A2).

Fig. A4
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. A1. Screenshot from video created with GoAnimate.

Fig. 1
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. A2. Screenshot from presentation created with Prezi.

In the chapter “Setting Goals” participants are instructed to set goals and to formulate goals using the SMART technique (Doran, 1981). In a little online game (created with Adobe Flash Professional CS5.5, http://www.adobe.com/de/products/flash) participants are told to imagine a spontaneous travel with a friend without knowing the destination (see Fig. A3). The task is then to pack their bags with a variety of clothes to choose from. Depending on the user's choice the travel destination is determined dynamically so that the clothes are not appropriate, e.g. if the user chose primarily sporty clothes the destination is an opera. The following video deals with the frustration that participants might have experienced and explains that without knowing one's goals it is not possible to choose the right means. Users are then asked to set goals for their online preparation course and for their academic studies afterwards. In the next presentation (created with Microsoft Powerpoint and distributed via Slideshare, http://www.slideshare.com), the SMART technique is introduced and participants are asked to refine their former goal setting using this technique (see Fig. A4).

Fig. 2
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. A3. Screenshot from game created with Adobe Flash Professional CS5.5.

Fig. 3
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. A4. Screenshot from presentation created with Microsoft Powerpoint and Slideshare.

The chapter “Time Management” helps users to derive action plans from their goals, to reflect their own time management and to create a learning plan for their online preparation course. Participants are guided to create a mind map of their own activities and chores, including length and priority of each of those activities. They are then asked to postactivities that they found inefficient to an online forum and to discuss them with their peers. In the following presentation well-established recommendations of time management are presented and transferred to the conditions of the online preparation course. The final task is to create a detailed time schedule for the four weeks of the online preparation course.

At the end of Lesson 1 the virtual trainer summarized the content in a video and encourages participants to write down all strategies that they found helpful in their personal strategy manual in order to implement them within the next days.

A.2. Lesson 2 — During Learning
The second lesson contains the chapters “Procrastination”, “Dealing with Distractions”, “Volition”, and “Learning Strategies”.

The chapter “Procrastination” starts with a picture story of virtual participant Lisa that postpones learning for her exams repeatedly but in the end reproaches herself for not having started earlier. Users are led to identify with this situation and to describe their own experiences with procrastination. After exploring similarities between the different situations and reflecting assets and drawbacks of delaying tasks in general, participants view a presentation with helpful clues like rewarding oneself or committing oneself in front of others.

In the chapter “Dealing with Distractions” users performed the Stroop color word interference test with and without background music (Cassidy & MacDonald, 2007) in order to experience for themselves whether their personal performance would be enhanced or diminished by music. After that a check list is presented which participants can use to identify potential external distractions (e.g. telephone calls) and internal distractions (e.g. tiredness). A presentation gives hint on how to deal with such distractions.

The chapter “Volition” starts with a video about children performing the marshmallow test (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). The following presentation explains the relevance of delay of gratification for learning and how volition can be trained. In a short physical exercise participants try the effect of self-motivation on themselves by thinking about a positive picture and repeating a positive motto while exercising in the first trial and comparing it to a second trial with a negative picture in mind and repeating a negative motto. Users are then encouraged to formulate a personal motto for their online preparation course.

In the last chapter “Learning Strategies” both cognitive, metacognitive and resource-oriented strategies are dealt with. All learning strategies (e.g. elaboration as one cognitive learning strategy, monitoring as one metacognitive strategy, and help seeking as one resource-oriented strategy) are explained and transferred to the situation of the online preparation course with hints on how to implement them. A discussion forum serves to encourage users to share their experiences with different strategies with their peers.

The lesson ends with a short summary and a reference to the strategy manual as in the first lesson.

A.3. Lesson 3 — After Learning
The third lesson contains the chapters “Dealing with Success and Failure”, “Reflection”, and “Motivation”.

The chapter “Dealing with Success and Failure” focuses on attribution and reference standards. A video shows virtual participant Lisa dealing with different situations of failure. The following presentation explains attribution theory (Weiner, 1985) and advocates an internal and unstable attribution for both successful and unsuccessful learning situations (e.g. “I was successful because I made enough effort.”). Afterwards the concept of social and individual frame of reference (Festinger, 1954) is established and an individual frame of reference is explained to be particularly motivating (e.g. comparing one's current knowledge with one's prior knowledge before learning). In an exercise users are guided to calculate their mean time investment in the online preparation course to date and to set a goal to surpass their individual frame of reference.

In the chapter “Reflection” the process model of self-regulated learning (Schmitz & Wiese, 2006) is revisited with a focus on the cyclical character of this model. A presentation advises participants to reflect whether a learning situation was successful or not and to infer intentions for the next learning situation. This principle is applied to three time levels: short-term (e.g. reflection after one particular mathematical problem), medium-term (e.g. reflection at the end of one learning day), and long-term (e.g. reflection after examination period). Participants are advised to recall their learning goals previously set in Lesson 1 and to reflect about whether they have achieved their goals.

The last chapter “Motivation” is intended to help participants to understand how they can actively improve their own motivation. Motivation being important in all phases of the process model of self-regulated learning, this chapter also serves as a summary of the entire training. Starting with an imagination exercise, users are guided to think about how they will feel when they will have reached their goals. Afterwards they are asked for obstacles that might prevent them from doing so. By switching the perspective repeatedly, motivation is supposed to increase (Oettingen, Pak, & Schnetter, 2001). Implementation intentions (Gollwitzer, 1999) are then used to prepare participants for coping with obstacles (e.g. “If the weather is nice and I don't feel like learning, I close the curtains and reward myself for learning afterwards with ice cream.”). A presentation explains the difference between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation and proposes strategies to foster intrinsic motivation (e.g. to recall successful moments). In a discussion forum users are asked to describe possible rewards for achieved daily goals.

The lesson ends with the participants writing a letter to their future self in which they state the insights they have got from the training. Participants were told the letters would be sent back to them in a non-specified future by the experimenter with the intention of reminding them of the strategies learnt in the training.

