The paper discusses how the intercultural knowledge is enhanced in a technology-enabled learning environment. We developed a comparative reflection approach, for an undergraduate course participated by three groups of students, who were globally distributed in the US, Mainland China, and Taiwan. Made possible by the videoconferencing technology, the approach included two group-based tasks of describing, comparing, analyzing, and reflecting on everyday activities and cultural practices. To evaluate the design effectiveness, we conducted a discourse-based ethnographic study to examine the knowledge construction stimulated by the task design. We identified that, while all the three groups constructed cultural-specific knowledge on the first task, some constructed deep cultural knowledge and insightful cross-cultural interpretations on the second task. As student groups undertook the two progressive tasks, they worked through various levels of understandings, hence moving from surface to deep learning.
Keywords
Videoconferencing
Reflection
Intercultural knowledge
Cultural difference
Higher education

1. Introduction
The videoconferencing technology has been widely adopted by intercultural and language educators to bridge globally distributed students for mediated interaction (Beldarrain, 2006; O'Dowd, 2006). The videoconferencing technology allows instructors and students to set up real-time, face-to-face meetings with remote participants in a cost-effective manner ((Arnold, Cayley, & Griffith, 2002). In comparison with the traditional student exchange program, the intercultural communication enabled by the videoconferencing technology can avoid travel and relocation costs or potential resource loss of leaving one's home country (Grayson & Coventry, 1998). Such an advantage in the cost shows a great implication on education equity, as it can empower students with limited financial resources.

Previous studies have showed that the videoconferencing technology had unique advantages in supporting intercultural knowledge construction (Armitt, Slack, Green, & Beer, 2002; Levin, He, & Robbins, 2006; McBrien, Cheng, & Jones, 2009; O'Dowd, 2000). Its immediacy in communication affords spontaneous, continuous, and frequent interaction among learners, which is proven necessary for the negotiation and synthesis of new ideas. Through the videoconferencing communication, students gain deeper knowledge of their own and alien culture (Lawson, Comber, Gage, & Cullum-Hanshaw, 2010; Lee, 2007; Liu, Morrison, Dai, & Lu, 2015; O'Dowd, 2006). Nevertheless, such development of student knowledge tends to be centred on the factual knowledge of highbrow (e.g., literature and arts) and lowbrow information (e.g., customs and folklore), with limited in-depth cultural knowledge or insightful cross-cultural interpretation (Çiftçi, 2016). To address this issue, scholars urge to transform the fact-based ‘content-competence’ model and forge deeper learning among students (Blasco, 2012; Dasli & Diaz, 2016).

The notion of reflection has gained prominence as scholars search for practical approaches to achieve the transformation. Reflection plays a critical role in the intercultural teaching and learning, especially in helping students move from surface to deep learning (Blasco, 2012; Deardorff, 2006; Nagata, 2005). Traditionally, reflection is assumed as a ‘source of superior insight, perspicacity or awareness’ (Lynch, 2000) that could be triggered naturally. This problematic assumption indicates a lack of theoretical underpinning and sustainable input in the relevant practices. As such, we need more theory-informed and design-based research that innovates the design of teaching and learning activities to trigger student reflections toward the intercultural knowledge construction (Beldarrain, 2006; Nagata, 2006).

Against this background, we present a comparative reflection approach that is validated upon a videoconferencing-based course among three universities in the United States (US), Mainland China, and Taiwan. This approach included a learning assignment with two progressive group-based tasks. Through the task engagement, we hoped to engage students in a structured, intentional, and collaborative process of comparative reflection, and therefore, enhance their intercultural knowledge, particularly the deep cultural knowledge. In implementing this approach, we conducted an ethnographic study to examine the student participation and evaluate its effectiveness in facilitating students' intercultural knowledge construction.

2. Literature review
We adopted Deardorff's framework of intercultural knowledge, and combined it with Bloom's taxonomy that provided a framework to approach different levels of learning. Meanwhile, we elicited four design principles based on a thorough literature review, which informed our development of the comparative reflection approach.

2.1. Intercultural knowledge construction
Intercultural knowledge is a vital component of intercultural competence. According to Deardorff (2006), intercultural knowledge includes cultural self-awareness, deep understanding and knowledge of culture, cultural-specific information, and sociolinguistic awareness. Underlying these components is a common focus on the “processes and practices related to social groups and individuals, along with comparative perspectives and knowledge of the cross-cultural learning process” (Czerwionka, Artamonova, & Barbosa, 2015).

Intercultural knowledge has long been a learning objective for global educational programs. It provides students with an informed frame of reference to ‘make accurate predictions and attributions’ in intercultural encounters (Wiseman, 2002), and therefore, to behave appropriately and communicate effectively. The more students know about other cultures, the more likely they would transit from overly emphasizing their own culture, to accepting, respecting, and adapting other cultures.

Deardorff's framework is characterized by a pyramid model with various degrees of competence, which allows customized design of specific programs or assessments according to the situated context (Deardorff, 2009). For example, the intercultural knowledge is often presented in two interdependent levels: cultural-specific knowledge and deep cultural knowledge, implying the growth path from surface to deep knowledge. Culture-specific knowledge refers to understandings about characteristics that can define a culture, such as practices, traditions, and cultural values. In contrast, deep cultural knowledge goes beyond factual information and delves into “the context, role, and impact of culture and others' worldviews” (Deardorff, 2006).

The cultural-specific and deep knowledge is echoed in Bloom's taxonomy with five levels of cognition: remember, understand, apply, analyze, and evaluate (cf. Anderson et al., 2001; Bloom, 1956). That is, learning can be seen as a continuum ranging from the stage of surface learning, where a learner simply identifies and memorizes new ideas, to the stage of deep learning that is highly collaborative, integrative and reflective, where a learner integrates new ideas into his/her existing cognitive structure through social negotiation (e.g., Beattie IV, Collins, & McInnes, 1997; Ke & Xie, 2009). Through this learning process, students work through various levels of understanding, moving from recall-based questioning (e.g., identify and list) toward reflection-driven questions that require a deeper level of understanding (e.g., compare, contrast, and evaluate). The learning at lower levels can build skills that lead to the higher levels, and the learning at upper levels can reinforce the lower-level skills.

Although intercultural knowledge can be constructed at different levels, few design-based studies have addressed the transition across levels, especially how to triger the moving from the surface to learning. The cognitive activities involved in this transiting process have been under-examined, yet research is too few to clarify its pathway. As such, the challenge in enhancing students' intercultural knowledge, becomes how to create learning opportunities and orient students to progressively gain deep knowledge.

2.2. Comparative reflection for intercultural knowledge
Intercultural knowledge construction is closely associated with reflective practices. According to the constructivist pedagogies, reflection is a kind of thinking, in which, the self(selves) becomes an object to oneself (selves) for “serious and consecutive consideration” (Dewey, 1896; Vygotsky, 1925/1999). Boud, Keogh, and Walker (1985) argue that the stimulation of reflection is essential for active learning and deep knowledge construction, as a reflective process involves synthesis of knowledge through an iterative re-evaluation of the experience by undertaking association, integration, validation, and appropriation. From this perspective, to reflect interculturally, is to make meaning of one's cultural experience and construct new understandings upon the reflected experience (Blasco, 2012).

We further reviewed relevant research to identify the gaps and potentials for a new reflective approach toward intercultural knowledge. Through the review, we elicited four design principles.

Firstly, as reflection is inherently a meaning-making process, the effective reflection often takes place in and through peer interaction (Blasco, 2012; Gudykunst & Kim, 2003; Markus, 2001). Social interaction can catalyze the creative exploration of a complex topic and facilitate the collaborative negotiation for the best view to support the intepretation. Traditionally, videoconferencing was not considered as an effective means to trigger student reflection, as the pressure of immediate response in synchronous communication appeared to afford little time and space for students to rethink and reflect. However, recent evidence has suggested otherwise, due to its interactive and collaborative nature, videoconferencing lends itself to a more dynamic and responsive form of reflection, along with enhanced depth and breadth in thinking (Armitt et al., 2002; Greene, 2007; Levin et al., 2006). Enabled by the increased internet bandwidth, the higher video quality can greatly improve the degree of “social presence”, and instill a closeness and trust among distant learners, creating a relatively safe place for reflection (McBrien et al., 2009).

Secondly, the reflection in intercultural settings often take place within the juxtaposition of two or more cultures, where the alien culture serves as the reference for reflection (Otten, 2003). That is, rather than merely rethinking one's own experience, the intercultural reflection is associated with contrastive analysis of multiple cultures (Kealey, Protheroe, MacDonald, & Vulpe, 2005; Nagata, 2005; Samovar & Porter, 2009; Silva & Duval, 2001). Initially drawing upon cross-cultural psychology and anthropology, the contrastive approach was intended to overcome the shortcomings of the factual information transmission model, as it embeds culture within an interpretative framework and reinforce the connection between self and other (Bennett, Bennett, & Allen, 2003; Kramsch, 1993; Liaw, 2006). Nevertheless, educators warn that the contrastive approach might have the risk of oversimplifying the richness and variety of a culture into some salient principles. It might have misrepresented a culture or even fossilized stereotypes, failing to capture the subtle difference across different cultures (Guest, 2002; Ortuno, 1991).

Thirdly, the reflection on cultural constructs should be linked with a student's everyday live and personal experience (Andenoro, Popa, Bletscher, & Albert, 2012; Colvin & Edwards, 2018; Jackson, 2011). Such links can not only enhance a student's understanding about the conceptual constructs, but also orient his/her to critically analyze their cultural assumptions and challenge the ‘taken-for-granted’, resulting in a more enlightened understanding of oneself. Besides, reflecting on the daily activities can help avoid the tendency to reproduce cultural stereotypes. When student reflections are supported by the real-life details, they are more likely to notice the micro-variation and “the context, role, and impact of culture and others.” On the other hand, some educators are concerned that the adherence to the everyday life and local details may be inadequate for fostering global understandings. Regarding this debate, it is increasingly leaning toward a consensus that the intercultural knowledge must be taught in a way to prepare students to be both global and local competent (Kramsch & Sullivan, 1996). To achieve the dual-purpose learning, instructional materials and activities should be applicable for both local and global contexts that are familiar or relevant to students' lives.

Fourthly, despite the various forms and “depths” of reflection, the fundamental purpose of reflection is not to figure out the what or how, but rather the why, “the reason for and consequences of what I/we do” (Fisher-Yoshida, 2005; Mezirow, 1990; Nagata, 2006; Taylor, 1994). That is, to reflect is to go beyond one's action and experience for insightful understandings about why people do things in a certain way. From this perspective, reflection is critical and analytical, seeking to challenge and reassess one's orientation to perceiving, knowing, believing, and acting. According to Bryam and Fleming (1998), students can develop such critical and analytical reflection through the training of “intercultural speakers,” in which students openly and publicly communicate what they find from reflections. They argue that this kind of public reflection can form a loop of iterative reflections, where students can further compare and reflect on their previous reflective practices, and realize how the life experience and personal background shape a person's reflective practice and forward thinking.

Guided by these principles, we developed the comparative reflection approach. Going beyond the general reflective practice, our approach emphasized the comparative analysis of cultures, based on which, we oriented students to critically analyze the whys behind similar/different cultural phenomenon. Through this approach, we hoped to enhance students' intercultural knowledge, moving from the cultural-specific to deep knowledge.

3. Research design
3.1. Research site and participants
This research was situated in an undergraduate course among three universities in the US, Mainland China, and Taiwan. The course was a pilot effort of the three universities to explore a technology-enabled approach for intercultural education. The three universities were all tier-one research universities, with an undergraduate population ranging from 15,000 to 20,000 students. The focal course was developed by a senior engineering professor from the US university as the instructor, on the subject matter of global innovation in product design. A key learning objective of this course was to equip students with the intercultural knowledge, which was framed as the basis to identify emerging innovation opportunities in the global market.

The course was offered as a three-unit elective for junior and senior undergraduates in the three participating universities. The students were enrolled on a first-come, first-served basis, with a prescreening to ensure the conversational proficiency in English, since the course was conducted entirely in English. The course was open to students from all majors in the universities of Mainland China and Taiwan, while it was only open to engineering and business students in the US university. A cohort of 20 students from each university participated in this course (the research), making a class of 60 students. The three cohorts were labeled as Group A (the US), Group B (Mainland China), Group C (Taiwan) in this research. Table 1 shows the student composition with respect to the disciplinary background and gender distribution.


Table 1. Student composition in the three groups.

Engineering	Science	Social science	Humanity & arts	Gender (male: female)	Total
Group A	15	0	5	0	12:8	20
Group B	6	2	7	5	8:12	20
Group C	7	2	7	4	7:13	20
3.2. The design of learning environment
We designed a comparative reflection approach for the situated course by the instructor's invitation. The design included two components, the learning environment and learning activities. The environmental design was centered on the deployment of the videoconferencing technology, through which, we connected three globally distributed classrooms toward a public learning space.

Fig. 1 illustrates the classroom layout, i.e., a design of interactive learning environment). While the three sites followed the same classrom layout, there were some minor variations in terms of how the equipment was arranged, integrated, and controlled considering the local constraints. As shown in Fig. 1, the classroom was equipped with three screens of the equal size, to project the lecture slide, the instructor, and the combined live streams of the two remote classrooms.1 In each classroom, a number of cameras and microphones were installed to capture and transmit the audio and video for the live streaming though videoconferencing. The table microphones afforded students an easy access to participating in the real-time interaction.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (162KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The classroom layouts.

Besides, we used the WebEx, a web-conferencing software, to manage the videoconferencing connection across classrooms, along with a dedicated internet bandwidth to ensure the video quality. In each classroom, a technical staff was responsible for setting up the classroom, managing the connection, and providing on-site supports. With these technical and personnel support, we hoped to shorten the physical stance and create public space for idea exchange and collaborative reflection.

3.3. The design of learning activities
Informed by the four design principles and the social construction perspective of learning, we designed a cross-cultural assignment with a series of learning activities. The assignment included two group-based tasks, each with a public presentation to report the task outcomes to the whole class. Students from the same university formed a group, i.e., Group A (the US), Group B (Mainland China), Group C (Taiwan).

As illustrated in Fig. 2, the assignment started with the task presentation by the instructor, when the instructor explained the assignment to the whole class. The three groups were given two weeks to work on the first task:

(1)
Each group was tasked to deliver a 10-min presentation to describe the ordinary life of college students on the local campus;

(2)
In the presentation, the description about student life should be “detailed and contextual”, situating student activities in specific contexts, such as “how and in what ways, you do some activity, by and with whom, under what condition, for what purpose”.

Focusing on the “detailed and contextual” way of describing student activities, this task aimed to orient students to re-think and re-examine their everyday life and “taken-for-granted.” The specific requirement of “how and in what ways (doing these activities)” was to prevent an overly simply and general description, as well as to avoid the reproduction of stereotypes. The presentation, in making public each group's outcome, was to create an opportunity for further comparison and reflection.

After two weeks' preparation outside the classroom, the three groups attended the videoconferencing class session from the local classrooms. The two-hour class session started with student presentations from the first task, where the three groups showed their own work and observed each other's work.

Following the presentations, was the second task: the videoconferencing connection was cut off, and the groups were given an in-class task within 30 min:

(1)
Each group would compare the similarity and difference in the student activities shown in the presentations for the first task.

(2)
Based on the comparison, each group would then analyze what had shaped the identified similarity and difference.

(3)
Each group would prepare another five-minute presentation to showcase their reflection and analysis.

For the second task, the three groups worked independently, as they did in the first task. The groups started with comparative analysis of the previous presentations to identify similarities and differences, though which, students were guided to scrutinize the factual information and probe into the underlying reasons, i.e., ‘what made one's ordinary life extraordinary (when compared with others),’ and ‘what makes a cultural practice functionally and culturally distinctive.’ By doing so, we hoped that students would go beyond the hows and whats regarding the surface-level similarity/difference and construct deep understanding and insightful interpretation about cultures. After the 30-min group work in private space, the technical staff reconnected the three classrooms for the second round of presentations.

Following the above structure, the instructor led the class in doing these specially designed activities, with logistical support from the local teaching teams. In both tasks, the basic unit of engagement was the group classified by the university affiliation. With the group work, we sought to engage students in the interactive and collaborative process of comparative reflection and knowledge construction.

3.4. Data collection and analysis
We conducted an ethnographic study to evaluate the impacts of the comparative reflection approach on students' intercultural knowledge construction. We asked two research questions (RQ):

RQ1

What intercultural knowledge had been constructed by students in doing the given assignment?

RQ2

How and in what ways did the comparative reflection approach facilitate students' intercultural knowledge construction?

To answer the questions, we adopted a discourse-based ethnographic approach, which used discourse as the empirical basis to approach the knowledge construction (Bloome, Carter, Christian, Otto, & Shuart-Faris, 2004; Green, Skukauskaite, & Baker, 2012). As all the groups used the verbal language (spoken or written) for meaning representation in their task presentations, discourse served as a common base for in-group and cross-group examinations. Besides, by tracing the discourse across moments, we could identify different levels of understanding construction, as students worked through the two tasks, based on which, we further discussed how the comparative reflection approach triggered the moving from surface to deep learning.

We collected data from multiple sources. Two educational ethnographers from the research team attended class sessions in the US classroom and conducted the participant observation (Spradley, 2016). Meanwhile, the classroom interaction was recorded on the local sites, which were collected as multimedia filed-notes. These video records greatly helped us understand the happenings in the Mainland China and Taiwan classrooms. Due to the instructor's concern that the presence of researchers would interfere the group work, we were not permitted to observe the groups' out-of-class preparation on the first task. To make up for the missed data, we interviewed two students from each group after the class session, to retrieve their group work process. Our interview questions included, for example, ‘what did you take away from the task,’ and ‘what did you see as the requirement and purpose of the assignment’. We followed the sociolinguistic convention in transcribing the class videos and interview audios, in which we transcribed the discourse in message units with contextualizational cues (Gumperz, 1992).

We combined discourse analysis and ethnography in analyzing the collected data. Given the group-based learning tasks, our analytical unit was the group, rather than individual students. Specifically, based on the transcripts of in-class presentations and interviews, we analyzed what had been proposed, recognized, acknowledged, and accomplished through the discourse and action, to identify the understandings constructed by students. Then we juxtaposed the identified student understandings with the task requirement under Deardorff's framework, to evaluate their learning outcomes and knowledge development. Additionally, we analyzed the cognitive activities students engaged in doing the tasks, to assess how the task design supported or constrained the respective learning. Throughout the analytical process, we triangulated data from multiple sources to explain and verify each other (Green & Chain, 2018).

Moreover, we drew upon insights from multiple researchers and insiders to enhance the trustworthiness of data analysis. This research was situated in a three-year research project, involving four educational ethnographers and two engineering educators. The researchers collaborated on data collection, but developed their own ‘sub-projects’ in the same site. For example, in terms of transcription, a researcher first transcribed the records, followed by a second researcher who reviewed the records and transcripts. The two researchers then presented their results, with disagreements highlighted, to the research team, who collectively negotiated and resolved the disagreements. Also, we shared some analyses to the course participants, i.e., students, teaching assistants, faculty members, to ensure that our interpretation was consistent with the insiders' perspectives and experiences.

4. Results
We present the research findings in two parts, each focusing on the analysis of a task. In each part, we demonstrate the groups' knowledge construction and explain how the task design facilitated such construction. Particularly, in analyzing the student performance, we created the flow of activities that the three groups constructed in the class session, as shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (256KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The flow of group activities in the class session.

4.1. The first task: cultural-specific knowledge and surface learning
The class session started with presentations from the first task, i.e., the detailed and contextual description of student activities. The three groups took turn to showcase their group work: a theatrical play, a self-made movie, and a PowerPoint slideshow. From the participant observation, we found that all three presentations focused on student activities. To further analyze their ways of describing the activities, we analyzed the discourse (text) used in the presentations.

We present a focused analysis of Group A to demonstrate the analytical process. In the presentation, students of Group A performed the theatrical play, as if actors, in the local classroom (stage), with voice-overs synchronously explaining such performance. In this way, Group A depicted the daily routine and regular activities of an imaginary student named Ruby. For example, in the scene of Getting Ready for School, the voice-over was as follows:

Alarm rang at 8 o'clock. Ruby reluctantly left her warm bed and went straightly to her laptop. After checking Facebook and mailbox, Ruby packed her things and got ready to go. Before going out the door, she looked out the window: Ahhh it's a typical Taipei day! Cloudy. It looks like it's going have afternoon showers. So she decided to have a backpack rather than a shoulder bag…

Accompanied by the acting, the voice-over described student activities with abundant details and specific information about the context. In correspondence to the task requirement, we identified the contextual information: when – after 8 o'clock, the environment – a bedroom with a window, for what purpose – checking the weather, under what condition – cloudy weather, with what consequence – changing from a shoulder bag to a backpack. With such information, Group A specified the situated context of student activities and reproduced a detailed description as required by the task. As such, we concluded that Group A achieved the intended learning outcome.

Using a similar method, we analyzed Group B's self-made movie, in which, they narrated student activities in the form of a documentary film. We elicited rich contextual information from the texts inserted into the movie (i.e., intertitles and captions), and therefore, concluded that Group B achieved the outcome as well.

As for Group C, four delegate students delivered a PowerPoint slideshow to introduce the transportation, food, academic life, and extracurriculum life of local students. Nevertheless, their slideshow appeared to ignore the requirement of “detailed and contextual description”, since they did not include much contextual information to explain these activities. For example, in introducing transport solutions for ‘going to school’, the presenter Nina said:

So, for going to school… The two most popular are likely bike or walking. There's also longboarding, rollerblading, ride scooters. More recently there's a thing called a chariot, where a guy bikes and two people sit in the back. That's kind of the newest implementation of transportation at our university. Another thing that we have is called the campus cruiser.

In this segment, Nina listed different means of transportation, such as bicycle, walking, longboarding, rollerblading, ride scooter, chariot, and campus cruiser. She did not explain the contexts about how, why, and under what conditions these facilities were used in the everyday life, but merely summarizing the means with brief descriptions. In examining the rest of the slideshow, we identified the same pattern that Group A included an exhaustive list of individual options, as if, a tour guide, without contextualizing nor elaborating each option. Group A's slideshow appeared to have missed the task requirement of ‘contextual’ description (i.e., “how and in what ways, you do some activity, by and with whom, under what condition, for what purpose”). As such, though Group C provided a comprehensive description of student lives, they did not fully achieve the task expectation.

Despite the varying degrees of fulfilling the requirements, the three groups unanimously agreed that the first task “forced” them to step back, scrutinize, and reflect on their everyday lives. For example, a student from Group A viewed this process as “weird at first.” According to the student, in preparting the task, the group had to “observe our habited behavior as strangers” and “replay(ed) the ordinary experiences in extremely slow motion,” in order to reconstruct their experiences in a detailed way. Even for Group C that did not create a contextual description as required, in their task preparation, each student looked at his or her daily activities and pulled out the individual options in transportation, food, academic life, and extracurricular activity. Next, Group C aggregated such individual reflections toward a comprehensive list.

As shown from the interviews, doing the first task can be seen as a process of deconstruction, reconstruction, and representation. During the process, students reflected on their daily activities and identified patterns of cultural practice in their own lives, resulting in better understandings of their own culture.

Besides, students gained a familiarity with other cultures by watching the presentations of their counterparts. For example, a student from Group C explained in the interview:

It kinda amazed me in watching what they do every day, where they live, how they go to school, what they eat, et cetera. It amazed me because before that, when talking about culture, it was always about something very general, like Chinese saves faces and avoid confrontation, or individualism versus collectivism. But now we get to know what they do exactly in their life…

The presentations created opportunities for the three groups to share and exchange culture-specific information about what people from other cultures did in their everyday lives. Such information might look fragmentary, but concretized students' imaginations and perceptions about other cultures, which subtly enhanced their intercultural knowledge. Especially, enabled by the detailed and comprehensive description, what students learned were not general traits or stereotypes, but solid and specific experiences that were relevant to their own lives. In this way, students felt closer to a distant culture.

As shown in the above analysis, in doing the first task, students were primarily engaged in the basic level of learning and thinking, with a focus on the fact-based information. Specifically, the requirement of ‘a detailed and contextual description’ oriented them to cognitive activities such as giving descriptions, (re)organizing the represented activities, and expressing ideas. In watching others' presentations, they were to accept new facts and ideas, and to develop a familiarity with new information. Most of these activities, such as describing, identifying, listing, and reporting, took place at the low-order level and focused on remembering and understanding, in other words, the “surface” learning (Anderson et al., 2001). Correspondingly, the knowledge students constructed was the factual and basic information about specific cultures, which can be seen as the cultural-specific knowledge.

4.2. The second task: deep cultural knowledge and deep learning
Following the three presentations, was the second task: the groups analyzed the similarity/difference in student activities from previous presentations and explored the underlying reasons. After the 30-min preparation, the groups delivered their second presentations: both Group A and B orally presented their group outcomes, while Group C performed a theatrical play.

4.2.1. Deep cultural knowledge
In analyzing the presentations of Group A and B, we identified that they had constructed deep cultural knowledge. We use an excerpt from Group A's presentation to exemplify the analytical process. In this excerpt, the presenter Chien compared their own activities with those of Group C:

For Group C, we see that you guys are seeking the connection, the connectivity between students. Like the part you have mentioned the Wi-Fi, in class you try to connect with internet…Also like the Greek life, the fraternity you mentioned about… But in as for our case, we try to avoid this kind of situation. Comparing to you guys, some of the students would not try to connect internet in the class. Because we want to stay away from our friends for the free time in class. Because we have so much time to talk to them in the campus. Because we live so close together…And that's the difference… is that you try to form connection, we try to avoid others from us. And the reason behind it is because we have limited space, so we stick to other people. But you have large space, so you are distant from people. Since you're distant from people you try to find connection. We are living in limited space so we try to avoid other people since we have so much chance to get close to them.

Chien's presentation began with analyzing the different ways of doing things as shown in the previous presentations: Group C tended to get Wi-Fi connected in the classroom and were into the Greek life, while Group A tried to avoid the internet connection and social networking. Based on the cited evidence, he probed the reasons behind the identified difference: the size of personal space and need for social connection. As shown in the chain of reasoning, Chien, by reflecting on the factual information about whats of differences, had constructed deep understandings of the sociocultural factors that shaped the cultural practice. According to Deardorff's framework, such an understanding was developed based on student interpretations regarding “the context, role, and impact of culture”, and therefore, could be seen as the deep cultural knowledge.

Following the above analytical method, we identified a series of deep cultural knowledge from Group A and B′ oral presentations, as summarized in Table 2. It should be noted that our analysis was not to assess the “correctness” of student interpretations, but to uncover the in-depth meaning that students constructed from the task engagement.


Table 2. A summary of comparative reflective practices by Group A and B.

Comparing whom	Comparative reflective practice (similar and/or different activities)	Deep cultural knowledge
Group A	A & B	A: sharing dorms with three girls, with crowded study room and cafeterias;
B: sharing dorms, with a busy dining hall	A common need for space, especially personal space;
A & B	A: dancing in the metro station;
B: doing extra-curriculum activities in classrooms	Different university regulations and different levels of freedom
A & C	A: Wi-Fi and internet connection, Greek lives and fraternity;
C: avoiding internet connection, and keeping the dorm quite	Different personal spaces, leading to different needs for social connection
Group B	A & B & C	A: living in dorms
B: living in dorms with public bathrooms
C: living on private housings	The different needs for personal space and different ideas of privacy
A & B & C	A: looking around during lectures
B: sending text messages to friends
C: searching for Wi-Fi	A common issue: absent-mindedness during lectures, which was caused by different requests for educational resources
Group C performed a theatrical play as Group A did in the first task presentation. In the play, they manifested a systematic, comparative analysis of student activities among the three groups, as shown in Table 3. In comparison with the in-depth analyses of Group A and B, Group C still focused on the factual information about different/similar activities, and their reflection stayed in the basic and superficial level.


Table 3. A summary of commonalities and differences presented in Group C's play.

Identified similar/different activities
Commonalities of the three groups	
•
Bike theft

•
Not enough parking space for bikes

Differences of the three groups	
•
Buying foods from cafeteria & bringing self-made foods to school

•
Attending classes as required & having personal freedoms to decide whether to attend or not

•
Having night curfew at 11 pm & no such curfew and having 7/24 libraries

•
Living in university dorms & Driving to schools

4.2.2. Comparative reflection for deep learning
To understand how the construction of Group A and B's deep knowledge was triggered, we examined their task engagement within the groups, with respect to how the task design stimulated respective learning. We found that the integrated design of the two tasks played a critical role in mediating the deep learning. We use an excerpt from Group A's group discussion during the 30-min preparation period to demonstrate the effect of task design.

Student A: The difference I found is… the internet. Group C seemed to really care about their Wi-Fi.

Student B: I noticed that too. Tim (a presenter of Group C) said two or three times, the Wi-Fi was very important blablabla…

Student C: Hmm, but we are like that too… We also use Wi-Fi a lot here.

Student A: No no no, still different. I mean, they want it so badly, you see, once they're in classrooms, they search for Wi-Fi and log on Facebook. They want to stay online all the time and chat with people. But we are not so, desperate.

All: (laughter).

Student A: To use myself as an example, sometimes I would deliberately go offline and be invisible in social media, especially in the classroom. Because too disturbing, messages popping out now and then.

Student D: Me too!

Student E: Oh I see. The different degree of reliance. But why?

Student A: I mean, it is the social connection. They want to stay online and connected, but we would rather avoid such connection, to be with myself.

Student D: To be with yourself? Is it also the space issue we just mentioned? We lived in dorms and had limited personal space, but Facebook would drag me back to the crowded social circle.

Student E: Okay.

Student B: Smart, this is a big difference. Remember Group C said they lived off campus and drove. So they have their own room, enough personal space, but also distant from people, so they desire for connection.

In this excerpt, the students followed the task requirement and engaged in an interactive process of comparing and reflecting on student activities. In citing the activities observed from the previous presentations, they summarized, synthesized, and abstracted common/different features of student activities, rather than simply retelling those activities. For example, in discussing the activities related to Wi-Fi and Facebook, they delved into the driving force behind these activities and made abductive inferences to interpret such activities. Meanwhile, they drew connections between the groups and developed their own theories to explain and evaluate the cross-group differences. In both the within-group and across-group analyses, they demonstrated some high-order thinking, including analyzing, synthesizing, abstracting, evaluating, and abductive reasoning. In performing these cognitive activities required by the task, they went beyond the cultural-specific knowledge, and constructed more insightful cross-cultural interpretations and deep knowledge.

Besides the task requirements, the progressive sequence of the two tasks also facilitated such deep learning. That was, student reflections on the second task were built upon the presentations for the first task. While students openly described their local activities to the whole class, such factual information about student activities were turned into raw materials for comparison and reflection, hence preparing students' mind for further engagement. These two progressive and interdependent tasks directed students to distance themselves from the ‘taken-for-granted’ and rethink what made their ordinary life extraordinary. In this way, they re-evaluated their cultural assumptions, made inference about their observations, and probed their observed cross-group differences.

Also, the videoconferencing technology facilitated the comparative reflection and deep learning. As the technical staffs cut off the videoconferencing connection for the in-class task preparation, it separated the three groups and created a private space for group work. In this way, the dichotomy of ‘we’ and ‘they’ was made salient, as the groups could focus on the comparison between the self and others, which paved the path for deep reflection. Within each group, students engaged in an interactive and collaborative process of sensitizing their observed phenomenon, negotiating conflicting perspectives, and resolving conflicts into new understandings. The questions they raised to each other, and the complementary arguments built upon each other, showed how social interaction empowered their knowledge construction and deep learning.

4.2.3. Understandings about formats of presentation
In addition to the intercultural knowledge, we identified another kind of understanding that had been constructed through the first task, that was, the understanding about presentation formats, about what counted as a presentation. In particular, we observed that the three groups adopted different formats of presentations across time: for the first task, Group C delivered a PowerPoint slideshow, while Group A and B each presented a theatrical play and a self-made movie, respectively; for the second task, Group C performed a theatrical play, while Group A and B both did oral presentations.

By analyzing the student interaction and interview, we learned that the groups started the first task with varying initial understandings about presentation formats and then constructed different understandings through the comparative reflection. Specifically, both Group A and B regarded a presentation as a way to publicly communicate ideas and information, while Group C almost equated a presentation with a PowerPoint slideshow. Such understandings were found relevant to the disciplinary composition of the groups. That was, students with a particular disciplinary background were trained with a certain skillset and mentality, which might have influenced their capability and decision making in doing the given tasks.

This was particularly evident for Group C, which consisted of engineering and business students exclusively. According to the interview of a student from Group C, in doing the first task, they “unconsciously” agreed to deliver a PowerPoint slideshow as the presentation. The student explained that the academic training in the business and engineering schools was closely associated with the professional practice in workplace, where the PowerPoint slideshow was the dominating presentation format. Due to the workplace-oriented training, it never occurred to the Group C that they could adopt an alternative format until they observed the presentations of Group A and B.

In contrast, in both Group A and B, students came from a wide range of disciplines, including humanities, arts, social sciences, sciences, and engineering. As a result, students brought in more diversified resources for the group task, as well as more open-ended understandings about presentation formats. For example, despite the initial suggestion of some members, Group A purposefully avoided a PowerPoint slideshow, because one member, who majored in history and served as the President of Musical Theatre Student Society, persuaded the group that a theatrical play would be more “fun and illustrative.” Similarity, Group B had benefited from several members majoring in cinematic arts in producing a movie to depict student activities.

The first round of public presentations in the connected classrooms created a unique opportunity for contrasting and reflecting on the presentation formats. In particular, Group C had the collective reflection about the presentation formats during the task preparation:

Student H: I say, um, we should make a five-minute video right now.

Student I: iMovie!

Others: (laughter).

The local teaching assistant: (joking) You guys are really intimidated.

Though not making a video due to the time constraint, Group C still changed their format from a PowerPoint slideshow to a theatrical play on the second task. Especially, they explained such a change to the whole class via the voice-over of the play – “since we aren't as creative as you guys (in the first presentation), so we decided that we would put on a production in our attempt to be more creative.” That was, the public presentations exposed students to more ‘creative’ formats and broadened their understandings. Triggered by the comparison and reflection, they learned from the best practice and adopted the new format for the subsequent task.

The understandings about presentations of Group A and B remained stable. As shown in the above analysis, they changed their formats to oral presentations, but for a different reason. On the first task, they learned from the first-hand experiences that it required a heavier workload in preparing the theatrical play and movie, in comparison with a PowerPoint slideshow. For example, Group A wrote the play script in advance and rehearsed multiple times. Group B went through a “painful” process of writing the script, designing the performance, shooting and editing the movie. Such a heavy workload discouraged them to adopt a complex format for the second task, especially in light of the 30-min time constraint. As a result, both groups chose the format of oral presentation.

5. Discussion and conclusion
The research findings clearly show the potentials of the comparative reflection approach for the intercultural knowledge construction. Table 4 summarizes the different levels of knowledge constructed among the three groups: all the groups achieved to construct cultural-specific knowledge, and Group A and B managed to construct deep cultural knowledge. Such a knowledge construction was supported by the task design and learning environment, which triggered a sequence of high- and low-order cognitive activities. Especially, the design of the two tasks followed an easy-to-difficult schedule and engaged students in the focused, purposeful, and progressive reflection. In this process, students were directed to move from surface to deep learning, from cultural-specific knowledge to deep cultural knowledge.


Table 4. A summary of the constructed intercultural knowledge of the three groups.

Task #	Constructed knowledge	Group A	Group B	Group C
1st Task	Cultural-specific knowledge (cultures of the self and others)	√	√	√
2nd Task	Cultural-specific knowledge (similar and different cultural practices)	√	√	√
Deep cultural knowledge regarding the role, impact, and context of culture	√	√	
While this research represents a preliminary effort, it makes visible some unique values of videoconferencing in enhancing the quality and equity of intercultural education. In particular, the control of cross-classroom videoconferencing connection/disconnection, alternated between public and private space for different group engagements, hence nourishing the interactive and collaborative reflection. Instead of the cutting-edging technology, this approach relied on the innovative use of ‘old’ technologies for the mutually reinforcing designs of learning environment and task (Beetham & Sharpe, 2013; Duhaney & Zemel, 2000; Honebein, Duffy, & Fishman, 1993). Besides, complemented by the comparative reflection approach, the videoconferencing technology created a “glocal” learning experience, in which, students were enabled to involve both locally situated task engagement and globally expanded intercultural exchange.

Though the learning gap among students is by no means uncommon, Group C's performance needs more discussions. They missed the requirement of ‘contextual description’ in the first task, which they attributed to “being careless.” Then in the second task, they did not reflect on the deep reasons behind the similar/different activities, while they were drawn to the contrastive presentation formats. Such mislearning might have been caused by the lack of clarity in the assignment prompt. That was, though the assignment prompt included the requirements and expected outcomes, it did not clearly explain the rationale and objective of such requirements. The lack of clarity might have hindered student comprehension about the real expectation of the task and caused their misinterpretation about the requirements.

Besides, the disciplinary composition in Group C might have influenced their interpretation of the task requirements. Given the focus on culture, it was possible that the tasks appeared more complicated and difficult for the engineering and business students. Especially, the lack of students studying humanities and social sciences, who might have completed cultural studies in their coursework, might have led to the identified learning gap. Beyond the choice of presentation format, the disciplinary composition might have influences on the task engagement as well, which shaped their perceptions and strategies in undertaking the assignment.

The present research was bounded to several limitations, pointing out the directions for future improvement. While the instructor led the activities in the class, he did not provide much scaffolding throughout the process. Instead of actively facilitating student learning, he was mainly responsible for the smooth delivery of pre-designed activities. In the future research, we will re-design the approach in a way that the instructor can monitor student learning and provide immediate support. Meanwhile, we will improve the task clarity in the assignment prompt and incorporate appropriate “procedural facilitation” and “thinking prompt” to guide students' task engagement.

Additionally, we will continue to revise and improve the instructional and research designs, to enhance the effectiveness of this approach. For example, the group size of 20 students appeared to be too big for the task engagement, which could easily cause the social loafing problems. Also, given the limited data access, we were unable to examine the individual participation nor the knowledge development. To address this issue, we will reduce the group size, or divide the big assignment into small sub-tasks, and distribute the sub-tasks to smaller groups. Also, we will develop an experimental research with new instruments to document and measure the individual development. Last but not least, while the current cross-group analysis only considered their academic backgrounds, we plan to collect more data about student backgrounds and examine the interaction between the sociocultural context and student knowledge construction.