The current study utilized a three-point lagged design to examine the role of mentors during the beginning, middle, and end of undergraduate and graduate-level online courses. Using self-determination theory as a theoretical framework, findings from 358 students show that peer mentor satisfaction at the beginning of the course predicted relatedness mid-way through the semester. Relatedness predicted two facets of online classroom communities, connectedness and learning, at the end of the semester. Learning, in turn, predicted final course grades. Relatedness mediated the relationship between mentor satisfaction and connectedness. The overall pattern of results indicates that mentoring relationships may help students succeed in online classes by meeting core psychological needs. Strategies for incorporating mentoring relationships into online courses are discussed.

Previous
Keywords
Distance education

Online classes

Mentor satisfaction

Self-determination theory

Classroom community

Relatedness

1. Introduction
In 2012, 7.1 million (33.5%) students were enrolled in at least one online course (Allen & Seaman, 2014). Since 2007, accredited universities that offer online courses have grown 43% (Allen and Seaman, 2014, Nelson, 2013). Defined as a learning environment that predominantly uses the internet for course delivery and interaction (Harasim, 2000), the number of students enrolling in online education is rapidly increasing (Rosenberg, 2001), and for good reason. Online education offers cost-effectiveness, flexibility, and efficiency that is difficult to match in face-to-face settings (Dede, 1996, Yukselturk and Yildirim, 2008), and makes classes available to individuals who might not have access otherwise (Means, Toyama, Murphy, & Baki, 2013). Furthermore, meta-analytic findings show that online classes offer students similar or better gains in procedural knowledge, declarative knowledge, and satisfaction when compared to face-to-face courses (Means et al., 2013, Sitzmann et al., 2006, U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, 2009).

Despite these advantages and the growing prevalence, online education has its critics. Xu and Jaggars (2013) found that college students in online classes were more likely to withdraw than students in face-to-face classes, and the authors argue that students from less-advantaged backgrounds may be particularly vulnerable. Zhao, Lei, Yan, Lai, and Tan (2005) emphasize that there is considerable variability in online classes and that the presence of student interactions with peers and instructors differentiate effective versus less effective online classes. However, research has not yet identified how these interactions with students and teachers can help students perform better in their classes. In the current study, we suggest that mentoring relationships may be one type of interaction that helps students succeed in online classes.

Although mentoring relationships provide many benefits (Eby et al., 2013), researchers are still discovering why mentoring relationships work (Baranik et al., 2010, Ragins and Verbos, 2007, Ramaswami and Dreher, 2007). Eby et al. (2013) propose that mentoring fulfills the protégés' need to belong, arguing that mentors can uniquely satisfy this protégé need by serving as role models, providing developmentally-appropriate career and psychosocial support, and fostering safe environments for personal growth and exploration (Eby et al., 2007, Johnson et al., 2007). Despite this theorizing, however, we know of no research that has empirically tested this explanation. In the current study, we use self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985) to argue that mentoring relationships satisfy the need to belong (i.e., relatedness) in online classes, which is in turn related to perceptions of classroom community at the end of the course. We expect perceptions of classroom community to predict higher final grades. Although classroom community has been identified as a key predictor of perceived learning (Rovai, 2002), little research has examined whether classroom community is related to actual classroom performance (see McKinney, McKinney, Franiuk, & Schweitzer, 2006 for an exception). Additionally, this study contributes to the research on classroom community and mentoring by examining relatedness as a mediator of the relationship between mentoring and classroom community using a three-point lagged design.

1.1. Mentoring, self-determination theory, and online education
In order to test Eby et al.'s (2013) suggestion that mentoring relationships predict attitudinal, behavioral, career-related and health-related outcomes across work and academic domains because mentoring relationships satisfy the need to belong, we drew from self-determination theory. Deci and Ryan's (1985) self-determination theory (SDT) assumes that healthy people are proactively motivated, and that environmental characteristics can direct the level of motivation that individuals experience. SDT proposes that individuals have needs for autonomy, competence and relatedness. Relatedness is the dimension that we focus on in the current study. According to SDT, needs can be influenced by the environment, such that the environmental and social context can enhance or serve as a barrier to need satisfaction, thus determining how well individuals can function (Ryan & Deci, 2000b). Not surprisingly, a number of researchers have used SDT to study student learning. In general, results have found that the more classroom environments support basic needs, the more likely that individuals will be intrinsically motivated. For example, Ryan and Grolnick (1986) found that students who thought their teachers were cold and uncaring reported lower intrinsic motivation, and Towler and Dipboye (2001) found that instructor expressiveness was related to student motivation to learn. In another study, Williams and Deci (1996) found that supportive instructors had medical students who reported successful internalization of relevant values and practices.

Students in online classes may be more vulnerable to not having their needs met than face-to-face students. Due to limitations of technology, cost, and scheduling conflicts, students in online classes may not be able to engage in synchronous communication, which is recommended to ensure that students and instructors can develop relationships with one another (Zhao et al., 2005). Students in online classes that use only asynchronous communication methods may have a particularly hard time meeting their need for relatedness. We argue that mentoring serves as a way to meet online students' need for relatedness, which is defined as experiencing connection, respect, caring and reliance in relationships with others. Our argument builds off work that suggests self-determination theory is a particularly promising perspective for pinpointing the motivational mechanisms that explain how and why close relationships, such as mentoring, are associated with well-being and relationship functioning (LaGuardia & Patrick, 2008). Mentors serve as need supportive partners, which LaGuardia and Patrick (2008) describe as partners who try to understand the person's interests and preferences, show interest in the person, and care for the person non-contingently (Ryan and Deci, 2000a, Ryan and Deci, 2000b). Mentors may serve as supportive partners because they provide support and advice (Eby, 1997, Kram and Isabella, 1985).

In the current study, we examine peer mentoring relationships because peer mentors tend to be more readily accessible than traditional mentors (Eby, 1997) and for this reason, we argue that peer mentoring relationships may be critically important in online classroom settings where there are often few instructors to many students. A peer mentor is defined as an influential peer in school or at work who is committed to providing support (Ragins, 1989). Peer mentors differ from traditional mentors because there tends to be less of a difference in age and hierarchical levels, more mutuality in the interactions, and the relationships tend to last longer (Kram & Isabella, 1985). In peer mentoring relationships, support for information sharing, career strategizing, providing feedback, confirmation, emotional support, personal feedback, and friendship (Kram & Isabella, 1985) tend to be reciprocated due to the lateral nature of the relationship (Eby, 1997). Mentoring relationships may help students feel increased trust due to the confirmation, emotional support, and friendship that tends to occur in these types of relationships (Eby et al., 2013). Research has shown that career and psychosocial functions received from the peer mentor are associated with more satisfaction with the peer mentoring relationship (Allen et al., 1997, Grant-Vallone and Ensher, 2000). Beyond predicting perceptions of the mentoring relationships themselves, peer mentoring support is also positively related to socialization (Allen, McManus, & Russell, 1999), satisfaction with the university (Sanchez, Bauer, & Paronto, 2006) and university-sponsored programs (Cutright & Evans, 2016) among students.

Mentoring scholars distinguish between formal and informal mentoring relationships. Informal mentoring relationships develop spontaneously between the two individuals, whereas formal mentoring relationships are created by a third party, such as a class instructor. Informal mentoring relationships tend to last longer than formal mentoring relationships and tend to be less structured. Research suggests that informal mentoring relationships tend to be more effective than formal mentoring relationships (Ragins & Cotton, 1999). We focus on informal mentoring because we wanted to examine the presence of these types of relationships in online classes, as we know of no other research that has done so. We use Eby et al.'s (2013) process-oriented model of mentoring, which specifies that relationship satisfaction is a key process that occurs in mentoring relationships and is an indicator that the individual is feeling supported by the peer mentor. We measure mentoring satisfaction at the beginning of the semester and relatedness at the middle of the semester to test our hypothesis.

H1

Mentor satisfaction will be positively related to relatedness in online classes.

1.2. Classroom community: perceptions of learning and connectedness
Classroom community can be defined as a learning environment where students feel obligated to one another and to their universities, and have confidence that their learning needs will be met (Rovai, 2002). Researchers have identified six variables necessary for creating classroom community, which include connection, safety, participation, support, belonging, and empowerment (McKinney et al., 2006). Rovai (2002) updated the concept of classroom community for online environments and identified two core dimensions of online classroom communities: learning and connectedness. Learning represents the quality of interactions students have as they seek to further their understanding and meet their educational goals. Connectedness is defined as the students' feelings of cohesion, spirit, trust, and interdependence. Subsequent work on learning and connectedness has found that, as expected, feelings of alienation are negatively associated with both learning and connectedness (Rovai & Wighting, 2005). Ritter, Polnick, Fink, and Oescher (2010) measured learning and connectedness in face-to-face, hybrid, and online classes, and found that student connectedness was rated lower in online classes than face-to-face classes, demonstrating initial evidence that students may be feeling disconnected from their peers and professors in online classes (Tinto, 1993).

In the current study, we seek to build on this line of research by examining antecedents and consequences of students' perceptions of connectedness and learning. According to self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985) needs must be met in order to experience motivation. Students whose relatedness needs are not being met may feel unable to take the initiative necessary to fully engage in the classroom community, such as by posting on a discussion board, contacting another student directly, or writing a reflection paper that is a sincere representation of who they are and what they believe. On the other hand, students whose relatedness needs are being met may feel comfortable letting their online persona reflect their true selves. These students may tell personal stories and jokes on the discussion board, confidently offer to help other students when needed, and make efforts to initiate meetings with the professor and other students outside of class via phone calls, skype and face-to-face meetings. These feelings of initiative and volition will help students engage in behaviors that help them feel more connected to others in the course and feel as though their interactions with others are helping to meet their education needs.

Students who feel that their relatedness needs are being met have an advantage, as they approach the classroom with feelings of connectedness. In other words, when students' relatedness needs are being met, they enter the classroom with a positive lens for viewing classroom interactions. These feelings enable students to be open to interactions with others and to trust others in the class. Rovai (2002) proposes that classroom community fosters perceived obligations to other students. Classroom community also extends beyond the classroom. Rovai (2002) describes classroom community as a feeling of relatedness to the school, as well as to other students in the class. Thus, we expect that feelings of relatedness during the middle of the semester will enable students to cultivate the type of meaningful relationships found in classrooms exhibiting high levels of classroom community at the end of the semester.

H2

a Relatedness will be positively related to learning. b Relatedness will be positively related to connectedness.

We expect that final grades will be a consequence of classroom community. Students who experience the high quality interactions that characterize a sense of strong learning and connectedness should engage with the material, feel safe to explore new ideas in a supportive environment, and be comfortable asking questions to further their knowledge, all of which we expect to result in more learning. Indeed, Wilson, Pollock, and Hamann (2007) found that reading and participating in discussion boards in online classes was related to higher final grades and Rovai (2002) found that classroom community predicted higher perceptions of cognitive learning. Examining whether classroom community predicts higher final grades is an important area to address, as some past research suggests that grades in online classes may be lower than grades in face-to-face classes (Schultz, Schultz, & Round, 2008).

H3

a Learning will be positively related to final grades. b Connectedness will be positively related to final grades.

Finally, we propose that relatedness mediates the relationship between mentor satisfaction and perceptions of classroom community. Past research has suggested that feelings of isolation are negatively related to a sense of community (Valverde, 1987). Thus, one of the goals of this study was to see if students who entered an online classroom could be protected from the negative effects of low classroom community perceptions through the relatedness that peer mentors provide. Bronfenbrenner (1986) suggested that a sense of relatedness is one of the primary contributors to perceiving low classroom community. We test Bronfenbrenner's (1986) work theorizing by proposing:

H4

a Relatedness mediates the relationship between mentor satisfaction and learning. b Relatedness mediates the relationship between mentor satisfaction and connectedness.

2. Method
2.1. Participants and procedures
Data were collected from students who were enrolled in online classes at a large, southeastern college at the beginning, middle, and end of the semester. Before the semester started, 466 professors were contacted, and 55 agreed to allow their students to participate in a total of 68 online classrooms. Students were recruited for the study through instructor announcements and emails directly from the researchers. Of the 55 professors, 28 offered extra credit to their students. The researchers designed equivalent alternative assignments that were available to students who wanted to receive extra credit, but did not want to participate in the survey. Of the 1620 students who were contacted, 738 students participated at Time 1, 570 at Time 2, and 581 at Time 3. Ninety-six percent of students reported that the class was a fully online class, with 2.8% reporting that the class was a hybrid course. Participants reporting that the class was a hybrid course or that they were not sure of the course type were dropped from analyses. Class subjects surveyed included adult education, art, biology, reading, computer science, business, child development and family relations, criminal justice, ecology, education technology, elementary education, English, exercise, nursing, finance, geography, health, psychology, statistics, library science, marketing, math, management, occupational safety, pharmacology, philosophy, political science, sociology, special education, and theatre.

Seventy-one percent of participants were female and the average age was 31.3 years old. Within the sample, 73.0% participants were White, 17.9% were Black, 0.6% were Native American, 2.5% were Latin American, 3.0% were Asian/Pacific Islander, and 2.9% reported “other.” One percent were freshmen, 6.4% were sophomores, 26.3% were juniors, 37.6% were seniors, and 28.4% were graduate students.

2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Time 1 mentor satisfaction
Ragins and Cotton's (1999) four-item measure was used to assess protégés' satisfaction with their mentors at the beginning of the semester. Sample items include, “My peer mentor is someone I am satisfied with” and “My peer mentor disappoints me” (reverse-scored). A Likert response scale ranging from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree) was used. Coefficient alpha was 0.90.

Before students were asked about their mentor satisfaction, they were given the following definition, “A peer mentor is generally defined as a peer who has been an influential individual in your school environment who has advanced experience and knowledge and is committed to providing you support” (Ragins, 1989). Students were then asked whether they had a peer mentor in their class. Of the students who participated at Time 1, 97 students reported that they had a peer mentor in class. Thus 13.1% of students reported having a peer mentor in their class during the beginning of the semester. Participants reported knowing their peer mentor for an average of 1.74 years. Students who reported not having a peer mentor in the class were given a mentor satisfaction score of “0.”

2.2.2. Time 2 relatedness
Three modified items from La Guardia, Ryan, Couchman, and Deci's (2000) nine-item Needs Satisfaction Scale were used to assess relatedness during the middle of the semester. The remaining six items in the Needs Satisfaction scaled were not used given that they measure autonomy and competence. A sample relatedness item is “In this class, I feel loved and cared about.” The response scale ranged from 1 (Not at all True) to 7 (Very True). Coefficient alpha was 0.74.

2.2.3. Time 3 classroom community
2.2.3.1. Classroom community: connectedness
Rovai's (2002) Classroom Community Scale was used to measure connectedness at the end of the semester. Participants were asked how much they agreed with each statement regarding how connected they felt in their online classroom environment and with other students in the class. The connectedness subscale consisted of ten items. A sample item for connectedness is “I feel connected to others in this course.” The response scale ranged from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree). Coefficient alpha was 0.91.

2.2.3.2. Classroom community: learning
Rovai's (2002) Classroom Community Scale was used to measure classroom community learning at the end of the semester. Participants were asked how much they agreed with each statement about how connected they felt to their learning environment. The learning subscale consisted of ten items. A sample item is “I feel that I receive timely feedback.” The response scale ranged from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree). Coefficient alpha was 0.86.

We used confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to test the factor structure of the classroom community variables. A two-factor model consisting of connectedness and learning was used to test the measurement model's fit to the Time 1 data. We correlated one error term in the model due to a reverse-scoring wording artifact (both “I feel reluctant to speak openly” and “I feel uneasy exposing gaps in my understanding” are reverse-scored items). The fit statistics indicated marginal fit for the 2-factor model (χ2[168] = 957.72, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.863, RMSEA = 0.084, SRMR = 0.057). To ensure that the two-factor model was the best fit to the data, we tested an alternative one-factor model in which all items loaded onto an overall classroom community variable. The one-factor model did not fit the data (χ2[169] = 1410.00, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.784, RMSEA = 0.106, SRMR = 0.080), suggesting learning and connectedness should be examined separately.

2.2.4. Time 3 final grade
Students self-reported their final grade. Grades ranged from 1 (F) to 12 (A).

2.2.5. Time 1 control variables
We include current GPA, classroom interactions and comfort with technology as controls. Since one of the strongest predictors of final grade is a student's overall grade point average (GPA), we controlled for students' GPA. Current GPA was asked via a single item about participants' current GPA on a 4.0 scale. Classroom interactions were measured with three items asking students to rate the amount of interaction they had with their professor, students, and others in the class on a 1 (no interaction) to 5 (extreme amount of interaction) response scale. Comfort with technology was measured with five items asking how comfortable and effective the student feels with the technology being used in the class and how comfortable and effective the instructor is using technology on a 1 (very uncomfortable) to 5 (very comfortable) response scale.

3. Results
Correlations between study variables can be found in Table 1. To investigate the proposed relationships between mentoring satisfaction, relatedness, connectedness, learning, and final course grade, a path analysis was conducted using Mplus 7.2. Full information maximum likelihood was used to handle missing data for all theoretical variables, resulting in a final sample size of 358 participants. To account for the nested nature of the data (students nested within classes), class was treated as a clustering variable, and standard errors were calculated using a sandwich estimator. Addressing class in this manner was important because literature suggests that students' perceptions of online classes can differ depending on subject matter (Arbaugh, 2013, Arbaugh et al., 2010). In the hypothesized model (see Fig. 1), mentoring satisfaction predicted relatedness (H1). Relatedness predicted learning (H2a) and connectedness (H2b). Final grade was predicted by learning (H3a) and connectedness (H3b). Additionally, two indirect effects were modeled: relatedness mediating the relationship between mentoring satisfaction and learning (H4a) and connectedness (H4b). Current college GPA, classroom interaction, and comfort with technology were included as control variables.


Table 1. Correlations and descriptive statistics for model variables.

Variable name	M	SD	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
1.
Mentoring satisfaction (Time 1)

0. 57	1.50	–							
2.
Relatedness (Time 2)

3.92	1.17	0.20	–						
3.
Classroom learning (Time 3)

3.84	0.57	0.15	0.30	–					
4.
Classroom connectedness (Time 3)

3.10	0.69	0.27	0.64	0.57	–				
5.
Final grade (Time 3)

10.02	1.98	0.10	− 0.02	0.30	0.19	–			
6.
Classroom interaction (Time 1)

7.56	2.72	0.29	0.38	0.34	0.50	0.09	–		
7.
Comfort with technology (Time 1)

20.91	2.91	0.06	0.22	0.34	0.26	0.15	0.29	–	
8.
GPA (Time 1)

3.39	0.57	0.07	− 0.07	0.17	0.15	0.45	0.11	0.05	–
Notes. Correlations take clustering into account. Final grades were coded as 1 = F and 12 = A. GPA was reported on a 4.0 scale (4 = A). Both classroom interactions and comfort with technology are reported as summative scales with a range of 3–15 for classroom interactions and 5–25 for comfort with technology.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (160KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Standardized path analysis results for the final model.

Notes. To ensure readability, control variables (overall GPA, interactions and comfort with technology), indirect effects and correlations between variables are not included in the model. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.

The model was an acceptable fit to the data, χ2 (2) = 2.92, p < 0.01, CFI = 0.998, TLI = 0.975, RMSEA = 0.036, SRMR = 0.011. The model with path coefficients can be found in Fig. 1. Those with high mentoring satisfaction reported higher levels of relatedness (β = 0.11, p < 0.05), supporting H1. Relatedness predicted learning (β = 0.18, p < 0.001), supporting H2a, and connectedness (β = 0.53, p < 0.001), supporting H2b. Learning predicted final grade (β = 0.22, p = 0.01), supporting H3a, whereas connectedness did not predict final grade (β = 0.02, p = 0.76), failing to support H3b. Inspection of indirect effects revealed that relatedness did not mediate the relationship between mentoring satisfaction and learning (β = 0.02, p = 0.05), failing to support H4a (although note that this effect nearly reached the 0.05 level of significance). Relatedness did mediate the relationship between mentoring satisfaction and connectedness (β = 0.06, p = 0.04), supporting H4b.

Several significant paths were observed between focal model variables and control variables. GPA predicted final course grade (β = 0.41, p < 0.001), learning (β = 0.15, p = 0.02), and connectedness (β = 0.15, p = 0.001). Classroom interaction predicted both learning (β = 0.18, p = 0.01) and connectedness (β = 0.24, p < 0.001), as well as relatedness (β = 0.33, p < 0.001) and mentoring satisfaction (β = 0.29, p < 0.001). Comfort with technology predicted learning (β = 0.24, p = 0.001), and relatedness (β = 0.13, p = 0.01).

4. Discussion
Early research on online education discussed the importance of mentoring (Dede, 1996), but there have been few empirical studies looking at how mentoring relationships may help facilitate student success in online classes (see Smith-Jentsch, Scielzo, Yarbrough, & Rosopa, 2008 for an exception). Moreover, although online education offers promise for educating students, much more research attention needs to be directed towards understanding what makes online courses effective (Arbaugh, DeArmond, & Rau, 2013). In the current study, we suggest that mentoring relationships help to fulfill students' basic needs in online classes and that this need fulfillment allows students to thrive in online contexts. We examined peer mentoring because it is more accessible to students due to the availability of more peers than experienced advisors, professors, or teachers (Eby, 1997). Additionally, individuals in peer mentoring relationships may have better communication, mutual support, and collaboration than in traditional, hierarchical mentoring relationships (Kram & Isabella, 1985). Our findings show that student reports of mentoring satisfaction at the beginning of the semester were related to higher feelings of relatedness during the middle of the semester. Relatedness was related to both forms of classroom community: classroom connectedness and learning. Perceptions of learning, but not connectedness, were related to higher final grades. Finally, relatedness was a mediator of the relationship between mentoring satisfaction and connectedness.

Our findings that a) mentoring satisfaction was related to relatedness b) relatedness was predictive of connectedness and learning and that c) relatedness mediates the relationship between mentor satisfaction and connectedness support self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985). Self-determination theory proposes that need satisfaction is essential for generating feelings of intrinsic motivation. Our study shows that peer mentors may play a vital role in helping students meet their relatedness needs in a context that may foster feelings of isolation, frustration and a perceived lack of support (Jaggars, 2011, Jaggars and Xu, 2010). By having their relatedness needs met by perceiving at least one other student in the class as a peer mentor, students then benefit with increased perceptions of classroom community, whereby students feel that they are cared about, can get the help they need, feel comfortable exposing weaknesses, trust others, and feel important to others in the class. Past research has started to identify reasons why mentoring relationships are linked to adaptive outcomes, suggesting that perceived organizational support is a key mediating variable between mentoring relationships and positive work outcomes (Baranik et al., 2010). Although mentoring scholars (e.g., Eby et al., 2013) have proposed that relatedness need fulfillment may represent another key mechanism, the current study was the first to test this possibility. Thus we add to the literature by providing empirical evidence that relatedness is another key variable that explains why mentoring relationships are linked to perceptions of the environment. It is important to note that our study focused on student perceptions of classroom community, rather than objective classroom community. Thus, our finding is that when students' relatedness needs are being met, they have a stronger sense of community in their online classes and that this perception of a stronger community is linked to higher final grades.

In the sample used in the current study, learning, but not connectedness, predicted final grades. Rovai (2002) found that both learning and connectedness were related to perceived cognitive learning, although the relationship between perceived learning and learning was stronger (r = 0.64) than the relationship between perceived learning and connectedness (r = 0.51). Supporting this trend, Smilyanski, Boyd, Perry, Rothman, and Jenkins (2015) found that the learning dimension of classroom community was a significant predictor of students' campus affiliation, whereas the connectedness dimension was not. It may be that learning is more important for performance outcomes, such as perceived and actual learning, whereas connectedness is more important for social outcomes. Supporting this, Rovai and Wighting (2005) reported that connectedness was a stronger predictor of feelings of social isolation (r = − 0.49) than learning (r = − 0.32). In connecting the current study's findings with the broader literature on classroom community, we emphasize that both dimensions are important, and future research should be conducted to see whether the learning dimension continues to be a better predictor of performance and whether the connectedness dimension proves to be a better predictor of social outcomes.

Although not the primary focus of our hypotheses, there were a number of noteworthy ancillary findings. First, we found that 13% of college students reported having peer mentors in online classes. The average length of the mentoring relationship was 1.74 years. The short length of the mentoring relationships suggests that many students may be meeting their peer mentors at their current institutions through other classes and social activities. Thus, students in online classes can and do meet mentors to help support their careers, but the vast majority of students in online classes probably do not have peer mentors. Second, Rovai's (2002) classroom community scale serves as an important tool for assessing the nature of online classes. Our CFA analyses reveal that the items “I feel reluctant to speak openly” and “I feel uneasy exposing gaps in my understanding” shared an unusual amount of variance with one another. As more researchers continue to use this scale to examine online class communities, it may be useful for future research to examine if the patterns identified in the current study replicate in other samples.

4.1. Implications for theory and practice
Our findings suggest that knowing just one person can make a difference in how students' needs are being met, how they perceive their classroom environments and how they perform. We extended the nomological network of classroom community (Rovai, 2002) by identifying relatedness as a key antecedent and by finding that learning, but not connectedness, predicts final grades. These results add to a growing body of literature that uses self-determination theory to better understand education and mentoring relationships (e.g., Janssen et al., 2014, Sun et al., 2014). We add to this stream of literature by examining how need supportive partners, or peer mentors, can help enable need satisfaction in online classes. We also add to the online education literature, and support Zhao et al.'s (2005) finding that one of the differences between successful versus unsuccessful online classes is classroom interactions between students. Our findings reveal that having just one peer mentor can make a difference in perceptions of need satisfaction, classroom community, and final grades. Studies have found that electronic peer mentoring relationships can be just as effective as face-to-face peer mentoring relationships (Smith-Jentsch et al., 2008), suggesting that students may benefit from peer mentoring even if they do not meet face-to-face.

Our findings suggest that an important role for instructors is to incorporate classroom activities that guide students towards creating a classroom community (Ritter & Polnick, 2008) and developing peer mentor relationships. We advise instructors to build social activities into their curriculum, as well as provide assignments that can help generate informal mentoring relationships (e.g., group activities). We agree with Nicholas' (2014) recommendation to use online discussion board forums, such as Blackboard, as powerful learning tools and motivators for students. In addition to using discussion boards to facilitate interactions, helpful design features include facilitating interactions between students include using real time interactions (e.g., online chatting), creating a course Facebook page, and exchanging emails or phone numbers with at least one other student at the beginning of the semester. These suggestions are bolstered by the recent finding that students participating in classroom activities that promoted social interaction exhibited more student-student dialogue and instructor-student dialogue, which lead to more self-efficacy (Cajiao & Burke, 2016). Academic advisors should encourage their students to take online classes with other students who they consider to be peer mentors. This key is for students to take classes with others who they consider peer mentors. The current study did not examine the effect of taking a class with good friends who are not considered peer mentors, and it is possible that this could distract students from learning or lead to other dysfunctional outcomes (i.e., cheating).

In addition to creating conditions that foster the development of informal peer mentors, findings from the current study suggest that online instructors may want to incorporate formal peer mentoring programs into their classrooms. This would involve instructors formally assigning two students to be peer mentors to one another and could be facilitated by having the pair meet on a regular basis. Although informal mentoring relationships are generally more effective than formal mentoring relationships (Ragins & Cotton, 1999), research has shown that formal mentoring relationships tend to be more helpful for individuals than not having a mentor at all (Chao et al., 1992, Noe, 1988). Colvin and Ashman (2010) noted that perhaps the biggest drawback to developing formal peer mentoring programs is the confusion that can result when participants are unclear about the roles and expectations. Thus, instructors who wish to implement formal peer mentoring programs in their classrooms should have familiarity with factors associated with successful mentoring relationships and should provide clear training and guidance for participants.

Finally, the current study focused on online classes in educational settings, but the results have implications for other online contexts, as well. In 2014, the American Society for Training and Development reported that 25% of corporate training was delivered online (Miller, 2014) and virtual work is becoming increasingly common, with up to 24% of workers reporting working some hours from home each week (Noonan & Glass, 2012). Beyond online training and virtual work, more teamwork is being conducted virtually (Gilson, Maynard, Jones Young, Vartianinen, & Hakonen, 2015). Scholars have identified relationship building and feelings of connectedness as critical factors to virtual teamwork success (Boros et al., 2010, Horwitz et al., 2006), and findings from the current study suggest that one possible reason for this is that stronger relationships help meet employees' psychological needs for relatedness in virtual settings. We agree with Arbaugh et al.'s (2013) assertion that online classrooms share similarities with phenomena occurring in workplaces, and that more research should be conducted to uncover the commonalities and differences in these contexts.

4.2. Limitations
Several limitations should be noted. First, a number of students were non-traditional students (i.e., the average age was 31 years), and these findings will not necessarily generalize to other types of educational settings, including those in other cultures and on younger or older students. Related to this point, although the current sample had more age diversity than many studies conducted in college contexts, it is important to recognize that students' responses to technology change as they age (Wolfson, Cavanagh, & Kraiger, 2014), meaning that more studies should be conducted that explicitly look at the role of student age and use of online technology. Second, as is common in longitudinal studies, we had attrition across time, with 738 respondents at Time 1, 570 at Time 2, and 581 at Time 3. Finally, only 97 students reported having a peer mentor in their classes throughout the semester.

4.3. Future research
Given that only 97 students reported a peer mentor in their class, future studies should be conducted on larger samples. In particular, it would be helpful to compare courses where formal peer mentoring is incorporated into the pedagogical design and courses where formal peer mentoring is not incorporated. Future research should be conducted on characteristics of effective mentors in online classes, types of mentor supportive behaviors (e.g., career and psychosocial support) that are most important for virtual settings, and how the length of the relationship with the mentor affects outcomes. Additionally, future research should examine how mentoring affects other online classroom variables, such as self-efficacy, satisfaction with the course and dropout rates. Finally, future research should examine mentor relationships and outcome variables across longer periods of time, especially among online cohorts. More broadly, more work should be done to examine what factors can enhance the sense of community in online courses. Rovai's (2002) concept of classroom community is a promising conceptualization for capturing the quality of online classes, and more work examining the initiatives that help foster classroom community, such as group work, synchronous activities such as lectures and chatting, and discussion board conversations, should be conducted.

