Pre-class preparedness is critical to students' in-class learning and overall success in the flipped classroom. This study used both trace data and self-report data to identify students' pre-class learning behavior profiles and investigate the relations of the identified learning profiles with the achievement trajectory over time and students' perceived achievement goal orientations in a flipped undergraduate math class. Three distinctive types of pre-class learning profiles emerged from the study, including the lecture-focused and low time-spent profile, lecture-quiz-balanced and average time-spent profile, and quiz-focused and high time-spent profile. The results show that students' performance trajectories were significantly different among the three learning profiles. In addition, achievement goals significantly impacted the membership of the learning profiles, indicating students' perceived goal orientations shape their pre-class learning behaviors. The theoretical and instructional implications are discussed, and specific design suggestions were provided to improve students' pre-class preparedness in the flipped math classroom.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Pre-class preparedness

Flipped classroom

Achievement goals

Latent profile analysis

Math education

1. Introduction
The flipped classroom has gained increasing popularity around the world for the last decade. It is an instructional model that moves the instructional content before class in forms of instructional videos, recorded lectures, and text readings. Then, the face-to-face (F2F) in-class time becomes available for students to practice in problem solving and engage in collaborative learning activities (Bergmann & Sams, 2012). Instructors can also utilize the F2F time to interact with students and provide personalized instructions (Williams, Sun, Xie, et al., 2017). To enjoy the benefits of the in-class learning of the flipped classroom model, students are required to complete pre-class learning tasks and prepared for the in-class activities (DeLozier & Rhodes, 2017).

A flipped classroom commonly consists of two components: the pre-class computer-supported online learning and the in-class group-based active learning (O'Flaherty & Phillips, 2015). In practice, these two components are closely integrated, that is, the in-class active learning activities are highly aligned with the pre-class online learning tasks. Thus, the performance of in-class learning heavily relies on students' preparedness in pre-class learning (Chen, 2016, Rahman et al., 2015). The extant literature has examined the effectiveness of the flipped classroom and showed evidence of success in implementing this instructional model to support learning. Particularly, studies have mainly focused on the in-class active learning component of the flipped classroom model (e.g. Freeman et al., 2014; Prince, 2004). For example, Jensen, Kummer, and Godoy (2015) provide evidence that active learning such as group work and personalized feedback could lead to students' learning gains and better attitudes towards the course in the flipped classroom. However, the pre-class online learning component is rarely studied in the extant literature. Specifically, how students learn in the pre-class setting in the flipped classroom, how the pre-class preparedness impacts students' academic performance over time, and what factors influence their pre-class preparedness have still been continuous questions among flipped classroom practitioners.

In the present study, we aim to answer these questions concerning learning in the flipped classroom by employing the theoretical framework of achievement goals (e.g., Elliot & Murayama, 2008). In general, the purpose of this study is to explore how the achievement goals impact students' pre-class learning behaviors that then further influence students' academic achievement trajectories over time. Specifically, we attempt to answer these questions by three sub-goals, which are (1) identifying students' pre-class learning behavior profiles based on the trace data of learning behaviors stored in the online learning management system, (2) examining the relationship between the identified behavior profiles and students' exam performance trajectories over time, and (3) investigating the impact of students' self-reported achievement goal orientations on the identified behavior profiles. This study makes contributions to the literature by providing insights on students' pre-class learning behavioral patterns in a flipped math course based on real-time trace data, linking these learning behavioral patterns with students' goal orientations, and suggesting flipped classroom design principles in the perspective of learners' characteristics (e.g. achievement goals).

In the following section, we first review the characteristics of pre-class online learning, then provide the theoretical framework by reviewing the literature on achievement goals and situating the achievement goals theory in the context of a flipped math course. The section closes with the research purposes and questions of the current study.

2. Background
2.1. Characteristics of pre-class learning in flipped classroom
The major goal of the pre-class activities is “information-transmission”, that is, to equip students with foundational knowledge and skills necessary to participate in the in-class activities (Abeysekera & Dawson, 2015). The pre-class learning activities are commonly designed to cover lower levels of cognitive knowledge (e.g., knowledge recall and comprehension) according to Bloom's revised Taxonomy (Gilboy, Heinerichs, & Pazzaglia, 2015; Krathwohl, 2002). In the flipped design, a variety of pre-class learning activities has been implemented including lecture videos (O'Flaherty & Phillips, 2015), interactive tutorials (Jensen, Holt, Sowards, Ogden, & West, 2018), text readings (Persky & Hogg, 2017), and other online resources like Khan Academy and NextGenU (Saunders, Green, & Cross, 2017). The pre-class learning is often ended with a low-stakes formative assessment to ensure the completion for the pre-class work (Lo & Hew, 2017).

The pre-class learning content is often delivered through Computer-Supported Learning Environments (CSLEs), which focuses on student-centered and self-directed learning. The advance of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) utilized in CSLEs empowers students through more flexible and personalized learning spaces and enables them to actively engage in the learning process (Wanner & Palmer, 2015). Since online learning is also commonly delivered through CSLEs, the pre-class learning of the flipped classroom model shares many similarities with the online learning model such as student-centered (self-paced) learning, multi-forms of content presentations, instant feedback on assessments and so on (Swan, 2001). However, there is one significant difference between the two learning models. That is, unlike online learning, pre-class learning is strongly associated and integrated with in-class learning in the flipped classroom model. The activities and tasks that students conduct in pre-class learning serve as foundations for their knowledge application and analyses in in-class learning.

Students' preparedness in pre-class learning directly impacts their engagement and achievement in in-class learning and would further influence the overall success in the flipped classroom (Mason, Shuman, & Cook, 2013; Rahman et al., 2015). A number of flipped classroom studies have identified the crucial influence of students' pre-class preparedness on their experience and achievement in the flipped classroom (e.g., Han & Klein, 2019; Hwang, Lai, & Wang, 2015). For example, Sun, Xie, and Anderman (2018) investigated both pre-class and in-class learning in a flipped introductory math class and found that students' pre-class achievement statistically predicted their in-class achievement. Although educators and researchers well acknowledge the importance of the pre-class preparedness, a review of flipped classroom literature shows that the major challenge in the flipped classroom practice is related to the pre-class learning such as inadequate students' preparation prior to the class (Al-Zahrani, 2015); pre-class boredom caused by long lecture videos (Schultz, Duffield, Rasmussen, & Wageman, 2014); and helpless feeling during the pre-class learning because of inability to get help from the instructors and peers (Bhagat, Chang, & Chang, 2016). If a student fails to be well prepared in the pre-class learning, s/he may not be able to fully engage in the in-class collaborative and active activities. If the situation continues, it would become a vicious learning circle and diminish the benefits of the flipped classroom.

To address these challenges, a list of pedagogical strategies is documented in the flipped classroom design studies. For example, to help students go through lecture videos, some teachers utilized the design strategies to enhance the video quality based upon the cognitive theory of multimedia learning (Mayer, 2005). These strategies include segmenting a long presentation into a series of short videos, personalizing lecture videos in a conversational style, and highlighting key points when presenting the content (Grypp & Luebeck, 2015; Schultz et al., 2014). To engage students in learning the pre-class content, a majority of teachers integrated low-stakes assessments and quizzes (Gilboy et al., 2015) and facilitated online discussions (Tsai, Shen, & Lu, 2015) in the pre-class activities. While these studies reported the overall effectiveness of these strategies, they also suggested that students are different from one another in their engagement and attitudes towards the flipped classroom even with the same pre-class design and facilitation (e.g., Gilboy et al., 2015; Schultz et al., 2014). Therefore, there is a need to examine students' personal factors that would influence their learning in the flipped classroom.

The student-centered feature of pre-class learning in CSLEs allows students to take control and ownership of their learning, and meanwhile, places high demands on students to regulate their own learning behaviors in order to be prepared for the in-class activities (Estes, Ingram, & Liu, 2014). The ways that students regulate their learning behaviors are believed to be highly dependent on the achievement goals they set before involving in learning tasks (Ames, 1992; Winne and Hadwin, 1998, Winne and Hadwin, 2008). For example, if students aim to master the learning content, they would spend sufficient time and effort on completing the pre-class tasks (e.g., viewing online lectures, finishing formative assessments, engaging in online group discussions, etc.) and reflect on the task completeness by using self-referenced standards. If students aim to outperform peers, they might focus on the grading tasks and endeavor to obtain satisfying grades on those tasks. Hence, students' achievement goal orientation is regarded as a critical factor influencing students' learning behaviors in the pre-class setting of the flipped classroom.

2.2. Motivational process: Achievement goal orientations
Achievement goals are theorized to understand learners' adaptive and maladaptive behaviors in achievement settings (Dweck, 1986). Achievement goal theorists believe that behaviors are purposeful, intentional and directed towards the attainment of certain goals in achievement situations (Schunk, Pintrich, & Meece, 2008). Different from the general goal setting that assigns specific challenging or vague performance goals (e.g., achieve 60% in the final exam or do your best in the final exam), achievement goals represent students' broad purpose for engaging in a learning task (Midgley, Kaplan, & Middleton, 2001; Seijts, Latham, Tasa, & Latham, 2004). These goals provide meanings to students' learning and orchestrate students' thoughts, emotions, and behaviors into a coherent learning pattern that is called a “goal orientation” (Senko, 2016). Achievement goal orientations are primarily differentiated in two categories, mastery goal and performance goal, which represent different reasons for engaging in a task and use different standards to define success (Dweck, 1986). Learners who adopt a mastery goal focus on developing skills, improving competence, and achieving a sense of mastery based on self-referenced standards, whereas learners with a performance goal focus on outperforming peers, surpassing normative standards, and achieving success with minimum effort (Ames, 1992; Elliot, 1999). These two goal orientations are then separated into the approach and avoidance forms aiming to explain learners' commitments on learning tasks (Elliot & McGregor, 2001; Elliot & Murayama, 2008). Learners with approach form focus on a positive possibility of completing a task (i.e. success), while those with avoidance form focus on a negative possibility (i.e. failure). Combing the mastery-performance and approach-avoidance distinctions leads to the 2 × 2 goal framework (Elliot & Murayama, 2008). Specifically, learners with a mastery-approach goal strive to improve task-based skills, while those with a mastery-avoidance goal try to avoid learning failures or skill decline. Learners espoused a performance-approach goal endeavor to outperform others or appear talented, while those with a performance-avoidance goal tend to avoid doing worse than others or appear less talented (Senko, Hulleman, & Harackiewicz, 2011).

A vast body of research has examined the effects of these four achievement goal orientations on learners' learning behaviors and academic achievements. In general, studies showed that the two avoidance goals (i.e. mastery-avoidance and performance-avoidance) are typically associated with negative achievement-related behaviors and outcomes such as high anxiety, low levels of interest and task involvement, as well as poor performance (e.g. Elliot & Moller, 2003; Moller & Elliot, 2006; Van Yperen, Elliot, & Anseel, 2009; Xie & Huang, 2014). The mastery-approach goal is consistently linked to a range of adaptive learning behaviors such as maintaining high levels of interest and task engagement, persisting at difficult tasks, and seeking challenges (e.g. Hulleman, Schrager, Bodmann, & Harackiewicz, 2010; Matos, Lens, Vansteenkiste, & Mouratidis, 2017). The performance-approach goal shows a mixed pattern. Some studies reported positive relations between the performance-approach goal and the desired learning outcomes such as task values and academic achievement (e.g. Church, Elliot, & Gable, 2001; Luo, Paris, Hogan, & Luo, 2011), whereas others showed negative relations between the performance-approach goal and the maladaptive constructs including self-handicapping tactics and help avoidance (e.g. Middleton & Midgley, 1997; Ryan & Pintrich, 1997). Interestingly, a meta-analytic study revealed that the performance-approach goal is more reliably and positively associated with academic achievement than the mastery-approach goal (Hulleman et al., 2010).

The positive influence of the performance goal on learners' adaptive learning behaviors and achievement is particularly prominent in CSLEs. For example, Carr, Luckin, Yuill, and Avramides (2013) found that performance-oriented learners seek more help in a computer-supported interactive gaming learning environment (i.e. Ecolab software), which further increased their learning gains at the posttest. In contrast, mastery-oriented learners used less help offered by the system and showed an academic regression from the pretest to the posttest (Carr et al., 2013). Similarly, Duffy and Azevedo (2015) also observed a significant interaction between achievement goals and scaffolding on SRL in a multi-agent intelligent tutoring system (i.e. MetaTutor). Learners adopting the performance-approach goal demonstrated higher achievements in the scaffolding condition than the control condition, while learners with the mastery goal showed no significant difference in achievements between the two conditions. It appears that learners with the performance-approach goal are more skilled in enacting self-regulatory strategies and achieve higher in CLSEs than those with the mastery-approach goal. To our best knowledge, there has been no literature on examining the impact of achievement goals on the learning behavior and academic achievement in the flipped learning environment. The present study attempts to fill this gap in the literature.

2.3. Contextualization: Situating achievement goal orientations in the context of flipped classroom
The current study was conducted in a flipped undergraduate introductory math course, Calculus I. The flipped course consisted of three parts: the pre-class online lecture viewing, the in-class group-based collaborative learning, and the after-class assignments. Based upon the Bloom's Revised Taxonomy (Krathwohl, 2002), the course was flipped with the pre-class activities targeting lower-level cognitive skills such as remembering, understanding, and sometimes applying, while the in-class activities and the after-class assignments targeting higher-level cognitive skills including applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating. In addition, the in-class activities and the after-class assignments were highly associated with the knowledge introduced in the pre-class activities. Without the pre-class learning, it would be quite difficult for students to engage in the in-class group work and the follow-up homework. The pre-class online lectures were designed in ways that: the instructors first explicitly specified learning goals of each online lecture, then provided relevant learning resources (e.g. lecture slides, video lectures, URLs for extra reading materials, and quizzes) for achieving the goals, and lastly offered the evidence and feedback in terms of students' success or failure to achieve the goals.

The Winne and Hadwin's (2008) self-regulated learning (SRL) model provides a useful theoretical framework to understand how achievement goals may influence learning behavior and achievement. The SRL model posits that a learner tends to set a goal and devise a plan to reach it before carrying out a task. The goal is viewed as a multifaced profile of standards with which to evaluate success. Depending on the learning goals that a learner forms, learning outcomes will target different levels of knowledge and skills, which determines how he/she regulates the learning process such as what types of learning strategies will be enacted to complete the task and how much time and effort will be put in the task (Winne & Baker, 2013). A learning goal is commonly framed with a combination of two types of goals: teachers' goals and learners' goals. Teachers' goals refer to specific task goals with clear learning objectives describing what they want students to know and be able to do when they finish the course. Learners' goals often mean students' personalized achievement goals with different goal orientations such as viewing learning tasks as opportunities to develop their competence and skills or as assignments to outperform peers (Winne & Hadwin, 1998). To set a learning goal, a learner often needs to balance between the two types of goals.

According to the SRL model, when giving a learning task, learners first develop a task definition based upon their prior experience and teachers' specific task goals. In the second phase, learners will activate their achievement goals and form learning goals by balancing between the teachers' goals and achievement goals. If learners' achievement goals are aligned with the teachers' goals, they would fully adopt the teachers' goals as their own learning goals and follow the learning path suggested by the teachers to complete the task. If the two goals are conflicting, learners would “consult and negotiate” with the teachers' goals, form their own learning goals and construct their own learning path to complete the task. After finalizing the learning goals, learners will make action plans to achieve the goals, such as the selection of appropriate learning strategies, use of relevant materials and resources, and allocation of time and effort on the task (Pintrich, 2000).

Since the focus of this study was on pre-class learning, we will use a general example to illustrate the impact of achievement goals on students' learning behaviors in the pre-class learning environment of the flipped math course. For example, for the pre-class online learning activities, students typically received a learning task like this: “By the end of this lecture, you are expected to master the concept A after completing the tasks X, Y, and Z. Task X is an online lecture consisting of lecture slides, text readings, and lecture videos, which is a required task. Task Y is an online multiple-choice quiz associated with task X, which is also a required task. Each student has three attempts to obtain the highest score in the quiz to be recorded into his/her final score of the course. Task Z is an optional task, and commonly refers to URLs to extra reading materials provided for deepening the understanding of the concept A.” Given such a learning task, theoretically, students first created a task definition mainly influenced by the specific goals that teachers set for the learning task. Then they activated their achievement goals such as the mastery-approach goal and/or performance-approach goal and formed their own learning goals for the learning task.

For the students with the dominant mastery-approach goal, they aimed to complete the task with a mastery level (i.e. I want to master the concept A). Such the achievement goal was coherent with the teacher's goals, so students adopted the teacher's goals as their own learning goals and followed the instructions by allocating all the time and efforts to complete all three tasks X, Y and Z and using self-referenced standards to reflect on the task completeness. For the students with the dominant performance-approach goal, they aimed to outperform peers after completing the task (i.e. I want to perform better than my peers on the concept A). Such the achievement goal was not perfectly aligned with the teacher's goals, so students tweaked the teacher's goals to form their own learning goals and made an action plan to achieve the goals. For instance, they might focus on the tasks X and Y, especially on the task Y – made max attempts to obtain the highest grade, and allocate less or no time on the task Z because they were not interested in mastering the concept A. For the students with the dominant performance-avoidance goal, they were afraid of failure and strived to avoid perform poorly on the task and appear less talented among peers (i.e. I will try to avoid fail on the task and appear incompetent among peers). This achievement goal conflicted with the teacher's goals, so students defined their learning goals by making great adjustments to the teacher's goals. To achieve the learning goals, they might check out all three tasks X, Y, and Z, but had no effective plans to optimize and reflect on their learning.

2.4. The present study
The conventional research in achievement goals and SRL are extensive use of self-report instruments, which are easy and efficient for collecting data but are continuously criticized for their incapability of capturing dynamics in the learning process and inaccurate responses due to biased information and subjective theories of the mental processes involved (Zhou & Winne, 2012). The widespread use of the learning management system in higher education institutions has made large quantities of trace data available. These fine-grain data points provide objective and detailed information on students' learning processes as well as have the potential to facilitate the understanding and optimization of learning and learning environments in which learning occurs (Siemens & Gasevic, 2012). However, relying solely on the trace data may only reveal partial information and cannot offer insights into underlying patterns of the learning behaviors (Pardo, Han, & Ellis, 2016). To address the limitations of these two methods, the research that combines the use of trace data and self-report data attracts increasing attention. The combination of the two data sources allows a more comprehensive view of students' self-regulatory process and enables a greater understanding of students' learning experiences in online and blended learning environments (Colthorpe, Zimbardi, Ainscough, & Anderson, 2015; Gašević, Jovanovic, Pardo, & Dawson, 2017).

Following the emerging trend of the combined use of the two methods, the present study used both trace data and self-report data to explore students' pre-class online learning behavior profiles and investigate the relations of the identified behavior profiles with the achievement trajectories and the perceived goal orientations. Specifically, the purpose of this study was threefold: (1) to identify students' learning behavior profiles as they unfolded in the pre-class online learning environment of the flipped undergraduate math course; (2) to examine the relations between the identified behavior profiles and students' achievement trajectories over a course semester; and (3) to investigate the impacts of achievement goals on the identified behavior profiles. The following three research questions guided the design of the present study:

1.
What are the students' pre-class online learning behavior profiles in a flipped undergraduate math course?

2.
Is there a significant relationship between the identified learning behavior profiles and students' exam performance trajectories over a semester?

3.
Do achievement goals significantly impact the membership of the identified learning behavior profiles?

3. Methods
3.1. Participants
A total of 104 undergraduate students (51% females) from a flipped Calculus I course in a large Midwestern public university in the United States participated in the study. The majority of participants were white students (60.6%) followed by Asians (33.7%) and the rest came from other ethnical backgrounds. Since this was an introductory course, the participants included first year students (55.8%), second-year students (29.8%), third-year students (8.7%), and fourth-year students (5.8%). The participants represented a variety of disciplines. Specifically, 51.9% were STEM majors including engineer, mathematics, computer science, and biology, 26% were business majors, 8.7% were social science majors, and the rest were undecided majors. Approximately 68.3% of participants had some knowledge of the flipped classroom, but only 17.9% of them had experienced a flipped classroom.

3.2. The flipped math course
The flipped undergraduate math course, Calculus I, was the target course in this study. It was a 16-week long course that consisted of three online lessons and two recitation sessions per week, with a total of 33 online lessons and 28 recitation sessions for the entire semester. The instructor created a course site in the Desire2Learn learning management system where she uploaded course materials and created links to the homework system and online discussion forums. During the semester, students engaged in three major activities: 1) completing online lectures and associated online quizzes before recitation sessions, 2) participating in recitation sessions through group-based collaborative work, and 3) finishing take-home assignments after recitation sessions.

Every Tuesday and Thursday, students attended in-class recitation sessions in person. The in-class recitation session lasted 55 min and typically had around 30 students per class. In each session, the instructor first spent approximately 10 min going through one or two warm-up examples related to the previous online lecture with the entire class and then divided the class into groups for collaborative work. Each group had 3–4 students and they worked together to solve practice problems. After every 5–10 min' group discussion, either the instructor or a randomly selected group presented solutions to the entire class. After each in-class recitation session, students were required to complete a corresponding take-home assignment. The total scores of the assignments accounted for 10% of the final grade.

To be prepared for the in-class activities, students were required to complete the associated online lectures. The suggested schedule for finishing the online lectures were every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, which were the days before recitation sessions. The online lectures were designed based upon Bloom's Revised Taxonomy (Krathwohl, 2002) and commonly consisted of short instructional slides and videos, graphical representations, and embedded quizzes. During the pre-class learning, students went through these online lectures whenever and wherever they preferred and also had options to stop and rewind the lecture until they understood the topic. They could also communicate with peers in the course online discussion forum. After each online lecture, students were required to complete a corresponding online quiz. The total scores of the online quizzes accounted for 11% of the final grade.

This study aimed to investigate students' pre-class learning behaviors and their relations with students' achievement trajectories and motivation factors, thus, the pre-class learning setting was our focus.

3.3. Measures
Means, standard deviations, Cronbach's alpha of survey scales, and correlation coefficients between all variables mentioned below are summarized in Table 1.


Table 1. Descriptive statistics of measures.

Measures	M	SD	α	Pearson r
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12
1. Mastery-approach	5.73	1.28	0.88	–											
2. Mastery-avoidance	5.33	1.43	0.81	0.49⁎⁎	–										
3. Performance-approach	5.66	1.35	0.91	0.48⁎⁎	0.50⁎⁎	–									
4. Performance-avoidance	5.56	1.49	0.94	0.29⁎⁎	0.56⁎⁎	0.78⁎⁎	–								
5. Prior math level	3.34	1.12		0.08	0.02	−0.02	−0.01	–							
6. Status	0.39	0.49		0.14	0.11	−0.06	−0.07	0.05	–						
7. Attempt	0.99	0.89		−0.04	0.05	−0.03	0.02	−0.01	0.52⁎⁎	–					
8. Time (mins)	152.23	344.73		−0.06	0.03	0.02	0.14	−0.09	0.29⁎⁎	0.08	–				
9. Exam 1	10.88	2.40		0.15	0.20⁎	0.28⁎⁎	0.06	0.37⁎⁎	0.18	0.18	0.02	–			
10. Exam 2	11.23	2.89		0.36⁎⁎	0.24⁎	0.19	0.01	0.25⁎	0.37⁎⁎	0.14	−0.05	0.62⁎⁎	–		
11. Exam 3	10.03	3.81		0.21⁎	0.12	0.18	0.03	0.27⁎⁎	0.38⁎⁎	0.15	−0.01	0.58⁎⁎	0.78⁎⁎	–	
12. Exam 4	18.65	7.26		0.23⁎	0.17	0.20⁎	0.04	0.21⁎	0.42⁎⁎	0.20⁎	−0.02	0.62⁎⁎	0.79⁎⁎	0.83⁎⁎	–
⁎
p < .05.

⁎⁎
p < .001.

3.3.1. Achievement goal orientations
The revised Achievement Goal Questionnaire-Revised (AGQ-R) is a 12-item self-report survey measurement developed based on Elliot and Murayama's (2008) 2 × 2 goal orientation framework. We adapted this measurement to assess students' motives for learning in the flipped math course. Items were measured on a 7-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (the statement is not at all true of me) to 7 (the statement is very true of me). A sample item for the mastery-approach goal subscale was: “My aim is to completely master the material presented in the flipped course”. A sample item for the mastery-avoidance goal subscale was: “My aim is to avoid learning less than I possibly could from the flipped course”. A sample item for the performance-approach goal subscale was: “My aim is to perform better than others in the flipped course”. A sample item for the performance-avoidance goal subscale was: “I am striving to avoid performing worse than others in the flipped course”. Reliability estimates (Cronbach's alpha) for these subscales were all moderately high, ranging from 0.81 to 0.94. The four achievement goals were significantly correlated with each other (see results in Table 1).

3.3.2. Prior math knowledge
Students' self-reported highest-level math class completed in high school was selected as an indicator of the prior math knowledge for taking the flipped course. Because this flipped math course was the first college math course for most participants, their math level in high school was assumed to influence their learning experience in the flipped course (Chen, Fan, & Macredie, 2006). The information regarding the highest math level in high school was obtained by asking the question: “What was the highest level of mathematics you took prior to college?” Six options were provided including below pre-calculus, pre-calculus, non-AP-calculus, calculus AP (AB), calculus AP (BC), and beyond calculus AP (BC), which ranged from 1 (below pre-calculus) to 6 (beyond calculus AP (BC)). Since no student responded to the prior math level as beyond calculus AP (BC). Hence, option 6 was eliminated from further analysis. The percentages of participants falling in option 1 to 5 are 5.8%, 21.2%, 18.3%, 44.2%, and 10.6 respectively. On average, the prior math knowledge of the participants was slightly below the AP calculus level (see results in Table 1).

3.3.3. Learning trace data
Three types of learning trace data were retrieved from the learning management system including 1) the status of completing each online lecture (i.e. complete = 1 vs. incomplete the lecture = 0), 2) the number of attempts on each online quiz (range from 0 to 3), and 3) the weekly total time (minutes) a user stayed on the course webpage. Although the learning management system automatically logged out a user if the login session had become inactive for over 60 min, the time measure we used might not fully exclude any away from keyboard behavior. During the pre-class online learning of the flipped math course, students mainly involved in two types of learning tasks: reviewing online lectures and completing associated online quizzes. These two types of on-task learning behavior data, together with the time on the course webpage, provide a possible measure of students' pre-class online learning behavior patterns. Over a semester, on average, the participants' completion rate of an online lecture was about 60%. They tried at least one time in each online quiz and spent approximately 153 min on the course webpage each week. The status of lecture completeness was strongly correlated with the quiz attempt (r = 0.52), and moderately correlated with the time stayed on the course webpage (r = 0.29) (see results in Table 1).

3.3.4. Achievement
Four exam scores were collected to demonstrate students' performance trajectories over the semester. In the flipped math course, students were tested four times in the paper-and-pencil format. The four exams were created by two instructors based on the textbook. They were largely evenly distributed throughout the 16-week long semester with exam 1 being implemented in week 4, exam 2 in week 9, exam 3 in week 14, and exam 4 in week 16. The first three exams were designed to assess students' understanding and application of the knowledge learned prior to the exam. The last exam was the final exam assessing students' comprehensive knowledge of the course. The total scores of the three periodic exams were continuous numbers on a scale of 0 to 100, which accounted for 50% of the final grade. The final exam score accounted for approximately 33% of the total final grade. The reliability of the four exams was moderately high (α = 0.84). The four exams were strongly and significantly correlated with each other (see results in Table 1).

3.4. Analysis
Three types of analysis methods were employed to answer the three research questions, respectively.

3.4.1. Latent profile analysis (LPA)
Latent profile analysis is a model-based probabilistic cluster technique that aims at classifying individuals from heterogeneous population into homogenous subgroups (for a review of the method, see Lubke & Muthén, 2005; Pastor, Barron, Miller, & Davis, 2007). In LPA, the cluster number is not pre-defined, and the mean and variance of cluster indicators are allowed to vary within and across clusters. Thus, different models with a varying number of clusters are examined and compared to one another in terms of statistical criteria, theoretical assumptions, sample size, and interpretability and uniqueness of the clusters (Pastor et al., 2007). Several model-selection criteria are commonly used to compare models and to decide on the number of clusters. They are Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC; Schwarz, 1978), Integrated Complete-data Likelihood (ICL; Biernacki, Celeux, & Govaert, 2000), Consistent Akaike's Information Criterion (CAIC; Bozdogan, 1987), Approximate Weight of Evidence Criterion (AWE; Banfield & Raftery, 1993), and Lo-Mendell-Rubin log-likelihood ratio test (LMR; Lo, Mendell, & Rubin, 2001). The BIC, ICL, CAIC, and AWE are all information criteria. A mode with lower values of the BIC, ICL, CAIC, and AWE indicates a better model fit. The LMR compares the improvement in model fit between two nested models (i.e. comparing k and k + 1 models). A significant LMR implies that adding a cluster improves model fit significantly.

To conduct LPA, we used the mclust package in R (Scrucca, Fop, Murphy, & Raftery, 2017). The mclust is a powerful and popular clustering package that can model Gaussian finite mixture data with different covariance structures and different numbers of mixture components (Scrucca et al., 2017). In the current study, data were modeled by using the VEE method in the mclust package which constrains the shape and orientation of the covariances but allows the volume of the covariances to vary across clusters (for a review of the method, see Celeux & Govaert, 1995). The number of clusters was determined by employing the BIC, ICL, CAIC, AWE, and LMR model-selection criteria.

LPA was performed to answer the first research question: identifying students' online learning behavior profiles in the pre-class setting of a flipped math course. To identify such behavior profiles, we used three types of online learning trace data for the LPA, which included students' status of lecture completeness (i.e. lecture), numbers of online quiz attempts (i.e. quiz), and total time stayed-on lecture webpages (i.e. time). Specifically, first, we aggregated the learning trace data by the four exam-time points. For example, the first exam was taken at the beginning of the 4th week of the semester. We took an average of each type of the learning trace data from the 1st to the 3rd week and generated 3 measurements – lecture1, quiz1, and time1 – for students' online learning behavior before taking the first exam. The same analogy applies to the rest three exam-time points. For each exam-time point, we calculated 3 measurements to represent students' online learning behavior during that period. In total, we obtained 12 measurements for the three types of learning trace data over the entire semester, which were lecture1–4, quiz1–4, and time1–4. Second, we used these 12 measurements as profile predictors to run LPA.

3.4.2. Multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA)
Multivariate analysis of Covariance (MANCOVA) is a powerful statistical procedure that is often used to quantify the relationship between variables, especially in the situation where there are two or more dependent variables (Stevens, 2002). Some of the basic assumptions of MANCOVA are (1) the independence of observation, (2) absent of multicollinearity and (3) homogeneity of variance-covariance matrices. The effect size of MANCOVA is measured by partial eta-squared (ηp2). The thresholds for small, moderate and large partial eta-squared are 0.01, 0.06, and 0.14 (Cohen, 1988; Miles & Shevlin, 2001).

In the current study, MANCOVA was conducted to answer the second research question: examining the relationship between the identified learning behavior profiles from LPA and students' exam performance trajectories over a semester. Due to the differences between the first three exams and the final exam, all exam scores were standardized for MANCOVA analysis. Thus, the dependent variables were the four standardized exam scores, and the independent variable was the identified learning behavior profiles. Since Winne and Hadwin, 1998, Winne and Hadwin, 2008 model and its related studies all emphasized the strong influence of prior domain knowledge on academic achievements, we then included prior math knowledge as the covariate in the MANCOVA model. The analysis was conducted using SPSS 24 (IBM Corp., 2016).

3.4.3. Multinomial logistic regression analysis
Multinomial logistic regression is an extension of the simple logit model for dichotomous dependent variables. Consequently, it is often used to deal with polychotomous dependent variables (O'Connell, 2006). In the current study, a multinomial logistic regression was performed to answer the third research question: modeling the relationship between students' perceived achievement goals and membership of the identified learning behavior profiles from LPA. The dependent variable was the three clusters obtained from LPA, and the predictors were prior math knowledge and the four perceived goal orientations: mastery-approach goal, mastery-avoidance goal, performance-approach goal, and performance-avoidance goal. Based on the SRL theory and its related studies, students' prior math knowledge was again included in the model as a covariate. The analysis was performed using SPSS 24 (IBM Corp., 2016).

4. Results
4.1. Identification and interpretation of the clusters
Before conducting LPA, normality and linearity of the data were checked based on Bauer and Curran's (2004) recommendations. As shown in Fig. 1, both the lecture and quiz measures were roughly normally distributed, but the distribution of the time measure was right-skewed, which indicates that the normality assumption was slightly violated. In addition, since the 12 measurements of the trace data were repeated measures of students' behavior, thus, the linearity assumption is also unavoidably violated. The limitation of conducting LPA with nonnormality and nonlinearity issues is discussed in the limitation section.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (728KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Univariate distributions of 12 measurements in LPA with a1–4 showing the four lecture measurements' distribution, b1–4 showing the quiz measurements' distribution, and c1–4 showing the four time measurements' distribution. The three latent profiles are colored in the distributions.

LPA generated 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4- cluster solutions. Five criteria used to statistically evaluate the model fit of different cluster solutions are summarized in Table 2 and depicted graphically in Fig. 2. The BIC, ICL, CAIC and AWE were unanimously the lowest for the 3-cluster solution among all the cluster solutions. Also, the LMR was significant for the 3-cluster solution but not significant for the 4-cluster solution, implying that significantly better model fit was obtained with the 3-cluster solution than the 2-cluster solution, but the 4-cluster solution did not significantly improve the model fit compared to the 3-cluster solution. Thus, all five model-selection criteria favored the 3-cluster solution. Fig. 3 graphically illustrates the profiles of the clusters in the 3-cluster solution mainly based on the variance of cluster means (Scrucca, 2014). The plot displays the projection of the online learning trace data onto the first two directions estimated by using the VEE cluster method, shown as Dir1 (the first direction) and Dir2 (the second direction). There appears a clear separation between clusters with larger variability in the first direction.


Table 2. Statistical model selection indices for four different model solutions.

# of clusters (K)	BIC	ICL	CAIC	AWE	Adj. LMR-LRT p-value (H0: K cluster; H1: K + 1 cluster)
1	8147.45	8147.45	8000.99	8362.52	–
2	8025.24	8030.05	7855.99	8273.77	<0.01
3	8000.63	8005.06	7808.60	8282.61	<0.01
4	8029.98	8034.98	7815.16	8345.41	0.18
Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (103KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Plot of model (a) AWE, (b) BIC, (c) CAIC, and (d) ICL values across four different cluster/profile solutions.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (238KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Contour plot of the cluster separation on the first two directions estimated with the VEE covariance structure.

The means of the 12 online learning measurements for each cluster are presented in Table 3 and visualized in Fig. 4, Fig. 5a–c. The combined chart (Fig. 4) offers a visual comparison among the three clusters in terms of the three types of online learning behavior data over a semester period in order to unveil students' online learning behavior profiles. The linear charts (Fig. 5a–c) provide a close look at the trajectories of the three types of learning behavior data over the semester aiming to detect the changing moments and characterize the changes.


Table 3. Profile size and means of the 12 online learning behavior measurements for each profile.

Profile	Size	Exam 1	Exam 2	Exam 3	Exam 4
Lecture1	Quiz1	Time1	Lecture2	Quiz2	Time2	Lecture3	Quiz3	Time3	Lecture4	Quiz4	Time4
1	26	2.20	4.13	232.88	2.20	4.15	223.40	1.83	3.28	168.38	1.47	2.24	84.75
2	66	1.94	5.50	611.50	1.97	5.33	449.33	1.50	4.41	394.29	1.23	2.88	214.36
3	12	1.94	6.30	1239.59	1.43	5.52	729.37	0.77	4.30	740.61	0.58	2.57	423.60
Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (102KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Combined plot of online learning profiles based on 12 online learning behavior measurements.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (217KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Plots of online learning behavior profiles (a-c) and exam performance trajectories (d) over a semester. The dotted line indicates the standardized average.

Profile 1 presents a high level of online lecture completeness and a low level of time spent on the course webpage. Table 3 shows that the average of lecture completeness of students in profile 1 is constantly higher than the students in the other two profiles. Visually, Fig. 4 demonstrates that students in profile 1 mainly focused on completing online lectures but spent less time on the course webpage compared to the other two profiles. Thus, we consider these students were persistent in the online lecture task throughout the semester. We named this profile a “lecture-focused and low time-spent profile” that characterizes approximately 25% of the participants.

Profile 2 presents a balanced learning pattern between completing online lectures and attempting online quizzes and an average level of time spent on the course webpage. Table 3 shows that compared to students in profile 1 and 3, students in profile 2 had the least mean difference between lecture completeness and quiz attempt over a semester. From Fig. 4, we observed that students in profile 2 exhibited a good balance between the lecture watching and quiz attempting learning tasks, and their time spent on the course webpage kept on an average level over the semester. Therefore, we called this profile a “lecture-quiz-balanced and average time-spent profile”. This profile is the most prominent one, which characterizes around 63.5% of the participants.

Profile 3 presents a distinctively high level of online quiz attempts and time spent on the course webpage, but a low level of online lecture completeness. Table 3 shows that, over the semester, students in profile 3 have the highest mean on time spent on the course webpage and quiz attempts among the three profiles. Based on Fig. 4, we can see that students in profile 3 spent significantly above the average amount of time on the course webpage in the entire semester and had more quiz attempts compared to the other profiles. Thus, we named this profile a “quiz-focused and high time-spent profile” that characterizes about 11.5% of the participants.

Although the students from the three profiles demonstrated distinctive learning patterns, one common feature was observed among the three profiles, that is, a clear decreasing trend of all the three types of learning behavior over the semester. Specifically, from Fig. 5 a–c, we found that profile 3 had the most dramatic decreasing trend in terms of all the three learning behaviors, while a similarly slightly decreasing trend for profile 1 and 2.

4.2. Examination of the relationship between the identified clusters and the academic performance trajectories
Firstly, MANCOVA assumptions were checked. Based on Tabachnick and Fidell (2011), the correlation coefficient among dependent variables should be below 0.90 to avoid the multicollinearity issue. As shown in Table 1, the correlation coefficients among the four exam scores were all below the threshold, indicating the assumption of homogeneity of covariance was satisfied. In addition, the assumption of homogeneity of variance-covariance matrices across three groups was also satisfied (Box's M = 27.46, p = .185). The satisfaction of the assumptions suggests that it is appropriate to conduct the MANCOVA test based on our sample data. Secondly, the MANCOVA results showed that the four exam performances were significantly different based on students' prior math knowledge (F (4,97) = 4.164, p = .004; Wilk's Λ = 0. 853, partial ηp2 = 0.15). More importantly, the four exam performances were also significantly different among the three profiles (F (8,194) = 3.060, p = .003; Wilk's Λ = 0.788, partial ηp2 = 0.11) while holding the prior math knowledge constant. Importantly, we observed that the overall partial eta-squared (ηp2) (0.11) were moderately large, indicating a student's profile membership explains a great amount of variability of his/her four exam performances. To further understand the significant results, a follow-up post hoc pairwise comparison analysis was implemented. Table 4 summarizes the descriptive statistics and MANCOVA results for the exam performances on the three profiles. Specifically, we can see that the ηp2 increased from Exam 1 to 4, implying a student's profile membership explains more variability of his/her exam performance in the later exams than in the earlier exams.


Table 4. Descriptive statistics and MANCOVA results for the exam performances among the three profiles.

Exam	Profile 1	Profile 2	Profile 3	F	p-value	η2
Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD
1	11.45	2.09	10.77	2.49	10.27	2.45	0.58	0.56	0.01
2	12.323	2.20	11.09	2.97	9.671	3.08	3.10	0.05	0.06
3	10.733	3.59	10.313	3.47	6.911,2	4.80	5.29	<0.01	0.10
4	20.763	5.95	19.113	6.75	11.511,2	8.75	0.79	<0.01	0.14
Note: For each profile group's value, the superscripts indicate the group(s) that statistically differ from the designated group at p = .05.

Fig. 5d provides a visual presentation of the exam performance trajectories of the three profiles over a semester. In general, we can see that there was an increasing trend in the exam performances in profiles 1 and 2. Specifically, the performance in profile 1 started above average and completed higher than the starting point by the end of the semester, while the performance in profile 2 started slightly below average and completed slightly above average by the end of the semester. In contrast, there was a steadily decreasing trend in the exam performance for profile 3, which started below average and completed even worse than their starting point at the end.

As for when the exam performances started to significantly differ among the clusters, the results of Tukey's post hoc pairwise comparisons showed that there was, in fact, no significant difference in the performances at the 1st exam among the profiles. However, starting from the 2nd exam, the performance gap between profile 3 and the other two profiles became significantly bigger. In particular, at the 2nd exam, the performance in profile 3 was significantly lower than the performance in profile 1 (Standardized Mean Diff = −0.874, p = .044). From the 3rd exam, the performance in profile 3 became even worse. It kept significantly lower than the performance in profile 1 at the 3rd (Standardized Mean Diff = −0.958, p = .022) and 4th exam (Standardized Mean Diff = −1.289, p = .001). It also became significantly worse than the performance in profile 2 at the 3rd (Standardized Mean Diff = −1.003, p = .005) and 4th exam (Standardized Mean Diff = −1.289, p = .001). Additionally, no significant difference in exam performance was detected between profile 1 and 2.

4.3. Investigation of the relationship between achievement goals and the identified clusters
The multinomial logistic regression analysis showed that adding predictors into the intercept-only base model significantly improved the model fit, x2(16, 104) = 25.809, Nagelkerke R2 = 0.27, p = .05. As shown on the left side of Table 5, significant contributions were made by the performance-approach goal and performance-avoidance goal. Mastery-approach goal, mastery-avoidance goal and prior math knowledge had no significant impact on the improvement of the model fit. To further understand the significant results, follow-up analysis was performed and summarized on the right side of Table 5.


Table 5. Summarized multinomial logistic regression results.

Predictors	Predictors' unique contributes in the regression model	Pairwise comparison
x2	df	p-value	Profile 3 vs.	B	Odds	p-value
Mastery-approach	0.64	2	0.73	Profile 1	0.10	1.10	0.82
Profile 2	−0.10	0.91	0.79
Mastery-avoidance	0.89	2	0.64	Profile 1	0.03	1.03	0.96
Profile 2	−0.18	0.84	0.67
Performance-approach	8.13	2	0.02	Profile 1	1.86	6.43	0.01
Profile 2	1.58	4.87	0.02
Performance-avoidance	10.90	2	<0.01	Profile 1	−2.08	0.13	<0.01
Profile 2	−1.70	0.18	0.01
We treated profile 3 (i.e. decreasing quiz-focused group) as the reference group. Accordingly, each achievement goal has two parameters, one for predicting membership in profile 1 rather than profile 3, and one for predicting membership in profile 2. Based on Table 5, we observed that, while holding the prior math knowledge as constant, if a student were to increase one unit of the performance-approach goal orientation, then the odds of this student being assigned to profile 1 compared to profile 3 would be 1.861. Also, if a student were to increase one unit of the performance-avoidance goal orientation, then the odds of this student being assigned to profile 1 compared to profile 3 would be 0.125. That means, if a student were more performance-approach oriented, then he/she would be more likely to belong to profile 1; while if a student were more performance-avoidance oriented, then he/she would be more likely to belong to profile 3. The exact same situation happened on the membership distinction between profile 2 and profile 3. No significant impact of the achievement goals on profile membership was detected between profile 1 and profile 2.

5. Discussion
The main purpose of this study was to understand how students learn or prepare in the pre-class setting of a flipped math course and investigate the cause and consequence of the pre-class preparedness. In specific, we used the trace data of students' online learning behavior to identify students' pre-class learning behavior profiles, examined the relationship between the identified behavior profiles and students' exam performance trajectories over a semester, and investigated the impact of self-reported achievement goal orientations on the membership of the identified behavior profiles. Findings from this research have important implications for the understanding of students' pre-class preparedness in the flipped classroom model and the improvement of the flipped math class design by providing insights into the role of learner characteristics, such as achievement goals. The results and implications of the findings are discussed in the following sections.

5.1. The pre-class learning and suggested instructional strategies
5.1.1. The pre-class learning behavior profiles and their relationship with academic performance trajectories
Based upon the analysis of the objective learning trace data, we first observed that students do learn differently in the pre-class setting of the flipped math course. The LPA revealed three distinct types of learning behavior profiles, including the lecture-focused and low spent profile, lecture-quiz-balanced and average time-spent profile, and quiz-focused and high time-spent profile. The learning behaviors in the first two profiles highly focused on the tasks with the students in profile 1 mainly focusing on the online lecture task, and the students in profile 2 balancing between the online lecture and quiz tasks. Although the task-focused behaviors in these two profiles showed a slightly decreasing trend over time, in general, they still maintained at an above-average level. As for the quiz-focused and high time-spent profile, although students in this profile spent significantly more time on the course webpage than the other two profiles, they solely focused on the quiz task at the beginning and largely ignored the lecture task. With the time approaching the end of the semester, although they still invested above-average time on the course webpage, their task-focused behaviors dramatically declined. The findings on the decreasing trends in lecture completeness, quiz attempts, and time spent on the course webpage in all three profiles were not unique in our study but consistent with previous research findings. For instance, two previous studies examined students' participation in online learning and both found that students' motivation significantly dropped over a 16-week long course and students' participation was strongly related to their motivation, implying a potential decreasing trend of the online participation (Xie, DeBacker, & Ferguson, 2006; Xie, Durrington, & Yen, 2011). Furthermore, we found that there was a significant relationship between the identified behavior profiles and students' academic performance trajectories over a semester. MANCOVA results showed that constant task-focused learning behaviors (i.e., lecture completeness and quiz attempts) can lead to satisfying academic performances over time, while declining task-focused learning behaviors, especially the lack of lecture-focused learning behavior gradually worsen the performances regardless of the amount of time stayed on the course webpage. In particular, from the middle of the semester, the achievement gap between the steady and declining task-focused profiles started to appear and became significantly bigger towards the end of the semester.

The current study contributes to the flipped classroom literature in several ways. First, we adopted a person-centered approach (e.g., latent profile analysis) to examine the differences in learning outcomes among various subgroups of students that naturally occurred. Existing studies in the context of flipped classroom mainly utilized variable-centered analysis that explores the effectiveness of the implementation of the flipped classroom (e.g., Butt, 2014; Strayer, 2012) and examines the relationship between academic achievement and self-regulatory factors (e.g., Lai & Hwang, 2016; Sun et al., 2018). The use of person-centered analytic technique provides a new perspective to explore how students learn in the pre-class setting of the flipped classroom and offers the insights into who struggle in the class and what are their weakness. Second, almost all flipped classroom studies utilized a one-time final achievement as the outcome measure to examine students' performance in the flipped classroom (Mason et al., 2013; Talley & Scherer, 2013). In our study, we measured students' achievement at four-time points across over a three-month period. The generated achievement trajectories demonstrate stability, change, and development of students' performance in different pre-class learning behavior profiles over time and offer insights into the appropriate time for instructional interventions (e.g., the middle of the semester). Lastly, the findings in our study provide empirical evidence demonstrating various patterns of the pre-class preparedness that naturally emerged among the sampled college students and showing the critical influence of the difference in the pre-class preparedness on students' academic paths over time.

5.1.2. Suggested instructional strategy for supporting students' pre-class learning in the flipped math course
Our results suggest that teachers should take full advantage of learning analytics in CSLEs to design interventions to support potential at-risk students in the flipped math course. In this study, students in the quiz-focused and high time-spent profile could be identified as an academically at-risk group of the course. Gašević, Dawson, and Siemens (2015) posited that two of the most popular tasks associated with learning analytics in education are predicting student learning success and providing proactive feedback to students and teachers. A vast number of applications of analytics have been developed and implemented in teaching over a past decade, such as academic early alert system (e.g., Course Signals from Purdue University (Arnold & Pistilli, 2012)), adaptive learning and cognitive tutoring system (e.g., MetaTutor (Azevedo et al., 2013; Azevedo, Johnson, Chauncey, & Burkett, 2010)) and so on. In a flipped class, students' pre-class learning commonly takes place in CSLEs, their learning trace data are then automatically restored in the learning management system. Therefore, teachers should leverage the learning analytics applications to gain insights into students' pre-class preparedness and enact corresponding instructional strategies. For example, they should be particularly attentive to the students displaying a high level of online quiz attempts coupled with a low level of online lecture completeness, because these students appear to struggle in the pre-class preparedness. In addition, they should also take notice to the students with salient decreasing trend of the lecture completeness, quiz attempts, and time spent on the course webpage and may provide individual help to encourage their engagement in pre-class learning.

5.2. The impact of achievement goals and suggested instructional strategies
5.2.1. The impact of achievement goals on the online learning behavior profiles
To understand why students developed different pre-class learning behavior profiles in the flipped math course, we draw on the findings from the motivation variable – achievement goals. In the study, we found the significant impact of achievement goals on the identified pre-class behavior profiles, indicating students' perceived goal orientations shape their behavior and learning in the pre-class setting of the flipped math course. Specifically, the students who adopted the performance-approach goal were more likely to belong to the persistent task-focused profiles (i.e., lecture-focused and low time-spent profile and lecture-quiz-focused and average time-spent profile), whereas those with the performance-avoidance goal were more likely to belong to the decreasing task-focused profile (i.e., quiz-focused and high time-spent profile). No significant relations were detected between the mastery goals and the membership of the learning behavior profiles. These findings seem contradicted with the traditional achievement goal theory that promotes the mastery goal, surpassing other achievement goals, as the optimal goal to pursue for desired learning outcomes (Ames & Archer, 1988; Dweck, 1986). However, the findings are aligned with the multiple goal perspective that believes both mastery-approach and performance-approach goals are conducive for learning, and students can adopt both goals simultaneously and reap the benefits of each goal by pursuing both (Senko, 2016; Senko et al., 2011). Our findings are also consistent with the studies conducted in CSLEs that showed the significant effect of the performance-approach goal on academic achievement and self-regulatory behaviors (e.g., help-seeking behavior), but no significant effect of mastery goals (Carr et al., 2013; Duffy & Azevedo, 2015). More importantly, the findings in the present study further previous research in the way that distinguishes the influences of the performance-approach and performance-avoidance goals on students' online learning behaviors in the flipped math class. Thus, it appears that the performance-oriented goals serve as stronger predictors of students' online learning behaviors in CSLEs such as the pre-class setting of the flipped classroom. This conclusion prompts us to ask: what accounts for the significant role of the performance goals?

One major reason is that this study was conducted in an introductory level undergraduate math course which has a great extent of performance-oriented goal structure. The introductory level college classes, especially in math discipline, tend to be large lecture classes, rely heavily on multiple-choice tests, and use a normative grading system to measure students' successes (Harackiewicz, Barron, Carter, Lehto, & Elliot, 1997). Based upon Ames's (1992) goal structure perspective, the high competitiveness context of the introductory classes may promote the adoption of performance-oriented achievement goals. Specifically, students in such the context are more likely to endorse either the performance-approach goal or performance-avoidance goal. Those adopted the performance-approach goal are motivated to obtain good grades and perform better than peers, thus, they work hard and manage their behaviors to focus on learning tasks like completing online lectures and attempting online quizzes. In contrast, those with the performance-avoidance goal strive to avoid failure and appear less talented than peers. Thus, their behaviors are largely driven by extrinsic concerns, which make them do the least amount of work or try a shortcut to obtain a good grade such as just attempting online quizzes without completing online lectures.

5.2.2. The suggested design principles for the flipped math classroom
Research has shown that classroom goal structure influences students' behavior and learning by shaping the type of goal orientations that they adopt (Meece, Anderman, & Anderman, 2006). Based on our findings, when the class has a performance goal structure, we suggest that teachers could create a learning environment that helps students to shift their goal orientation to a performance-approach focus as compared to a performance-avoidance focus in the pre-class setting the flipped math class. Vansteenkiste and his colleagues found that when the performance-approach goal was given in an autonomy-supportive learning context, it could lead to more beneficial learning outcomes such as effective information processing, good time management, and high concentration (Vansteenkiste, Sierens, Soenens, Luyckx, & Lens, 2009). The instructional practices of the autonomy-supportive learning context include acknowledging difficulties, providing a rationale, and using noncontrolling languages (Roth, Assor, Niemiec, Ryan, & Deci, 2009). Thus, we suggest that, in a flipped math class, teachers can use the below instructional example in the pre-class setting to positively promote the adoption of the performance-approach goal:

An instructional example for the pre-class lectures of a flipped math class:

After finishing this pre-class lecture, you would be able to describe derivative and understand its mathematical importance in real-life situations. More importantly, you would be able to conduct basic derivative computations. On average, it takes around one hour to complete both the lecture and the quiz. I know the concept might be abstract but try to understand through the real-life related examples in the lecture. See if you can solve the problems in the quiz and obtain good grades.

In addition, teachers should pay extra attention to the students who are either system-identified at-risk students or appear struggling to involve in group work and discussion in the F2F class. They can enact tactics to help these students avoid the fear of failure, such as complementing their growth, attribute their poor performance on the lack of effort, and encourage them to try harder (Patrick, Anderman, & Ryan, 2002).

6. Limitation and conclusion
The study has several limitations that must be acknowledged. First, it is important to notify that our findings are limited to students in a particular classroom environment, specifically, an introductory calculus course in a large public Midwest university that had a large lecture format and assessed students by a normative grading system. Even though the participants represented a good mix of demographic characteristics, it should be cautious to generalize the results to other populations and disciplines. Second, the achievement goals were measured at the beginning of the semester. We assumed students' goal orientations were stable over the semester based on Muis & Edwards, (2009) findings in the traditional classroom setting. But the goal orientations might change across tasks and over time in the flipped classroom setting. Further studies need to be conducted to examine the stability of achievement goals in the flipped classroom. Third, the study only focused on students' pre-class learning activities and our findings do not represent the in-class learning activities. We suggest that future studies could investigate how students' pre-class learning behavior profiles may lead to different behaviors in the F2F class and further the differences in academic achievements in the flipped classroom. Fourth, validity issues associated with the digital trace data (e.g. time data) needs further research. We recommend future studies to collect self-reported behavior data to triangulate the trace data in the analysis as a way of increasing data validity. Fifth, the learning profiles found in this study were based on a semester-long aggregated data. We suggest that future studies may alter the time range of the analytic data (e.g. weeklong data) to obtain dynamic groupings and enact prompt interventions. Sixth, one of the limitations of latent profiles analysis method is the spurious identification of subgroups that may not exist in the population, especially with nonnormality and nonlin

earity issues in the data (Bauer & Curran, 2004). In this study, the constraints of data collection introduce nonnormality and nonlinearity issues, which pose potential validity problems. Thus, further studies are needed to validate the findings in this study. Finally, the sample size in the present study was not sufficiently large. We observed the significant size difference among the three learning profiles with profile 3 comprising the least size of students comparing to the other profiles. We also noticed there was no profile representing all low or high engagement behaviors. We suspect the size difference and the lack of certain types of profiles might be due to the overall small sample size, thus, a replicated study with a larger sample size would be beneficial to validate the findings.

To summarize, the present study aims to find answers to the continuous questions in the flipped classroom practice regarding students' pre-class preparedness. Based on the achievement goal theory, we explored how students learn in the pre-class setting of an undergraduate flipped math course, investigated the relation of the pre-class learning behaviors with students' math performance over time, and examined the impact of achievement goals on the pre-class learning behaviors. Our findings contribute to the literature by identifying pre-class learning behavior profiles through learning analytics, showing the significant and gradual influences of the identified behavior profiles on students' performance trajectories, as well as demonstrating the form of the behavior profiles as a function of performance goals.

