The growth of online learning environments entails understanding of how to promote collaborative knowledge construction processes and create learning environments that support meaningful student engagement and interactions. Asynchronous online discussion forums are intended to support knowledge construction and higher-order thinking and are becoming even more appealing for their predictive relationship with learning. This paper describes a study that explored the complex dynamics of knowledge construction in pre-service teacher education through examining student teachers' cognitive presence in online discussion forums and their academic performance. The results of multiple regression analysis showed that certain levels of cognitive presence were associated with students' academic performance. In addition, network analysis of discussion forums revealed that student centrality within their learning networks moderated the association between the highest level of cognitive presence and academic performance. The paper concludes with discussing the theoretical and practical implications of the findings.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online learning

Cognitive engagement

Teacher education

Content analysis

Social network analysis

Measures of prominence

1. Introduction
Learner interactions in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environments have been argued to promote learning through intellectual stimulation and exchange of ideas (Agudo-Peregrina, Iglesias-Pradas, Conde-González, & Hernández-García, 2014). This shared knowledge construction in the collaborative learning process is what advances the individual to higher-order thinking and enhanced learning gains (Brindley, Walti, & Blaschke, 2014), thus, becoming the desired outcome of education in the 21st century. Asynchronous online discussion forums, i.e., virtual spaces for students to have discussions by posting messages to an online discussion board, are one of the most commonly used means for promoting collaborative knowledge construction (Schrire, 2006).

However, participation in discussion forums as such does not guarantee co-construction of knowledge and does not necessarily result in higher-order cognitive processing (Admiraal, Lockhorst, Wubbels, Korthagen, & Veen, 1998; Dillenbourg, 2002; Lockhorst, Admiraal, Pilot, & Veen, 2002). A learner needs to actively contribute to the discourse of meaning creation in order to gain an enriched understanding of an issue and acquire knowledge (Brindley et al., 2014). However, recognizing the role of individual cognitive engagement is not sufficient, as “meaning is not created in the mental processes of an individual, but in joint activity, typically in accordance with established social practices” (Stahl, Ludvigsen, Law, & Cress, 2014, p. 239) Learner interactions in a learning community or network form the mechanism through which collaboration for learning takes place, and in order to understand how interaction advances learning, it is necessary to examine “the relationship of the change process we call ‘individual learning’ to that individual's participation in socially accomplished learning” (Suthers, 2006, p. 319). Still, existing research does not explicitly address the question of how the complex relationship between individual learner cognitive engagement and learner-learner interaction in knowledge constuction in CSCL affect learning outcomes (Kovanovic, Joksimovic, Gasevic, & Hatala, 2014b; Romero, Lopez, Luna, & Ventura, 2013). Understanding the dynamics of this relationship becomes even more important in today's teacher education in which theory- and practice-based reflection, critical inquiry, and collaboration skills are regarded as essential outcomes and are meant to prepare reflective practitioners ready to meet the demands of 21st century education (Craven & Penick, 2001; Doran, Doran, & Mazur, 2011; Kaufman & Brooks, 1996). This study set out to explore the nature of the relationship between the cognitive and social constituents of collaborative knowledge construction. In particular, it examined how individual student teacher cognitive engagement was related to their learning depending upon interactions with other learners. In order to examine how individual learner interactions with other learners might affect the extent to which the levels of cognitive engagement predict students' academic performance, we first explored the levels of individual learner cognitive engagement and how each level predicted student academic performance. Then, we tested how individual student interaction with other learners interacted with the levels of cognitive engagement to predict student academic performance.

2. Cognitive engagement of students
One of the theoretical frameworks for the analysis of online collaboration is the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework which is based on collaborative constructivist approaches to teaching and learning. The framework supports higher-order learning through the interaction of its three components: cognitive presence, social presence, and teaching presence (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001; Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007). Teaching presence is conceptualized through instructional design, facilitation of productive discourse, and direct instruction (Anderson, Rourke, Garrison, & Archer, 2001). Social presence is the ability of learners to engage socially and affectively in a community of inquiry (Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 2001). Cognitive presence is defined as the degree to which “learners are able to construct and confirm meaning through sustained reflection and discourse in a critical community of inquiry” (Garrison et al., 2001, p. 11). To guide the analysis of cognitive presence in an educational experience, Garrison et al. developed a Practical Inquiry model which is built on Dewey's (1933) reflective and critical inquiry model and is operationalized through four progressive levels: 1) triggering event, 2) exploration, 3) integration, and 4) resolution (Garrison & Anderson, 2003). Triggering event initiates critical inquiry through posing a question/problem observed or experienced to which learners can relate from their own experience or previous studies. Exploration is the level of understanding the essence of the question/problem and searching for relevant information and explanations. The third one, integration, is a highly reflective level that constructs meaning from the information shared in exploration. The final level of practical inquiry is the resolution of the question/problem through direct or mental modeling of solutions. Cognitive presence entails engagement in all the four levels of practical inquiry, and understanding of this engagement is necessary for understanding of how individuals approach learning and construct knowledge in collaboration with others (Garrison, 2017).

Previous research on knowledge construction (Garrison et al., 2001; Shea et al., 2010; Zheng & Spires, 2011) suggests that cognitive presence in online discussions tends to stay at its lower levels. However, as noted by Gašević, Adesope, Joksimović, and Kovanović (2015), the overwhelming majority of previous studies have focused on the substantiation of cognitive presence indicators in entire groups, falling short of providing a thorough analysis of the knowledge construction of individual learners within a community of inquiry; whereas it is the level of individual engagement in discourse that functions as a key indicator of learner performance (Romero et al., 2013; Wang, Wen, & Rosé, 2016). In addition, perceived cognitive presence has been found to show significant discipline-based differences suggesting that the individual elements of the CoI framework may be affected by specific academic disciplines (Arbaugh, Bangert, & Cleveland-Innes, 2010).

The evaluation of the way in which the individual elements of the CoI framework and subject matter affect one another may be even more relevant in teacher education in which “the development of collaborative skills is important not only in the theoretical framework of online learning but also as a required outcome of teacher education courses” (Doran et al., 2011, p. 14). However, student teacher collaboration in online communities is not an end goal by itself, as it does not guarantee an exchange of reflections on pedagogical content knowledge and one's own teaching practices and tends to stay at the level of emotional support exchange (e.g., Admiraal et al., 1998). The qualitative analysis of online discussions from graduate-level language teacher education courses (Pawan, Paulus, Yalcin, & Chang, 2003) indicates that students by and large engaged in “serial monologues” suggesting “discussions do not automatically become interactive and collaborative simply by virtue of being an anytime/anywhere asynchronous medium” (p. 137). For student teachers to construct high quality knowledge, they would have to explore and reflect upon their existing pedagogical content knowledge, process and assess new knowledge about teaching and learning as well as integrate this new knowledge into their existing knowledge and belief system (Evens, Elen, & Depaepe, 2015; Kaufman & Brooks, 1996; Nilsson, 2008).

Hence, this study tries to unveil the complex dynamics of knowledge construction in pre-service teacher education by examining individual student teacher cognitive presence as reflected in their contributions to the discussion forum. For this purpose, the study explores the nature of student teacher exchanges and evaluates the level of cognitive presence manifested in these exchanges. Thus, the first research question that the study aims to address is the following:

RQ1

What levels of cognitive presence characterize co-construction of knowledge in online discussion forums in communities of student teachers?

Studies indicate that in-depth interpretation of the determinants of learner performance must incorporate the analysis of the social component, i.e., the dynamics of learner interactions with other learners in CSCL (De Laat, Lally, Lippo, & Simons, 2007; Doran et al., 2011; Romero et al., 2013; Shea et al., 2010). One of the effective means to analyze learner interactions in CSCL is Social Network Analysis (SNA) which enables to map out the information flow between learners and identify learner positions within the community of learners (Freeman, 2000; Wassermann & Faust, 1994). The position of a learner in each community is determined based on the degree of prominence of the learner in a network, i.e. the learner's Centrality (or out-degree centrality index) and Prestige (or in-degree centrality index). These two concepts of prominence distinguish between outgoing and incoming connections of an actor in a network and are measured by normalized out-degree and in-degree centrality indices (Wassermann & Faust, 1994). Studies have used these indices to reveal hub and authority students (e.g., Romero et al., 2013). In addition, the indices have been linked to students' cognitive and affective learning outcomes suggesting that students that have more connections to other students in a learning network tend to have better learning performance (e.g., Cadima, Ojeda, & Monguet, 2012; Russo & Koesten, 2005) and more meaningful learning experience (Toikkanen & Lipponen, 2011).

Research, applying SNA as an instrument “to automate the measurement of theoretically-derived desirable behaviors in online learning environments” (Shea et al., 2010, p. 17), has revealed that learner-learner interactions in CSCL often stay at surface level resulting in insufficient knowledge construction (e.g., Shea et al., 2010; Zhang & Zhang, 2010). Despite the documented “predictive power of social presence on academic performance” (Joksimović, Gašević, Kovanović, Riecke, & Hatala, 2015, p. 650) and its “central role in the construction of meaningful teaching and cognitive discourse, sense-making and higher-order learning”, the stimulation of “the social presence in online learning does not per se [emphasis original] generate enhanced cognition” (Armellini & De Stefani, 2016, p. 1212). Thus, learner-learner interaction should not be an end in itself since as such the quantity of interaction cannot equate to learning. This indicates that the relationship between the cognitive and the social is more than straightforward, and the roles that these two dimensions play in knowledge construction in CSCL might be contingent upon one another (Stodel, Thompson, & MacDonald, 2006). This further suggests that the cognitive and the social might interact in their influence on learning (Hayes, 2013) implying that enhanced understanding of collaborative knowledge construction would necessitate insights into the underlying mechanism through which these two dimensions interact in CSCL. Thus, combining SNA with content analysis and analyzing how the cognitive and the social dimensions interact will allow to reveal whether central members of a given network are central to the learning as well (Cela, Sicilia, & Sanchez, 2015; De Laat et al., 2007) which in its turn will lead to better pedagogical frameworks that reinforce co-construction of knowledge (De Laat, Lally, Lipponen, & Simons, 2006). The current study investigates the relationship between the level of cognitive presence and learner prominence, at the one hand, and academic performance, at the other hand. Thus, the second research question is:

RQ2

How do different levels of individual cognitive presence and learner prominence measures interact in their influence on academic performance?

3. Method
3.1. Research context and sample
The study intends to advance insights from research on cognitive presence in teacher education using data from two student teacher communities. These communities were comprised of student teachers of a 2-year graduate level program leading to a Master's degree in Teaching English as a Foreign Language. Community 1 was comprised of first-year, first-term student teachers (N = 22; Mage = 23) enrolled in a 15-week course; Community 2 was comprised of second-year student teachers (N = 29; Mage = 25) taking their last (15-week) course. Of the total number of students, only two were male (4%). The courses included an online component that required students to jointly work in asynchronous online discussions in Moodle reflecting on their weekly readings, identifying theory and research based implications for classroom practices, finding connections with their actual classroom practice, as well as applying theory and research-based findings for explaining actual teaching problems, and hypothesizing possible solutions. Participation contributed 5% towards the final grade, subject to a minimum number of posts (15 posts/responses to peer posts). Since the students were familiar with Bloom's Taxonomy (Bloom, 1984) and had been applying it in their courses, a decision was made to use the Taxonomy as a guideline both for the students in formulating questions/responses in the discussion forums and for the instructor in facilitating the discussions. One of the authors being the instructor of the two courses permitted to have roughly equal levels of discussion facilitation and, thus, ensure equal levels of instructor presence in both forums.

3.2. Data
As recommended by recent CSCL research, the study applied a multi-method approach encompassing Content Analysis allowing to discover traces of knowledge construction in online discussions (Schrire, 2006; Strijbos, Martens, Prins, & Jochems, 2006; De Wever, Schellens, Valcke, & Keer, 2006), and Social Network Analysis allowing to measure the interaction patterns among learners (De Laat et al., 2007; Doran et al., 2011). The data for the study included transcripts of students' posts in two asynchronous discussion forums collected by Moodle during the two 15-week courses and students' academic performance measured by the course final grade of each student, i.e., a percent mark from 0% to 100%. The final course grades consisted of weighted scores from a final reflection paper (10%), response paper to articles (15%), chapter presentation and facilitation (20%), synthesis paper (20%), application task (15%), in-class participation (10%), attendance (5%), and online participation in discussion forum (5%).

3.3. Measures
Transcripts of 15-week online discussions in each course were analyzed with regard to their cognitive and interactive dimensions. The initial choice of a complete message as the unit of analysis created problems as the majority of messages were too long, and very often a single message contained sub-message units, e.g., a response to a peer at the integration or resolution level and a response to another peer which would start with exploration and end with a synthesis of ideas of other peers. In addition, this unit of analysis posed problems in identifying ties between students in each community as a message of a single student would sometimes contain a response to another student and a follow-up to their own previous message, or an initiation and a response at the same time. Thus, to avoid content ambiguity and segmentation reliability issues posed by other common units of analysis and to improve the accuracy of coding, ‘the sentence’ was used as the unit of analysis on account of it being “more likely to contain a single concept, expression or statement” (Strijbos, Martens, Prins, & Jochems, 2006, p. 16). Two researchers coded 140 units with an inter-rater agreement of Cohen's kappa of 0.90 with a 95% confidence interval of 0.80 < κ < 0.99. According to De Wever, Schellens, Valcke, and Van Keer (2006), Cohen's kappa values above 0.75 demonstrate excellent agreement beyond chance. A total of 2158 units were coded for their level of cognitive presence based on the coding scheme developed by Garrison et al. (2001) with revisions by Shea et al. (2010) with four levels of cognitive presence: 1) triggering event, 2) exploration, 3) integration, and 4) resolution. All relevant cognitive units were coded into these four levels; the remaining non-cognitive units, such as greetings and expressions of appreciation, that could not be coded using these four levels, were coded as “other”. Examples of each level of cognitive presence can be found in the Appendix.

To understand the dynamics of student behavior and interaction in the two communities, it was necessary to complement content analysis data with the data from mapping the information flow between students. The Social Network Analysis (SNA) of the communication logs captured in Moodle was carried out to obtain network diagrams reflecting data on who initiates communication with whom and who responds to whom together with the indication of the frequency of communication. The SNA allowed us to identify the position of each learner within their corresponding learning community based upon their contributions to cognitive discourse. Gephi, an open-source interactive visualization and exploration platform for all kinds of networks (Bastian, Heymann, & Jacomy, 2009; Gottardo & Noronha, 2012), was utilized for mapping and visually displaying the interactions manifested within each community. The utilization of Gephi offered insight into the level of engagement of each participant and interaction patterns between participants. The positions of learners in each community were determined using centrality and prestige, the two SNA measures of participant prominence in a network. Centrality is the ratio of the number of a participant's outgoing interactions to the total number of participants and is calculated as the normalized node out-degree of a participant; prestige is the ratio of the number of a participant's ingoing interactions to the total number of participants and is calculated as the normalized node in-degree of a participant (Wassermann & Faust, 1994).

3.4. Analyses
To answer the first research question, descriptive statistics were used for the four levels of cognitive presence in both online communities. To answer the second research question, a multiple regression analysis was performed with the course final grade as the dependent variable, the four levels of cognitive presence and measures of prominence as independent variables, and student ages and years of study as covariates. The analysis of the interaction effect of the levels of cognitive presence and measures of prominence on the course final grade was conducted using the PROCESS macro developed by Hayes (2013).

4. Results
The findings on cognitive presence and interaction for both communities are detailed in this section. The content analysis of students' contributions to each discussion forum provided an understanding of the presence of triggering event, exploration, integration, and resolution levels in the process of knowledge construction, thereby answering Research Question 1 concerning the levels of cognitive presence characterizing co-construction of knowledge in online discussion forums.

4.1. Levels of cognitive presence
To address Research Question 1, we conducted content analysis that revealed the presence of all four levels of cognitive presence. Table 1 presents the distribution of the coded units in the two communities together with the means and standard deviations of cognitive presence levels and students' final grades. All the students had met the minimum discussion post requirement, and the means of final grades for Community 1 and Community 2 were 87.38 and 90.81, respectively. As shown by the percentage distribution of the coded units, the discussion posts in both courses showed almost equal distribution between the levels of triggering event and exploration on the one hand and integration and resolution on the other. In Community 1, the proportion of combined discussion posts at the higher levels of cognitive presence—integration and resolution (47%)—was almost equal to the proportion of combined posts at the lower levels of cognitive presence—triggering events and exploration (53%). In Community 2, higher levels of cognitive presence, involving integration and resolution, accounted for virtually half (49%) of the analyzed units with integration being the most frequent (45%). It is also worth noting that the means of higher levels of cognitive presence—integration and resolution—were 16.64 and 2.64 for Community 1 and 19.44 and 1.93 for Community 2. Thus, it was interesting to see that, contrary to expectations, first- and second-year students had demonstrated similar tendencies in their cognitive presence in the discussion forums. For this reason, the two communities were treated as one in the subsequent analysis.


Table 1. Comparison of descriptive statistics for community 1 and community 2.

Community 1 (Nstudents = 22)	Community 2 (Nstudents = 22)
N	%	M	SD	N	%	M	SD
1. Age			23.36	3.66			25.14	3.87
2. Triggering event	90	10	4.10	3.57	218	17	7.52	7.06
3. Exploration	386	43	17.55	11.07	420	33	14.48	11.61
4. Integration	366	41	16.64	11.65	564	45	19.44	12.68
5. Resolution	58	6	2.64	4.29	56	4	1.93	3.05
6. Centrality			0.64	0.28			0.74	0.33
7. Prestige			0.15	0.12			0.13	0.11
8. Final grade			87.38	6.30			90.81	7.53
Note. N = Number of units coded at cognitive presence levels.

4.2. Relationship between students' cognitive presence, learner prominence, and academic performance
In response to the second research question, we first explored the possible associations between the students' levels of cognitive presence and course final grade. For this, the data on the four levels of cognitive presence were aggregated at the student level. Table 2 presents the correlations of each level of cognitive presence with final grades. According to Table 2, statistically significant relationships were found between the three levels of cognitive presence—triggering event, integration, resolution—and course final grade (r = 0.37; r = 0.58; r = 0.50, with p < .01, respectively). However, the relationship between exploration and course final grade was not significant (r = 0.07, p = 60).


Table 2. Summary of intercorrelations.

1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
1. Age	–							
2. Yeara	0.23							
3. Triggering event	0.18	0.28⁎						
4. Exploration	0.03	−0.13	0.03					
5. Integration	0.11	0.11	0.19	0.15				
6. Resolution	−0.03	−0.10	0.13	0.03	0.48⁎⁎			
7. Centrality	−0.02	−0.15	0.42⁎	0.17	0.38⁎⁎	0.31⁎		
8. Prestige	−0.09	−0.10	0.34⁎	0.00	0.19	0.41⁎⁎	0.83⁎⁎	
9. Final grade	0.16	0.24	0.37⁎⁎	0.07	0.58⁎⁎	0.50⁎⁎	0.50⁎⁎	0.30⁎
Note. N = 51.

a
Dummy coded: 0 = first year, 1 = second year.

⁎
p < .05.

⁎⁎
p < .01.

To make sure that the assumptions of multiple regression were not violated, normal Q-Q Plots were examined to check for the normality of residuals. Independence of residuals was assessed by a Durbin-Watson value of 2.17, and the multicollinearity of predictors was checked by VIF (Variance Inflation Factor) values below 10. The results of multiple regression analysis (Table 3, Model 1–2) indicated that the frequencies of integration and resolution significantly predicted student final grade (B = 0.22, p = .006 and B = 0.62, p = .016, respectively).


Table 3. Multiple linear regression models.

Constant	Model 1	Model 2	Model 3	Model 4
87.58	(1.53)	88.01	(1.22)	88.90	(1.25)	89.16	(1.15)
Yeara	3.07	(2.05)	2.31	(1.69)	0.75	(1.78)	1.90	(1.65)
Age	0.20	(0.27)	0.10	(0.21)	0.15	(0.20)	0.11	(0.18)
Triggering event			0.24	(0.14)	0.17	(0.14)	−0.14	(0.16)
Exploration			0.02	(0.07)	−0.04	(0.07)	−0.05	(0.07)
Integration			0.22⁎⁎	(0.07)	0.14	(0.08)	0.21⁎⁎	(0.08)
Resolution			0.62⁎	(0.25)	0.72⁎⁎	(0.26)	1.18⁎⁎⁎	(0.31)
Centrality					13.30⁎	(5.54)	8.52	(5.24)
Prestige					−26.34	(15.27)	−11.25	(15.11)
Resolution× Centrality							−4.55⁎	(1.99)
Resolution× Prestige							4.11	(4.37)
R2	0.07	0.49⁎⁎⁎	0.56⁎⁎⁎	0.66⁎⁎⁎
ΔR2		0.43⁎⁎⁎	0.05	0.04⁎
Note. N = 51. Unstandardized regression coefficients are reported with standard errors in parentheses. All predictors were centered prior to analysis.

a
Dummy coded: 0 = first year, 1 = second year.

⁎
p < .05.

⁎⁎
p < .01.

⁎⁎⁎
p < .001.

Next, the interactions manifested within each community were mapped and visually displayed. Fig. 1 depicts the participation levels and interaction patterns in the two communities. In the visualization, the vertices or nodes correspond to forum participants, and the directed lines or edges between the nodes represent the frequency and direction of participant interactions in the forum. Edge width represents the rate of occurrence of interaction between particular participants. Node size indicates the degree of centrality (Centrality) of a participant in the network, with the larger the more central. Node shading is indicative of a participant's Prestige, with the darker the more messages received. The relationships between Centrality and Prestige and course final grade are presented in Table 2. The results of multiple regression analysis (Table 3, Model 2–3) indicated that centrality significantly predicted student final grade (B = 13.30, p = .021) where as prestige did not (B = −26.34, p = .092).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (533KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Interaction patterns in the two communities.

Next, we examined the moderating role of centrality and prestige in the relationship between the predictor variables and the outcome variable. To probe for potential variable interactions, we used Hayes' (2013) PROCESS Model 1 with 5000 bootstrapping iterations (Hayes, 2013). The results are summarized in Table 3 (Model 3–4). We identified centrality as a significant moderator of the relationship between resolution and final grades (B = − 4.55, p = .028, Model 3–4). As demonstrated by simple slope analysis (Fig. 2), the relationship between resolution and final grade was significant at low levels of centrality (2.60, [SE = 0.68], p = .0001, 95% CI [1.23, 3.98]). By contrast, at higher levels of centrality, there is no significant relationship between resolution and final grades (−0.25, [SE = 0.72], p = .73, 95% CI [− 1.69, 1.20]).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (74KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Moderating effect of centrality on the relationship between resolution and final grades. High and low levels of centrality one standard deviation above and below the mean.

On the contrary, prestige was not found to be a significant moderator of the relationship between resolution and final grades (B = 4.11, p = .353, Model 3–4). Thus, it appears that the social network measure of centrality moderates the relationship between resolution and learner academic performance. This further suggests that a student's active contribution to discussion forums through responding to other students' posts is associated with learning gains even when the student's contributions do not reach the highest level of cognitive presence.

5. Discussion
The present study investigated the relationship between learner cognitive presence and academic performance, and how learner prominence moderates this relationship in the context of teacher education with an aim to enhance our understanding of co-construction of knowledge in blended learning environments. Using the CoI framework, our study placed the focus on learner cognitive presence as a requisite for academic performance and examined the levels of individual cognitive presence characterizing co-construction of knowledge in online discussion forums. It intended to reveal the dynamics of the relationships between the different levels of cognitive presence and academic performance and aimed to examine the importance of a learner position in a learning community and its potential role in the association between cognitive presence and academic performance.

5.1. Cognitive presence
With regard to the levels of cognitive presence, the results of the study showed that in both courses the students' level of cognitive presence was quite high. Contrary to previous studies investigating the development of higher levels of cognitive presence (e.g.,Garrison et al., 2001; Shea et al., 2010) and studies examining computer conferencing in teacher education (Admiraal et al., 1998), the results of the current study revealed significant engagement in higher-order thinking. This engagement was manifested through considerable contributions to online discussions at the level of integration, which is indicative of knowledge construction in the CoI framework. These results are in line with Akyol and Garrison (2011) who found the integration level to be prevalent in both online and blended environments. Vaughan and Garrison (2005) and Meyer (2003) attribute the relatively frequent manifestation of the integration level in online discussions to the reflective and permanent character of asynchronous online discussions. It is this reflective character that can explain student teachers' contributions in the current study in which they were able to combine evidence from various sources, relate this evidence to their existing pedagogical content knowledge, and further build on each others knowledge. The analysis of contributions at the level of integration revealed that students very often hypothesized new interpretations of the discussed problems by building these hypotheses on their course readings and experience of their fellow student teachers. In contrast, the limited number of student teacher responses at the resolution level observed in both courses were also reported in previous research (Garrison et al., 2001; Shea et al., 2010) and, as suggested, may be caused by various factors related to the course instructional design—e.g., the course content not always ‘requiring’ solutions as such, or topics discussed not always lending themselves down to resolutions. In addition, considering the limited teaching experience of the students in both courses, it can be concluded that in some cases they might not have had the chance to test a solution to an issue in their real-life teaching and, thus, were not able to reflect on it.

The results of the current study further indicate that while students were able to reach the integration and resolution stages, the levels of cognitive presence reflecting exploration were more common accounting for a sizeable proportion of total contributions in both courses. These findings are similar to those of other researchers inquiring into the development of cognitive presence (e.g., Meyer, 2003; Schrire, 2006; Shea et al., 2010). Analysis of units coded as exploration suggests that there were two ‘levels’ of exploration: ‘genuine’ explorations and explorations ‘driven by a grade’ when a student posted a response that would just restate a previous response made by a peer only to show participation. Although the courses of the current study included discussion participation guidelines which are suggested to lead to desired levels of cognitive presence (Gašević et al., 2015), some students still contributed at the minimum level. This offers an important aspect for course instructors to consider when evaluating student participation and performance in online discussion forums.

In addition, the results of the content analysis of student postings to the second course discussion forum (i.e., second-year students) indicate that the students on the whole stayed on task with only 3% of the total contributions coded as “other”. This picture is different for the first-year students; a total of 12% of their contributions was coded as “other”. These contributions were mainly social in their nature. This difference in social contributions between the two courses can be explained by the fact that the first-year students who were in the first term of their university studies had more need to establish personal relationships and maintain them in order to sustain discourse; whereas the second-year students were taking their last course together and had already established enough relationships to maintain discourse.

5.2. Cognitive presence and academic performance
With regard to the relationship between learner cognitive presence and academic performance in the context of teacher education, the results of the current study indicate that certain levels of cognitive presence manifested by students positively associated with their academic performance. In particular, regression modeling suggests that the degree of engagement in the two levels of the Practical Inquiry model—i.e., integration, and resolution—were significant predictors of student final grades. The strong association between the contributions at higher levels of cognitive presence and high levels of learning in the context of teacher education supports the results of previous research proposing that perceived cognitive presence in online discussions is related with perceived learning and actual learning outcomes (Akyol & Garrison, 2011; Rockinson-Szapkiw, Wendt, Whighting, & Nisbet, 2016). The findings of the current study thus suggest that engagement in critical reflection and discourse manifested at the integration and resolution levels is associated with coherent and refined understanding of pedagogical content knowledge as it allows student teachers to reflect on concepts, findings, beliefs, and experiences and integrate these into their existing knowledge and experiences as well as provide rationale for their teaching choices and actions. Such reflections and evaluations of theories, experts' opinions, and research findings in relation to one's day-to-day teaching are particularly important for teacher development (Richards & Lockhart, 1994). This further suggests that discussion forums can be used to make such reflections more ‘visible’ not only to the individual that contributes but also to others in the learning community. In line with Meyer (2003) and Vaughan and Garrison (2005), these findings imply that online discussion forums can be constructive for “sustaining the discussion momentum and expanding the scope of the dialogue” (Vaughan and Garrison, 2005, p.8), thus, allowing reflection to go beyond the limits of the time and the space of the traditional classroom. This supports Garrison and Kanuka (2004) in that blended learning is specifically efficient in facilitating a community of inquiry as it provides an essential reflective component that allows fulfilling specific learning aims.

5.3. Moderation of student interaction
Building on the theoretical assumptions of the interaction in the CoI framework, our study examined the moderating role of student interactions in the association between cognitive presence and academic performance. Our findings suggest that social network measure of centrality moderates the relationship between resolution and learner academic performance. This contributes to research that investigates the interactive effects of the CoI elements as the study suggests that responding to posts in discussion forums is connected with learning even if an individual is not able to reach the highest level of cognitive presence, i.e., resolution, in their responses. The findings further imply that facilitating participation and interactions in online discussion forums through explicitly ‘stimulating’ learners' responses to other learner posts might contribute to better-performing learning networks in which learner interactions generate knowledge construction associated with increased academic performance. This confirms the crucial role of collaborative activities for knowledge construction, suggested by previous studies (Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005; Schrire, 2006), as it shows that student-student interactions are associated with academic performance. The findings suggest that online discussion forums can provide plenty of opportunities to every member of a learning community to actively benefit from potential knowledge construction by engaging effectively in online discussions.

In addition, these findings examining the interactive patterns in relation to the cognitive presence demonstrate how network analysis of student interaction in online discussion forums can enhance our understanding of knowledge co-construction taking place in learning communities. The relationships between participation, interaction, and cognition open a fertile ground for follow-up research by providing support for collaborative processes in developing higher-order thinking. Monitoring interactions in student learning communities can provide information on individual student performance in communities, on the development of student-student relationships, as well as on the development of the entire learning community.

5.4. Limitations and directions for future research
Clearly, the findings of the present study must be interpreted in the light of its limitations. First, the sample of graduate level pre-service teacher students limits its generalizability to other educational contexts or other knowledge domains in higher education. Future studies should incorporate larger samples and include students from various disciplines in order to obtain a better understanding of knowledge co-construction. The current study employed content analysis to assess students' level of cognitive engagement in online discussion forums. Interviewing students in future studies will allow a more comprehensive interpretation of students' engagement, as it will shed light on students' expectations and motives for engagement in collaborative knowledge construction.

In addition, the generalizability of our findings is limited to blended learning environments. In future, we plan to evaluate the applicability of our results on students' levels of knowledge construction in massive open online courses (MOOCs) and examine how the levels of learner cognitive engagement and learner prominence measures change with time. To gain a deeper understanding of the relationship between the cognitive and the social in knowledge construction, it would be necessary to examine the time-related aspects of this relationship. Also, it would be interesting to apply multilevel analysis to investigate the impact of individual, group, and task variables on knowledge construction in CSCL.

5.5. Practical implications
Notwithstanding the above-mentioned limitations, the findings of the current study offer practical implications for course designers and instructors on the potential knowledge construction benefits of asynchronous discussion forums as well as guidance for the more coherent exploitation of these benefits for student teacher learning in teacher education programs. The first important implication is that individual student contributions to online discourse can meaningfully represent student level of cognitive engagement and provide course instructors with valid evidence about the level of their students' cognitive engagement in course content. The knowledge of what kinds of contributions are associated with students' academic performance is critical for course designers for structuring courses in a way that would take advantage of the reflective and permanent characteristics of text-based communication that facilitate critical thinking and promote the academic level of the discourse (Garrison, 2017). This knowledge of what levels of contributions are related to learning is also crucial for instructors to avoid ambiguous conclusions on student performance in discussion forums and be able to facilitate discussions and introduce instructional interventions for individual students if needed. Second, our findings indicate that social presence moderates the relationship between cognitive presence and student academic performance. This implies that instructional interventions that are aimed at promoting student participation and interaction as well as diversifying interaction and increasing response rates in online discussion forums are desired. Such interventions are likely to “reshuffle” the learning networks resulting in better-performing learning networks in which student-student interactions generate co-construction of knowledge associated with increased academic performance.

In addition, students need to be made aware of potential knowledge construction benefits of discussion forums in order not to view contributions to online discussions as something ‘extra’. Thus, highlighting to students the relationship between active and meaningful participation in online discussion forums and learning would allow students to see the potential advantages of collaborative activities in developing knowledge. As suggested by research (e.g., Kauffman, Ge, Xie, & Chen, 2008), students are capable of self-regulating but often just fail to do so. Becoming aware of their own performance in discussion forums or being able to monitor their interactions through visualization tools can serve as an essential self-regulated learning activity. One challenging way to continuously inform instructors and students about student current cognitive performance and learning outcomes associated with it would be to provide automatic analysis of learner-generated data, i.e., content and social network analysis of online discussion transcripts. Researchers have been examining text mining and text classification for automatic content analysis focusing on the cognitive presence of the CoI framework. In their work (Kovanovic & Gašević, 2014; Kovanovic, Joksimovic, Gasevic, & Hatala, 2014a), they have identified coding at a message level as a problem for standard text classification algorithms using lexical features, such as N-grams, as the classification is carried out without taking into account the location of a feature within the message or the fact that a message contains indicators of several levels of cognitive presence. Based on the findings of our study, we believe that using the sentence as a unit of analysis could provide a significant improvement of the text classification accuracy.

6. Conclusion
Considering the results of the current study, it can be concluded that the online asynchronous discussion board can serve as an effective instrument to reflect individual learners' level of cognitive engagement in the learning process. It can further be concluded that individual student contributions to online discussions at certain but not all levels of cognitive presence are useful predictors of student academic performance. In addition, the predictive value of contributions at the level of resolution is dependent upon the individual student centrality in their learning community. These findings can serve as guidelines on how best to promote collaborative knowledge construction processes and create learning environments that support meaningful student engagement in teacher education programs through adding an online dimension to teacher education courses.

Appendix A. Examples of cognitive presence coding

Level	Examples
Triggering event	We watched this video in class and I have a question that we didn't manage to discuss.
So, which one is their first language and which one is heritage language?
Exploration	In my opinion both face-to-face interaction and virtual aids play a great role in language learning.
From my point of view interaction is very important, but it should not necessarily be face-to-face interaction.
I guess that also depends on the amount of the input.
I think it is not necessary for them to have both heritage and native languages.
Integration	The speaker was trying to say that while learning a language babies, despite their culture, are able to differentiate among diverse languages.
According to the articles, young children do catch up with older learners, and it is difficult to even distinguish them from native speakers: do not forget that there should be plenty of time and massive exposure for long-term benefits.
Resolution	Because of these stages of development, we notice that at the second stage our students tend to make mistakes in forms and structures, which they had already mastered in their first stage.
As a teacher, we should encourage our students not to feel disappointed and embarrassed in their second stage of language development explaining them that it is a natural way of language acquisition.
Recently I used …; it did work; my students were excited to see a new approach to the class.
I have noticed that if the student is a risk-taker and is willing to experiment with words in writing and speaking, this is much more useful in remembering words and so I encourage this.
Nevertheless I have observed that the Monitor over-users succeed in speaking later, but their progress is much more constant and long-lasting, because they make sure to correct all their mistakes and strive for the best.
Other	Thanks for the videos, I also watched them.
Hi girls, hope you are ok☺
Nice to read all your comments.
Thanks for your comments☺
