Even though Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have created highly personalized and dynamic learning environments for higher education, the low completion rate has hampered their development. Nevertheless, how to engage MOOC learners in continuing to learn online remains unclear in terms of psychological mechanisms. Enlightened by the social cognitive view of learning and hardiness theory, this study investigates the mediating role of online academic hardiness (the courage that is needed to turn stressful changes from burdens into advantageous growth in online environments) between web-based learning self-efficacy (the specific beliefs that people have in their capability to complete tasks when learning online) and online learning engagement. Using validated self-reported scales, a total of 608 participants of six MOOCs courses from Taiwan were included in this study. The results of structural equation modeling indicated the significant mediating effect of commitment on behavioral, emotional and cognitive engagement in learning MOOCs. Additionally, we found that the components of web-based learning self-efficacy led to different types of engagement: general Internet-based learning self-efficacy contributes to behavioral and emotional engagement, whereas functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy contributes to emotional and cognitive engagement. The direct and indirect effects of web-based learning self-efficacy highlight its critical role in online learning engagement. Overall, our conceptual model based on the agentic view of social cognitive theory provides researchers and practitioners with a holistic picture to understand the MOOC engagement phenomenon by revealing mixed results compared to traditional distance education.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Massive open online courses (MOOCs)

Online academic hardiness

Online learning engagement

Web-based learning self-efficacy

Commitment

Challenge

1. Introduction
The proliferation of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) has created highly interactive learning environments for higher education, allowing for more dynamic experiences (Loizzo & Ertmer, 2016; López-Meneses, Vázquez-Cano, & Román-Graván, 2015). The Horizon Report also encourages instructors of residential universities to employ MOOCs to facilitate teaching and learning for deeper academic engagement (Becker et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2016). However, research shows that the completion rate of MOOCs (approximately 5–15%) is relatively low compared to traditional online learning (approximately 60–75%), which has hampered the development of MOOCs (Freitas, Morgan, & Gibson, 2015; Hew, 2016; Hew & Cheung, 2014; Jordan, 2014; Levy, 2007; Martin, 2012; Perna et al., 2014). Recent studies have also confirmed that the bane of MOOCs (low completion rate) has not improved over 6 years (Reich & Ruipérez-Valiente, 2019) and that the various behavioral interventions to increase MOOC engagement had only minor effect (Baker, Evans, & Dee, 2016; Janelli & Lipnevich, 2021; Kizilcec et al., 2020). Therefore, how to engage MOOC learners in continuing to learn online requires further investigation.

Several factors have been identified as drivers that hamper online course completion in terms of student, course/program, and environmental factors (Carnoy, Rabling, Castano-Munoz, Duart Montoliu, & Sancho-Vinuesa, 2012; Chen, Chang, Ouyang, & Zhou, 2018; Hart, 2012; Hew & Cheung, 2014; Lee & Choi, 2011). From the perspective of student motivation to take MOOCs, Barak, Watted, and Haick (2016) examined the motivational factors of MOOCs (i.e., intrinsic motivation, self-determination, self-efficacy, career motivation, and grade motivation), and found that the most significant gap between completers and non-completers is self-efficacy (i.e., the specific beliefs that people have in their capability to complete tasks). They found that self-efficacy is critical to learners' social engagement (video watching, post, and reply). However, Sun and Rueda (2012) found computer self-efficacy (i.e., the specific beliefs that people have in their capability to use computers to complete tasks) to be an insignificant factor in learning engagement, while self-regulated learning and situational interest played significant roles in traditional web-based learning environments. They did not identify whether the contextual differentiation changes the role self-efficacy plays in engagement. These inconsistent results (MOOC versus traditional web-based learning) triggered our motivation to investigate the role of self-efficacy in the MOOC environment. To be more specific, we are interested in how different forms of self-efficacy are related to different kinds of online learning engagement.

Moreover, in view of the critical low completion rate in the MOOC environment, we argue that there is a missing link between web-based learning self-efficacy and online learning engagement in MOOCs. First, unlike the traditional e-learning environment, MOOC learners have more online learning autonomy (Tschofen & Mackness, 2012). The openness and high learner autonomy imply that MOOC learners require more self-regulated attitudes to not only commit themselves to online learning but to also manage their emotional and cognitive resources for the best results. Second, MOOCs are open for all learners in terms of age, discipline, educational and cultural background, rather than being tailored to meet the needs of specific learners. The massive enrollment may increase the diversity of learning experiences of MOOCs; that is, learners can experience social interaction with people of diverse backgrounds (Joksimović et al., 2018; Walji, Deacon, Small, & Czerniewicz, 2016). However, the diversity and non-exclusive experiences may also magnify the difficulties of the MOOC class, e.g., communicating with learners with different shared prior knowledge, language proficiency or cultural backgrounds. Hew and Cheung (2014) indicate that up to 90% of MOOC students drop out because of failure to understand the content material and having no one to turn to for help. Pursel, Zhang, Jablokow, Choi, and Velegol (2016) and Joksimović et al. (2018) also indicated that student demographic data play a critical role in MOOC engagement, even though there are no prerequisite requirements for taking a MOOC. These findings suggest that engaging MOOC learners may require challenging attitudes by viewing the academic difficulties as a challenge to make progress rather than a burden leading to giving up.

Enlightened by social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986, Bandura, 2001), we posit that learners' self-efficacy can be transformed into context-specific hardy attitudes that sustain and support learning engagement. That is, learners' online academic hardiness, the beliefs and courage to turn academic challenges from burdens into profitable growth in the online environment (Benishek, Feldman, Shipon, Mecham, & Lopez, 2005), is very likely to play a mediating role between self-efficacy and learning engagement. According to Bandura (2001), people's beliefs and interactions embedded within the socio-structural environment produce personal agency. Learners' prior experiences and self-efficacy within the learning environment formulate context-specific attitudes by temporal extension of agency through intentionality, forethought, and self-regulation mechanisms (Artino, 2012). Accordingly, learners make sense of the meaning and purpose within the MOOC environment and thus formulate hardy attitudes into the representation of agency. Online learning engagement, to a certain extent, can be viewed as the outcomes of personal agency in the online learning environment. To be clear, we argue that learners' web-based learning self-efficacy, at least partially, contributes to online academic hardiness, which eventually leads to online learning engagement.

This study investigates the relationship of learners' web-based learning self-efficacy, online academic hardiness and online learning engagement in a MOOC environment. We propose and verify the direct and indirect links between web-based learning self-efficacy and online learning engagement by theorizing online academic hardiness as a mediator. There are several contributions in the current work. First, we propose and confirm online academic hardiness, from Kobasa (1979), as a significant antecedent of online learning engagement in MOOC. This finding opens up another promising but seemingly neglected discussion in the online learning environment. Second, we found that web-based learning self-efficacy (including general and functional self-efficacy, discussed later) plays a critical role in online learning engagement in MOOCs. This finding not only complements prior studies of MOOC motivation among completors and non-completors, but also sheds lights on the specific role of computer self-efficacy in certain types of engagement in MOOCs, which is different from the finding in the traditional e-learning environment. Third, we found that web-based learning self-efficacy provides sound sources for online academic hardiness. This idea reflects the agentic view of social cognitive theory that learners' beliefs interact with the online learning environment to produce a self-regulated attitude toward learning. Fourth, we advance the understanding of antecedants of cognitive engagement and emotional engagement in MOOCs. Joksimović et al. (2018) indicated the lack of affective aspective of learning outcomes in MOOC studies. Even though online learning engagement in MOOCs has been widely explored, most measures of learning engagement in MOOCs have only employed behavioral engagement (Barak et al., 2016; Lu, Huang, Huang, & Yang, 2017; Sunar, Su, Abdullah, & Davis, 2017), ignoring the important role of emotional and cognitive engagement (Joksimović et al., 2018; Zhu, Sari, & Lee, 2018). Our study takes a more comprehensive view of online learning engagement in MOOCs.

To present our idea more clearly, we first review relevant literature from online learning engagement, academic hardiness, and web-based learning self-efficacy to build up fundamental understandings of learning theory. Based on theoretical and practical observation, we follow by formulating a conceptual framework via developing hypotheses. We then introduce our data collection and analysis to verify our proposed model. By presenting the results and discussion, we elaborate on the theoretical and practical implications by holding an interactive dialogue with previous literature.

2. Literature review
Although learning engagement is a popular topic in the online learning literature, scholars hold various viewpoints and definitions. Below we first review online learning engagement and introduce its importance, especially in online learning environments. Next, we review the hardiness theory from personality psychology and develop the idea of online academic hardiness. Lastly, we examine web-based learning self-efficacy to stress the different definitions and effects of self-efficacy in Internet-based learning environments.

2.1. Online learning engagement
Learning engagement plays a vital role in learning in both campus settings and online environments. In general, learning engagement (or student/academic engagement) refers to “the time and energy students devote to educationally sound activities inside and outside of the classroom, and the policies and practices that institutions use to induce students to take part in these activities.” (National Survey of Student Engagement, 2007, p. 3). Fredricks, Blumenfeld, and Paris (2004) indicate that student engagement is essential to learning because it is positively related to critical learning outcomes, such as achievement and dropping out. For example, Kuh, Cruce, Shoup, Kinzie, and Gonyea (2008) found that university students' learning engagement is positively related to first-year student grades and persistence between the first and second years of college. In addition to achievement and dropping out, previous studies have argued the positive association between engagement and psychological status (Ben-Eliyahu, Moore, Dorph, & Schunn, 2018; Christenson, Reschly, & Wylie, C. (Eds.)., 2012; Garrett-Peters, Mokrova, Carr, & Vernon-Feagans, 2019; Rumberger & Palardy, 2005; Skinner, Pitzer, & Steele, 2016). Skinner and Pitzer's (2012) motivational dynamics model of engagement claims that high-quality engagement and achievement bolster students' positive self-perceptions and academic resilience.

In online learning contexts, much attention to learning engagement has been paid because it is critically related to learning outcomes (Lee & Choi, 2011; Vayre & Vonthron, 2018). Unlike face-to-face settings, online interactions such as peer-to-peer and instructor-to-learner interaction have been mediated by computer or other technologies. Online learners are more likely to feel cognitively or emotionally isolated because of a lack of social support (Vayre & Vonthron, 2017). The lack of social support and disengagement lead to a greater likelihood of dropping out. Lee and Choi (2011) found that the high dropout rate of online courses may be partially due to students' lack of online engagement. Vayre and Vonthron (2018) indicated that learners' online learning engagement leads to learning achievement (attending and passing the exams).

Accordingly, several studies have explored the antecedents of online learning engagement, including motivation (Barak et al., 2016; Watted & Barak, 2018), the roles of peers and instructors (Cho & Cho, 2014; Hew, 2016), and individual differences (Pellas, 2014; Sun & Rueda, 2012). Sun and Rueda (2012) explored the relationship of situational interest, computer-self-efficacy, self-regulation and online learning engagement in traditional e-learning environments. They found that situational interest and self-regulation play critical roles in engagement, whereas computer self-efficacy is insignificant to learning engagement. Pellas (2014) explored the role of self-efficacy, metacognitive self-regulation and self-esteem among university students in the virtual world (Second Life). They found that computer self-efficacy is positively related to cognitive and emotional engagement while being negatively related to behavioral engagement. This indicates that computer self-efficacy plays different roles in online learning engagement across different contexts.

When students learn in a MOOC environment, their engagement may be regarded as a more significant factor than it is in traditional distance education because they are faced with a variety of open educational resources online (Tschofen & Mackness, 2012). This means that learners have more autonomy in choosing different MOOC platforms (e.g., Coursera, edX, and FutureLearn), course types (e.g., self-learning/instructor-supported: learning a course without/with facilitation of teaching assistants and instructors), and forms of knowledge acquisition (e.g., interactive: learning materials are composed of videos, posts, quizzes and discussion from multiple forms and sources versus lecture-based: learning materials are composed of video lectures). Although a high level of autonomy seems beneficial to online learners, too many accessible resources may, on the other hand, bring about confusion and information overload (Fischer, 2014). Information overload is likely to make learners disengaged from the MOOC, leading to a high dropout rate (Hew & Cheung, 2014). Therefore, sustaining student engagement in MOOC environments is more decisive than it is in traditional e-learning environments.

Several studies have been conducted to explore how and what factors can increase students' online learning engagement in MOOCs in terms of pedagogical mechanisms and psychological factors. Recent research on pedagogical mechanisms in MOOCs reflects how the social constructivist view supports individual learning engagement (Chen et al., 2018; Freitas et al., 2015; Hew, 2016; Sunar et al., 2017). The social constructivist view emphasizes the significant role of other actors (such as peers, instructors, and interactive technologies) and culture in learning and development (Hodson & Hodson, 1998; Staver, 1998). For example, the case study by Freitas et al. (2015) identified gamified elements, immediate feedback, and real-world challenges and testing in an Astronomy MOOC as interactive features that lead to learning engagement and retention. More recently, Sunar et al. (2017) found that learners' social behaviors in MOOCs (“follow” and “like”) increase the probability of their finishing the course, which can be thought of as essential factors of a predictive model of course completion. To increase social engagement in MOOCs, Chen et al. (2018) designed a social network analysis (SNA) toolkit to visualize the discussion posts for learners. By reading the networked view of learners' argumentation, the learners are expected to reflect learning gains and different perspectives. However, the results indicated that the SNA tool does not greatly benefit online discussion, noting the need to bring analytics, psychological design and online learning engagement into close coordination.

Findings regarding pedagogical mechanisms and online learning engagement show that interactive features (such as gamified elements, immediate feedback, social learning analytics tools, follow and like buttons) on MOOCs increase online learning engagement (Chen et al., 2018; Freitas et al., 2015; Sunar et al., 2017). That is, by implementing interactive features in MOOCs, learners will make more behavioral and cognitive efforts. However, fewer empirical studies have investigated the underlying process and the psychological mechanisms of such interactive design. It is worthwhile for future studies to explore the psychological mechanism of MOOC pedagogical advancement.

As for psychological factors and online learning engagement, we found that MOOC researchers integrate both conventional and innovative techniques to explore individual factors (Zhu et al., 2018). Pursel et al. (2016) used multiple data sources (student demographic data, intended behaviors, and course interactions) together with logistic regression to explore students' engagement in MOOCs. Their survey results indicate that even though MOOCs do not specify a prerequisite requirement of taking a course, learners' age, education level, identified status (types of MOOC learners), English fluency, and behavioral count data (videos and posts) have impacts on learning engagement. This finding implies that individual differences still play a critical role in MOOC engagement even though MOOCs rarely specify the prerequisite requirement.

Online learning engagement can be conceptualized as either a unidimensional (Phan, McNeil, & Robin, 2016) or a multidimensional construct (Deng, Benckendorff, & Gannaway, 2020; Sun & Rueda, 2012). The unidimensional online learning engagement refers to behavioral aspect of engagement (such as watching video, taking notes, reading posts), whereas multidimensional online learning engagement captures various aspect of engagement, including behavioral, cognitive, and emotional engagement. Behavioral engagement is the observable behaviors necessary for academic success such as attendance, participation, and homework completion in the online environment (Fredricks et al., 2004). Emotional engagement includes the general affective reaction learners have about their learning experiences, such as interest, enthusiasm, enjoyment, vitality, frustration, or boredom, and their social connection with others (instead of temporal affective status) (Fredricks et al., 2004; Skinner, Furrer, Marchand, & Kindermann, 2008). Cognitive engagement is the concentrated effort learners put in to effectively understand what is being taught, including self-regulation and metacognitive behaviors (Fredricks et al., 2004; Skinner et al., 2008). Although previous studies on MOOCs have demonstrated valuable insights into how different pedagogical and psychological factors contribute to learning engagement (Watted & Barak, 2018; Zhu et al., 2018), we found that most studies only related to behavioral engagement (Barak et al., 2016; Freitas et al., 2015; Joksimović et al., 2018; S. Lu & Liu, 2016; Sunar et al., 2017; Walji et al., 2016). However, we argue that emotional and cognitive engagement are also significant factors in online learning, especially for open learning environments. In open learning environments such as MOOCs, learners' situational interest will sustain the continuous intention to utilize the MOOC platform, and hopefully support their behavioral and cognitive engagement (Sun & Rueda, 2012).

Based on our present reviews, the relationship of students' self-efficacy and hardiness are less investigated in MOOC environments (Zhu et al., 2018). As mentioned earlier, the online learning environment between MOOCs and traditional distance education varies in terms of the enrollment (size of the course), diverse backgrounds, interactive features, and instructional design. Not only web-based learning self-efficacy but also online academic hardiness, the context-specific hardy attitude generated within MOOCs, is very likely to lead to higher online learning engagement. Considering MOOCs as highly self-directed, self-paced, and self-regulated learning environments, we hold that it is of great importance to investigate the relationship of self-efficacy, online academic hardiness and online learning engagement in terms of its theoretical and practical values. First, an understanding of the theoretical mechanisms can offer a holistic view of how prolonged engagement occurs in technology-enabled open learning environments. From practitioners' viewpoints, they are interested in creating, designing, and innovating open learning environments that support learners' learning and achievement.

2.2. Online academic hardiness
Academic hardiness is an essential psychological resource to help individuals strive for academic excellence and cope with academic challenges in physical and online learning environment. Derived from the personal and social psychology literature, the concept of psychosocial hardiness or cognitive hardiness refers to individuals' disposition that functions as a resistance resource when encountering stressful conditions (Kobasa, 1979). Hardiness provides a positive view of psychological well-being which can help to understand why certain people are more willing to engage in challenging work and cope with stressful jobs (Kobasa, 1979; Maddi, 2006). Kobasa (1979) and Maddi (2006) further developed and verified the theory of hardiness which characterizes it as a combination of three attitudes (commitment, challenge, and control) that offer and sustain the individuals' courage and motivation to turn stressful environments into positive opportunities for personal development. Although the original concept of hardiness was used to measure the hardiness in life/work stress and other personal stressors, several follow-up studies repurposed the hardiness theory for face-to-face academic settings to measure students' academic hardiness and their performance, such as late elementary school (Kamtsios and Karagiannopoulou, 2013a, Kamtsios and Karagiannopoulou, 2013b), junior and senior high school (Abdollahi & Noltemeyer, 2018; Creed, Conlon, & Dhaliwal, 2013), and college (Weigold, Weigold, Kim, Drakeford, & Dykema, 2016). Research has found that academic hardiness plays an imperative role in learning, such as anxiety (Benishek & Lopez, 2001), self-efficacy (Wang and Tsai, 2016, Wang and Tsai, 2018), and academic performance (Benishek et al., 2005).

Academic hardiness is defined as an ability to incorporate three components—commitment, control, and challenge—to achieve academic excellence (Benishek et al., 2005). Academic hardiness is composed of the 3C distinct attitudes: Commitment, Control, and Challenge (Benishek et al., 2005; Benishek & Lopez, 2001; Maddi, 2006). Commitment refers to the student's reported willingness to achieve specific goals or to make sense of and find a purpose in life. Control is defined as a learner's belief that he/she can achieve personal desirable educational goals through efforts and effective emotional self-regulation. Challenge is the student's purposeful efforts that he/she believes to be essential to achieve higher levels of goals in terms of more demanding tasks or experiences.

It is worth noting that academic hardiness is not the motivation of learning. Rather, it serves as the attitudes and beliefs that support and sustain learning. From the agentic perspective of social cognition (Artino, 2012), prior knowledge and experiences are capable of increasing in-situ cognition and attitudes. When learners have a good command of a specific subject or domain, it is very likely that the academic hardiness of the subject/domain is higher. Moreover, considering the motivation for learning (Elliot & Thrash, 2002; Higgins, 1998), positive motivation (such as approach goal orientation or promotive focus) is likely to increase learners' academic hardiness, whereas negative motivation (such as avoidance goal orientation or preventive focus) would hinder learners' academic hardiness. Accordingly, academic hardiness can be theoretically derived from learning motivation to increase learning engagement.

Previous studies on academic hardiness have either taken the mean scores of the three components (Maddi, 2006; Maddi, Harvey, Khoshaba, Fazel, & Resurreccion, 2012) or adopted three- or four-dimensional factors (in terms of Commitment, Challenge, Control of affect, Control of effect). However, some studies (Karagiannopoulou & Kamtsios, 2016; Weigold et al., 2016) have suggested that even though the use of the unitary academic hardiness construct is efficient for measuring the relationship with other psychometric properties, it is more appropriate to take multi-dimensional factors because commitment is differentiated from control and challenge, and is more positively linked to other stressor constructs.

Additionally, academic hardiness also partially contributes to academic performance. Benishek et al. (2005) found that students' self-reported Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) scores increased as the level of challenge dimension increased among high school graduates. Similar findings could be found in Weigold et al.'s (2016) study. The rigorous analysis of academic hardiness among university students indicates the predictability of the effect of academic hardiness on college students' GPA (grade point average) where commitment predicted first-semester GPA, and control of affect predicated second-semester GPA. For subject-specific performance, Daneshamooz and Alamolhodaei (2012) indicated that academic hardiness in the cooperative learning group is higher than in the traditional learning group in three university mathematics courses. They also found that academic hardiness was negatively correlated to mathematics anxiety and led to better mathematics performance, highlighting the relationship between academic hardiness and performance.

Previous studies have investigated the relationship between academic hardiness, self-efficacy, and academic performance, and have mapped the interplay of those constructs (Benishek et al., 2005; Cheng, Tsai, & Liang, 2019; Daneshamooz & Alamolhodaei, 2012; Wang & Tsai, 2018; Wong, Khalil, et al., 2019). A limited number of studies have explored academic hardiness in web-based or online learning environments. This might be due to two specific reasons. First, the original context of academic hardiness was regarded as a general concept as a whole rather than as a context-sensitive construct. Research on general learning concepts assumes that the findings cover both face-to-face and online learning contexts. Second, inasmuch as academic hardiness was not seen as a motivational factor with direct impacts on online learning performance, previous perspectives neglected the significant role of academic hardiness (Benishek & Lopez, 2001). The low engagement issue of MOOCs calls attention to the need to find antecedents that foster learners' sources of prolonged engagement. In view of MOOCs as hardy learning environments (the difficult course content provided by prestigious universities and professors) and hardiness as something that develops rather than is inborn (Maddi, 2006), we are interested in the role of academic hardiness in online settings and how it affects students' online learning engagement.

Some research considers academic hardiness as a global construct that influences psychological/environmental factors, such as self-efficacy and job stressors, while some have argued that hardiness is a subject-specific construct, strengthening the role of hardiness in certain subject-matters, such as science learning hardiness or mathematical hardiness (Daneshamooz & Alamolhodaei, 2012; Wang & Tsai, 2016). In this study, considering the nature of online learning environments, we defined online academic hardiness as a multi-dimensional construct. It refers to the belief and attitudes that learners possess to achieve specific goals within online learning environments. This context-specific attitude may work together with motivation to affect learning engagement in MOOCs.

2.3. Web-based learning self-efficacy
Derived from Bandura's social cognitive theory, self-efficacy refers to an individual's personal belief in his/her capabilities to organize and execute courses of action required to attain designated types of performance (Bandura, 1986, Bandura, 2001). Self-efficacy is considered as an important concept that has a powerful impact on learning outcomes (Artino, 2012; Pajares, 1996), such as academic listening (Graham, 2011) and academic performance (Chemers, Hu, & Garcia, 2001). With the rapid development of the Internet and technologies, much research has been investigating the context-specific self-efficacy in web-based or online learning environments, developing specific constructs such as computer self-efficacy, Internet self-efficacy, and web-based learning self-efficacy (Compeau & Higgins, 1995; Peng, Dey, & Lahiri, 2014; Tsai, Chuang, Liang, & Tsai, 2011).

The first construct, computer self-efficacy is generally defined as learners' perceived ability to accomplish tasks using computers (Compeau & Higgins, 1995), whereas the second construct, Internet self-efficacy, refers to self-assessment of the ability to organize and execute Internet-related activities that elicit the desired results (Kuo, Walker, Schroder, & Belland, 2014; Tsai et al., 2011). Although these constructs are heterogeneous in nature, they share similarities with how people's beliefs and capabilities of using computers and the Internet might be positively associated with their learning outcomes. The higher Internet self-efficacy the learners possess, the more likely it is that they will complete the tasks (Tsai et al., 2011). Previous studies have demonstrated how learners' Internet self-efficacy might influence their learning outcomes, such as online interaction and peer engagement (Prior, Mazanov, Meacheam, Heaslip, & Hanson, 2016), e-learning outcomes (perceived learning, persistence and satisfaction) (Chu, 2010; Chu & Chu, 2010), computer use (Compeau & Higgins, 1995), engagement in the virtual world (Pellas, 2014), meaningful cognitive engagement (Walker, Greene, & Mansell, 2006), and psychological academic engagement (Vayre and Vonthron, 2017, Vayre and Vonthron, 2018).

Web-based learning self-efficacy, the third construct, takes into account learning which the first two constructs (computer self-efficacy and Internet self-efficacy) do not. Although previous studies have defined Internet self-efficacy, computer self-efficacy, or Internet-based learning self-efficacy to investigate the effects on Internet-based learning (Compeau & Higgins, 1995; Tsai et al., 2011), those concepts differ slightly in accordance with its construal definition. A recent review and an empirical study proposed web-based learning self-efficacy, a global construct that includes both general Internet-based learning self-efficacy and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy, to clarify the differences (Cheng & Tsai, 2011; Tsai et al., 2011). General Internet-based learning self-efficacy represents the specific belief that people have to master online learning activities or courses in general. The higher general Internet-based learning self-efficacy is, the higher confidence the individual will have in his/her self-perceived capabilities to complete online courses. On the other hand, functional Internet-based self-efficacy refers to individuals' perceived belief that they have the Internet skills required to complete online tasks (such as searching, enrolling, submitting assignments). To be clear, the first two constructs “computer self-efficacy and Internet self-efficacy” refers to the functional part of the Internet-based learning self-efficacy that captures students' beliefs in their skills using the computer and the Internet. Given that web-based learning self-efficacy is a more comprehensive construct, we chose web-based learning self-efficacy to investigate the role of self-efficacy in MOOC environments.

When looking specifically into functional part of Internet-based learning self-efficacy, how learners' Internet self-efficacy contributes to online learning engagement seems to be a paradox in the current literature (Pellas, 2014; Sun & Rueda, 2012). Sun and Rueda (2012) found that computer self-efficacy was not a significant predictor of the learning engagement variables, while self-regulated learning plays an essential role in learning engagement. In contrast with previous studies, Pellas (2014) explored 305 undergraduates' learning in a virtual learning environment (Second Life) and found the positive role of computer self-efficacy, metacognitive self-regulation, and self-esteem as predictors of students' cognitive and emotional engagement. The mixed results triggered our interest in exploring the underlying mechanism of functional part of Internet-based learning self-efficacy and online learning engagement.

Moreover, research has also indicated the bright side of general part of Internet-based learning self-efficacy. Barak et al. (2016) found self-efficacy to be the critical determinant of MOOC completers and non-completers. To be more specific, self-efficacy is critical to students' social engagement (posting, video watching, replying to the posts) on the MOOC platform. This finding reveals the significant role of self-efficacy but fails to consider the web-based learning construct, both the general and functional Internet-based learning efficacy, in MOOC learning environments. Accordingly, it remains unclear whether web-based learning self-efficacy, both general and functional, are related to online learning engagement.

Considering MOOCs as highly self-paced learning, we argue that learners' web-based learning self-efficacy still plays a significant role in learning engagement because learners' confidence and belief in learning online ensure their capabilities of online learning readiness, which is a fundamental prerequisite for successful online learning. In view of this perspective, we are interested in the underlying mechanism of how web-based learning self-efficacy (both general and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy) influences online learning engagement.

3. Conceptual framework and hypothesis development
Based on the reviewed literature, we posit three general hypotheses on online learning engagement from the perspective of social cognitive theory and hardiness theory. Through the lens of these hypotheses, a conceptual model together with specific research questions was thus developed.

3.1. Online academic hardiness is necessary for online learning engagement
Although there are many differences between traditional distance learning and learning in MOOCs, one major difference is that students are capable of browsing, exploring, and comparing different courses on different MOOC platforms. When learners are faced with various platforms with different affordances and heterogeneous courses with different instructional designs, how they sustain their online engagement on MOOC platforms seems to depend more on their willingness and hardiness regarding learning online. Moreover, although online learning engagement results from motivation, learners' high motivation can increase their online academic hardiness as well. As Hew (2016) indicated, active learning is critical for online learning engagement in MOOCs. We therefore argue that students' active desire and commitment to specific MOOC courses are highly likely to result in online engagement.

Moreover, previous studies showed that learners' academic hardiness contributes to their academic performance (such as GPA) (Benishek et al., 2005; Creed et al., 2013; Daneshamooz & Alamolhodaei, 2012; Weigold et al., 2016), while studies on learning engagement also indicate its influence on academic success (Henrie, Halverson, & Graham, 2015; Howard, Ma, & Yang, 2016). Logically, we anticipate that students' academic hardiness increases their engagement in online learning environments, and this leads to academic success. Based on the above argument, we hypothesize:

H1

: MOOC learners' online academic hardiness has a positive relationship with online learning engagement.

3.2. Web-based learning self-efficacy promotes learning engagement directly and indirectly
Several studies have highlighted the important role of web-based learning self-efficacy in both online learning and organization learning environments (Pellas, 2014; Salanova, Lorente, Chambel, & Martínez, 2011; Tseng & Tsai, 2010). Cheng and Tsai (2011) found positive association between web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic help seeking (including information searching, formal and informal queries) in university students. Their finding implied web-based learning self-efficacy are related to behavioral engagement in online learning environment. Prior et al. (2016) also indicated the positive relationship between self-efficacy and online social learning behavior (peer engagement and platform interaction). Moreover, Barak et al. (2016) found that the critical factor of the motivational difference between MOOC completers and non-completers is self-efficacy. Empirical evidence shows that self-efficacy plays a critical role in learning from MOOCs.

In contrast, Sun and Rueda's (2012) study findings differed from those of other studies. They found an insignificant role of computer self-efficacy in learning engagement variables, while self-regulated learning and situational interest played significant roles in traditional web-based online learning environments. Another study of virtual learning environment indicated that computer self-efficacy is negatively related to behavioral engagement and positively related to cognitive and emotional engagement (Pellas, 2014). These studies suggest the context-specific role of functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy, which encourages further investigation.

These inconsistent findings triggered our interest in investigating the mechanism and actual role of web-based learning self-efficacy in learning engagement, especially in MOOC settings. We argue that web-based learning self-efficacy (including both general and functional) is of great importance when taking MOOC courses since learners are surrounded with multiple platforms and courses that require attention and technical skills to master the learning content. Therefore, we hypothesize that web-based learning self-efficacy has a positive direct effect on online learning engagement. We posit that:

H2

: Learner's web-based learning self-efficacy has a positive direct effect on online learning engagement in MOOC settings.

Following on from the discussion above, we speculate that learners' web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness have direct effects on their learning engagement. In the context of learning MOOCs, students' web-based learning self-efficacy is believed to be fundamental for their own learning and will lead to their prolonged engagement and academic success. However, considering the diversity and openness of learning environments in the digital age, we argue that having high web-based learning self-efficacy is not enough for high learning engagement. As MOOCs are composed of professional academic content provided by prestigious universities, the learning content may be challenging for online learners and could plausibly become a barrier. As Hew and Cheung (2014) indicated, up to 90% of MOOC students drop out because of failure to understand the content materials. Therefore, how learners transform the difficulties into opportunities for personal growth makes the connection between web-based learning self-efficacy and online learning engagement. To be more specific, we posit that the missing link between learners' web-based learning self-efficacy and engagement is the mediating role of students' online academic hardiness. With the support of online academic hardiness, we believe that online learners with high web-based learning self-efficacy are more likely to concentrate on their goals and the process of learning.
Moreover, when learners have high levels of web-based learning self-efficacy, they are more likely to develop higher online academic hardiness to support their online learning. On the contrary, when they have limited web-based learning self-efficacy, even though they possess high determination and willingness to engage in the online learning environment, their low web-based learning self-efficacy makes it less likely that they can sustain their hardiness. From an empirical perspective, Weigold et al.'s (2016) study also indicates the strong relationship between self-efficacy and four-construct academic hardiness. Accordingly, we posit the indirect effect of Internet self-efficacy on learning engagement, which is mediated by learners' online academic hardiness, as in H3:

H3

: Learners' web-based learning self-efficacy has a positive indirect effect on online learning engagement which is mediated by online academic hardiness.

In support of our preceding hypotheses, Fig. 1 identifies the structural relationship of Internet learning self-efficacy, online academic hardiness, and online learning engagement as our conceptual framework. Composed of multidimensional indicators, our conceptual framework provides researchers and practitioners with a better perspective on learning engagement and also suggests more sophisticated implications for the instruction, design, and development of MOOC platforms. In view of the above arguments, we specify the following research questions to guide this study:
1.
Does online academic hardiness have mediating effects on learning engagement?

2.
What is the relationship of web-based learning, self-efficacy learning and online academic hardiness on different kinds of online learning engagement?

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (126KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Conceptual framework of online learning engagement in MOOCs.

4. Method
4.1. Context and procedure
We partnered with one of the popular MOOC platforms in Taiwan and distributed the survey on the platform at the end of the courses in March and April 2017. Several universities and organizations in Taiwan contribute courses to this platform. To represent the context of the MOOCs, six courses were selected from different disciplines including life science (Eco-system and Global Changes; Systems Neuroscience), computer science (Introduction to Data Structure; Introduction to IoT), and business and management (Topics on Investment; Understanding & Rethinking Media). The courses have been running on a yearly basis and the course designs are similar in nature. All the courses are video-based learning MOOCs; that is, instructional videos were the main content and were used to identify the important concepts. The instructional videos in this study were course lectures, which are specifically recorded in campus studio. They can be one of the three formats: (1) lecture without slides (but with section title and keywords), (2) lecture with slides (with picture-in-picture effect), and (3) lecture with annotated slides (using interactive touchscreen). In addition to instructional videos, the supporting learning activities including a discussion board, weekly quizzes, and assignments were to help the students better understand the course content. There were also midterm/final examinations for evaluating the effectiveness of the courses.

Previous studies on MOOCs have taken advantage of various techniques to study learning engagement, such as log data, interviews, surveys, and web content analysis (Barak et al., 2016; Lu et al., 2017; Sunar et al., 2017; Walji et al., 2016). More recently, several researchers take the advantage of student’ log data and learning analytics to understand or intervene the complex online learning process (Lim et al., 2020; Prinsloo, Slade, & Khalil, 2019; Wong, Liang, and Tsai, 2019; Zheng et al., 2021). However, given that the purpose of this study is to investigate the underlying psychological mechnism between web-based learning self-efficacy and different types of online learning engagement, we chose validated survey questionnaires to better capture the psychological processes.

The data used in this study were obtained mainly from convenience samplings from online survey websites in Chinese. We chose convenience sampling for two reasons. First, the primary purpose of the study is to examine the relationship of the proposed theoretical model rather than to generalize results to the population. Second, we chose convenience sampling because we only have access to the participants in the six courses. Therefore, based on Hulland et al., 2018, pp. 95–96) recommendation, we chose convenience sampling as our sampling method. Nevertheless, our data obtained from real MOOC learners were representative of the proposed model.

We distributed the online survey via class announcements at the end of the MOOC courses. The platform manager helped us to place the survey link on the course announcement and send emails to the enrolled learners of the class. We specified that the purposes of the anonymous survey are for academic research and platform improvement. We also noted that the qualified participants should attend the course for at least two weeks and their response would not have any impacts on their scores. To attract MOOC learners to complete the survey, we specified its full voluntary nature but offered a limited lucky draw (10 movie tickets and 10 USBs for 20 participants) as an incentive. Each participant enrolled in the courses took around 10–20 min to complete this survey.

4.2. Participants
The total enrollments of the six courses were 4285 learners, namely, Eco-system and Global Changes for 209 learners, Systems Neuroscience for 318 learners, Introduction to Data Structure for 1100 learners, Introduction to IoT for 773 learners, Topics on Investment for 1643 learners, and Understanding & Rethinking Media for 232 learners. All the participants were Chinese-speaking learners (most learners were from Taiwan and a very few were from China and other Chinese-speaking areas). All six courses were offered in Chinese by National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan.

We distributed the survey announcement to 4285 learners. A total of 1350 learners visited the survey website, and 665 respondents successfully completed the survey (completion rate 49.26%). To detect anomalies in the data of the survey questionnaires, we used Rasch fit statistics from Item Response Theory (Chien et al., 2007; Felt, Castaneda, Tiemensma, & Depaoli, 2017) and finally excluded four responses of which the outfit and infit statistics were above 2. In total, 608 observations constituted the study, of which male learners represented 46.71%, female learners represented 52.96%, and other gender represented 0.33% (two participants reported themselves as other).

The average age was 23.93 [standard deviation (SD) = 5.78], which indicates that most learners were undergraduate or graduate students (see Table 1). The demographic data of highest educational background demonstrates that most of the participants had obtained a bachelor's degree (72.37%), 21.38% had received a master's degree, 3.45% had received a high school leaving certificate, and 0.82% had obtained a doctoral degree. Of all the learners, 43.26% had previous experience of online courses and had completed 1–2 courses, 12.5% had completed at least three online courses, 29.44% had experience of online courses but had failed to complete them, and for 14.80% of the respondents, this was their first online course.


Table 1. Frequency and percentage of the participants by gender, age, education, and experience of online courses.

Demographic factors	n	%
Gender		
 Male	284	46.71
 Female	322	52.96
 Others	2	0.33
Age		
 Under 20	150	24.67
 21–30	400	65.79
 31–40	36	5.92
 41–50	18	2.96
 Above 51	4	0.66
Education		
 PhD degree	5	0.82
 Master's degree	130	21.38
 Bachelor's degree	440	72.37
 Technical school	12	1.97
 High school and below	21	3.45
Experience of online courses		
 Had completed at least three online courses.	76	12.5
 Had experience of online courses and had completed 1–2 courses.	263	43.26
 Had experience of online courses but had failed to complete.	179	29.44
 First online course.	90	14.80
4.3. Instrument
Below we introduce the instruments with one sample item and report their reliability using Cronbach's α from our dataset (validity will be reported in the results). The instruments of the study were adapted from existing validated scales. The original scales of online learning engagement and web-based learning self-efficacy are used in the web-based learning environment. Therefore, we only modified the items based on the features of MOOCs if they included features that cannot be found in MOOCs. For online academic hardiness, we kept the original items and added a contextual description “When I am taking an online course…” to define the context-specific feature of online academic hardiness. All the scales used a 5-point Likert rating (5 = strongly agree, 4 = agree, 3 = neither agree nor disagree, 2 = disagree and 1 = strongly disagree) and they can be found in appendix.

4.3.1. Online learning engagement
The online learning engagement scale (OLE) was adopted and modified from Sun and Rueda (2012) to measure undergraduates' three types of online learning engagement in terms of behavioral engagement (e.g., “I complete videos and exercises on time.”), emotional engagement (e.g., “The online class is a fun place to be.”), and cognitive engagement (e.g., “If I do not know about a concept when I am learning in the online class, I do something to figure it out.”). We adjusted the wordings to better fit the context of MOOCs. For example, we changed the original item “I follow the rules of the online class.” into “I complete videos and exercises on time.” Cronbach's alpha for behavioral, emotional and cognitive engagement items were 0.86, 0.88, and.75 respectively (Sun & Rueda, 2012).

4.3.2. Online academic hardiness
The online academic hardiness scale (OAH) was adopted from Creed et al. (2013) and Wang and Tsai (2016). The 17-item OAH scale is designed to measure scientific academic hardiness. To fit the context of the study, 13 items were retained and modified into three constructs: commitment (COM, e.g., “[When I am taking an online course, as contextual instruction] I take my work as a student seriously.”), challenge (CHA, e.g., “I enjoy the challenge of difficult classes.”), and control (CON, e.g., “If I do poorly, I doubt my ability as a student.”). Cronbach's alpha for commitment, challenge, and control subscales were 0.79, 0.68, and 0.72 respectively (Creed et al., 2013).

4.3.3. Web-based learning self-efficacy
The web-based learning self-efficacy scale was adapted from Cheng and Tsai's (2011) study to measure undergraduate and graduate students' web-based learning self-efficacy by integrating the concept of academic learning self-efficacy and Internet self-efficacy. The scale is composed of general Internet-based learning self-efficacy (ISG) and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy (ISF). The former assesses learners' self-efficacy about general web-based learning (e.g., “I believe that I can capture the basic concepts taught in web-based courses.”), while the latter measures students' self-efficacy in terms of utilizing the Internet or computer skills in web-based courses (e.g., “I believe that I can find the functions I need in an online learning system.”). Cronbach's alpha for general Internet-based learning self-efficacy and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy were 0.86 and 0.84.

It is worth noting the disadvantages of using self-reported measures. One disadvantage of using an anonymous survey is the inability to link the survey results to the log data. We do not have this advantage because we distributed the anonymous survey to increase participants' willingness to complete the survey. We also did not have permission to access the learners' data for the current study. Another potential threat of using surveys is the selection bias. However, we attempted our best to obtain MOOC learners' responses in order to examine the proposed theoretical framework by increasing the sample size and course disciplines (life science, computer science and management). Therefore, it should be noted that our results cannot be generalized to all MOOCs.

4.4. Data analysis
The purpose of the study is to investigate the role of web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness in MOOC learning engagement. Based on our theoretical framework, we have derived the complex relationship between different constructs as dependent, mediating and independent variables from theories and empirical evidence. Moreover, a series of the direct and indirect links of web-based learning self-efficacy is investigated. Therefore, structural equation modeling (SEM) is appropriate for testing the model of multiple dependent variables (Hair, Black, Babin, & Anderson, R. E. (Eds.)., 2014).

To ensure expert validity, the questionnaire was first drafted and sent to two academic professors and five students for internal review. Based on their comments and suggestions, we revised the wording and items to improve the scale quality. After collecting the data from the online survey website, all the questionnaire responses were transformed and coded using RStudio software (Version 1.0.136). The R packages included psych, corrplot, lavaan, semPlot, TAM, and sirt. We used the TAM and sirt packages to formulate the Rasch model for detecting anomalous data, the psych and corrplot packages to calculate the reliability and correlation matrix, and the lavaa and semPlot packages for the structural equation modeling (SEM).

5. Results
We first utilized correlation analysis to understand the relationship between the constructs. Next, we validated our instruments using confirmatory factor analysis. A measurement model based on the research hypotheses was then built up and tested to confirm our hypotheses. Finally, we organized our findings in Table 4 and Fig. 2 for a better presentation of the results.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (130KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Structural Equation Model of Web-Based Learning Self-efficacy, Online Academic Hardiness, and Online Learning Engagement (nonsignificant paths are not shown in the figure).

Note. Standardized path coefficients are reported with the t-value in brackets; ⁎p < .05, ⁎⁎p < .01, ⁎⁎⁎p < .00.

5.1. Measurement validation
Table 2 lists the means, standard deviations, and correlations of the measurements of the study. We created a composite score (the average score of the items) and conducted Pearson correlations to identify the relationship between different constructs. The analysis shows that online academic hardiness and online learning engagement are correlated. Commitment (COM) is found to be significantly moderately correlated to behavioral, emotional, and cognitive engagement (BE, EE, CE) (r = 0.58, 0.56, 0.60 respectively, p < .01), while challenge (CHA) has a significant moderate correlation to all the types of engagement (r = 0.38, 0.42, 0.46, p < .01). Contrary to our hypothesis, control (CON) has a weak and negative correlation to engagement variables (r = −0.10, −0.12, 0.07), indicating that people who have higher ability of control do not necessarily possess higher engagement.


Table 2. Means, standard deviations and pearson correlations for measured variables.

Factor	M	SD	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
1. ISG	3.57	0.64	–						
2. ISF	3.83	0.62	0.68⁎⁎	–					
3. COM	3.73	0.64	0.56⁎⁎	0.59⁎⁎	–				
4. CHA	3.34	0.78	0.50⁎⁎	0.39⁎⁎	0.46⁎⁎	–			
5. CON	2.80	0.77	−0.03	0.06	−0.14⁎⁎	0.03	–		
6. BE	3.60	0.75	0.53⁎⁎	0.52⁎⁎	0.58⁎⁎	0.38⁎⁎	−0.10⁎⁎	–	
7. EE	3.64	0.66	0.60⁎⁎	0.56⁎⁎	0.56⁎⁎	0.42⁎⁎	−0.12⁎⁎	0.57⁎⁎	–
8. CE	3.74	0.66	0.55⁎⁎	0.57⁎⁎	0.60⁎⁎	0.46⁎⁎	0.07	0.51⁎⁎	0.64⁎⁎
Note. ISG= Internet-based learning self-efficacy (general), ISF = Internet-based learning self-efficacy (functional), COM = Commitment, CHA = Challenge, CON = Control, BE = Behavioral engagement, EE = Emotional engagement, CE = Cognitive engagement; *p < .05, **p < .01; M = Means; SD = Standard deviations.

The correlation of Internet learning self-efficacy and online learning engagement were found to be significantly correlated. Both general Internet-based learning self-efficacy (ISG) (r = 0.53, 0.60, 0.55 respectively, p < .01) and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy (ISF) (r = 0.52, 0.56, 0.57 respectively, p < .01) were found to be highly significantly correlated to behavioral, emotional, and cognitive engagement (BE, EE, CE).

To evaluate the instrument validity and reliability, we used composite reliability (CR) to assess the construct reliability and average variance extracted (AVE) to assess convergent and discriminant validity criteria using confirmatory factor analysis (Hair et al., 2014). Table 3 illustrates the instrument validity and reliability. As shown, the internal reliability using Cronbach's α indicates that all the items are above 0.72, indicating good reliability. The composite reliability (CR) for each construct ranged from 0.73 to 0.90, all higher than the recommended threshold of 0.60 (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). The AVE of each construct exceeds the cut-off value of 0.5, demonstrating adequate construct validity because more than 50% variance is explained by the construct. Additionally, the AVE of each construct is higher than the shared variance (the square of the Pearson correlation), indicating appropriate discriminant validity (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). The results indicate satisfactory convergent and discriminant validity.


Table 3. Instrument validity and reliability.

Factor	Number of items	Factor loading	AVE	CR
General Internet-based learning self-efficacy	5	0.56–0.65⁎⁎⁎	0.64	0.90
Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy	5	0.55–0.64⁎⁎⁎	0.52	0.84
Commitment	7	0.46–0.70⁎⁎⁎	0.54	0.89
Challenge	2	0.62–0.71⁎⁎⁎	0.57	0.73
Control	3	0.67–0.71⁎⁎⁎	0.50	0.80
Behavioral engagement	3	0.52–0.76⁎⁎⁎	0.59	0.81
Emotional engagement	6	0.44–0.70⁎⁎⁎	0.55	0.88
Cognitive engagement	5	0.56–0.68⁎⁎⁎	0.54	0.85
Note. ⁎p < .05, ⁎⁎p < .01, ⁎⁎⁎p < .00.

5.2. Test of the structural model
To understand the overall relationship and to specify the mediating role of online academic hardiness, we used the lavaan package to calculate the overall fit and explanatory power of the SEM model using Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE). We conducted the normality test using skewness and kurtosis statistics to evaluate the item distribution, and found that the kurtosis statistics of five items were above 3.5 (kurtosis = 3, indicating perfect normal distribution). Therefore, the five items were excluded from our measurement model. Before testing the mediation model, we first built a main effect structural model (Model 1) to ensure the effect of Internet-based learning self-efficacy on online learning engagement. As shown in Table 4, general Internet-based learning self-efficacy (ISG) has significantly positive contributions to behavioral and emotional engagement, whereas functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy (ISF) has a significantly positive association with emotional and cognitive engagement. This laid the foundation for our mediating model comparison.


Table 4. Path analysis and path coefficients of structural relationship.

Model 1
Main effect	Model 2
Hardiness as mediator
Predictor	β	t	β	t
DV: Behavioral Engagement				
 General Internet-based learning self-efficacy	0.43	4.37⁎⁎	0.28	2.71⁎
 Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy	0.17	1.68	0.06	0.58
 Commitment			0.42	7.13⁎⁎
 Challenge			−0.02	−0.36
 Control			0.04	1.02
DV: Emotional Engagement				
 General Internet-based learning self-efficacy	0.37	4.07⁎⁎	0.25	2.55⁎
 Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy	0.28	3.04⁎⁎	0.23	2.47⁎
 Commitment			0.16	2.95⁎⁎
 Challenge			0.11	2.04⁎
 Control			0.06	1.44
DV: Cognitive Engagement				
 General Internet-based learning self-efficacy	0.14	1.39	−0.13	−1.18
 Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy	0.46	4.16⁎⁎	0.40	3.73⁎⁎
 Commitment			0.23	3.76⁎⁎
 Challenge			0.33	4.78⁎⁎
 Control			0.01	0.15
DV: Commitment				
 General Internet-based learning self-efficacy			0.42	4.56⁎⁎
 Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy			0.25	2.62⁎
DV: Challenge				
 General Internet-based learning self-efficacy			0.59	5.76⁎⁎
 Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy			0.02	0.16
DV: Control				
 General Internet-based learning self-efficacy			−0.09	−0.77
 Functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy			0.22	1.92
Note:

a. DV = Dependent variable; β = Standardized β; ⁎p < .05, ⁎⁎p < .01, ⁎⁎⁎p < .00

b. Model 1: Chi-square/df ratio (χ2 = 719.32; 160) = 4.50 (p < .00), CFI = 0.91; TLI = 0.89, RMSEA = 0.08, SRMR = 0.07, BE R2 = 0.33, EE R2 = 0.38, CE R2 = 0.34;

c. Model 2: Chi-square/df ratio (χ2 = 1226.87; 380) = 3.22 (p < .00), CFI = 0.91; TLI = 0.89, RMSEA = 0.06, SRMR = 0.03, BE R2 = 0.44, EE R2 = 0.42, CE R2 = 0.46, COM R2 = 0.40, CHA R2 = 0.36, CON R2 = 0.03.

We then built up another model using online academic hardiness as the mediator in Model 2. Based on Hu and Bentler's (1999) criteria, our model shows a satisfactory model fit. The χ2/df ratio (χ2 = 1226; df = 380) statistic is 3.22 (p < .00), the comparative fit index (CFI) is 0.91, the root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA) is 0.06, and the standardized root-mean-square residual (SRMR) is 0.03. To evaluate the explanatory power of the path model, the R2 values were examined. We found that behavioral, emotional, and cognitive engagement account for 0.44, 0.42, and 0.46 of variance respectively, while the explanatory power for the three online academic hardiness constructs is 0.40, 0.36, and 0.03 respectively. These results suggest limited relationships among learners' Internet-based learning self-efficacy (both general and functional) to control.

The standardized path coefficients of both direct and indirect effects are presented in Table 4 and Fig. 2. Overall, both web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness have significant contributions to learning engagement. First, the direct effect of web-based learning self-efficacy on learning engagement shows interesting mappings. We found that both general and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy still play significant roles in emotional engagement (β = 0.25; 0.23 respectively, p < .05) and their roles in behavioral and cognitive engagement are partially mediated by commitment and challenge. However, we also found that general Internet-based learning self-efficacy does not contribute to cognitive engagement, whereas functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy does not lead to behavioral engagement. This finding indicates that general and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy play different roles in online learning engagement. These results support H2.

Among online academic hardiness, commitment seems to be the most powerful predictor, resulting in three kinds of learning engagement (β = 0.42; 0.16; 0.23 respectively, p < .01). Challenge has a positive relationship with cognitive engagement (β = 0.33, p < .01) and emotional engagement (β = 0.11, p < .01). To our surprise, control has no significant relationship with behavioral, cognitive, or emotional engagement. The above results found partial support for our H1.

Furthermore, the general Internet-based learning self-efficacy was found to be positively correlated to both commitment and challenge (β = 0.42; 0.59 respectively, p < .01), while functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy only has a positive relationship with commitment (β = 0.25, p < .05), partially supporting H3. Interestingly, neither general nor functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy have a significant relationship with control, suggesting the limited relationship between web-based learning self-efficacy and learners' control.

6. Discussion
MOOCs have been claimed to create a digital tsunami regarding the traditional view of higher education by offering high-quality resources and opportunities for worldwide learners (Brooks, 2012). However, the richness and variety of MOOCs also lead to students' low engagement issues, a problem which is hindering their development (Reich & Ruipérez-Valiente, 2019). Several studies have shed light on different pedagogical mechanisms and the learning environment design of MOOCs (Janelli & Lipnevich, 2021; Kizilcec et al., 2020; Rincon-Flores, Mena, Ramirez-Montoya, & Ramirez Velarde, 2020). This present study further extends our understanding of online learning engagement in MOOCs by integrating social cognitive theory and hardiness theory to highlight the role of online academic hardiness. When learners are faced with various courses and multiple MOOC platforms, possessing a high level of web-based learning self-efficacy is insufficient for prolonged engagement in an online learning environment. Rather, considering online academic hardiness as a critical mediator, our results verified our conceptual model, offering a holistic view of learning engagement in MOOCs.

The results show several findings. First, in our direct effect model (Model 1), both general and functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy show significantly positive relationships with online learning engagement. In addition, web-based learning self-efficacy also, directly and indirectly, affects engagement in our mediating model (Model 2). However, contrary to Sun and Rueda's (2012) study which showed a minor role of computer self-efficacy, our results are consistent with previous findings (Bates & Khasawneh, 2007; Pellas, 2014; Walker et al., 2006), signaling its important role. We found that general Internet-based learning self-efficacy has a positive association with behavioral and emotional engagement, whereas functional Internet-based learning self-efficacy (called computer self-efficacy in Sun and Rueda's study) still plays a critical role in emotional and cognitive engagement in the context of MOOCs. This finding suggests that web-based learning self-efficacy is more critical for MOOC learners than for traditional e-learning learners.

Moreover, we also found the paradox of a similar concept with mixed results. The self-regulation in Sun and Rueda's (2012) study showed a significantly positive relationship with learning engagement, whereas learners' control indicates limited impacts on learning engagement. The mixed findings of both web-based learning self-efficacy and learners' control/self-regulation indicate a need for future discussion on different perspectives of online learning.

Considering contextual differences as plausible reasons (traditional distance education vs. MOOC learning environments), online learners in traditional distance learning environments may require more self-regulated strategies because of loss aversion to the great amount of pecuniary investment. Online learners who have purchased a traditional online course may be more self-regulated in their engagement in online courses. On the contrary, MOOCs emphasize the “openness” and “freemium” nature of learning, highlighting the learners' autonomy of online participation. Moreover, the duration of traditional distance education is mostly one semester or a quarter, whereas most MOOCs consist of shorter sessions (around 3 to 6 weeks). Therefore, participating in MOOCs may require more Internet web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness but fewer self-regulating strategies.

Second, our results found that web-based learning self-efficacy contributes to learners' online academic hardiness (commitment and challenge). This finding implies that whenever learners have higher web-based learning self-efficacy, they are more likely to possess higher online academic hardiness, leading to better learning engagement. This perspective sheds light on two important issues: 1) learners' web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness are highly correlated, which echoes previous findings of academic hardiness (Wang & Tsai, 2016); and 2) strengthening learners' web-based learning self-efficacy may increase the likelihood of their online academic hardiness. However, key factors and the mechanisms that foster students' online academic hardiness require further investigation into the role of hardiness, such as self-regulation, the use of cognitive strategies, and academic motivation (Weigold et al., 2016).

Third, our model shows that commitment is a significant factor of learning engagement, challenge makes a significant contribution to emotional and cognitive engagement, but control plays a limited role in online learning engagement. This finding is not intuitive in terms of our current understanding. Learners' control of affect and efforts seems to play a significant role in self-directed learning. One plausible and compelling explanation may result from the strong relationship between commitment and challenge to learning engagement, leading to the minor relationship of learners' control. In view of this perspective, MOOC instructors and platform designers are required to consider how to foster feasible learning environments that trigger learners' commitment and challenge.

6.1. Theoretical implications
This study investigates the relationship of web-based learning self-efficacy, online academic hardiness, and online learning engagement in MOOC settings using structural equation modeling. The present study derives four major theoretical implications. First, we propose and verify a conceptual model of learning engagement from social cognitive theory and theory of hardiness in the context of MOOCs (Bandura, 1986, Bandura, 2001; Kobasa, 1979). The comprehensive model offers researchers and practitioners a better understanding of the mechanism of how web-based learning self-efficacy relates to our learning engagement in MOOCs. Using actual responses from our partner platform in Taiwan, the empirical findings support our model and hypotheses, identifying the important role of web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness in learning engagement.

Second, our findings reveal the complementary mediating role of online academic hardiness in learning engagement (Zhao, Lynch, & Chen, 2010). This finding highlights a new focus of “online academic hardiness” in online learning environments. Within the ever-changing learning environment with ubiquitous computing, being equipped with web-based learning self-efficacy is insufficient for prolonged engagement. We argue and confirm the importance of online academic hardiness in MOOC learning contexts to open a discussion of future learning initiatives. From a broader view of learning, we believe that online academic hardiness can be claimed as one of the new literacies, as online and blended learning and participatory culture are becoming mainstream in the digital age. Online academic hardiness requires leaners to become self-aware and to self-manage their cognitive, emotional, and social competences in ubiquitous learning environments.

Third, our analysis clarifies the mixed results and the blurred role of web-based learning self-efficacy in online learning environments by revealing its direct and indirect roles in learning engagement (Bates & Khasawneh, 2007; Pellas, 2014; Sun & Rueda, 2012; Walker et al., 2006). Acting as a driving antecedent of online learning engagement in our model, our findings provide a new insight into the theory of student engagement by filling the gap in the existing literature.

Moreover, as reflected by Wang and Tsai (2016), teachers' hardiness increases learners' hardiness as well as efficacy, and so the effect of social behaviors, peer learning, and teachers' presence on MOOC platforms may plausibly increase the likelihood of learners' online academic hardiness (Sunar et al., 2017; Walji et al., 2016), thus leading to more online engagement. Lastly, reflecting the ideas of Khalil and Ebner (2017) that intrinsic factors are recommended to improve students' commitment, our current study complements and provides empirical evidence for how web-based learning self-efficacy and online academic hardiness support MOOC learners' engagement.

6.2. Instructional implications
During pandemic, a great number of postsecondary institutions adopted online teaching and learning as strategic responses to COVID-19 (Al-Maroof, Salloum, Hassanien, & Shaalan, 2020; Nussbaum et al., 2020; Santiago, Ángel, Julián, & Prieto, 2021). Although the effectiveness of adopting online learning remains unclear and the results may be complicated due to several organizational and situational factors, promoting students' active engagement in MOOC can contribute to sustaining educational quality and justice in higher education. A few recent studies and editorial begin to highlight the value of grit or mindfulness in online learning environment (Nussbaum et al., 2020; Yeh, Chang, & Chen, 2019). Such statements reflect the fundamentals of online learning, especially how individual differences derive various learning process and outcomes. Although there are many discussions on the engagement issues of MOOCs, our current study presents the roles of online academic hardiness and web-based learning self-efficacy in three different kinds of learning engagement. Based on the conceptual framework and with theoretical underpinnings, our current study derives three instructional implications for online learning engagement.

1.
Valuing learners' online commitment: Our model found that learners' commitment serves as an important mediator of learning engagement. Based on Maddi's (2006) model of hardiness and a previous study (Wang & Tsai, 2016), it is suggested that MOOC online instructors and teaching assistants pay attention to learners' online learning commitment by implementing strategies that encourage learning commitment. For example, they can provide sufficient hardy social support by 1) explaining the learning gains in detail, 2) offering necessary pedagogical support when needed, 3) showing teachers' persistence and hardiness based on their previous experiences, and 4) taking different perspectives on tasks rather than merely focusing on the difficulties. It is suggested that MOOC platform designers create a relaxing, immediate feedback learning environment that supports hardy coping. For example, they can create interactive features, such as 1) praising learners' commitment to the course, and 2) priming the value of commitment using cues and signals in the MOOC environment.

2.
Fostering learners' online challenge: A previous study indicated that learners prefer simplified learning materials: “Unfortunately, learners may prefer videos that present material more simply. For instance, students use more positive language to describe instructional videos that present straightforward descriptions of phenomena, even though students learn more from media that directly address misconceptions” (Reich, 2015, p. 34). In light of our structural model, challenge plays an essential role in cognitive and emotional engagement, which implies that creating a challenging learning environment makes learners more cognitively and emotionally involved in the learning process. As Chickering and Gamson (1987) indicated, communicating high expectations to undergraduates in a classroom setting is effective educational practice. When teachers and institutes have high expectations of learners, the expectation becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. This golden rule can be applied in technology-enabled environments as well. In MOOC learning environments, our results suggest the need to foster challenge and high expectations for online learners. Instructors should avoid over-simplifying the learning content to improve understanding in MOOCs; rather, as enlightened by Wen, Tsai, Lin, and Chuang (2004), they are encouraged to create a challenging learning environment that carefully addresses the existing knowledge to promote higher order academic competences such as student negotiation, inquiry learning, and reflective thinking. In challenging learning environments, cognitive disequilibrium is engendered, and thus knowledge structures are refined and extended. In designing such activities, conflict maps could be used to design problems that foster science learning (Tsai, 2000; Tsai & Chang, 2005). As for platform designers, reconfiguration of instructional elements of challenging content to encourage users to cognitively and emotionally engage with the courses is recommended.

3.
Promoting web-based learning self-efficacy of learning MOOCs: Our results show the direct and indirect effects of web-based learning self-efficacy on online learning engagement, supporting the social cognitive view of learning in the context of MOOCs. According to Bandura, 1986, Bandura, 2001 theory and Tsai et al. (2011) review paper, we suggest that educators take advantage of MOOC resources as part of blended or flipped learning to foster learners' enactive or vicarious experience. By gaining the experiences of using online learning as a developmental or technical tool of knowledge building, learners are more likely to gradually develop web-based learning self-efficacy. Moreover, MOOC platform designers can design collaborative features that promote group-based learning or knowledge sharing to model learners' experiences of completing a MOOC.

6.3. Limitations and future research
Derived from social cognitive theory and the theory of hardiness, our study explains why some learners succeed while others fail by identifying online academic hardiness as a mediator to better understand the MOOC engagement phenomenon. However, although we collected our data from a partnering company which delivered the survey, and the results of the convenience sampling are sufficient to verify our proposed model (Hulland, Baumgartner, & Smith, 2018), our findings may not reflect all the phenomena of MOOCs. This indicates that there might be other models derived from other theoretical perspectives to investigate the MOOC engagement issue.

First, in light of the growing interest in self- and socially regulated learning (Artino & Jones, 2012; Broadbent, 2017; Cho, Kim, & Choi, 2017; Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012; Isohätälä, Järvenoja, & Järvelä, 2017), future studies can explore the role of online academic hardiness in self- and socially regulated learning in both traditional distance education and MOOCs. Our current study provides the initial steps to probe this issue.

Second, future work on MOOC engagement can work on a more comprehensive measure of academic hardiness, such as adopting the existing four constructs (commitment, challenge, control of affect, control of effort) or developing new measures based on contextual or theoretical underpinnings, to accurately capture the variance in learners' control. Considering online academic hardiness as a context-specific construct, it would be interesting to explore the cross-level effect, i.e., whether online academic hardiness (between individuals) leads to online engagement across different MOOC courses (within individuals).

Third, future studies could employ more rigorous techniques of MOOC data collection, such as stratified sampling, field experiments, or multiple source collections to improve the data quality. Nevertheless, this study has shed light on the impact of online academic hardiness on learning engagement in online learning environments. Future researchers can further investigate how online academic hardiness influences the learning process and outcomes in various technology-enhanced/enabled learning environments, such as seamless mobile learning, interactive eBooks, knowledge building (knowledge forums), or virtual learning environments.

Lastly, it is equally important to explore the interpersonal, technological, and contextual factors that consolidate or debilitate online academic hardiness. Therefore, we sincerely hope that the current study benefits both academia and practitioners by highlighting the new and important concept of online academic hardiness, and hope that there will be more studies on online academic hardiness and learning engagement in the future.
