Online tutoring has been found to have a positive impact on student learning in STEM education. The aim of this study was to explore how and to what extent students supported their own and other students' processes of inquiry during online tutoring. More specifically, question and answer sessions (Q&As) were studied, and online tutoring transcripts were analyzed using the Relationship of Inquiry coding scheme adapted from the Community of Inquiry framework. The students interacted voluntarily with each other and with the teachers. The results show that the students supported both their own process of inquiry as well as other students' process of inquiry. Furthermore, the results indicate that students acquired metacognitive development through self- and co-regulation when they expressed teaching presence. Overall, we conclude that Q&As have the potential to support student learning when working on assignments in STEM education.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Community of Inquiry

Metacognition

Online tutoring

Teaching presence

Transcript

analysis, Q&A.

1. Introduction
Online real-time feedback has been suggested as one approach to addressing low retention rates of students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). One example is synchronous videoconferencing, which can be used to provide support to students with divergent needs (Rennar-Potacco, Orellana, & Salazar, 2017). Campbell, Gallen, Jones, and Walshe (2019) found that STEM tutors see greater attendance in online tutorials compared to face-to-face tutorials, although it remains a challenge to encourage student interaction in online synchronous tuition. Chappell, Arnold, Nunnery, and Grant (2015) studied the impact of synchronous online tutoring on 119 struggling students' mathematics achievement. The tutoring contributed to statistically significant improvement in student assessment scores. Student perceptions of online tutoring were mainly positive. Rennar-Potacco, Orellana, Chen, and Salazar (2019) investigated academic support in a high-risk science course in higher education. Student groups who received face-to-face academic support, synchronous videoconference tutoring, and no tutoring were compared. There was no significant difference in retention or final grades for face-to-face and online students, while the untutored group had the lowest grades.

Question and answer sessions (Q&As) have been studied to a limited extent, especially when compared with online discussion forums (Smith IV et al., 2020). Although online discussion has not been as adopted as much in STEM fields as in the social sciences, Q&As have potential in STEM fields due to the need for solution-orientated communication (Smith IV et al., 2020). For example, Q&As may support synchronous learning when students work on assignments and problem solving. Q&As have been shown to not only benefit the student asking the questions, but also other students reading the answers (Huang & Law, 2018). Q&A interactions have been found to be student driven (Smith IV et al., 2020), and overly active instructors might inhibit student interactions (Mazzolini and Maddison, 2003, Mazzolini and Maddison, 2007). Several studies indicate that students can learn through interactions with others, also when they are less visible and active themselves (e.g. Bozkurt, Koutropoulos, Singh, & Honeychurch, 2020; Smith IV et al., 2020).

Theoretically, this paper draws on the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework, defined as “a group of individuals who collaboratively engage in purposeful critical discourse and reflection to construct personal meaning and confirm mutual understanding” (Garrison, 2011, p. 2). Based on the research reviewed above, online tutoring and Q&As seem to have great potential in STEM education. However, most research has focused on outcome measures and perceptions, and there is only a limited understanding of what characterizes the inquiry processes in such settings. We are interested in gaining a deeper understanding of the interactions between teachers and students, and especially how and to what extent students focus on their own process of inquiry compared to other students' process of inquiry, i.e. helping and supporting other students. Through these interactions students are able to engage in both the personal and collaborative learning process (Garrison & Akyol, 2015). Furthermore, indicators for metacognition have been observed in text-based online discussions and online communities, which have been suggested to provide an environment that is supportive for metacognition (Akyol & Garrison, 2011).

The aim of this study was to explore how and to what extent students supported their own and other students' processes of inquiry during online tutoring. We explored online tutoring through Q&As in a master course on advanced machine learning. The Q&As were organized during evenings to answer questions from students. It was also possible to ask and answer questions between the Q&A sessions.

This study was guided by the following research questions:

•
What types of interactions occurred during the Q&As?

•
How did students support their own process of inquiry?

•
How did students support other students' process of inquiry?

2. Theoretical background
2.1. Relationship of Inquiry
The CoI framework has been one of the most-used theoretical frameworks to structure and describe the process of a meaningful online learning experience (Chen, deNoyelles, Patton, & Zydney, 2017; Garrison, 2017; Stenbom, 2018). The framework was introduced by Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (2000) and consists of three interdependent elements - Teaching presence, Cognitive presence, and Social presence. The CoI framework was conceptualized for analyzing the learning process within a group of students and instructors. The Relationship of Inquiry (RoI) framework is an adaption of CoI for studying learning environments with one student and one tutor (Stenbom, Hrastinski, & Cleveland-Innes, 2012; Stenbom, Jansson, & Hulkko, 2016). RoI has adapted the three elements from CoI - Teaching, Cognitive, and Social presence - but has added a fourth element - Emotional presence – that builds on Cleveland-Innes and Campbell's (2012) work to reflect emotions related to the process of inquiry and its outcome and emotions related to directed affectiveness (Cleveland-Innes, Stenbom, & Hrastinski, 2014; Stenbom, Cleveland-Innes, & Hrastinski, 2016). Furthermore, the two methods of analyzing data from the CoI framework, namely transcript coding and a standardized survey, have been transferred to the one-to-one context of RoI.

Teaching presence is defined as “the design, facilitation, and direction of cognitive and social processes for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile learning outcomes” (Anderson, Rourke, Garrison, & Archer, 2001, p. 5). It consists of the categories Design and organization, Facilitating discourse, and Direct instruction. Teaching presence is seen as important for creating a sense of community and for perceived learning as well as for student satisfaction (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007). Any participant can express teaching presence, instructors as well as students, and students' expressions of teaching presence have been suggested to be important for their metacognitive development (Garrison & Akyol, 2013). However, students' teaching presence has often not been included in the items in the CoI survey (Arbaugh et al., 2008; Stenbom, 2018), and many studies using transcript analysis have focused only on the instructor's teaching presence or how students perceive the instructor's teaching presence (Bliss & Lawrence, 2009; Kamin, O'Sullivan, Deterding, Younger, & Wade, 2006; Kilis & Yildirim, 2019; Zhao & Sullivan, 2016). Only a few studies have included students' expressions of teaching presence while performing a transcript analysis (Chen et al., 2017; Weerasinghe, Ramberg, & Hewagamage, 2012; Zydney, de Noyelles, & Seo, 2012) or have included items in the survey to capture students' views of other participants' teaching presence (Shea, Pickett, & Pelz, 2003).

Cognitive presence is defined as “the extent to which learners are able to construct and confirm meaning through sustained reflection and discourse” (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001, p. 11). The element has the four categories Triggering event, Exploration, Integration, and Resolution and is constructed with guidance from research such as that of Dewey (1933)) and his conception of practical inquiry (Garrison et al., 2000).

Social presence is defined as “the ability of participants to identify with the community (e.g., course of study), communicate purposefully in a trusting environment, and develop inter-personal relationships by way of projecting their individual personalities” (Garrison, 2009, p. 352). In CoI, social presence consists of the three categories Personal/affective, Open communication, and Group cohesion. In RoI, however, the Personal/affective category is extracted from the element in order to form Emotional presence. The two remaining categories for social presence in RoI are Open communication and Relationship cohesion. Social presence is seen as essential to supporting the development of collaboration and higher order thinking, as well as metacognitive processes, by establishing a secure climate so that participants feel that they are able to contribute to the inquiry (Garrison & Akyol, 2015; Garrison et al., 2000).

Emotional presence was conceptualized and suggested to be integrated as part of the CoI framework by Cleveland-Innes and Campbell (2012). In the RoI framework, emotional presence has been defined as “the outward expression of emotion, affect, and feeling in a relationship of inquiry” (Stenbom, Cleveland-Innes, & Hrastinski, 2016, p. 11). It consists of the three categories Activity emotion, Outcome emotion, and Directed affectiveness.

2.2. Metacognition
In a CoI, each participant may take on the responsibility and roles of teaching and learning (Anderson et al., 2001; Garrison, 2017). By asking questions, giving feedback and directions, and helping one's peers, Akyol and Garrison (2011) suggest that a community provides opportunities to support metacognition. Participants have the opportunity to take responsibility for regulating their personal learning while receiving collaborative support and direction. Metacognition in an online learning community is defined as “a set of higher knowledge and skills to monitor and regulate manifest cognitive processes of self and others” (Akyol & Garrison, 2011). It is the link between the construction of internal knowledge and collaborative learning activities (Garrison & Akyol, 2015), and the essence of the metacognitive construct can be found at the intersection of teaching and cognitive presence elements.

Akyol and Garrison (2011) first described metacognition in terms of knowledge, monitoring, and regulation of cognition. However, after further studies it was concluded that the construct did not take into account both individual and shared learning activities (Garrison & Akyol, 2013). Therefore, the metacognition construct was modified to consist of the two interdependent elements of self- and coregulation of cognition (Garrison & Akyol, 2015). While both elements reflect the strategies and skills of metacognitive monitoring and managing, self-regulation of cognition refers to when the participant is engaged in the personal reflective learning process, and co-regulation of cognition refers to when the participants are engaged as members of a group of learners in the collaborative learning process (Garrison & Akyol, 2015).

Based on a meta-analysis, Caskurlu, Maeda, Richardson, and Lv (2020) conclude that teaching presence is linked to student satisfaction and perceived learning. They argue that these findings can have practical implications, for example, by giving students an understanding of how they can be more active in a course and by giving them the opportunity to interact with other students, experience their point of view, and construct knowledge through collaboration. Metacognition in an online learning community is closely linked to teaching presence. Garrison and Akyol (2013) argue that, by assuming teaching presence responsibilities and having an understanding of the inquiry process, participants may achieve metacognitive development. Metacognition may, therefore, be found in the student's expressions of teaching and cognitive presence, while social presence creates a frame of reference (Garrison & Akyol, 2015). By assessing what they know about a subject or assignment, by reflecting on their own and other participants' contributions, and by asking for help or giving help to others, students take on teaching presence responsibility and achieve metacognitive development.

2.3. Online Q&A sessions
Online Q&As have not been studied as much as general discussion forums, and the research has often been conducted in non-STEM fields (Smith IV et al., 2020). While much is known about help seeking in classrooms, research about online help-seeking is limited (Huang & Law, 2018). However, there are some notable exceptions. Examples include students' online help seeking in Q&A forums (Hao, Barnes, Branch, & Wright, 2017; Hao, Wright, Barnes, & Branch, 2016), active online discussions in Q&As and the relation to overall course outcomes (Kolluru & Varughese, 2017), and Q&As in self-regulated online learning (Awofeso, Hassan, & Hamidi, 2016). It has been found that students prefer to ask peers for help through Q&As over searching for information online (Hao et al., 2016). However, in later studies it was found that students searched online more than asked a peer or a teacher, but that students still asked peers for help more frequently than they asked a teacher (Hao, Barnes, Branch, & Wright, 2017; Hao, Barnes, Wright, & Branch, 2017). Q&As seemed to reduce question redundancy and student visits during office hours (Kolluru & Varughese, 2017).

It has been argued that Q&As have potential in STEM fields due to the need for solution-orientated communication (Smith IV et al., 2020). Kolluru and Varughese (2017) observed a significant improvement of students exam results when using a Q&A forum compared to a previous year when Q&As were not used. Awofeso et al. (2016) argued that Q&As contributed to covering the specific learning outcomes of the course as well as impacted the students general use of information and communication technologies in order to improve their knowledge. Studies by Bozkurt et al., 2020) and Huang and Law (2018) have indicated that Q&As benefited both the student asking the questions and the peers reading the answers. In a Q&A environment students can alternate between lurking and taking an active part in the discussion (Looi, 2005), even when students are less visible and active they may learn from the interactions with others (Bozkurt et al., 2020; Smith IV et al., 2020). Interactions in Q&As have been found to be student driven (Smith IV et al., 2020), and it seemed that students did not have a strong dependence on teachers (Hao et al., 2016). An online environment could provide more equal participation for students and tutors, where tutors take on a less dominant role in the conversations (Burnett, 2003). Even though the instructor is an important participant, overly active instructors might inhibit student interactions (Mazzolini and Maddison, 2003, Mazzolini and Maddison, 2007).

Previous research has found a number of benefits of text-based synchronous communication. Studies have found that virtual office hours through chat appeared to make students more satisfied with office hours (Li & Pitts, 2009), synchronous online tutoring contributed to improvement in student assessment scores (Chappell et al., 2015), student-teacher interactions increased when online chat communication was introduced as a complement to campus education (Cifuentes & Lents, 2010), and students were more involved in the inquiry process (Jansson, Stenbom, Enoksson, & Hrastinski, 2020). When instant messaging was used in a course, it was found that student-student messages were almost ten times more frequent as compared with student-teacher messages (Contreras-Castillo, Pérez-Fragoso, & Favela, 2006).

3. Method
3.1. Participants and context
During the fall of 2018, data were collected from a campus course in advanced machine learning. The course was mandatory for the participants, who were first-year master's students. Two teachers were in charge of lectures, exercises, assignments, and examinations, as well as student communication, which previously had taken place through email or the discussion board in the LMS. The course was divided into two parts, with the two teachers responsible for each part, and several assignments were due during the period of the course. Throughout the first half of the course, the responsible teacher planned seven Q&As in a text-based learning environment before the first assignment deadline. Halfway through the course, at the beginning of December, the second teacher planned two more sessions. Over 200 students were enrolled in the course and were invited to participate. Data were collected from November 14, when the first participants entered the online room, until December 20, when the last message was sent.

The Q&As were conducted in order to give the students the opportunity to ask questions and receive help in their work with the individual assignments. The students in the course were all invited to participate in these Q&As using a link from the LMS to an online room that was set up for the course. The first teacher had, before the first Q&A session, demonstrated the online room for the students. The teachers informed the students about when the Q&As were scheduled and that the online room was open for students to discuss with each other at any time. None of the Q&As were mandatory, but the teachers encouraged the students to ask the teachers and their peers for help if they needed it. The students were encouraged to discuss with each other and to help their peers by answering questions and giving suggestions or support, both during and outside of the Q&As. However, the students had no obligation nor received any formal gain to aid their peers, but could choose to do so voluntarily.

The online room used for the Q&As was an online educational system designed for one-to-one and group tutoring in mathematics. The system is currently under development in a research project at a technical university. Fig. 1 shows a screenshot of the system illustrating an online room. Every room is constructed with the possibility for group conversations through a chat area and an interactive whiteboard. In the chat area, participants can send texts, emojis, and mathematical formulas. It is also possible to share files and images. The whiteboard area can be used collaboratively by all participants with possibilities for freehand drawing, importing of pictures, and using geometrical figures, as well as for creating multiple pages. In the group conversations, every participant can see and join the chat or whiteboard area. Furthermore, all materials being shared in the group conversations are saved in the room, making it possible for participants to look at what has been done at a previous time, as well as to ask questions and come back at a later time to read the answers. Hence, the system creates the possibility for participants to communicate synchronously as well as asynchronously. Both of the teachers in the course used the system, though the first teacher was more active in the first part of the course than the second teacher in the second part.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (214KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Illustration of the Q&A sessions.

The system offers anonymity with the possibility to choose a username, making it difficult to determine how many students actively participated in the Q&As. Google Analytics was enabled in order to measure activity in the online room, and data from Google Analytics identified over 140 users in the online room during the study. The majority of users accessed the room from a computer. Google Analytics registers new users by cookies on their devices; however, should one participant change their device or delete their cookie history they would be registered as a new user. Some participants might therefore have been registered more than once.

3.2. Data collection
The empirical data used in this study consisted of all chat messages (text, emojis, and mathematical formulas) sent during the course along with the date and time of the message and the username. The teacher responsible for the first part of the course informed all students how the system worked and that all data in the system would be used for research. In addition, prior to entering the online room, every participant provided consent that their conversations were going to be used for research. The students chose which username they wanted to use, while the two teachers used their real names.

A total of 787 messages were downloaded from the system. Thirty-three messages were disregarded due to the fact that they were automatically sent by the system (e.g. Welcome to your new room), and the remaining 754 messages, 503 posted by students and 251 posted by the two teachers, were used in the analysis. The distribution of messages during the period of this study is shown in Fig. 2. The striped bars represent the scheduled Q&As, the checkered bars are when the teacher was active though no session was planned, and the filled bars are days when there were only messages from students.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (155KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Chat messages sent per day in the online room.

3.3. Data analysis
A method for transcript coding of data has been developed in the CoI framework (Garrison et al., 2000, Garrison et al., 2001; Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, Koole, & Kappelman, 2006), and in CoI it is the group interactions that are being analyzed, i.e. how the group, or community, works together to solve a problem. In this study, the teachers set up Q&A sessions, and rather than a discussion between a teacher and a group of students, the interactions were teacher to student or student to student. Therefore, considering that the RoI coding scheme is adapted to one-to-one online education, RoI was chosen for the analysis of the data.

The RoI coding scheme is an adaption of the CoI coding scheme to a tutoring context (Stenbom, Jansson, & Hulkko, 2016). When applying the RoI coding scheme, transcripts from educational interaction are analyzed using a unit of analysis, which in this study was chat messages. Fixed units, such as chat messages, are more objectively recognizable (Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 2000) compared to more dynamic thematic units such as units of meaning (Henri, 1991). Chat messages are easy to use and reliable, even though it should be acknowledged that dividing the text into chat messages may be inconsistent when communication is informal (Hillman, 1999; Rourke et al., 2000). For example, one student might write a full sentence in one chat line, while another student might write one sentence on several chat lines (Hrastinski, 2007). The RoI coding template is presented in Table 1.


Table 1. Coding template of the RoI framework (adapted from Stenbom, Jansson, & Hulkko, 2016).

Element	Category	Indicators (examples only)	Example	Examples from this study
Cognitive presence	Triggering event	Stating a problem
Changing direction	“Here's the problem …”
“I have another issue.”	“Hi Teacher, could you elaborate Q8, namely what is meant by ‘how it connects’ and ‘filter’ in the first and the second part of the task?”
“I would just like to say I find it pretty hard adjusting to this course after having read SF2940 Probability Theory. The expression I've written on the board doesn't make sense to me.”

Exploration	Brainstorming
Broad search for insight
Information exchange	“Perhaps I could use …”
“Am I thinking right here?”
“What is a square root?”	“But there are formulas in the cookbook actually giving different results, e.g. a factor of 2 for off-diagonal elements.”
“What am I doing wrong here?”
“And what does ‘assume column vectors’ mean?”
Integration	Connecting ideas
Computations	“I can combine … and …”
“7/2 – x = 1/4 “	“Yes, that's true. I assumed that the row vectors would keep their dimensions (1xq that is), but that isn't the case.”
“then we also have p(wi∣xi,ti)∝exp.{−12 s2(wi − μi)T(wi − μi)}”
Resolution	Achieve solution
Analysis of solution
Implementation	“The answer is 3!”
”I made a mistake with …”
“Then the apple is cheaper.”	“Okey, then I get it …”
“That would mean that our expression is undefined”
“oh Now I understand, though different, still some certain patterns in there.”
Teaching presence	Design and organization	Establishing interaction
Setting parameters for the inquiry	“What can I help you with?”
“You can type in the textbox or draw on the whiteboard.”	“Are there any more questions for today?”
”Let's move to the corresponding question topic”
Facilitating discourse	Stimulating constructive inquiry
Assessing process	“Do you have an idea?”
“What answer did you get?”	“BTW do you understand how to sample values for all variables of a DGM?”, “how about looking at A matrix…I will say no more;)”;
“You brought up an interesting point however about adjusting sigma based on the ML approach. What did you use as M?”
Direct instruction	Providing step to solution
Summarizing the discussion	“You should multiply by 10.”
“1/3 + 1/4 = 4/12 + 3/12”	“indeed it should come out as qxq”
“Exactly, the nonlinear mapping is your latent space, which you want to recover. This latent space is linearly projected to Y space, which is where our observations y are.”
Social presence	Open communication	Acknowledging
Trivial expressions	“Okay”, “Perfect.”
“I can't see the figure.”	“Ok, let's see now.”
“sphericity I meant”, “hm”
Relationship cohesion	Greetings
Vocatives
Building links	“Hello”, “Good luck!”
“Thanks for your help, Coach!”
“What should we do now?”	”Welcome!”
“Thank you, Teacher!”
“… When we add a point, we have to compute…”
Emotional presence	Activity emotion	Emotions about the inquiry	“We solved it!:-)”	“nvm question B i figured that one out hehe:)”,
“I don't know, can I get one more clue? Can't really wrap my head around this”
Outcome emotion	Emotions about the consequence of the inquiry	“Gah! I have a test on Monday that I will fail if I don't get this.”	“I would just like to say I find it pretty hard adjusting to this course after having read SF2940 Probability Theory. The expression I've written on the board doesn't make sense to me.”,
“alright, thanks a lot for this, got really worried that I had missed [the assignment deadline]”
Directed affectiveness	Emotions towards the other person	Thank you for helping me!”, “:-)”, “:-(“, “:-P”	“thank you thank you!”, “Okay! [raising hands-emoticon]”,
“Student 1: Can you suggest us a paper or book for completing this question please?
Student 2: The Bible might be a good start”
According to the CoI framework (Garrison et al., 2000), both students and instructors can express teaching presence. However, the survey does not take the students' perspective of teaching presence into account, while the use of the coding scheme mainly focused on instructors' expressions of teaching presence. Being an adaptation of CoI, the RoI framework was also lacking this perspective. Therefore, in this study, adding on the RoI coding template, teaching presence was also coded from the student perspective. This made it possible to study how students support their own and other students' process of inquiry. In a previous study, examples of students' teaching presence were found (Jansson, Stenbom, Enoksson, & Hrastinski, 2020), and these examples together with examples from this study are shown in Table 2.


Table 2. Examples of teaching presence from students.

Category	Student messages
Design and organization	”I'm having some trouble understanding the linear equation. Could someone explain?”,
“Good evening everybody. I am a bit confused about the paper [reference] suggested by the assignment. The it is stated that: a big variance of the parameter prior results in a sharp linear boundary in the x space. Even though I have seen this statement often I wonder why this should be the case.”,
“Are we supposed to present the group project orally or only submit a report? The instructions for the project seems to be locked until December 7.”,
“By the way, could you tell me later how I make the symbol for ‘to the power of” on the computer?,
“Is it OK to create a new topic myself and post my question there?”
Facilitating discourse	“Yes. Actually I still don't understand if the question is correctly formulated. If it was ‘Why’ instead of ‘What’ it would make more sense”,
”do you understand my confusion?”,
“I'd advice you to look through [the teachers] notes on posterior distributions”,
”I would insert the points and perhaps try and see what you get, since it's parallel it has the same K-value, then you can look at the m-value from the point you have.”
Direct instruction	“It is actually easy! Just take derivative w.r.t. one element in W and follow the matrix cookbook”,
“Since the answer is zero the parentheses will cancel each other out, 2*4–8 = 0 and − 3 + 3 = 0”,
”If the term under the radical sign can't be solved, it's not a real number.”,
“Murphy first write about the noise-free case, and uses the same notation as Bishop (K). Then, they both consider the noise, but use different names”,
“W should be D × q”
The RoI framework consists of four elements, each with several categories representing an aspect of the specific element. In total there are twelve different categories. The codes were therefore made on the category level and then aggregated to form the elements. For each message, the categories and the corresponding elements were considered and coded as either present or not present. This procedure made it possible for a message to be coded with more than one category. The majority of messages, 388, had one code, while 235 messages had two codes, 116 messages had three codes, and 15 messages had four codes. After all of the messages were coded, student messages coded as Teaching presence were analyzed further, and it was determined whether the messages were meant for the student's own process of inquiry or for another student's process of inquiry. Furthermore, the content of each message was re-read to get a deeper picture of the conversations, in order to identify the context in which the student was expressing teaching presence (administrative, understanding assignment, subject related, etc.).

The reliability of the coding procedure was tested by having two coders involved in the process. First, all messages were coded by the main author. Then, one of the co-authors was introduced to the coding template and performed test coding that was compared and discussed. Finally, 71 messages (~10%) were coded by both persons in order to calculate the reliability by percent agreement. Percent agreement was calculated as the ratio between codes that were identical for the two coders and the total number of codes, and this is a recognized method for reliability calculations in transcript analysis (De Wever, Schellens, Valcke, & Van Keer, 2006). The calculations showed an agreement at the category level of 0.81 and at the element level of 0.91, indicating an acceptable agreement of the coding (ibid). Percent agreements were also calculated for each element individually in order to identify any fluctuations at the element level. The results of the calculations showed acceptable levels of agreement for all of the presences (Teaching presence = 0.77, Cognitive presence = 0.88, Social presence = 0.80 and Emotional presence = 0.74).

4. Results
The results from the transcript analysis are presented in Table 3. In section 4.1, the distribution of the codes is described. In section 4.2, the student messages that were coded as Teaching presence are presented.


Table 3. Results from the RoI coding.

Students	Teachers	All
Teaching presence	213	248	461
Design and organization	164	95	259
Facilitating discourse	31	52	83
Direct instruction	18	101	119
Cognitive presence	315	–	315
Triggering event	123*	–	123*
Exploration	123*	–	123*
Integration	47	–	47
Resolution	22	–	22
Social presence	225	68	293
Open communication	60	16	76
Relationship cohesion	165	52	217
Emotional presence	138	57	195
Activity emotion	44	36	80
Outcome emotion	6	0	6
Directed affectiveness	88	21	109
4.1. Types of interactions
The total number of codes was 1264, where 891 were codes of student messages and 373 were codes of teacher messages. Teaching presence was the most coded presence, followed by Cognitive presence and Social presence (Table 3). The element with the least number of messages was Emotional presence.

4.1.1. Teaching presence
Of the messages coded as Teaching presence, slightly more were teacher messages than student messages. The distribution of the codes between the three categories, Design and organization, Facilitating discourse, and Direct instruction can be seen in Table 3. Design and organization had the most codes, and the majority of codes were from students (n = 164). This category included explanations about how the online system worked, directions to where one might find different course materials, asking for help, and describing what kind of help was needed, as well as information about deadlines and submissions. Several of these messages were at the beginning of a conversation.

Facilitating discourse had the lowest number of codes, and a few more were from teachers than students. The category included asking for thoughts or feedback on something a student had shared, asking open questions to help someone else in their thought process, giving examples of how to solve a problem, and opening up for discussion. These messages mostly occurred during the conversations and were meant to help the student reach the solution to their problem, but they could also open up a session by starting a discussion.

Direct instruction had the majority of codes from teachers' messages (n = 101). This category included, for example, giving instructions on how to proceed, explaining a concept, summarizing what has been said, and referring to other materials or previous lectures where instructions or answers can be found. Direct instructions were often found during or towards the end of the conversation and as answers to a student's question or problem.

4.1.2. Cognitive presence
The coding scheme considers student's cognitive processes but not teachers. Therefore, all messages coded with Cognitive presence were made by students. Triggering event and Exploration had the same number of codes (n = 123) and were the categories with the most codes. Triggering event was often the starter to a conversation, and this was especially the case in this paper where we have studied Q&As. Messages coded in this category often included students asking for help or clarification about a topic, problem, or concept. Messages coded as Exploration included brainstorming, gathering information, and sharing of ideas. Exploration could, for example, be found in messages where the students asked about something they did not understand, referred to the course literature, or expressed their confusion about a subject.

Both Integration and Resolution had a lower number of codes. Integration included messages concerning proposals of solutions and integrating ideas with the aim of reaching a solution. Resolution typically included messages consisting of solutions and analyses of solutions. However, because the Q&As were conducted prior to submission deadlines, solutions or detailed steps towards solutions could not be shared. Resolution was therefore found in messages where students showed that they had understood the problem, or solved the issues, but did not show the actual solutions themselves.

4.1.3. Social presence
Of the messages coded as Social presence the vast majority were from the students, 225 messages compared to 68 from teachers. Open communication, which includes filler words (such as hmm, yeah, ah, mmm, etc.) as well as trivial expressions, had quite a low number of codes. Relationship cohesion had the most codes. This category included messages consisting of participants referring to one another by name, using the concept of “we”, and greetings and goodbyes. Many students were polite in their communication, adding greetings and closures to the conversations. This might be explained by the fact that many questions were directed to the teachers.

4.1.4. Emotional presence
Emotional presence was mostly expressed by students and was the element with the lowest number of codes. Outcome emotions, referring to emotions regarding the consequences of a successful or failed inquiry, had only six codes, all of which were student messages. Directed affectiveness was the category with the highest number of codes assigned to it, most of them from students. This category included messages with, for example, students thanking another participant for their help, the use of emoticons, and expressing humor. Activity emotions were expressed more equally by students and teachers. Messages could contain, for example, expressions of concern, worry, or frustration for not understanding something or not managing to solve an issue, showing enthusiasm for understanding, and encouraging someone.

4.2. Students support of their own and other students' learning
The results from the RoI coding (see Table 3) demonstrate that students did indeed show teaching presence. In order to understand whether this was directed towards their own or other students' process of inquiry, further analysis was conducted (see Table 4). In total, there were 213 messages that received a code from a teaching presence category. The majority of the messages were directed towards the students' own process of inquiry, while fewer were directed towards other students' process of inquiry. Worth noting is the division of the messages, where a larger part of the students' messages with teaching presence had a cognitive focus rather than an administrative focus. Most of the messages concerned students' understanding and how to solve a problem, while fewer messages concerned administrative topics, such as assignment deadlines or session or system-related questions.


Table 4. Analysis of student messages coded as Teaching presence.

Student's own process of inquiry	Other students' process of inquiry
Design and organization	155	9
Facilitating discourse	9	22
Direct instructions	0	18
Total	164	49
Student messages meant to aid their own learning were mostly in the category of Design and organization (see Table 4). Examples included students initiating a conversation by, for example, asking if someone can help them, explaining what they have already done, or what they are having problems with. The messages could also be about the system and how to use it. Other messages focused on course-specific instructions, for example, deadlines or where to hand in assignments. Messages meant to support students' own learning often had a double code with Triggering event, meaning that they often came in the beginning of a conversation. A few of the messages were coded as facilitating discourse, which consisted of students opening up for discussion. None of the messages were coded as direct instruction.

Messages from students directed towards other students were most often coded as facilitating discourse and direct instruction (see Table 4). The few messages coded as design and organization were mostly answers to inquiries about assignment deadlines or assignments procedures. Messages coded as facilitating discourse included, for example, students guiding other students on their way to the solution, asking open questions about the students' understanding or process, or giving examples. Messages coded as direct instruction mainly contained explanations about a concept or the model of solution.

5. Discussion
The results from the RoI coding are discussed in section 5.1 to give a background on the interactions during the Q&As. In section 5.2, the students' support of the inquiry process through their expressions of Teaching presence are discussed. The study's limitations and suggestions for further research are discussed in section 5.4.

5.1. Types of interactions during Q&As
The conversations focused on solving a specific assignment problem or issue and took a tutoring approach. The result showed that students engaged in online Q&As by expressing teaching, cognitive, social and emotional presence. Q&A interactions have been found to be student driven (Smith IV et al., 2020), and students were the ones in charge of the sessions, for starting and ending the conversations, and for keeping the interactions going. Considering that almost two thirds of the messages were posted by students, it seems that the teachers did take a less dominant role in the conversations, which has also been found in a previous study (Burnett, 2003). Even though overly active instructors have been found to reduce student interactions (Mazzolini and Maddison, 2003, Mazzolini and Maddison, 2007), the students seemed more inclined to participate in the discussions on the dates when they knew the teacher would be available. As seen in Fig. 2, most messages were sent on the days the teacher had announced a Q&A session. In this study, the students seemed to require the presence of the teacher, but it did not seem to be necessary that the teacher was the one to answer the questions. As previously found by Hao et al. (2016), the students did not seem to depend on the teachers to answer their questions. Even though many students addressed their question to the teacher, no one rejected an answer from another student, and no one expressed any displeasure with an answer from another student. The knowledge of the teacher being there to clear up any misunderstandings or inaccuracies, should there be any, might have contributed to the students listening to each other. The finding that students were more active during the announced Q&As might also relate to the synchronous communication. The students seemed to prefer to be active when they knew that others were online, and this is in line with a previous study where high school students could discuss mathematics in preparation for the national tests (Jansson, Stenbom, Enoksson, & Hrastinski, 2020). The students were more inclined to post something in the online room when other students were online.

The statistics from Google Analytics indicated that more people were attending the Q&As and were online in the room than were active in the conversations. Students might be online in the room in order to be able read other students' questions, discussions, or information from the teacher, while not being willing or in need of posting something themselves (Bozkurt et al., 2020). Even though they are not themselves active in the discussion, the fact that all the conversations are saved in the room might support student learning (Smith IV et al., 2020).

5.1.1. Relationship of Inquiry coding
Even though it is stated that all participants can express teaching presence in the CoI framework (Anderson et al., 2001), to the best of our knowledge there has been very little research on students' teaching presence. Previous research has mainly studied instructors' teaching presence or the student views of the instructors' teaching presence (Bliss & Lawrence, 2009; De la Varre, Keane, & Irvin, 2011; Kamin et al., 2006; Kilis & Yildirim, 2019; Morgan, 2011; Saadatmand, Uhlin, Hedberg, Åbjörnsson, & Kvarnström, 2017; Shea, Hayes, & Vickers, 2010; Shea, Li, & Pickett, 2006; Zhang, Lin, Zhan, & Ren, 2016; Zhao & Sullivan, 2016). However, in the Q&A setting, which might differ from online discussion forums, the students were more involved in the inquiry process (Jansson, Stenbom, Enoksson, & Hrastinski, 2020). Therefore, it was not so surprising that teaching presence was found to be the most frequently occurring element. The Q&A setting included many conversation starters that seem to have increased the occurrence of the category Design and organization. Due to the structure of Q&As in terms of addressing specific problems and issues and helping students to find the right solution to assignments, it is reasonable that Facilitating discourse was not as present as Direct instructions.

The Q&A structure might also be a reason for the high number of codes in the cognitive categories Triggering event and Exploration due to the large number of separate conversations, each with a new start to a discussion meant to solve the problem at hand. Thus, Integration and Resolution could not be expressed as much considering that the assignments would be handed in and graded as an individual task. Consequently, many conversations ended before reaching a solution, and indicators of resolution were therefore limited to student messages expressing that the question has been answered.

Students and teachers were polite and kind towards each other. Almost 40% of all the messages included a social expression, largely in the category Relationship cohesion, through the use of the concept “we” as well as greetings. Meanwhile, the most typical expressions of emotions were in the category Directed affectiveness, mostly expressed when students showed gratitude towards a peer or teacher for their help. This indicates the importance for students to build a relationship with their peers and teachers during their inquiry process in an online environment. One other interesting note is the low number of messages coded as Outcome emotion, which was in line with previous studies that also identified few codes for this category (Jansson, Stenbom, Enoksson, & Hrastinski, 2020; Stenbom, Jansson, & Hulkko, 2016). This could imply that the categories for Emotional presence in the RoI framework should be revised.

5.2. Students' support of the inquiry process
To answer how students supported their own and/or other students' process of inquiry, students' expressions of teaching presence were analyzed more closely. Garrison and Akyol, 2013, Garrison and Akyol, 2015 suggest that teaching presence encourages students to take responsibility for their own learning and other students' learning, and thus also provides the opportunity for metacognitive development. This study showed that students supported their own and other students' process of inquiry in an online Q&A setting by designing the conversation, asking for feedback, guiding one's peers, sharing information, and providing steps towards solutions. The same result was found by Zydney et al. (2012), where students shared their expertise, helped facilitate the discussion, and took an active role while using resources. Students might take more ownership of the discussion when expressing teaching presence, thus increasing the sense of community or relation, as well as reducing work for the instructor. Because the students expressed teaching presence and engaged in both self- and co-regulation, they contributed to metacognitive development (Garrison & Akyol, 2015). Even though it has been said that self-regulation can be difficult to assess in transcripts from a collaborative learning environment (Garrison & Akyol, 2015), we argue that expressions of this can be found through analysis of students' teaching presence. More research is suggested to further investigate students' teaching presence and its connection to cognitive presence.

5.2.1. Students' support of their own process of inquiry
Students appeared to support their own process of inquiry in different ways, though the majority of student messages meant to support their own inquiry were coded as Design and organization. While the teacher designed and organized the course and the course content, the students organized the Q&A sessions. The Q&As were set up by the teacher, though as seen in previous studies (Garrison et al., 2000) the interactions were driven forward by the students. By clearly stating what they needed help with or what they had trouble understanding, the students framed the conversation to include what was important for them at that time. The structure of the Q&A gave the students the possibility to outline the inquiry and set the goals (Stenbom, Jansson, & Hulkko, 2016), thus supporting their own process of inquiry.

By asking for feedback from others, the students also opened up for discussion, although such facilitating discourse expressions were not as common. Similarly, both Chen et al. (2017) and Weerasinghe et al. (2012) found that students helped facilitate the discussion by encouraging feedback from one another. Our analysis of students' messages in support of their own process of inquiry seems to show that students reflected on their own knowledge and contribution to the discussions. They seemed aware of the inquiry process, therefore achieving metacognitive development (Garrison & Akyol, 2015). Students had no messages coded as Direct instructions that were directed towards their own process of inquiry. This is not unexpected considering that direct instruction is the act of sharing information or providing steps to solutions. However, the aspect of summarizing the discussion could be seen as support of their own inquiry.

5.2.2. Students' support of other students' process of inquiry
By answering questions, clearing up misunderstandings, and helping peers, students also supported other students' process of inquiry, even though these messages occurred less frequently compared with those directed towards their own inquiry. Given the opportunity, students were willing to aid other students by helping them regulate their learning by giving them direction and support (Akyol & Garrison, 2011). Students did not seem to have issues with receiving help from their peers instead of the teacher. Some students could post an issue they were struggling with while responding to another student's question in the next message. Even though the teacher had explained that they were welcome to help each other, the students had no obligation to help their peers. It is important to note that the students were not appointed peer tutors nor did they have a role as facilitators. The expression of teaching presence or acting as a tutor for their peers emerged spontaneously during the sessions. However, the review by deNoyelles, Zydney, and Chen (2014) of strategies to support online CoI found assigned peer facilitators to be an effective way to facilitate discussions, by increasing the level of knowledge construction, encouraging more questions, and freeing up time for the instructor. Our results also indicate that the students might have taken some of the burden off of the teacher through their expressions of design and organization by providing information to their peers, answering other students' questions about the course structure, methods, and deadlines, and forwarding information already given by the teacher or available to them in the course material. Students directed their suggestions and guidance to other students, thus facilitating the conversations in order to help them in their problem solving. They also shared their knowledge on the subject or a problem, acting as the expert in different situations, by their expression of Direct instructions. Overall, the students took an active part participating in the Q&As, interacted with others, and constructed their knowledge through collaboration, indicating that teaching presence was distributed between students and instructors (Caskurlu et al., 2020) and that students might have achieved metacognitive development through coregulation (Garrison & Akyol, 2015).

5.3. Limitations and further research
The inter-reliability tests indicated that the transcript coding was reliable even though the coders were not familiar with the subject (advanced machine learning) nor were they involved in the course. The coders did experience some difficulties in interpreting some of the messages due to the lack of knowledge on the subject of the course. Transcript analysis can have uncertainties, because it is dependent on the coders' own experiences and difficulties with interpreting the meaning in a text message (Downe-Wamboldt, 1992).

The participants could be anonymous, which might have encouraged the participants to interact in conversations (Roberts & Rajah-Kanagasabai, 2013). It was also possible for participants to change their usernames during the period of the study. This made it complicated to distinguish different participants from each other in the analysis, thus making it difficult to know exactly how many participants were active during the Q&As. Anonymity can be useful and add confidence in interacting in discussions, though we would recommend for further studies that participants choose a username that they use throughout the study in order to improve the analysis.

It is worth mentioning that many of the student messages, meant to support their own inquiry, coded under the category Design and organization, were double coded as the cognitive category Triggering event. There were also other messages that received a double code containing both teaching and cognitive presence. Garrison and Akyol, 2013, Garrison and Akyol, 2015 argue that it is in the interface between teaching and cognitive presence that metacognitive development takes place and that it is important to explore this in collaborative learning environments. Further studies on this would bring a deeper knowledge regarding the students' expressions.

6. Conclusion
This paper aimed to study how students supported their own and other students' process of inquiry in an online educational system. All messages posted during Q&As were collected from the system, and the transcripts were analyzed with the Relationship of inquiry coding scheme adapted from Community of Inquiry. Furthermore, student messages coded with Teaching presence were further analyzed. This study indicated that Q&As have potential for supporting learning while working on assignments in STEM fields. The large number of students visiting the Q&As without posting anything might imply that the opportunity to read other students' questions and responses brought value. The results showed that with their expressions of teaching presence, the students supported both their own and other students' inquiry by explaining what they were having problems with, what they already knew or had tried, answering other students' questions, giving suggestions, and sharing information. With their expressions of teaching and cognitive presence, connected to self- and co-regulation, the students were shown to acquire metacognitive development.

Even though the students' messages that expressed teaching presence were analyzed to determine whether they directed their support towards their own or other students' process of inquiry, further research could bring more knowledge about the students' part in the inquiry process. Several messages got a double code with teaching and cognitive presence, but the connection between them was not further analyzed in this study. Studies have suggested (Garrison & Akyol, 2015) that it is in the intersection between teaching and cognitive presence that the essence of the metacognitive construct can be found, and more research on this is suggested.

