This study examined how Pinterest, a multimodal social networking site, was used as a tool in a graduate course to allow students to explore interesting language use in everyday life for a class assignment. The findings indicated that pinners' collection on the Pinterest board celebrated various uses of language and multimodal signifiers as different examples of language use. Thus, pins revealed pinners' interpretation of what made particular instances of language use “psycholinguistic examples.” The affordances of the Pinterest board as a public site allowed pinners to engage in on-going communication with their fellow pinners and the greater Internet public. Both images and accompanying messages revealed pinners' intentions to express their thoughts about noteworthy language use and to invite their audience to pay attention to what they had shared. The Pinterest activity as digital curation created a participatory culture that encouraged students' collaboration and informal learning.

Keywords
Collaborative learning
Learning communities
Participatory culture
Multimodality

1. Introduction
With the prominent presence of various social networking sites (SNSs) in everyday practices and the ever-increasing number of users participating in these spaces, educators have considered ways to incorporate these practices in instruction not only to take advantage of students' facility with technology but also to improve their critical skills and strategies when engaging in SNSs (Hamid, Waycott, Kurnia, & Chang, 2015). Keeping pace with the ever more creative uses of semiotic tools in online spaces has challenged theorists and educators to understand what it means to be literate in the 21st century. Characterized with multimodality, and interactivity, SNSs such as Facebook, MySpace, and blogs can facilitate authentic communication as part of class assignments as they apply and extend what they learn from class (Arnold and Paulus, 2010, Delello et al., 2015, White and Hungerford-Kresser, 2014). Furthermore, SNSs can facilitate informal learning within and beyond classroom. As each SNS has its unique affordances and constraints that can mediate interactions among participants, a more particularized look at various uses of SNSs in a classroom context is needed to increase educators' and researchers' understanding of how digital technologies can facilitate students' experimentation with what they learn as they participate in a class-designated SNS.

Through our access to a course that used Pinterest as an integral means of fulfilling course goals, we examined how such a social network tool enabled students, pinners as we call them, to remix, recontextualize, and interconnect multimodal texts while creating affinity spaces with class members and the greater internet public. Research has suggested that the uses of Pinterest could facilitate learning both in formal and informal education settings through visual resources and effective communication (Pearce & Learmonth, 2013). Given the increasing use of social networking sites for pedagogical use and the need to explore and understand better how students can benefit from the appropriation of their social venues for pedagogical purposes, examining how Pinterest can mediate students' learning and interactions on a Pinterest board may contribute to the discussion of educational uses of SNSs. As a small contribution to this expanding challenge, we undertook to explore how graduate students repurposed the multimodal site to illustrate and enhance their appreciation of the ways language works and to navigate, negotiate, and contemplate the concepts addressed in the course. Therefore, we had two research questions: (a) How did students make use of a multimodal public forum as a class activity that engaged them in exploring language use in everyday contexts?; and (b) How did the multimodal and public nature of the Pinterest board mediate students' participation in the class assignment?

1.1. Literacy practices on SNSs
Conceptually, this study is situated in the research on new literacies, an area of literacy research that is concerned with how digital technologies and social practices reciprocally impact, change, and create individuals' ways of using literacy (Leu, Kinzer, Coiro, Castek, & Henry, 2013). From this perspective, everyday literacies in online contexts help organize and archive our personal lives and allow us to communicate with others as we make sense and participate in social practices (Barton, 2012a). Social practices mediated by digital technology allow for the (re)contextualization of texts, collaboration among participants, and inter(con)textual links among texts. With new digital technologies, new practices have developed for interaction and communicating (Leu et al., 2013, The New London Group, 1996). Although reading and writing continue to have communicative functions in online spaces, the affordances of online spaces contribute to possibilities for communication using multimodal resources (e.g., images, sounds, music, symbols) and media (e.g., writing, video clips, speech) (Kress, 2003, Lankshear and Knobel, 2006). Participating in SNSs involves composing activities with various modes such as posting a still or moving image, writing a Facebook or blog entry, pinning on a Pinterest board, leaving a responding comment, or simply clicking response buttons (Kress, 2003, Lankshear and Knobel, 2006).

Social networking sites (SNSs) have also become integral platforms for everyday literacies, influencing the ways reading and writing are used (Lankshear & Knobel, 2006). Tagging, making comments, and posting digital images with comments added are some of these new SNS literacies. Although clicking buttons for “like,” “dislike,” “follow,” or “pin it” may not require traditional writing practices, such actions use written texts or symbols as communication tools as individuals take up the new writing practices of the online world (Merchant, 2009). Thus, new forms of writing practices emerge reflecting the affordances of each SNS as individuals express, communicate, and create through multimodal composing and publishing rather than simply consuming what is available.

For example, Barton (2012a) and Barton and Lee (2012) examined how multilingual users engaged in writing practices on Flickr.com as they documented their lives with photos and comments in interaction with others. The focal SNS allowed participants to modify traditional writing practices as they created titles and comments for their photos and responded to others' photos by using their linguistic and multimodal repertoire (Barton & Lee, 2012). Furthermore, participation on social networking sites facilitated informal learning as revealed in participants' comments (Wodzicki, Schwammlein, & Moskaliuk, 2012). Writing was not simply a means for communicating, but also for reflecting and projecting their learning trajectories.

By the nature of sharing and participating, literacy practices on SNSs contribute to an expanding participatory culture as participation in SNSs “shifts the focus of literacy from individual expression to community involvement” (Jenkins, Purushotma, Weigel, Clinton, & Robison, 2009, p. xiii). A participatory culture is characterized by distributed cognition, accessibility for creation and participation, and informal learning and support, creating democratic ways of collaborating among participants to share and celebrate multiplicity and heterogeneity of ideas as individuals execute their knowledge and expertise in creative ways. Thus, literacy becomes a tool for collaboration, creativity, social change, and networking in the sociocultural world (Black, 2006, Lankshear and Knobel, 2006). In that it promotes celebratory, democratic ways of expressing ideas even as it resists accepted mainstream norms, a participatory culture is connected to Bakhtin's (1984) concept of the carnivalesque that is characterized with disruption of authoritative discourses and multiplicity of expression and interpretation. Because the need to be an adept cultural being in a participatory culture will only increase, and because we saw that there were still very few systematic studies of practices in such new cultures, we were encouraged to examine how a participatory culture was created through a class assignment that asked students to post examples of a central course construct in the public space of a Pinterest board.

1.2. Mediation of SNSs in classroom activities
SNSs as digital tools have affordances and constraints that mediate students' learning in different ways. How the integration of SNSs for educational purposes influenced students' learning experiences has been examined in several studies with the goal of identifying how such sites create participatory literacy practices.

Characterized as encouraging informal communication and learning, SNSs have been shown to provide opportunities for authentic communication and learning with multimodal resources. For example, the uses of Ning in online education courses promoted higher levels of student interactions and contributed to a sense of community as students experienced authentic participation in activities on Ning (Arnold and Paulus, 2010, Brady et al., 2010, Hung and Yuen, 2010). Furthermore, Pearce and Learmonth (2013) stated that the integration of Pinterest in an anthropology class encouraged student learning within and beyond the classroom as students shared resources not only with their classmates but also with family, friends, and acquaintances outside the class. Likewise, White and Hungerford-Kresser (2014) reported that preservice teachers shared their interpretation of and reflection on a novel by creating a page about a character and journaling on Facebook.

In sum, the integration of SNSs in classroom practices has been shown to foster authentic collaboration not only for learning course-related content but also for informal learning through interactions with classmates and resources shared. The unique functions of each SNS allowed different opportunities for participants to transfer skills and strategies. Furthermore, new online tools reflect and encourage new literacy practices that allow users to participate in social networks and to combine multimodal resources with writing. Pinterest as one such site seemed worthwhile as the focus of a study. Building on previous work on the adoption of SNSs in classroom activities, this study examined students' multimodal artifacts on the Pinterest board to understand how affordances of Pinterest facilitated students' exploration of language uses in relation to course concepts.

2. Method
2.1. Participants and setting
The context of this study was a graduate level course focusing on psycholinguistics offered by an educational psychology professor in a large university located in the U.S. southwest. The class consisted of the instructor (Donna; all names are pseudonyms) and 12 graduate students (11 women and one man; one international student) from various disciplines such as educational psychology, linguistics, music education, and literacy studies.

For one class project, an analytic paper of how language is used, students were asked to collect psycholinguistic examples throughout the semester by noticing examples of language use in their social and cultural world. Donna had used this same activity previously, asking students to collect their examples in personal notebooks. Thus, students in the past had not been able to see each other's examples except for the one or two examples shared publicly at the start of each class session. Inspired by Barton, 2012b, Barton, 2013) on how individuals made use of Flickr to share photographs with the Internet public in the “365 Project,” Donna decided to use a similar public venue to engage her students in sharing images and their ideas in relation to her psycholinguistic course.

After careful consideration, Donna chose Pinterest as it allowed multimodal images rather than written messages to be central to each post. She set up a board, entitled Psycholinguistics Spring 2013 (as we write, the board is still available), to allow her students to share their collected examples more fully with one another. For the project, the syllabus mentioned that they should aim to note at least one example per day in order to collect enough examples for their final report on language use, but that students were encouraged to post at least four pins per week to the Pinterest board with contextualizing information, graphics, or a picture of the example itself. Donna only suggested students to put the date of their posting in the comment section of the pin and did not require students to comment each other's posts. However, many students added much more than dates. Eleven students with their instructor (total 12 participants) contributed to the Pinterest board; one student never pinned any examples for undisclosed reasons.

After the semester was over, a reflective survey was delivered via e-mail to all students, and nine students responded. The survey addressed the pinners' familiarity with Pinterest, strategies to determine which examples to share on the board, ways of selecting visuals and of using written texts, and their current understanding of psycholinguistic examples.

2.2. Pinterest as a platform for students'curation
First publicized as a beta version in March 2010 and then officially launched in late 2011, Pinterest is a publicly shared digital scrapbook in which a user “pins” or collects images of interest, often with links to other websites. Like other SNSs, any individual can create one or several boards. Also similar to other SNSs, users can access and join other individuals' boards or choose not to share their personal profiles and instead keep their board private. Visitors can interact with the board as they click buttons to “follow” a board, “Save,” or “♥” (love) pins they find interesting or useful, and they can comment on a pin. A board may also be created by/for a group, with pinning restricted only to members of the group who are given permission as “board contributors.” Pinterest shares all the features that Merchant (2009) identified as characteristics of multimodal online spaces: Such spaces allow users to develop online presence and identity, to personalize the configuration of web spaces, to create and modify texts, and to interact with others. Furthermore, the practices on Pinterest can be described as curation as individuals select, organize, present, and archive images collected in a digital space (Hall & Zarro, 2012).

2.3. Data sources and analysis
Data sources included the pins on the class Pinterest board contributed by 12 participants (11 students and the instructor), and the end-of-semester student surveys from nine student participants. At semester's end, the board held 552 pins. Seven of these were accidentally posted twice (when students were still figuring out how to use the board). Therefore, we focused our analysis on the 545 unique pins on the class Pinterest board, representing various sources and constituting many interpretations of psycholinguistic examples. As shown in Fig. 1, pins on a Pinterest board appear chronologically without any category designation, juxtaposed with unrelated pins. The newest pins appear at the top of the board whereas older ones are at the bottom. The surveys addressed students' experiences with Pinterest before and in the focal class, how they used the Pinterest board, and their strategies in selecting and posting examples and in using comments.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (620KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. A screenshot of the Pinterest board, Psycholinguistics Spring 2013.

The group posted a mean number of approximately 42 pins across the 13-week period, making for three to four pins per person per week. The total number of pins per person ranged from 23 (4.2%) to 111 (20.5%). Along with responding comments to pins that they found interesting, students used other communication functions such as “Save” and “♥.” Finally, pins originated from several sources, including quotes from conversations in which pinners had engaged; quotes and lines from movies, books, and poems; and photos of signs from various places (e.g., restaurants, businesses, schools, churches, streets, and bumper stickers).

Using a constant comparative approach (Corbin & Strauss, 2008), we focused on content of the Pinterest board. Guided by our initial research questions, we looked through the pins to develop a sense of the types of pins students had posted and to understand how images and written texts were used in the pins. Our initial codes reflected the complex interconnections across examples highlighted in pins, pinners' comments, contexts of examples, and multimodal signifiers. By comparing and contrasting examples of each code, we developed an initial set of codes that we then grouped into superordinate categories, as well as found more specific subdivided codes.

The three superordinate categories included (a) type of language use featured in pins; (b) pinner's intention; and (c) the role of the pinner's comments, each with four to five subcategories. Table 1 presents subordinate categories of each superordinate category with definitions. For type of language use, we categorized the pins into five types of psycholinguistic examples: (a) language play; (b) meaning mismatch; (c) unconventional uses of grammatical features; (d) juxtaposition of language and context; and (e) blend of language and semiotic signifiers. For the second superordinate category, we categorized the likely intention we inferred behind each pin, based on both the content of the pin itself and any message from the pinner in the caption. We were guided in this analysis by ideas from Speech Act theory of locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocutionary functions of language in which an utterance is analyzed in terms of what the words mean, what they imply about a speaker's intention, and what they “do” to the listener as the listener “uptakes” the intention of the speaker (Austin, 1962, Searle, 1969). In our use, this second superordinate category was made up of four subcategories: (a) humor; (b) exploration; (c) appreciation; and (d) reflection. Finally, we analyzed the captions accompanying the pins as the captions often added complexity and nuance by what was said about the images in the pins, directing fellow pinners' attention and inviting response from fellow pinners. The subcategories here included (a) commentary; (b) title; (c) examples; and (d) sources.


Table 1. Coding schemes with definition.

Superordinate category	Subordinate Code	Definition
Types of language use	Language play	Playful and creative uses of language; how words in an example were juxtaposed and combined to create a profound influence on feelings, causing laughter and inspiration or encouragement (e.g., inspirational quotes, signs, child’s language uses, various literary devices, etc.)
Meaning mismatch	Creative or playful interpretation of language use and misunderstanding of idioms.
Unconventional uses of grammatical features	(a) unintentional errors in syntax or pronunciations; and (b) intentional parody of unconventional syntactic, mechanical, and spelling errors.
Juxtaposition of language and context	Juxtaposition of language use with social contexts
Blend of language and semiotic signifiers	Entanglement of language use and semiotic signs (e.g., symbols, illustrations, color, and emoticons).
Pinner’s intention	Humor	To share humor: (a) language use to be designed for humor; (b) unintended humor
Reflection	To reflect on language use in relation to course concepts
Exploration	To explore how language works in context
Appreciation	To appreciate the beauty or intricacies of language at work
Role of the pinner’s comment	Source	A source of the focal example including the date of the posting and a place in which the focal example was found.
Title	The main idea of the focal example; or reiteration of the focal example
Commentary	The pinner’s interpretation or evaluation of the focal example.
Psycholinguistic example	Fragments of conversation shared in the message function; Images were added to complement or highlight the focal example.
After we had coded 150 pins using initial categories, we modified and refined definitions. We coded each pin three times, making a pass for each kind of superordinate category with its subcategories. With a new set of 150 pins, we established inter-rater agreement of between 90% and 95%, resolving any differences through discussion. As we reviewed the coded pins and frequencies of each code along with our reflective notes during our meetings, we developed themes in relation to the research questions. We also cross-checked the emergent themes with the students' responses to the survey questions to confirm and disconfirm our conclusions.

Finally, we note that three of the researchers for this study had been in the class, either as instructor or students. They provided insider perspectives on possible course context for a particular pin, information about the participants, and the possible connections between ideas on the pins and concepts addressed in class. The remaining team member provided an outsider perspective to our emerging interpretations.

3. Findings
Two themes emerged from our analysis: (a) various types of language use were celebrated on the Pinterest board; and (b) social nature of the participation in the Pinterest board.

3.1. Pinterest encouraged a celebration of various types of language use
The multimodal and public nature of the Pinterest board facilitated students' understanding and learning of how language use in real life was related to course concepts. Students' end-of-semester survey definitions of psycholinguistic examples revealed their conceptualization of what language use could encompass. For example, Jeremy defined psycholinguistic examples as “language anomaly through real life examples.” Amelia viewed them as examples that “more or less divert one's thinking immediately to the use of language.” Rachelle seemed to focus more on “an interesting play on words or an interesting way of thinking and verbalizing something.” Students also sought examples that were relevant to the course topics as Charlene suggested, “I usually connected the reading themes to what I placed on the board.”

By using the board, the students collaboratively explored and entertained psycholinguistically distinctive uses of language in relation to course concepts as well as in response to the teacher's guidance for the project. Reflecting students' definitions of psycholinguistics examples, the subcategories (see Table 1) developed from our analysis showed how students' conceptualization of psycholinguistics were evident in the examples that they had collected throughout the semester. Table 2 shows examples and frequency of each subcategory.


Table 2. Types of language uses with frequencies and examples.

The most common category of pins represented language play (n = 195; 35.8%), not unexpected given the guideline for the assignment and students' definitions of psycholinguistic examples. Although all examples in different categories demonstrated interesting ways of using language, the multimodal affordance of the Pinterest board allowed students to explore a variety of language uses with images that showed contextual backgrounds and additional layers of meaning. The way that the Pinterest board influenced students' collection of psycholinguistic examples was particularly evident in the next two most frequent subcategories: Juxtaposition of Language and Context and Blend of Language and Multimodal Signifiers. Approximately 32.8% of the pins demonstrated examples of language use that garnered connotations from their particular sociocultural and political contexts, and 15.4% of the pins showed examples of language use for which multimodal resources added meaning. As shown in Pin #91 and # 220 in Table 2, for example, language use in these two categories might have not appeared in years prior when students had collected their examples in actual notebooks. The affordances of the Pinterest board allowed students to expand their attention to various language uses that included layers of meaning due to accompanying multimodal resources and due to contextual elements (e.g., social events, political circumstances, cultural elements).

Along with multimodality, the public nature of the Pinterest board allowed students to explore and expand their understanding of language uses. Although most students seemed to prefer one or a few types of pins over others, they nevertheless could not help but encounter the broad variety of pins that was posted by everyone in the class. We saw in our data that some seemed to gravitate to only a few types of pins (e.g., Boyoung with more than 50% of pins in the language and context category; Kris with high percentages in two categories), whereas others showed a wider array across types, as shown in Table 3.


Table 3. Individual counts of types of language uses.

n
(%)	Language play	Meaning mismatch	Grammar featuresa	Lang. & contxtb	Lang. & sem. sig.c	Totald
Charlene	57
(50.9%)	3
(2.7%)	2
(1.8%)	24
(21.4%)	26
(23.2%)	112
Amelia	19
(29.4%)	2
(3.1%)	3
(4.6%)	29
(44.6%)	12
(18.5%)	65
Emily	29
(45.3%)	2
(3.1%)	7
(10.9%)	19
(29.7%)	7
(10.9%)	64
Sarah	19
(34.5%)	8
(14.5%)	5
(9.1%)	20
(36.4%)	3
(5.5%)	55
Aimee	14
(29.2%)	2
(4.2%)	9
(18.8%)	17
(35.4%)	6
(12.5%)	48
Rachelle	18
(45%)	0
(0%)	3
(7.5%)	17
(42.5%)	2
(5%)	40
Boyoung	5
(13.5%)	5
(13.5%)	4
(10.8%)	21
(56.8%)	2
(5.4%)	37
Kenzie	13
(37.2%)	2
(5.7%)	0
(0%)	9
(25.7%)	11
(31.4%)	35
Jeremy	4
(13.8%)	18
(62%)	4
(13.8%)	2
(6.9%)	1
(3.5%)	29
Callie	6
(23%)	2
(7.7%)	1
(3.8%)	7
(27%)	10
(38.5%)	26
Kris	9
(39.1%)	0
(0%)	0
(0%)	10
(43.5%)	4
(17.4%)	23
Donna
(Instr.)	2
(18.2%)	4
(36.4%)	1
(9%)	4
(36.4%)	0
(0%)	11
Total	195
(35.8%)	48
(8.8%)	39
(7.2%)	179
(32.8%)	84
(15.4%)	545
a
Unconventional uses of grammatical features.

b
Juxtaposition of language and contexts.

c
Blend of language and semiotic signifiers.

d
Percentages reflect proportions of each type of pin posted by one pinner.

More than 60% of Jeremy's examples (18 of 29) fell in the meaning mismatch category as he frequently shared his toddler sons' language use. Others in the class had many fewer examples from this category (for a total of 48, 8.8% of the pins). Amelia and Boyoung posted pins focusing on language use in sociopolitical and cultural contexts, each representing 44.6% and 56.8% of their pins respectively. Aimee shared more examples with unconventional uses of grammatical features (18.7% of her pins) than others, representing 9 of the 39 pins that fell within the category. Likewise, Charlene posted more examples of language play (57 of her 112 pins, representing 50.9%) and language with semiotic signifiers (26, or 23.2% of her pins), both of which were well above the class means (35.8% and 15.4% respectively). Furthermore, some students did not collect any example of certain categories. For example, Rachelle never pinned examples of meaning mismatch, Kenzie did not include examples of unconventional grammatical features, and Kris pinned no example of either category. Yet, the shared nature of the Pinterest board meant that even students who posted few or no pins of a particular type were still likely to benefit from encountering examples in those categories. As other classmates shared examples in categories they themselves rarely chose for their own psycholinguistic examples, students like Rachelle, Kris, and Kenzie could extend their understanding for what made for an interesting or unusual use of language. Thus, we conjecture that participating on the Pinterest board extended students' experiences with various kinds of language use as they accessed examples collected by the others.

3.2. The social nature of participation in Pinterest
As the Pinterest board was accessible to the greater Internet public, it served to extend class members' conversations about psycholinguistic concepts that had begun in face-to-face class. Although the instructor did not require the students to comment on each other's posts, it was clear that students interacted with one another on the board in several ways. Students voluntarily provided extended comments to their own pins and responded to each other's, not only with comments but also with embedded response functions such as “Save” and “♥.” Many of the pins received comments from classmates. All of the pins were repinned at least once, demonstrating that the pinners and other visitors interacted with the pins on the board. Furthermore, several pins represented various aspects of course concepts explicitly and implicitly, demonstrating that students continued their reflection on what they were learning through pinning. In approximately 50% of the pins, the students made explicit connections to the ideas addressed in assigned articles and to conversations initiated in face-to-face class sessions.

As students participated in ongoing conversations about psycholinguistic issues and phenomena initiated from class interactions and the assigned readings, their pinning (e.g., images, photos, videos, and writing) and comments functioned as dialogic artifacts to express particular intentions when sharing an example. On SNSs, language is not the only medium of communication but texts are often created with other semiotic modes such as symbols, images, and sounds (Jewitt, 2008, Jewitt and Kress, 2003). As new technologies have affordances for users to (re)organize multimodal resources, the communication practices in online spaces become multi-layered discursive practices in which users interpret, design, produce, and distribute meaning with language, as well as with other modes and media (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2001). Therefore, considering both the images and messages in the pins, we identified four major dialogic functions based on the purposes that we assumed pinners intended or implied with their examples. Additionally, there were five ways that pinners used captions. Table 4 shows the frequency of each subcategory that we discuss in turn in the sections below.


Table 4. Frequencies of Pinners’ intentions and messages.



3.2.1. Pinners' intentions
First, as shown in Table 4, almost half of the pins seemed to reflect a pinner's intention to share humor (n = 263; 48.3%). Many of the examples in the humor category had originally been designed for humor, showing creative and intentional uses of linguistic features (e.g., phonetic characteristics, grammatical features, homonyms, etc.). A few reflected unintentional humorous effects, shared as humorous by the pinners who then emphasized or even exaggerated certain features of the pins (e.g., uses of irony in language, juxtaposition of two opposite words, unconventional grammar use) by adding comments to direct the attention of the audience. In Table 5, pin #241 shows an intentional use of humor whereas pin #29 demonstrates an unintentional use of humor.


Table 5. Types of pinners’ intentions with examples.

The next most frequent category included exploratory pins (n = 138; 25.3%) through which the pinners seemed to intend to explore the meaning of the original picture or words, sharing with their audience how these examples puzzled them or caused questions. Here, pinners simply reported what they had found, seeking help in interpreting the pin from classmates as shown in pins #362 and #413 in Table 5. Instead of offering extensive interpretations of these example, pinners invited the audience to focus on what the pinners found curious about the pins.

Approximately 20% of the pins presented examples that we coded as appreciation of language, as intending to provide inspiration and motivation (see pins #89 and #166 in Table 5). In these pins, the pinners seemed to want to share with classmates examples of language use that they themselves appreciated. These pins were often interestingly related to course concepts in that they sometimes addressed the topics discussed in class such as argument, gender differences in discourse, inner voices, and baby/child language.

Finally, 33 pins (6.1%) represented pinners' elaborated reflections on language in context, often referring explicitly to course topics and concepts introduced in class as a lens, and elaborating on what the images or words (or phrases) had meant to them (see #154 and #240 in Table 5). Although the pins in this category were relatively rare, we found the pinners' intention to share their thought processes regarding course concepts or ideas particularly relevant to the instructional use of this SNS activity. For example, Boyoung, the most frequent poster of reflection pins (21 of the 33 pins in this category), suggested her reasons for posting such pins in the survey: “… as a non-native English speaker, I could not have discretion or intuition to find interesting English expressions. So I often pinned what I think of the issues discussed in psycholinguistic class.” Reflection pins allowed pinners to demonstrate their thinking about particular language use or course concepts.

3.2.2. The role of captions
We also saw that students made interesting use of the comment function of the Pinterest board in adding different types of comments to their pins. These comments augmented our grasp of what pinners intended to communicate with their fellow pinners and of the social nature of participation in this activity. Despite the instructor's guideline asking students to add a date to each pin in the comment section, it is interesting that only 20 (3.7%) of 545 pins had only the date in the comments section. The most frequent subcategories seemed to reflect pinners' intentions to help fellow pinners (and board visitors) understand the function of a particular pin and the pinner's interpretation of the pin as a psycholinguistic example. Students reflected in their end-of-semester surveys that they were using the comments function of the board in these ways: “My examples needed a deeper explanation of the context” (Amelia); “I tried to write something just to guide the other people looking at the posts” (Emily).

Most pins (78.1%) were accompanied by comments that seemed to reflect the pinners' intention to guide the audience. The most frequent category (236; 43.3%) included captions in which the pinners explicitly commented on their pins, providing their own interpretation or evaluation. Some messages in this category raised questions about the pinner's example (e.g., “Is it enough to just express your woes, or does someone else have to be listening?”; “Luxury free? Is that the opposite of luxurious?”), and others made open-ended comments (e.g., “I don't know what it means but it caught my eye”; “Even with shared intentions, we can mess up”). It seemed that these messages were intended to entice the audience to engage with the examples. Additionally, some messages in this category showed the pinners' emotional response, not only with emoticons but also with words (e.g., “Funny”; “Saw this on Facebook and was really disturbed by it”; “;-)”). Although some messages were short, they revealed the pinners' feelings about their examples, seemingly providing a space for the audience to join the pinners in sharing a similar interpretation of the pins.

Two additional subcategories of comments provided information to the audience about the source of the pin (79 captions, 14.5%) or simply gave a title to the pin (166 pins, 30.4%). These messages either gave the context about where the pinner had found the example to help the audience understand the language use better (e.g., “Classroom discussion posters on teachernotebook.com”; “Recital poster in the school of music”), or provided a title to emphasize the foci of the examples without forcing an interpretation or evaluation on the audience (e.g., “Football valentine”; “Scientific inquiry planning”).

A final and interesting use of the comment function of pins was its use to deliver the actual psycholinguistic example (64; 11.9%). These pins revealed students' creative use of the board's functions, in which they shared the actual psycholinguistic example in the form of dialogue excerpts in the message function and added related images in the pinning area, as when a pinner wrote in the comment function what she had heard on NPR and posted it with a photo of her car radio dial.

In sum, the examples in pins, with visuals and comments, revealed pinners' intentions to communicate their interpretations of what constituted psycholinguistic examples, as they highlighted, imitated, contemplated, and acknowledged various types of language use, encouraged by the social nature of this curation activity to collaborate on an important course assignment and deepen their understanding of an important course construct.

4. Discussion
By its nature, the Pinterest board allowed pinners to share images accompanied by short commentaries, thereby making participation in the classroom activity of pinning examples on the Pinterest board a venue to enact literacies in distinctive ways. The nature of the board as a public online space for sharing and communicating facilitated collaborative learning about various course concepts as the students curated, illustrated, and shared real-life examples of language practices and developed an appreciation for the myriad of ways that humans use language. Pinners' use of visuals (images or symbols) worked to enrich the meanings conveyed by the words students shared in the online medium, bringing in through image capturing the real-world context where examples had been encountered. Furthermore, the pinners used comments in the form of writing and emoticons to communicate their ideas and emotions about their examples, to emphasize certain aspects, and to provide explanations for context. Thus, the board acted as a multimodal venue to capture and share students' emerging understanding and appreciation of language in use, the topic of the course.

Whereas previous studies have often investigated students' perspectives to understand the influence of SNSs on students' experiences in class, the findings of our study add to this previous work by providing a close examination of students' multimodal artifacts on a Pinterest board. Our findings demonstrated that participation in the Pinterest activity allowed the students to collaborate in their exploration of course concepts by collecting real life examples of language use in multimodal forms through their pins and by making explicit and implicit connections to the ideas discussed in class. Through this activity, students engaged in authentic communication with the greater Internet public as well as with their classmates as shown in their comments to others' pins as well as through communication buttons (e.g., Save, ♥) (Arnold and Paulus, 2010, Brady et al., 2010, Hung and Yuen, 2010). Thus, this study augmented insights into how students used SNS opportunities as part of a class assignment to expand their understanding of course concepts, how the affordances and constraints of Pinterest facilitated students' collaboration, and how multimodal resources encouraged exploration and sharing of insights about language use.

This study has several contributions to the discussion on learning and teaching in the higher education. First, the class activity on the Pinterest board demonstrated some attributes of a participatory culture as discussed by Jenkins et al. (2009): distributed cognition, collaboration, and informal learning. As these students fulfilled their teacher's intention to have them become more sensitive to the ways that language and communication work, they collectively defined and expanded what constitutes creative language use in their daily lives in light of theories and ideas addressed in class. The student pinners as contributors expressed their interpretive and reflective voices on the uses of language and other modes in various contexts as evident in their choice of examples. Furthermore, these student pinners engaged in on-going connections with the Internet public as well as fellow pinners through images, writing, and emoticons to communicate their ideas. Pins with their accompanying captions became discourse artifacts that provided signs of the students' learning about language use in real life and course concepts. Thus, the class Pinterest board afforded an intersection of informal and formal learning as students interwove examples that were directly based on course concepts with those more loosely tied to general notions of language in use.

Second, we likened this participatory culture created on the Pinterest board to Bakhtin's (1968) notion of carnival in that democratic and diversified ways of expressing ideas were celebrated. First, the board allowed for seemingly disconnected and disorganized pins to exist literally side-by-side, occasioning a deeper appreciation for the many ways that language works and that students responded to the assignment. Because the board simply posted the pins in chronological order as students added them, a deeply touching pin might appear next to a cartoon or a cute child story, encouraging a kind of hypertextual thinking about language and meaning (Reinking, 1997). Furthermore, the pinners curated various types of language use in everyday life. Exaggeration, mockery, and parody of the types of language use took place as the pinners posted such examples to make these aspects visible to fellow pinners. Finally, the interplay between the examples and pinners' messages in some pins also heightened such effects when messages became parodies by borrowing the phrases captured in the examples, and others questioned and exaggerated the meaning and intentions of the examples.

Third, as Bakhtin (1984) suggested that all human communication is dialogic in nature, pinning was similarly a dialogic practice in which the pinners communicated their interpretation of particular types of language use to their fellow pinners and the greater Internet public. Pins and messages served as responses to other discourses in the form of intertextual connections from pins to course concepts, other pins, and other sources. Even as they pinned images as their examples, pinners seemed to anticipate and invite their classmates' responses by their appended commentaries. Additionally, the pins reflected pinners' conceptualization of what made for a psycholinguistic example, and frequently seemed to respond to course constructs, connected to the audience by way of a shared experience of course readings and class discussion.

Finally, the findings of this study further highlight the utility of integrating popular social networking sites (SNSs) as part of classroom assignments to provide a space in which students can actively explore and apply course-related ideas and thus extend their learning. When designed carefully and aligned attentively with course assignments, the integration of SNSs can promote formal/informal learning. The public nature of SNSs may encourage authentic communication as it allows students to shape their messages with a real (though virtual) audience in mind. Furthermore, the multimodal affordances of SNSs expand the possibilities for students to use different modes to make meaning and to navigate different ways of expressing ideas.

Although this study adds to the current research on students' participation in a publicly shared multimodal networking site as an important classroom activity, it also has some limitations. Although our analysis was centrally informed by the student-created artifacts on the Pinterest board, it made minimal use of students' perspectives on their learning and experiences while using the board. Therefore, future research may explore both students' perspectives of their experiences on a class-designated SNS and their discourse artifacts on the SNS to understand how students' views and actual contributions are connected. Additionally, how students' participation in a collaborative project using a SNS influenced their actual learning of course concepts, though not explored directly in the current study, could yield a better and more critical understanding of the pedagogical use of Internet resources and tools for student learning. Such a research agenda could move the field from a rosy view of the promise of the Internet as a boundless resource for student engagement to a more informed perspective on how best to promote student learning.