We demonstrate how motivational and behavioral processes can explain which students may be more likely to select into online (OL) than face-to-face (F2F) courses and also less likely to perform well in OL courses. University students (n = 999) reported their reasons for OL course selection: university constraints, specific need for flexibility, general preference for flexibility, and learning preferences. Compared to F2F students, only OL students with certain self-selection reasons showed differences in motivation, behavior, and performance. Notably, OL students who said they had a specific need for flexibility created by the costs of competing responsibilities spent more time on non-academic activities (e.g., working, commuting), less time on academic activities (e.g., study groups), and ultimately performed worse when compared to F2F peers. These students were especially likely to be women, older, and part-time. We discuss implications for practice and for using demographic characteristics to control for selection effects.


Keywords
Online education
Motivation
Selection effects


1. Introduction
If online (OL) students are performing worse than their face-to-face (F2F) peers, is the difference due to issues with the quality of OL education, or simply because of existing differences in students who select OL courses to begin with? This is a key question amidst growing concern about deficiencies in the quality of OL education (Alpert, Couch, & Harmon, 2016; Bettinger, Fox, Loeb, & Taylor, 2017; Bowen, 2012; Deming, Goldin, Katz, & Yuchtman, 2015), and it is one that may soon become especially relevant at large research universities. At institutions, such as the University of California, which had been prioritizing funding the transformation of F2F courses to fully OL courses before the COVID-19 pandemic demanded it (“ILTI Request for Proposals,” 2017), students who eventually return to living on campus are likely to find that the F2F course offerings will be supplemented by equivalent OL options like never before. But when assessing the quality of OL course offerings, researchers have bemoaned the lack of randomized studies able to address selection effects (Bowen, 2012), given the near impossibility of getting approval to randomly assign students to either OL or F2F modalities. As a result, the majority of researchers in this field must make do with quasi-experimental studies, using statistical techniques to estimate whether differences between OL and F2F course outcomes are caused by the course formats themselves, or are simply due to pre-existing differences in the students who choose OL courses (see Shadish, Cook, & Campbell, 2002).

1.1. Incorporating Eccles and colleagues' expectancy-value theory of motivation
Unfortunately, most research overlooks potentially important psychological differences between students who choose OL and F2F courses. Studies comparing OL and F2F effectiveness rarely control for student differences beyond demographic variables such as age, race, gender, and socioeconomic status (for review, see Lack, 2013; Means, Toyama, Murphy, & Baki, 2013). This may be due to the convenience of collecting demographic variables. However, students' motivation when beginning a course is considered a much more proximal predictor of academic choice than race or gender (Eccles, 1994; Eccles et al., 1983). Yet, motivation has not been accounted for as a pre-existing difference between OL and F2F students by even the most rigorously-controlled quasi-experimental studies (e.g., Xu & Jaggars, 2011). This is especially concerning considering qualitative findings suggesting that students prefer to take more “important” or “interesting” courses face-to-face (Jaggars, 2014). According to Eccles et al.’ (1983) expectancy-value theory of motivation, finding a course important or interesting indicates that the student is more likely to value participating and succeeding in the course. Therefore, if online students are more likely to believe a course is less interesting or important, they would be less likely to experience motivation to succeed.

Eccles et al.’ (1983) expectancy-value theory offers one of the most prominent and nuanced frameworks of motivation available today ((Eccles, 2017)APA, 2017). Building off the simple questions we often ask ourselves, “Can I do it?” and, “Do I want to do it?,” expectancy-value theories of motivation (e.g., Atkinson, 1957) suggest that people will be motivated to engage in a task if they expect they can succeed and if they see value in succeeding. A key contribution of Eccles and colleagues' model is the delineation of different reasons one might assign value to a task: utility, interest, attainment, and cost. Utility value is the usefulness the task holds for helping achieve future goals and interest value is the natural enjoyment one gets out of a task, similar to the idea of intrinsic motivation as defined by Deci and Ryan's self-determination theory (Wigfield & Eccles, 1992). Meanwhile, tasks that are important to maintaining our desired personal identities hold attainment value (Wigfield & Eccles, 1992). Finally, perceiving that there are costs to succeeding in a task detracts from its value (Flake, Barron, Hulleman, McCoach, & Welsh, 2015). Altogether, assessments of students' expectancies of success and various values for school subjects have been used to successfully predict their choices, behavior, and performance (Eccles, 2005). These constructs are applied to the OL learning context in the present study by capturing students' expectancies for success and subjective values of the specific course subjects they are studying.

1.2. Who is more likely to choose online courses and why?
Compounding the lack of work on motivational differences in OL and F2F students, large-scale data sets have yielded limited findings on how selection effects play out in OL and F2F courses, as these data sets are typically armed with little beyond basic demographic information. Women are generally more likely to enroll in online courses than men (Price, 2006). Additionally, online students are more likely to be older (Moore & Kearsley, 2005; Romero & Usart, 2014), employed, and single parents (Escueta, Quan, Nickow, & Oreopoulos, 2017), reflecting the flexibility desired for completing studies alongside employment and family responsibilities (Bailey, Ifenthaler, Gosper, Kretzschmar, & Ware, 2015). These demographic characteristics are therefore seen as important covariates when controlling for bias due to selection effects.

However, demographic differences, such as being women or being older, should not be considered proximal causes for differential performance in school. Rather, any observed associations between demographic characteristics and course performance should be mediated by behavioral or psychological processes consequential for course performance. Therefore, more nuanced information about students who choose OL courses is needed to understand what characteristics could predispose them to perform differently compared to F2F peers. To discover more meaningful differences between OL and F2F enrollees, students' qualitative reasons for selecting into OL courses may offer insight. Understanding the primary reasons that students choose OL courses can lead to a more nuanced understanding of the behavioral and psychological differences between them and their F2F peers.

Only a handful of studies to date have explicitly examined students' reported reasons for choosing between OL and F2F courses. Several have found that students do so for the flexibility OL courses provide (Bailey et al., 2015; Johnson, Stewart, & Bachman, 2015; Vanslambrouck, Zhu, Lombaerts, Philipsen, & Tondeur, 2018). This affordance often outweighs students' suspicion that OL courses will provide an inferior learning experience (Aslanian & Clinefelter, 2013; Jaggars, 2014). On the other hand, students who choose F2F courses seem to do so by prioritizing their learning preferences (Jaggars, 2014). Often, there is a concern that interactions with the instructor would be diminished in an online environment, which is cited as a common reason for choosing F2F courses (Jaggars, 2014; O'Neill & Sai, 2014). Similarly, students who believe online classes diminish interactional quality will often pick F2F courses if they value the social elements of their school experience or believe that interactional quality will help them self-regulate and manage their studies (Hagel & Shaw, 2010). Finally, qualitative work has suggested that, when weighing the flexibility of OL courses against the higher interactivity of F2F courses, students will consider the difficulty of the class (Jaggars, 2014). That is, if students believe the class is “easy,” and presumably, that they won't need to depend upon interactions with the instructor, they may be more willing to take the course online. Overall, the differences between OL and F2F students' reasons for selecting their respective course modalities hints that selection effects may be responsible for disparities in OL and F2F course performance. Yet no studies to date have related students' reasons for taking OL and F2F courses to their motivational, behavioral, and performance outcomes.

1.3. The present study
Given the importance of understanding selection effects when assessing OL course effectiveness, and the lack of research on the role of motivation in course selection, we use Eccles and colleagues' expectancy-value theory of motivation to answer the following research questions:

1.
Are there baseline motivational differences between students who take OL and F2F courses?

2.
What are the reasons that students provide for taking courses OL and F2F at a large research university in the United States?

3.
How are student reasons for choosing OL courses associated with their motivation, behavior, and performance?

4.
Do student reasons for choosing OL courses help explain why there are demographic differences in OL course selection and performance?

The first research question immediately addresses the lack of literature on the possibility that OL students may simply be less motivated for the relevant academic subject than their F2F peers, as suggested by qualitative research (Jaggars, 2014). The second research question then moves to a broader investigation of why students choose an OL or F2F course when both modalities are available. We anticipate that these results will largely reproduce previous findings in the literature. However, reproducing these findings in a large, research-focused, American university would confirm that patterns in students' reasons are consistent with those from community college (Jaggars, 2014), professional development (Vanslambrouck et al., 2018), and international settings (Bailey et al., 2015). The third research question extends this body of literature by connecting students' reasons to their motivational, behavioral, and performance outcomes, providing the most nuanced evidence to date of how selection effects may be impacting comparisons between student performance in OL and F2F courses. The fourth research question attempts to substantiate our earlier claim that demographic characteristics should not be considered proximal causes of differential performance. We evaluate whether there is empirical support suggesting student reasons for selection may be a mediating mechanism between the demographic characteristics and course performance.

2. Methods
2.1. Participants
Participants in this study were students from three courses at a large research university in the southwest United States. Of the 1196 students enrolled in these courses, 999 (83.5%) participated in the study by completing a pre-course survey. These students were 54% men, 45% Asian/Asian-American, 35% Hispanic, 16% White, and 4% African American. In addition, 36% of the sample was from a low-income background, and 52% of students were first-generation college students. Subsets of these students are identified below for analyses in which missing data or exclusion criteria apply.

2.2. Setting
Online courses and the students who take them can vary dramatically from context to context. Therefore, it is important to consider that the present study was done in a large research university where the vast majority of undergraduate students enroll at age 18 immediately after completing high school. The courses under study all had both an OL and F2F version of the same course. The availability of an OL and F2F version of the same course is common at such a large school, where a single course often offers two to five classes (any of which might be OL) to accommodate the hundreds or thousands of students who desire to take the course each term. In order to limit the potential for teacher effects to influence results, only courses with the same instructor teaching both versions of the course were included in the study. Additionally, because students' reasons for choosing between OL and F2F has been shown to change over time (Bailey et al., 2015), we surveyed courses at both introductory and advanced levels (see Table 1). These courses included Engineering, Chemistry, and Human Anatomy.


Table 1. Overview of courses included in study.

Course	Modality	Typical student	Year	Term	Instructor	Total Enrollment
Intro Engineering	F2F	First year	2016	Fall	Dr. Hatha	315
Intro Engineering	OL	First year	2016	Fall	Dr. Hatha	57
Intro Chemistry	F2F	First year	2018	Winter	Dr. Yen	447
Intro Chemistry	OL	First year	2018	Winter	Dr. Yen	210
Adv. Anatomy	F2F	3–4 year	2016	Summer	Dr. Quill	47
Adv. Anatomy	OL	3–4 year	2016	Summer	Dr. Quill	37
Adv. Anatomy	F2F	3–4 year	2017	Summer	Dr. Quill	42
Adv. Anatomy	OL	3–4 year	2017	Summer	Dr. Quill	41
Note. All instructor names are pseudonyms.

Details of the study's setting are also important for critically evaluating a large assumption made by research question three: that differences between OL and F2F students' behavior and performance are due to differences between the students themselves. However, differences in the actual quality of OL and F2F courses would also be a highly plausible explanation for these differences. It is therefore important to note that each of the courses under study were conducted in partnership with teaching faculty well known on campus for the quality of their teaching and their leadership in developing online courses.

2.2.1. Introductory engineering
Leading up to our study, enrollment had been rapidly increasing at the university, making it difficult for administrators to find space for all incoming engineering students. Therefore, a small online section was added to supplement the limited number of spaces available in the traditional face-to-face introductory engineering course.

2.2.2. Introductory chemistry
The Department of Chemistry's online introductory course was developed largely due to grant incentives from the university. Built from an existing F2F course, this class was intended to create access to a high-demand course for students from other universities. Despite this, very few students from other universities were enrolled in this course (< 1%). The online version of the introductory class was not offered alongside equivalent F2F courses during the Fall term, but was offered during Winter term, when off-sequence students who are behind in coursework typically take the course.

2.2.3. Advanced anatomy
A F2F version of Human Anatomy was offered in the summer because the F2F version of Human Anatomy offered during the academic year typically reaches maximum capacity and has a wait list. As many professional health programs require Human Anatomy for enrollment, there was a demand for offering Human Anatomy in the summer. Additionally, professional health programs accept OL versions of Human Anatomy, so an OL version of the course was taught in summer alongside a F2F version to compare the efficacy of each.

2.3. Procedure
In the first week of each course under study, all students in the course were offered the opportunity to participate in a survey study. Students consented to participate after being informed the research team would match data on their grades, course enrollment, and demographic characteristics from the university to their survey data. At the same time, they received an individualized link to a survey through the campus' learning management system, which automatically matched responses with each participants' identifying information from university records. The survey asked about their motivation for the upcoming course, as well as their reasons for choosing either the OL or F2F version of the course. In the final week of each course, students were again surveyed. In the post-survey, students were asked about how much time they spent on different course-related activities and a variety of non-course-related activities. In the engineering and anatomy courses, students were given course credit for completing each survey. In the chemistry course, which was also under study by a separately funded research grant, students were offered a $5 gift card for completing each survey. Each course had slightly different surveys, as these courses were part of a larger study spanning multiple years in which research questions evolved over time. The full list of survey items available in each course is presented in the Appendix as Table 7. Although all students were asked about their reasons for choosing the course and various questions regarding motivation, not all students received the exact same battery of motivation items.

2.4. Measures
2.4.1. Reasons for choosing modality
Students' reasons were assessed by asking the question, “Why did you choose to take this course [online/ face-to-face] as opposed to [online/ face-to-face]?” This was open-ended response question, to which students were expected to give answers of one to two sentences.

2.4.2. Motivation
Motivation was operationalized as students' expectancies of success within the course and the value they attached to the subject of study, consistent with Eccles and colleagues' expectancy-value theory of motivation (Eccles et al., 1983). Specifically, we examined data on students' self-concept of ability, utility value, interest value, attainment value, and cost value for their respective courses. Often, each of the constructs was measured using scales of two to three items. These items were adapted from Gaspard et al. (2015), but response scales were changed from a true/not true scale to item-specific scales (e.g., the item “Math is very important to me personally” with a scale from 1 = not at all true to 7 = very true became “How important is math to you, personally?” with a scale from 1 = not at all important to 7 = very important).

2.4.3. Relative motivation
We also measured students' perceptions of their course's importance and interest relative to the other courses that they were taking that term. We first asked students to list their other courses, then had students rank their unique courses from most important to least important, and then from most interesting to least interesting. The number “1” ranked course represented the “most interesting” or “most important” course, whereas larger numbers represented relatively less interesting or less important courses.

2.4.4. Time spent on academic activities
Students were asked to indicate how many hours per week they had spent on activities such as coursework, meetings with the instructor, and meetings with study groups (Flynn, 2014).

2.4.5. Time spent on non-academic activities
Students were asked to indicate the frequency with which they engaged in activities such as caring for dependents, driving to or from class, and working for pay (Flynn, 2014). The scale for these items was (0) never, (1) once or twice a month, (2) once a month, (3) twice a month, (4) every week, (5) more than once a week.

2.4.6. Demographic variables
A wide array of variables provided by the university's office of institutional records after the course was completed. These variables included students' gender (men, women), age (which we recoded into categories of 18 and over 18 years of age), Ethnicity (White, Latino(a), Asian American, African American, Native American, or Other), first-generation college student status (0 = One or more parents hold a bachelor's degree, 1 = Neither parent holds a bachelor's degree), low-income college student status (0 = Non-low income student, 1 = Student comes from “low-income” households that is eligible for the Pell Grant), and language spoken at home (0 = Both parents speak English, 1 = One parent speaks English, 2 = Neither parent speaks English).

2.4.7. Academic variables
We obtained student's academic information from the institutional records office. This included students' primary major, their college application SAT score, and their high school GPA.

2.4.8. Grades
All graded assignments for the course were provided by the instructor. This included points assigned for participation, homework, labs, projects, and exams.

2.4.9. Goal grades
In each course, we asked students to report the grade that they expected to get. For the Chemistry course, we were also able to ask students what grade they wanted to get, as well as and the worst grade that they would consider acceptable.

2.4.10. Goal grade achievement
This was a measure of students' final course grade relative to the grade they reported they expected to get at the beginning of the course.

2.5. Analysis
To first investigate motivational differences in OL and F2F students (RQ 1), quantitative data of students' self-reported motivation for the course was compared between OL and F2F versions of the same course. These comparisons were conducted upon the subsets of expectancies and task value outlined in sections 1.1 and 2.4, including self-concept of ability, utility value, interest value, attainment value, and cost value. For the introductory Chemistry course, we were also able to test for differences on measures of relative motivation and target grades. Although t-tests are typically conducted to compare two groups on normally distributed quantitative scales, distributions of students' value for their respective course subjects were skewed towards the higher end of the value scales. This is unsurprising, because students in these courses are often majoring in the discipline and are therefore likely to see immense value in the course. The non-normality of these data required that an equality of medians tests be used to assess between-group differences. This test is appropriate when the compared distributions are skewed, but of the same shape, and is much more robust to outliers than those comparing means. This tests the null hypotheses that both groups come from the same distribution, counting the number of cases from each group that fall above and below the median of the combined distribution. When cases from one group fall disproportionately above the median of the combined distribution, a statistically significant X2 value indicates that the two groups are detectably different from each other on the given measure (Corder & Foreman, 2014). All quantitative analyses were conducted in STATA 15 (StataCorp, 2017).

Second (RQ 2), students' qualitative reasons for choosing the OL or F2F modality were analyzed. Importantly, students were also asked if they were aware that the course had been offered both OL and F2F, and the responses of those who reported they were not aware of this choice were considered invalid and excluded (n = 214, 21.4%). The two lead authors first agreed upon a coding scheme after reviewing a subset of responses of both OL and F2F students. This was done through initial coding (Saldaña, 2014), and was informed by a combination of previous findings and considerations relating to expectancy-value theory (Vanslambrouck et al., 2018). We did not use a priori codes or prior literature to guide these themes. This was to account for the potential that a large university context might produce distinct themes compared to those of community college, professional development, and international contexts on which the literature is based. The coding scheme consisted of general themes and subcategories for each of those themes. Responses were coded for whether they fell under any general themes, then given an additional code if they fit a specific subcategory of that theme. Some responses were given multiple codes, as they implied multiple reasons for making the choice. The coding scheme was then used by two researchers to code the entirety of the data. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen's kappa. Results were then examined for differences between course modality (OL and F2F), course subject (Engineering, Chemistry, Human Anatomy), course level (introductory and advanced), and term (regular academic year and summer terms).

Third (RQ 3), OL students' reasons for selecting the OL version of the course were associated with their academic outcomes, time on academic activities, time on non-academic activities, and motivational measures. OL students were separated by theme, and each group was compared to all F2F students in order to explore whether distinctions in students' reasons for choosing an OL course were associated with motivation, behavior, and performance. These variables (e.g., utility value, cost, time spent in study groups, time spent working for pay) were standardized within each course (combining OL and F2F distributions for each course, respectively). This eliminated variance due to course topic and instructor while retaining variance associated with course modality. This was done to reflect the practical question of whether there were detectable differences between OL students and their F2F peers. We conducted equality of medians tests on the course experience variables described in section 2.4, comparing F2F students with OL students from each of the major themes for choosing the OL course.

Finally (RQ 4), the four categories of reasons for choosing OL courses were associated with students' demographic characteristics. Because each reason for selecting either OL or F2F courses is coded as either a 0 or 1, we used Chi-square tests to determine their associations with gender, race/ethnicity, low-income status, and first-generation status, whereas we used t-tests to determine their association with the normally distributed variables of age, SAT scores, high-school GPA, prior college GPA, academic year in school, and units attempted during the same term.

2.5.1. Missingness
Of the 721 students of students who completed the pre-survey measures and explained why they selected into their course, 31% did not complete the post-survey and 6.5% of dropped out of the course. OL students were more likely to be missing post-survey data (p < .001) or have dropped out of the course (p = .008). Because our study focused mainly on understanding how student's outcomes were associated with their reasons for selecting the course, we analyzed whether missingness was associated with these reasons. Students who said they took the OL course due to a general desire for flexibility (see 3.2) were overrepresented among those missing post-survey data and among those who dropped out of the course. We return to the implications of this in the discussion.

3. Results
3.1. Are there baseline motivational differences in students who take courses online?
Quantitative comparisons of motivational differences presented in Table 2 showed there were no consistent significant differences between OL and F2F students in their expectancies or values for their courses. Only in introductory Chemistry was the subject-matter interest of OL students less than that of F2F students. Chemistry students also had lower relative interest than that of F2F students (Table 3). That is, when Chemistry students were asked to rank their current courses from most interesting to less interesting, OL students reported having a greater number of other courses they found more interesting than Chemistry.


Table 2. Comparison of motivation variables by course modality (Equality of Medians Test).

Intro Engineering	Adv. Anatomy	Intro Chemistry
F2F	OL	p-value	F2F	OL	p-value	F2F	OL	p-value
Expected course grade	Mean	11.40	11.20		11.40	10.90		10.40	10.20	
Median	12.00	12.00	0.99	12.00	12.00	0.25	11.00	10.00	0.63
Self-concept of ability	Mean	4.00	3.98		4.93	4.82		5.17	5.08	
Median	4.00	4.00	0.76	5.00	5.00	0.99	5.25	5.00	0.24
Utility value	Mean	6.67	6.78		6.25	5.93		5.00	4.78	
Median	7.00	7.00	0.73	6.50	6.25	0.06	5.00	5.00	0.72
Interest value	Mean	8.96	8.70		5.15	5.36		4.41	3.92	
Median	10.00	10.00	0.15	5.50	5.50	0.31	4.40	4.00	0.003**
Attainment value	Mean	6.55	6.47		6.16	6.05		4.30	4.12	
Median	7.00	7.00	0.42	6.50	6.50	0.91	4.25	4.13	0.53
Opportunity cost	Mean				5.64	5.08		4.63	4.65	
Median				6.00	5.00	0.07	5.00	5.00	0.93
N		312	57		88	77		324	139	
Note. All p-values are for equality of medians tests. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001. Expected course grade was letter grade recoded numerically, from A+ (13), A (12), A- (11), B+ (10), B (10), through D- (2), and F (1).


Table 3. Comparison of relative importance and target grades by course modality.

Intro Chemistry
F2F	OL	p-value
Relative importance	Mean	1.82	1.70	
Median	2.00	1.00	0.081
Relative interest	Mean	2.12	2.58	
Median	2.00	2.00	0.004**
Desired grade	Mean	11.49	11.48	
Median	12.00	12.00	0.552
Expected grade	Mean	9.46	9.26	
Median	9.00	9.00	0.454
Worst acceptable grade	Mean	7.88	7.40	
Median	8.00	7.00	0.011*
N		318	146	
Note. All p-values are for equality of medians tests. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001. For relative importance and relative interest, “1” represents the “most important” or “most interesting” course, respectively. Larger numbers represent less relative motivation (e.g., “2” represents the “second most important course). Expected course grade was letter grade recoded numerically, from A+ (13), A (12), A- (11), B+ (10), B (10), through D- (2), and F (1).

Importantly, results did not show that OL students desired or expected lower grades than their F2F peers. Table 3 displays these additional analyses, which were conducted on variables that were only in the introductory Chemistry course. Much like the literature on performance in MOOCs, it is important to consider whether students' differences in overall performance may stem from differences in desired and expected performance at the beginning of the course (Kizilcec & Schneider, 2015; Li & Baker, 2018). But we do not see evidence that OL students had less lofty performance goals than their F2F peers. Separate from desired and expected grades, however, OL students typically reported the lowest grade they would be satisfied with receiving was lower than that of F2F students. This was a “C-” for the OL course, which was statistically significantly lower than the “C” grade students in the F2F course reported (p < .011). Notably, C- is the minimum grade required to satisfy major requirements and move on in the major.

3.2. What are the reasons that students take courses online and face-to-face at a large research University in the United States?
After initial coding, four overarching themes emerged for why students chose online courses, including general preference for flexibility, specific need for flexibility, university constraints, and learning preferences. Cohen's kappa indicated strong agreement between the two raters (k = 0.85) (Hallgren, 2012). As we detail the results, we note that the final coding scheme, including sample quotes, are available in the Appendix. A visualization of the results can be seen in Fig. 1. Of the 219 OL students who offered reasons for their choice, the most common overarching reason was a general preference for flexibility (n = 71, 32%). These students often mentioned their preference for flexibility and convenience. The second most common theme was specific needs for flexibility (n = 68, 31%). These students suggested that other specific activities raised the cost of attending the F2F course so much that the OL course became the best option. Half of the students in this category mentioned costly commutes, whereas a third mentioned course conflicts. Fewer students mentioned conflicting obligations regarding employment and family. The third most common theme was university constraints (n = 51, 23%), namely that the F2F course was full when the student enrolled, so the OL option was the only one that remained. The final, least cited theme was learning preferences (n = 43, 20%). These students said that they generally liked the format of OL classes better than that of F2F classes, that they liked the freedom to control the pace of the course material, that they felt OL course environments improved their ability to self-regulate, and that they preferred online peer interactions.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Student reasons for choosing online or face-to-face courses. Students could be coded into multiple categories, resulting in sums that exceed 100%. Sp. flex = Specific need for flexibility. LP = learning preference. UC = University constraints. For a full explanation of the coding scheme, see Table 8 in the Appendix.

Only two of these overarching themes were relevant for the 500 students who offered reasons why they chose F2F courses: learning preferences and university constraints. By far, the most prominent of these was learning preferences (n = 470, 94%). Although many of these students briefly cited a general belief that the F2F modality was better for their learning, many of these students mentioned distinct reasons they believed the F2F modality was better. Students commonly said that they were concerned about their self-regulation, referring to distractions in OL courses or feeling more engaged in F2F courses. Students also said they desired peer interaction, professor interaction, and noted the belief that they learn better when they can see/hear the professor giving a lecture from the same room. Some students said that they had previous experiences with online courses and simply disliked them. Finally, students also cited the theme of university constraints (n = 23, 5%), saying they believed the OL version of required courses would not be accepted when applying to post-graduate programs.

Comparing across OL courses, there was a considerable amount of between-course heterogeneity in reasons provided (see Table 9, Table 10, Table 11, Table 12 in Appendix for full breakdown). In the introductory courses, Engineering and Chemistry, only 23% and 17% of the students, respectively, chose the online courses due to specific needs for flexibility. Meanwhile, specific needs for flexibility was a reason given by 62% of the summer Advanced Anatomy students, suggesting that either summer courses or courses with more senior students may be associated with more specific needs for flexibility. Introductory students were much more likely to cite university constraints than advanced summer students. Fifty-four percent and 21% of introductory Engineering and Chemistry students, respectively, said that they chose the OL course simply because the F2F version of the course was full. No students in the advanced summer course mentioned the impact of university constraints. The OL and F2F versions of the advanced summer anatomy course were evenly enrolled, and the F2F course did not reach its enrollment capacity.

Among F2F students, learning preferences of Engineering students were slightly different than those of students in the other courses. Whereas Chemistry and Anatomy students most frequently cited self-regulation concerns (29% and 35%, respectively) and a desire for professor interaction (29% and 9%, respectively), Engineering students cited peer interactions as the factor most commonly driving their decision (20%). Detailed responses revealed that many wanted this peer interaction because the course involved group-work assignments for building vehicles. Additionally, the advanced Anatomy students were far more likely to say they avoided the OL course because it would not count for graduate school requirements (15%) compared to introductory Chemistry (1%) and Engineering (3%) students. These answers provided insight into why students' preferences for OL or F2F courses might vary by discipline or course level.

3.3. How are student reasons for choosing OL courses associated with their motivation, behavior, and performance?
To begin assessing this question, we conducted separate comparisons of F2F students to OL students from each of the four different reasons for selecting their OL course: university constraints, general preference for flexibility, specific needs for flexibility, and learning preferences. Table 4 shows that compared to F2F students, OL students who reported they were in OL courses simply because the F2F course was full showed no differences in motivation, did not exhibit any behavioral differences, and did not differ in their performance when compared to F2F students.


Table 4. Medians for course outcomes by course modality and reasons for selecting OL course.

F2F	OL
F2F full	General flexibility	Specific flexibility	Learning preferences
Academic outcomes
Final grade	0.22	−0.06	0.08	−0.16**	−0.05*
Goal grade achievement	0.14	0.07	−0.11	−0.15	−0.43
Desired grade	0.37	0.37	0.37	0.37	0.37
Expected grade	0.40	−0.17	0.53	0.47	0.40
Worst acceptable grade	0.15	−0.36	−0.39	0.15	−0.39

Academic behaviors
Time on course	−0.23	−0.48	−0.55	−0.20	−0.48
Speaking with faculty	−0.05	−0.05	−0.17	−0.17	−0.17
Study groups	−0.12	0.32	−0.68	−0.72**	−0.72**

Non-academic behaviors
Working for pay	−0.40	−0.40	−0.58	0.40*	−0.40
Caring for dependents	−0.41	−0.41	−0.41	−0.01**	−0.51
Socializing	−0.23	−0.23	−0.23	−0.04	−0.23
Commuting	−0.11	−0.11	−0.20	−0.20	−0.20

Expectancies and values (presurvey)
Expectancies	0.00	0.00	0.11	−0.02	0.22*
Utility	0.49	0.49	0.17*	0.44	−0.03**
Interest	0.10	0.02	0.05	−0.27*	−0.26*
Attainment	0.62	0.26	−0.16*	0.38	0.36*
Cost	0.25	0.25	−0.28*	−0.28	0.25
Note. Bolded cells represent statistically different distributions from those of the F2F course, as concluded from equality of medians tests. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001. Of academic outcomes, final grade is reported from gradebook, whereas others are taken from survey measures. All variables were first standardized within course to remove between-course variation and create a standard scale so that all courses could be analyzed together. Medians presented above are of standardized distributions.

In contrast, OL students who reported picking the course out of a general desire for flexibility did report lower motivation than their F2F peers. However, these OL students did not show different engagement in academic or nonacademic activity and did not perform worse than their F2F peers.

OL students who cited specific needs for flexibility (e.g., commuting, employment) performed worse than their F2F peers. These students also reported more time on nonacademic behaviors than their F2F peers, like working for pay and caring for dependents. Additionally, they reported less time on academic behaviors, like time spent in study groups. Interestingly, although they reported both less time on academic activities and more time on nonacademic activities, these students did not report lower cost at the beginning of the course than did F2F students.

Finally, students who cited learning preferences as their reason for choosing an OL course had higher expectancies for success than did their F2F peers. However, these students also reported lower utility, interest, and attainment value for the course, less time spent in study groups, and had lower course performance.

3.4. Do student reasons for choosing OL courses help explain why there are demographic differences in OL course selection and performance?
Demographic characteristics were indeed associated with selection into the OL courses in our sample. Women, older students, and part-time students were more likely to enroll in online courses (see Table 5). Associations between these demographic variables and reasons for selecting OL courses showed that women in OL courses were more likely than men to make that selection due to employment conflicts. Men in OL courses, conversely, were more likely than women to cite that the F2F course was full, or that they had course conflicts. Part-time students in OL courses were more likely to cite long commutes as the reason for their choice relative to full-time students, who were more likely to cite that the F2F course was full. Finally, older students exhibited a similar trend to part-time students, citing long commutes as the reason for their choice relative to younger students, who were more likely to cite that the F2F course was full. Overall, these results suggest that certain demographics, such as gender, age, and part-time enrollment status, are associated with the decision to take the course online. Reasons for selecting OL courses were not associated with ethnicity, low-income status, first-generation status, home language, transfer student status, SAT score, or high school GPA in our sample.


Table 5. Association of demographic variables with course modality choice and reasons for choosing OL courses.

Demographic variable	Subgroup more likely to select OL modality	ubgroup associated with reasons for selection
Gender	Women	Women more likely to cite employment for choosing OL course
Men more likely to cite course conflict & F2F full for choosing OL course
Ethnicity	none	none
Low income	none	none
Part time status	Part-time students	Part time students more likely to cite long commute for choosing OL course
Full time students more likely to cite F2F full for choosing OL course
First generation	none	none
Home language	none	none
Transfer student	none	none
Age	Older students	Older students more likely to cite long commute for choosing OL course
Younger students more likely to cite F2F full for choosing OL course
SAT score	none	none
High school GPA	none	none
Note. “Subgroup more likely to select OL modality” uses either a X2 test (categorical demographic variable) or a t-test (continuous demographic variable) to test for an association between that demographic variable and likelihood of choosing an OL course (n > 800 for all tests). When p < .05, the subgroup of the demographic more likely to select an OL course is listed, and “none” is listed when the test was insignificant. “Subgroup associated with reasons for selection” uses the same analyses to test for an association between that demographic variable and different reasons for choosing OL courses, limiting the sample to OL students (n > 167 for all tests). When p < .05, the significant association is listed, and “none” is listed when the test was insignificant.

3.5. Post-hoc hypothesis testing: Are women, part-time students, and older students doing worse in OL courses?
Our results show that students who choose OL courses citing specific needs for flexibility (e.g., employment, commuting) perform worse than F2F students, and that choosing an OL course for these specific needs is especially likely to occur among women, part-time students, and older students. Therefore, we may expect that women, part-time students, and older students in OL courses are performing worse than their counterparts in F2F courses. We compared OL and F2F students' final grades and goal grade achievement after breaking down the sample by gender, part-time status, and age. Because of our sample's large number of students in introductory courses, 71% of our students were 18 years old. Therefore, the 29% of students older than age 18 were considered “older students.” Older students' ages ranged from 19 to 29 (M = 20.53, SD = 1.88) with a median of 20.

Table 6 reflects the accuracy of these hypotheses. Although women did worse in OL courses than F2F courses, men did not. Although part-time students did worse in OL courses than F2F courses, full-time students did not. Although older students (over age 18) did worse in OL courses than F2F courses, younger students did not. Part-time and older students also had lower grade goal achievement than did F2F students, meaning that they had lower grades relative to the grades that they reported expecting to get at the beginning of the course.


Table 6. Associations of demographic variables and course performance by course modality.

Final grade	Goal grade achievement
F2F	OL	p-value	F2F	OL	p-value
Women	Mean	0.19	−0.12		0.32	0.01	
Median	0.27	−0.09	0.009**	0.37	0.05	0.084
Men	Mean	0.09	−0.09		0.07	−0.13	
Median	0.16	0.07	0.552	0.02	−0.03	0.745
Part-time	Mean	0.49	−0.51		0.94	−0.29	
Median	0.68	−0.31	0.022*	0.99	−0.53	0.003**
Full-time	Mean	0.11	−0.06		0.14	−0.03	
Median	0.17	0.04	0.085	0.07	0.05	0.710
Age > 18	Mean	0.31	−0.26		0.31	0.11	
Median	0.44	−0.04	0.004**	0.36	0.02	0.009**
Age = 18	Mean	0.08	−0.02		−0.20	0.02	
Median	0.15	0.03	0.123	−0.16	0.07	0.580
Note. All p-values are for equality of medians tests. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001. Final grade was provided from the instructor gradebook. Goal grade achievement was the student's final grade subtracted from their expected grade. Both outcome variables were standardized within each course (combining OL and F2F distributions for each course, respectively). This eliminated variance due to course topic and instructor while retaining variance associated with course modality.

4. Discussion
Past research has suggested that students in OL courses have lower performance than those in F2F course formats (Bettinger et al., 2017). With the exception of a small number of randomized control trials (e.g., Alpert et al., 2016; Bowen, Chingos, Lack, & Nygren, 2012), these conclusions have relied heavily on the presumption that variance due to selection effects is being removed by controlling for demographic variables (e.g., Xu & Jaggars, 2011). In this study, we find evidence that specific demographic variables (i.e., gender, age, part-time status) are indeed associated with selection processes and differential performance outcomes in online courses. More importantly, we depict the nuance of how these selection effects may be influencing students' results by incorporating their qualitative reasons for course format selection and their motivational beliefs. Specifically, we find that groups who choose OL courses due to competing responsibilities (i.e., other courses, employment, long commutes) are likely to report engaging less in academic activities (e.g., study groups), report engaging more in non-academic activities (e.g., commuting, caring for dependents), and ultimately perform worse than their F2F peers. This suggests the critical role that opportunity cost plays in leading students both to select into OL courses and to underperform. Below, we further discuss how disaggregating students by selection reasons can illuminate the different challenges that may be leading to lower achievement among OL students.

In our aggregated analyses, our results showed that OL and F2F students had similar levels of course motivation, contrary to recent qualitative findings (Jaggars, 2014). However, breaking down the students by their selection reasons told a different story. One of our most important realizations was that many OL students in our sample did not willingly select into the OL version of the course—they were forced into it because the F2F version was full. These students serve as a representation of the growing necessity of OL courses as a cost-effective means of accommodating larger numbers of students in higher education (Bowen, 2012). They ended up in OL courses because university constraints left them without the option to select between OL and F2F courses. Appropriately, they exhibited no differences from their F2F peers related to motivational, behavioral, or performance differences. This suggests selection effects are less likely to play a role in evaluations of OL courses that are mainly offered to increase access for students who would otherwise have taken the course F2F.

In contrast, statistically significant differences between OL and F2F students did appear when examining students who cited competing responsibilities as specific reasons they needed the flexibility of an OL course. These students indicated that even if they had preferred the F2F course, competing responsibilities made it too costly to select the F2F modality. The behavioral and performance patterns that subsequently appeared for these students supported the idea that their course performance may have suffered because greater engagement in nonacademic activities came at the expense of lower engagement in academic activities. This is a functional representation of “cost” in motivational literature (outside effort cost, Flake et al., 2015; opportunity cost, Perez, Cromley, & Kaplan, 2014). Attempting to formally capture this motivational mechanism of cost, we asked students to report their anticipated opportunity cost for their respective courses. However, because OL and F2F students were reporting their cost already knowing which course modality they had selected, inherent differences between these modalities might confound any comparisons between them. Having chosen the OL version of the course may have implied less commuting and more flexibility to plan coursework around other valued activities. This may be a reason that we found no significant differences in OL and F2F students' cost, despite the evidence suggesting OL students with competing responsibilities should perceive more cost. This is in line with the work by Vanslambrouck et al. (2018), who also used an expectancy-value approach to understand OL selection patterns, concluding that students engage in a weighing of positive and negative (i.e., cost) value when considering whether to take a course online. Our evidence reinforces this, but additionally sheds light on the mechanisms by which this choice may be impacting students' performance.

On the other hand, even the students who chose OL courses due to the belief that they would provide a superior learning experience ended up performing worse than their F2F peers, contrary to our hypothesis. We believed they would perform just as well as F2F students because an overwhelming 94% of students who selected the F2F modality used the same reasoning: the learning experience of their selected course format would be superior for them. However, students' preference for their learning environment is not necessarily causally related to their performance in a course (Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, & Bjork, 2008). The lower amount of time these students spent in study groups leads us to wonder whether what these students may actually be signaling, then, is a preference for not interacting with their classmates as much. Therefore, even when dealing with students who do not feel pressured into selecting OL courses due to competing responsibilities, it is important to consider that students may not know which modality is best suited for their own achievement.

Overall, our findings highlight different mechanisms to consider when attempting to control for selection effects in OL and F2F courses. To date, researchers controlling for selection effects have largely assumed that demographic characteristics are sufficient proxies for the mechanisms that might lead an OL student to perform differently than a F2F student. However, the practical reasons researchers control for these demographic differences have remained unclear. There are conflicting findings regarding the associations between success in online courses and demographic variables such as age, gender, and ethnicity (see Wladis, Conway, & Hachey, 2015, for review), which reinforces the notion that demographic variables certainly should not be considered inherent causes of success in online courses. Rather, demographic variables such as age, gender, and ethnicity may be associated with student outcomes if they also happen to be associated with motivational processes that can directly influence student outcomes. Our final analysis (Table 6) supports this, showing that demographic groups describing the cost created by competing responsibilities (i.e., women, older, part-time students) performed worse in OL than F2F courses, whereas demographic groups that didn't select OL courses for these reasons (i.e., men, younger, full-time students) performed just as well as their F2F peers.

Beyond these implications for research, understanding the motivational processes underlying OL course selection may be especially helpful for instructors and administrators who want to increase their responsiveness to the unique needs of different types of OL learners. Our findings demonstrate how students' reasons for selecting an OL course may signal the need for specific types of support. In our sample, for instance, students who needed the most academic support were those who selected into online courses because of competing responsibilities. To complement this, we also showed that these students may uniquely benefit from self-regulation and help-seeking support that will increase the frequency of key academic behaviors, such as behavioral nudges that connect them to peer study groups or remind them to schedule study time (Baker, Evans, Li, & Cung, 2018). Educational stakeholders may benefit from taking a similar approach at their own institutions; investigating the motivational processes underlying OL course selection both to identify which OL students need support and also to discern what kinds of support may be most helpful.

4.1. Limitations
One important assumption underlying many of our comparisons between OL and F2F students was that the OL course format was of equal overall quality compared to that of its F2F counterpart. This is an assumption that may be unfounded in many contexts (e.g., Bettinger et al., 2017). As we noted, we attempt to avoid this issue by working specifically with teaching faculty well known on campus for the quality of their teaching. Yet, because online courses offer fewer opportunities to convey one's personality (Moore & Kearsley, 2011), transitioning one's F2F course to an OL course may actually be even more consequential for charismatic instructors who benefit from the opportunities to engage students in-person.

Additionally, it is important to recognize that the number of hypothesis tests we conducted raises the likelihood that statistically significant findings occurred simply due to chance. We did not alter our threshold for statistical significance (e.g., Bonferroni correction), knowing that such a large adjustment would likely have suggested no statistically significant associations among any of our variables. Instead, we consider the generalizability of our findings in light of their consistency with those of related studies in this body of literature.

We were able to replicate the finding that student selection into OL courses is linked with a desire or need for flexibility, which has also been found in community college (Jaggars, 2014), professional development (Vanslambrouck et al., 2018), and international settings (Bailey et al., 2015). Our finding that students with competing responsibilities were less likely to engage in academic activities and perform well is consistent with research on adult distance learners showing that “physical constraints” (i.e., work, family, health) are associated with decisions to drop out (Choi & Park, 2018; Rovai, 2003). We further replicated that women and older students were more likely to select into online courses (Moore & Kearsley, 2005; Price, 2006; Romero & Usart, 2014). Of course, it is important to note that “older students” is a relative label, which in our study represented those from ages 19–29. This likely does not represent those considered “older students” in contexts outside of four-year research universities that have larger age ranges, such as community colleges or professional development programs. Still, the very high proportion of students age 18 in our sample (71%) made it evident that in our setting specifically, being even one or two years over the age of 18 may represent a practically significant difference between students and was the most appropriate way to understand the role of age in the current study.

Knowing that similar trends have been found before in quite different populations of online learners strengthens our confidence in our conclusions. Still, the associations of these selection reasons with motivation, behavior, and performance must be tested and replicated beyond the three courses we examined. The heterogeneity observed even among the few courses in this study exemplifies the importance of considering the context of online courses when understanding reasons for selection and subsequent experiences. Of the reasons for selection observed here, we imagine students selecting OL courses due to competing responsibilities would be just as prevalent in non-STEM courses. But if students perceive non-STEM courses as easier than STEM, they may be more willing to self-select into OL versions and forego the benefits of interactions F2F versions afford. Additionally, future studies that use click-data may capitalize on measurement of students' behavior and motivation that is less prone to biases associated with self-report data. Students may have overestimated some behavioral activities such as time on course either because they wanted to appear to have spent more time on the course (good subject bias) or because they completed surveys at a time when they were studying especially hard to prepare for finals (recency bias).

Finally, we must return to the fact that students who said they took the OL course due to a general desire for flexibility were overrepresented among those missing post-survey data and among those who dropped out of the course. Because these students showed less motivation during the pre-survey compared to their F2F peers, we may be underestimating the behavioral and performance differences between students who select into OL courses due to general flexibility and their F2F peers.

4.2. Future directions
Overall, our results support the formation of a conceptual model by which demographic characteristics are associated with competing responsibilities, motivation, and one's reason for selecting between an OL and F2F course. This, in turn, may be hypothesized to lead to differences in behavior and changes in motivation throughout the course, ultimately impacting students' performance. We offer this outline both to organize our findings theoretically as well as suggest avenues for future empirical work. When selecting an appropriate venue for further comparisons of OL and F2F courses, it is important to select the appropriate context, and we discovered that students who do not willingly select into OL courses (i.e., “F2F full”) may be more likely to be found in introductory OL courses developed as an accommodation for student overflow. In these situations, performance differences between OL and F2F courses were very slight. Conversely, in advanced summer courses where OL course selection was more willfully enacted, motivation, behavior, and performance differences were readily apparent. Therefore, we advise researchers who are attempting to limit the impact of selection effects when comparing OL and F2F courses to choose impacted introductory courses for the most similar sample.

5. Conclusion
Improving the quality of online courses should be an increasingly important priority among higher education stakeholders. In assessing the extent to which we are succeeding in doing so, however, we must account for the differences of those who choose to take our online courses. Although accounting for demographic variables has been instrumental in attempts to account for selection effects, online education stands to benefit greatly from understanding the processes by which people from different backgrounds select into and approach online courses. In the present study, we describe a variety of ways in which OL course selection occurs, and also identify the processes by which that selection may end up leading to poorer course performance. In doing so, we uncover key assumptions about how including demographic characteristics in statistical models may help researchers control for selection effects and implore educational stakeholders to consider the challenges different OL students face to generate targeted supports for them.
