This study examined how alumni perceived their ePortfolio they created during their time as school counseling graduate students and whether they still use either in their work as school counseling professionals. The findings support previous research on school counseling students' utilization of ePortfolios in their graduate program. However, the findings also show a decrease in valuation of ePortfolios by school counseling professionals post-graduation. Lack of time and lack of perceived value by school administrators were the most cited reasons for not continuing to use ePortfolios as professionals or integrating ePortfolios as a tool in comprehensive school counseling programs. Suggestions for increasing the use and valuation of ePortfolios by school counselors are discussed.


Keywords
ePortfolios
School counselors
Counselor education
Professional development
Early career

1. Introduction
Portfolios have long been used in education as a way for students to collect, reflect, and assess their academic, social, and career development (Boes, VanZile-Tamsen, & Jackson, 2001; Cheng & Chau, 2013; Lyons, 1999; Rhyne-Winkler & Wooten, 1996). With the ubiquity of online connections and the need for graduates to be savvy users of online technology portfolios have moved online and are termed, most often, ePortfolios.

ePortfolios offer advantages over portfolios, especially given that many fields expect entering professionals to be savvy users of digital, online technologies for communication. Alumni surveyed by Hastings, Acosta, and Wiemann (2015) specifically reported that creating portfolios in an electronic format would improve the value of the portfolio. ePortfolios are adaptable as their digital format allows for easier editing and rearrangement than paper-based portfolios (Carlson & Yohon, 2008). Furthermore, there is the ability to link to external documents and connect different parts of an ePortfolio via hyperlinks allowing for enhanced navigation (Roberts, Maor, & Herrington, 2016). ePortfolios are also portable, especially if created on free, open-source platforms (Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014) and graduates have reported having success in using their ePortfolios when interviewing for jobs (Carlson & Yohon, 2008). These advantages, along with the increasing integration of digital technologies in educational settings, have led to professions such as teaching, to integrate ePortfolios in pre-service and professional contexts (Panos, 2015; Roberts et al., 2016).

While there is research showing the benefits of ePortfolios—and the portfolio process more generally—for allied professions such as teaching (Panos, 2015; Rhyne-Winkler & Wooten, 1996), there is only nascent research on ePortfolios in the school counseling field. The research on ePortfolios in the school counseling field, as in other professional fields, is mainly limited to studying how graduate students in the professional programs value and use ePortfolios (Boes, VanZile-Tamsen, and Jackson, 2001; Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014). These studies demonstrate that the majority of graduate students found creating their ePortfolios a beneficial process for self-reflection, increased self-efficacy, and preparation for job interviews (Kryder, 2011; Thornton, Ferris, Johnson, Kidwai, & Ching, 2011; Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014). However, few studies explore how graduates and early career professionals continue to use, or not use, the ePortfolios they created as graduate students as they navigate the challenges in the professional working world and their continued professional development.

The studies that do explore the early career uses of portfolios and ePortfolios by alumni are often focused on school teachers, as many of the portfolio studies are in the teacher education field. As Panos (2015) noted, ePortfolios are becoming a ubiquitous part of teacher education and can help early career teachers reflect and improve their pedagogy and practice. However, the motivation to continue developing the ePortfolio can lag if there is not a clear purpose defined by the early career professionals as found by Boulton (2014), especially if the ePortfolios are not embedded as part of the teachers' professional development and assessment. A focus on ownership of the ePortfolio also was found to be very important to continued use of the ePortfolios (Boulton, 2014). Thornton et al. (2011) found that music educators did not use their ePortfolios heavily after graduation, although some encouraged their students to create portfolios. From the literature, it is clear there is some disconnect between the use of ePortfolios for graduate students versus as a tool for continued professional development once in the field. Some research has shown that external motivating factors may account for the use or non-use of ePortfolios by professionals.

Valuation of portfolios in general by administration has a significant impact on the continued use of portfolios by teachers (Van Wagenen & Hibbard, 1998). This makes sense given the time-consuming nature of creating, reflecting on, and sustaining documentation of practice in addition to the daily work of teaching. One of the few studies that looked at post-graduation use of portfolios by non-educators found that respondents used their portfolios instrumentally mainly for professional development in regards to interviewing and referencing previous work for current projects (Hastings, Chacko, Acosta, Hergenroeder, & Wiemann, 2015); however, this study focused on suggestions for improving the portfolio process within the graduate program and had not yet converted their portfolios projects from in-print to online.

Although the valuation of ePortfolios by individuals at different phases of career and professional development is still not fully understood, ePortfolios are often positioned as a useful tool for reflection, assessment, and guiding professional development. Roberts et al. (2016) showed that with scaffolded assignments, ePortfolios could be successful in introducing reflective activities into student learning during a pre-service teaching program. Likewise, having faculty be explicit in their discussion of assignments related to the ePortfolio allows students to understand the value ePortfolios bring to their own reflection and assessment of growth (Harring & Luo, 2016). The use of ePortfolios for assessment and accreditation at the programmatic level is also seen as having great value while students are at the university (Kahn, 2014) and ePortfolios could also be used for assessment when they transition to practicing professionals.

The ePortfolio literature, and portfolio literature in general, with regards to school counseling education and school counselors focuses on two areas: calls for implementing portfolios (Boes, VanZile-Tamsen, and Jackson, 2001; James & Greenwalt, 2001) and studies of school counseling graduate students (Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014). There remains a lack of studies on early career school counselors' uses and views on ePortfolios, even as allied professions move toward integrating portfolios more intentionally and with greater emphasis in their professional development work.

1.1. Purpose
While ePortfolios are gaining traction in many professional disciplines (Panos, 2015) and more university educators are using ePortfolios in their programs, there is a lack of studies on how early career alumni perceive and use their ePortfolios once they are professionals in their chosen fields. This study explored how school counseling professionals viewed ePortfolios, which were used as part of the documentation in their ePortfolios as graduate students, in relation to their work as early career school counselors. It expands on previous research of school counseling that focused on graduate students in the field (Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014) to determine how ePortfolios are used after graduation.

This gap in the literature is especially apparent with regards to school counselors in relation to other education professionals such as teachers. Research is needed to fill this gap in order to determine if ePortfolios are valuable for school counseling educators beyond the uses for reflection and job interview preparation that are valued by school counselors-in-training (Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014). The study of ePortfolio perceptions by early career school counselors can serve not only to influence school counseling curriculum surrounding the adoption and positioning of ePortfolios, but also suggest ways in which ePortfolios could be integrated in school counselors' professional work as has been successfully reported by the allied teacher educator profession (Panos, 2015). Without further research, there is no evidence for counselor educators to use in adopting or adapting ePortfolio processes in their curriculum nor evidence for how school administrators can support ePortfolios as an assessment and professional development tool as they have with teacher educators.

2. Methods
2.1. Setting
For over 15 years the graduate program has required school counseling students to complete a Professional Practice Portfolio. For the past 10 years the program has required graduate students to complete an action research project involving a classroom, departmental, school-wide or even district level intervention. The action research project orients school counselors toward systems change and relational practices and the portfolio orients school counselors toward understanding professional practice and development as an ongoing process requiring documentation and reflection on results in order to guide improvement.

In 2010, the coordinator of the school counseling program, who is a faculty member in the Educational Psychology Department, invited a faculty member from the Library Department to collaborate in moving the portfolios into a digital format. The two faculty members had previously been part of a faculty learning community on teaching with technology where they had used Google Sites to share information among the learning community members and create their own sites for use in their teaching. This led to this ongoing collaboration on eProfessional Practice Portfolios (aka ePPP), which are hereafter referred to as ePortfolios. Google Sites provide a free and open platform for creating ePortfolios that are portable and owned by the graduates. Unlike ePortfolios that are tied to university accounts, these ePortfolios are still accessible after the students graduate, supporting the social justice orientation of the program. The graduate students maintain control over their ePortfolios and develop skills to potentially implement ePortfolios in their school communities when they become school counseling professionals.

These ePortfolios provide a way for graduates to demonstrate their professional competencies by sharing and reflecting on the evidence they created throughout the program. The ePortfolios and the rubrics designed to assess them were structured around the School Counseling Standards defined by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. These are informed by the Council for the Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP), as well as the California Standards for the School Counseling Profession defined by the California Association of School Counselors (2009).

2.2. Participants
After the research proposal was approved by the university's Institutional Review Board, school counselors who had graduated from the program in cohorts from 2010 to 2015 were asked to participate. The researchers used these cohorts as the ePortfolio was introduced into the program in 2010 and the study was conducted in 2016. These graduates comprised a total of 71 individuals: 42% European and Middle Eastern (White), 30% Latino (Hispanic), 21% Asian/Pacific Islander, and 7% African-American. All graduates created an ePortfolio as part of their school counseling curriculum.

2.3. Data collection
In order to collect the reflections and perspectives of school counselors on the ePortfolio process and its value, an online survey was designed. An email invitation explaining the purpose of the study and request to participate was sent in spring of 2016 to all the school counselors, along with three reminders. The online survey had questions similar to those used by Hastings et al. (2015) and asked the school counselors to reflect on their experience of creating their ePortfolios, designing and implementing their action research projects while they were graduate students, and their perspectives on the values and uses of the ePortfolio and action research project after graduation. The survey included both forced choice and free-text questions. The forced choice questions were designed to collect general ideas about the overall perspectives of the school counselors on how they viewed their ePortfolios and their action research projects and whether they continued to use either after graduation. The free-text/open-ended questions asked respondents to delve deeper into why they used or did not use ePortfolios and action research in their work as school counselors and what, if anything, would make these two tools more valuable to their work and professional development.

2.4. Data analysis
Quantitative data from the survey was analyzed using descriptive statistics and qualitative data was analyzed in an iterative process. The quantitative data was analyzed using descriptive statistics because the sample size was too small for the use of inferential statistics, especially when the data is sectioned by cohort. The qualitative content analysis uncovered overarching themes and categories that emerged from the open-ended question responses (Saldaña, 2009). The content analysis was an iterative process with both researchers reading the survey responses multiple times to familiarize themselves with the data before moving to coding. The codes arose from analyzing the similarities and differences in the responses to the survey questions and grouping the responses into categories based on their similarities. These categories provided more detailed view of the school counselors'-in-training perceptions of the ePortfolios than quantitative data alone could provide. The survey data was analyzed both in the aggregate and by comparison among graduation years to determine if there were differences in responses among the cohorts. Reliability of coding of data was ensured by having both authors review and categorize the responses, then compare categories and themes. Any discrepancies were resolved through discussion to determine categories and themes.

3. Results and discussion
Analysis of the survey results showed that while ePortfolios were highly valued by school counselors when they were graduate students, they were not used deeply once the school counselors were in their first professional positions. This discrepancy in the valuation of ePortfolios calls into question how school counselor educators, as well as school administrators, can ensure ePortfolios have continued value for school counselors past graduate program requirements. As majority of alumni responded to the survey with 50 total responses and an overall response rate of 70.42% across cohorts (see Table 1 for response rate by cohort), the authors believe the results provide a representative view of ePortfolio and action research valuation by early career school counselors in this university's program.


Table 1. Number of school counselors-in-training and response rate by cohort year.

Cohort year	Number in cohort	Cohort response rate
2010	9	77.8%
2011	13	53.8%
2012	13	92.3%
2013	10	50%
2014	13	53.8%
2015	13	92.3%
The following sections discuss the results in the aggregate as differences among the cohorts in terms of their valuation and use of ePortfolios and action research were not seen, with one exception that is noted in Section 3.1. Table 2 shows overview of responses from respondents on their views of the ePortfolio and use of the ePortfolio after graduation. Limitations and future research directions for continued study of ePortfolios are discussed in a later section.


Table 2. Views of ePortfolios as graduate students and use after graduation.

Respondent percentage
ePortfolios are viewed as
Assisting in recognizing professional development and something to share in future workplace	56%
Space for reflection on growth and development	38%
Something to share in the future	4%
Graduation requirement	2%

ePortfolio use after graduation
Reviewed once a year	60%
Not looked at since graduation	30%
Reviewed more than once per year	10%
Added to ePortfolio	16%
3.1. Reflection on ePortfolios as graduate students
The results relating to how graduate students perceived and valued ePortfolios during their time as graduate students support previous research in this area (Wakimoto & Lewis, 2014). Respondents were overall positive about the reflective, professional development, and job seeking uses of their ePortfolios. Over half of the respondents (56%) noted that their ePortfolios helped them recognize their professional development in the program while at the same time being something they could share in the future at their workplace. Another 38% recognized that the ePortfolio allowed them to reflect on their professional growth and development. However, a small minority (2%) saw the ePortfolio merely as a graduation requirement. Another 4% viewed their ePortfolio primarily as something to share in the future. Some of these differences may tie into whether or not the individual felt that reflection was a valuable and valid use of their time for professional development (Rønnestad & Skovholt, 2003). These findings are similar to Lin's (2008) with student teachers and Hastings et al. (2015), which also found that ePortfolios were viewed, overall, as useful for reflection and job seeking activities.

In addition to finding value in using ePortfolios to reflect on professional development, the respondents found the ePortfolios especially useful for job seeking. Except for the 2015 cohort, the overwhelming majority (2010–2014 cohort percentages ranged from 71% to 86%) used their ePortfolios while looking for employment. The ePortfolio was seen as important, “whether or not it [ePortfolio] was ever thoughtfully reviewed by a potential employer, I think the fact that it existed made an impact. By inviting them to view my ePPP before an interview, I was making it clear that I am tech savvy in a 21st century world, detail oriented, and data driven.” The graduate students found the reflection on their growth helped with interview preparation and confidence, even though the majority noted that they did not get a response from sharing their ePortfolios with potential employers.

The minority of respondents who did not find the ePortfolios useful noted that the employers did not seem prepared for documentation in an online format, reflecting results in an earlier study by Yu (2011). As one respondent wrote, “it doesn't seem that many employers and hiring personnel are quite ready to receive an electronic portfolio” and another wrote that “I still think it's a valuable too[l] with a lot of potential but it was not beneficial to me” because no employer asked for it. This issue of valuation by employers may also be a reason why ePortfolios are not continued to be used by early career professionals and is explored further in Section 3.3.

Unlike the rest of the cohorts, the 2015 cohort was split evenly (50% each) between using and not using their ePortfolio during their job searches. The job market for school counselors in 2015 was not as robust and a number of graduates took part-time positions in schools. Some even selected to become marriage and family therapist interns over school counselors, which may have affected the results; however, this is speculation and something that merits further investigation.

3.2. Reflection on ePortfolios as professionals
While this study supports previous research, which showed creating and using ePortfolios brings a substantial benefit to graduate students in the education and helping professions, the results of this present study show a less positive picture of the continued use and value of ePortfolios for early career professionals after they have been hired into their first position. Only 10% of respondents reported that they looked at their ePortfolio more than once a year after graduation and 30% noted they had not looked at their ePortfolio since graduation. The other 60% noted that they had referred to it at least once per year. Of those that had looked at their ePortfolio after graduation, only 16% had added materials or documentation regarding their professional development to it; they mainly updated resumes and added new work experience, similar to Boulton's (2014) findings with new teacher educators. None of the respondents had taken the next step to introduce the ePortfolio process to middle or high school students as part of developing a more comprehensive school counseling career and college planning program. The main reasons cited for no longer actively updating their ePortfolios were that the ePortfolios were not required by district administrators or useful to school counseling professionals who had little time. Barriers and potential solutions to continued use are discussed in Section 3.5.

3.3. Barriers to continued use of ePortfolios as professionals and potential solutions
There appear to be multiple barriers to the continued use of ePortfolios by early career school counselors. Upon reflection of what would make them more likely to resume using their ePortfolios, the alumni noted that “searching for future employment”, having more time, requiring the ePortfolio in their places of employment as part of their evaluation, having the ePortfolio recognized and valued by employers, and receiving reminders to update their ePortfolios would encourage them to view and edit their ePortfolios. These responses provide avenues for both counselor educators and school administrators to encourage the use of ePortfolios as professional development tools.

As the respondents articulated, a systemic change in the valuation and use of ePortfolios at their school sites would be most beneficial. If something is not valued, no time is set aside for it and it is not completed. This appears to be the current state of ePortfolios for professional school counselors. As with Boulton's (2014) findings that professionals do not feel that the ePortfolio is valued in their organizations and therefore feel less inclined to continue work on it. This means that school administrators have the opportunity to reorient the documentation and reflective work of professional school counselors by valuing ePortfolios and providing the time and incentives to continue this important work. By not positioning the ePortfolios as simply one more task to accomplish, but embedding it within the workflow of the school counselors, administrators can create a positive learning environment for the school counselors, administration, students, and community. Professional school counselors will have time to reflect on and improve their work, which has direct benefit to the students. School administrators will have access to documentation of the ongoing, positive work at their sites—especially if school counselors continue to integrate action research directed at improving the school culture into their practices—and have a more holistic method of evaluation and assessment. And the community will benefit if school counselors provide access to their ePortfolios through showcasing the programs being implemented at the school. This showcase also provides a powerful, authentic promotion and outreach tool for the administration by showing and not telling how professional school counselors are making a difference in students' lives at their schools.

While the respondents stated that they found value in the reflective aspects of the ePortfolios while in the graduate program and this reflection helped them prepare for interviews, once they were no longer in job-seeking mode the reflective aspect was devalued. They wrote “it was nice to reflect on my learning” and “the process assisted me in conceptualizing our program and school counselor requirements” while they were in the program. However as school counselors, the majority of the respondents wrote that the ePortfolio was “not useful for my current job” and “not quite applicable to job” as if had served its instrumental purpose—gaining employment—and now no longer was of any value in guiding professional reflection and development. There is a disconnect then between realizing the importance of reflective practice as graduate students and the continued importance of guiding professional development via reflective practice as practitioners. A potential area to explore further is if and how school counselors value and enact reflective practices outside the ePortfolio structure. This may help to better integrate ePortfolios or another digital tool into the school counselors' workflows to save time and effort by collocating reflective products in one place for future use in professional development and evaluation processes. By responding to this disconnect and emphasizing the importance of continued reflection about professional efficacy and development, school counselors may be more likely to continue to use their ePortfolios even if they are not required by their school site.

School counselors must also have intrinsic motivation, as noted by Panos (2015), to continue to reflect and document their work in ePortfolios beyond any requirements defined by administration or professors. As shown from the results of this study, few of the respondents demonstrated intrinsic motivation to continue utilizing their ePortfolios after they were no longer in the graduate program and were gainfully employed as discussed previously. There is little that can be done to increase internal motivation, however, so school administrators and counselor educators would do well to focus on demonstrating the value of ePortfolios in hopes that this will eventually lead to an increase in continued and lifelong professional development.

School counselor educators also have a role to play through outreach to their partners at school internship sites to promote the continued use of ePortfolios and through more careful integration of ePortfolios in the school counseling programs at their K-12 schools. If more school counselors find the ePortfolios valuable in daily practice, they can also advocate for acceptance by their administration as an aspect of professional evaluation. Furthermore, through the input of site supervisors, school counseling educators may find ways for improving the ePortfolio experience so the graduate students experience the transition using the ePortfolios as early career professionals as more seamless. This may include providing examples of how to modify the ePortfolio for different audiences and focusing on the reflective, professional development uses as practitioners. Attention to and discussion of the ePortfolio and how it can serve multiple purposes—reflection, assessment, and professional development—are important for increasing the long-term value of ePortfolios (Cheng & Chau, 2013; Harring & Luo, 2016). School counselor educators could also integrate the ePortfolios more fully into the program by introducing the ePortfolios at the start of the program as suggested by Roberts et al. (2016). This would allow more time for the graduate students to become comfortable with the ePortfolio platform and provide time for more reflection on what would make the ePortfolio of greatest value both during and after the program. While the implementation of many of these changes requires collaboration and buy-in from the school sites and school administrators, school counseling educators can also try to guide graduate students to see the value in continuing to use their ePortfolios as part of their professional development by emphasizing the importance of reflective and results-based practice, as well as discussing concrete strategies for defining time to document and reflect on their work.

3.4. Limitations
While this study extends our understanding of the current and potential uses of ePortfolios by school counselors, there are limitations. While the response rate to the survey was high, there are still limits in the generalizability of the findings. Replication and comparison studies would improve the study's generalizability and, more importantly, would allow educators, school counselors, and school administrators to begin to develop best practices for using ePortfolios as multi-pronged tools for fostering continued professional development, assessment, and use with students. Also, replicating the study with more participants may also allow for the analysis of potential differences in perspectives on ePortfolios that may be due to different counselors-in-training cohort demographics.

Another fruitful direction for future research would be to conduct interviews or collaborative action research with school counselor graduates to collect more detailed information about their perspectives on ePortfolios than can be accomplished via a survey. Interviews could be conducted individually or in focus groups and action research could be conducted as collaborative endeavors involving university faculty, program graduates, and school administrators. Such collaborative research could be investigated as a form of action research focused on lifescaping a career (Lewis & Winkelman, 2017). Although school counselors have many demands on their time, if supported by administration or if enough were willing to be interviewed or engage in collaborative action research, the findings may show interesting variations in how school counselors see and experience ePortfolios. Such research could shed light onto some of the contradictory responses by graduates as found in this study and point to ways to sustain ePortfolios as integral to professional development.

Collecting perspectives of potential employers of school counselors—such as school principals and other administrators on hiring committees—would be very useful for understanding how ePortfolios are currently (not) used. This would also make it possible to learn how ePortfolios could be better integrated into the hiring and work processes at school sites as previous research has shown a lack of awareness of ePortfolios on the part of hiring personnel (Yu, 2011). While ePortfolios have been shown to be valuable to a range of students in different educational programs, there is still a lack of information about employers' views or aspirations. Integrating ePortfolios into district or site professional evaluation processes would provide a unique pathway for guiding professional growth and development and opportunities for continued research.

4. Conclusion
ePortfolios are now a prevalent part of graduate education in many fields and for the majority of graduate students they provide an important tool for documentation of and reflection on developing professional competencies and professional identity. The value of ePortfolios for early career school counselors is less clear as this study has shown. However, as ePortfolios are making inroads in allied fields such as teaching (Panos, 2015), school counselors have a model to use to promote the continued value of ePortfolios as part of their professional practice and professional development. Encouraging reflection on how school counselors are improving their students' lives through the school counseling program is beneficial to the entire community. The way forward to realizing the full potential of ePortfolios is together, with school counselors working with school administrators to leverage this free, open, and accessible technology that has the potential to create lasting, positive change.