This study of the #acadv chat community details a longitudinal study about a digital learning network comprised of academic advising professionals who work in higher education. We discuss how networked communities of practice (CoP) scaffold professional learning and development of post-secondary educators, while also contributing to their daily practice. Utilizing Twitter chat transcripts, digital documents, social media platforms, and interviews with 17 participants of this community, we report 22 topics discussed with the top five themes focused on student needs, orientation support, advising approaches and structures, workload, and individual career development. Using a netnographic approach, we explore and offer insights about the origins, management, and sustainability of this networked practice over a seven-year period. Important findings center the organic, participatory nature of the community, the shared leadership structure, and the bidirectional nature of online and offline relationships as impacted in an online, occupational CoP. We suggest further research into networked practice to understand more about self-directed learning, participant motivation, digital archiving, and digital knowledge sharing in these types of networked occupational CoPs.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Netnography

Community of practice

Higher education

Professional development

Networked practice

Learning communities

Social media

1. Introduction
Social media platforms are changing how professionals gain access to and share information, network, and build communities. The variety of digital technologies and their affordances—video, text, image, audio, and media—offer many avenues for ongoing personal learning and professional development. In the digital age, training engagement to enhance workplace learning can be found on individual blogs, within group webinars, through the use of video tutorials, and via other digital mediums, through knowledge sharing/management, and communication (El Ouirdi, El Ouirdi, Segers, & Henderickx, 2015). How we participate in occupational learning and development is no longer bound by physical space, synchronous time, or geographic location. On-demand professional development is just a click or slide away with our digital devices and social tools. Both employee development and training initiatives should consider how networked practices are augmenting the skills, knowledge, and abilities of the workforce.

In the higher education sector, research has often examined how social media and networked technologies impact scholarly and pedagogical practices. These studies typically focus on faculty utilization and integration of social media platforms, such as Facebook, Twitter, or blogs, for instructional design, curriculum support, or classroom practice (Gikas & Grant, 2013; Roblyer, McDaniel, Webb, Herman, & Witty, 2010; Tess, 2013), or on student perceptions and uses of social media platforms for out-of-class engagement and learning (DeAndrea, Ellison, LaRose, Steinfield, & Fiore, 2012; Ford, Veletsianos, & Resta, 2014). Additionally, there is a growing canon of research that has investigated how academics engage in networked participatory scholarship (Veletsianos & Kimmons, 2012) and form open educational practices within these social networking sites to gain intentional support for both personal and professional needs (Cronin, 2017; Veletsianos & Stewart, 2016). Expressions of digital scholarship vary on social media. Some academics use blogs to start a conversation on a topic and offer ways to publish open access insights into their research, writing, and publications (Mewburn & Thomson, 2013). Scholars also use Twitter, blogs, and Facebook communities to distribute one another's publications to a wider audience in more conversational ways (Greenhow & Gleason, 2014; Priem & Costello, 2010; Stewart, 2015, Stewart, 2017; Veletsianos, 2012; Veletsianos & Kimmons, 2013).

The purpose of this article is to fill a gap in the empirical literature by investigating professional staff and practitioners' utilization of social media to form online communities of practice (CoP) engaged in professional practice. Using netnographic methods, we examine one community in particular, the Academic Advising Twitter chat (@acadvchat) and its related hashtag, #acadv, to explain a growing phenomenon of networked practices in higher education. This study will focus on academic advising professionals, which may include professional staff whose primary role at the university is to provide academic advising services, adjunct instructors, tenure and non-tenure track faculty, and/or a variety of administrative staff, to support student success in postsecondary education environments. For the purpose of this article and to be inclusive of the various functions, roles, and institutional job titles, we will refer to all roles as either ‘academic advising professionals’ or ‘advising professionals.’ By exploring the history of the @acadvchat, analysis of topics, and evaluation of participation patterns over a seven-year period, this paper offers insights into the ways academic advising professionals are harnessing Twitter and other social media platforms to build a CoP, (re)define the boundaries of shifting and divergent notions of professionals in higher education, and most importantly, understanding how digital technologies provide avenues for sustained, networked practice.

2. Literature review
2.1. Social and digital tools for professional learning & development
Social and digital tools augment and enhance how many professionals learn today. Technologies like social networking sites, collaborative platforms, and cloud storage, “leave a digital audit trail, documenting our journey—often an unfolding story—and provide a path for others to learn from” (Bingham & Conner, 2015, p. 9). Regardless of your industry, occupation, or role, social media empowers a growing number of professionals to become more agile in training methods and encourages connected learning experiences.

For example, the medical field utilizes digital social media tools to enhance professional learning and development (Gonzalo, Thompson, Haidet, Mann, & Wolpaw, 2017; Roberts et al., 2015; Roland, Spurr, & Cabrera, 2017; Thoër, Millerand, & Duque, 2017). Chretien, Tuck, Simon, Singh, and Kind (2015) examined the role of Twitter for professional learning and development amongst a group of medical students. Their digital ethnography examined medical student Twitter ‘superusers,’ finding Twitter played an important role informationally and socially. This included perspective taking, increased access to experts in the field, and what the researchers called “a sense of equalization within the medical hierarchy” through Twitter's affordance of providing users with a voice to share information and network with patients and experts in the field (Chretien et al., 2015, p. 1673). This study also found that medical students on Twitter were navigating the complexities of being a doctor in the digital age, including learning patient privacy protocols, acquiring advocacy skills, participating in dialogues around healthcare public policy, and maintaining levels of personal authenticity with balanced professionalism.

Additionally, K-12 educators and support staff also utilize social media and digital platforms to enhance their personal and/or professional learning networks (PLN). Moreillon (2015) conducted a netnographic case study on #txlchat, a Texas statewide discussion of school librarians. This PLN discussed a range of issues important to librarians—from technology and library management to pedagogy and marketing strategies—and also helped form community and sense of belonging amongst Texas school librarians. Teachers in K-12 have also harnessed social media to develop PLNs to enhance their training and growth within their occupational role (Krutka & Carpenter, 2016; Trust, Carpenter, & Krutka, 2016; Trust, Carpenter, & Krutka, 2017; Visser, Evering, & Barrett, 2014). As learning is social (Bingham & Conner, 2015), it is not surprising that K-12 educators are harnessing social networks and digital platforms to create on-demand, learning opportunities.

Trust et al. (2017) researched how higher education professionals define, identify, and participate in PLNs. In their survey, nearly three quarters of respondents discussed online spaces, such as Facebook, Twitter, blogs, or particular hashtags such as #edtech or #edchat as vital to their ongoing learning and development. In their comprehensive literature review, Manca and Whitworth (2018) reviewed 111 papers examining the role of social media in PLN practices for post-secondary educators. These empirical studies broke down into four main themes regarding social media in higher education: general educational research; behaviors of professionals at work; the impact of administrative interventions; and how social media PLNs generate new knowledge and literacy practices.

2.2. Communities of practice
While online PLNs are leveraging user-driven technologies and social media to connect colleagues, there is a growing interest to go beyond these points of interaction and peer social learning. Some PLNs begin to evolve and organize into a collective group that is focused on interests and topics related to professional roles. This intentional group of professionals form online communities of practice (CoP) that are vital to enhancing professional work and stewarding expertise in a growing knowledge economy (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). Defined as “groups of people who share a concern, a set of problems, or a passion about a topic,” CoPs function by bringing people together to “deepen their knowledge and expertise…by interacting on an ongoing basis” (Wenger et al., 2002, para. 1). CoP members often share a common identity, interests, and values for stewarding a body of common knowledge, practices, and approaches in their domain (Wenger et al., 2002). A CoP may develop within formal organizations, or spontaneously, as individuals realize collective challenges and opportunities associated with knowledge sharing across organizational boundaries. Those who participate in online CoPs often experience both short and long-term value, including problem solving, relationship building, developing a sense of belonging, enhancing professional identity, and cultivating confidence.

Houle (1981) examined and theorized how professionals who have completed formalized academic training continue learning in the profession to enhance their work. CoPs often form to support ongoing learning, to scaffold shared practice around a particular domain, and to deepen knowledge and expertise in a particular area by interacting for sustained periods of time (Wenger et al., 2002). Ongoing stewardship of practice, using the CoP framework, continues to be researched in a growing number of vocational settings, including medicine (Gonzalo et al., 2017), librarianship (Anderson, 2017) and teacher development (Maciá & García, 2016). Each occupational role has developed different approaches, but most professionals engage in ongoing learning practices by participating in conferences, disciplinary events, personal learning networks, and formal training programs.

Previously in higher education, CoPs were seen as valuable organizational systems for faculty development (Sherer, Shea, & Kristensen, 2003). Through dynamic topic analysis, Guidry and Pasquini (2013) found semantic relationships between ideas and constructs in a natural conversation thread amongst the student affairs (#sachat) Twitter participants. This study recognized the importance for organizations and leadership to maintain this informal professional learning network; however, the patterns of periphery participation was more connected to situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991) rather than being a CoP. With changes to job responsibilities, evolving student demographic needs, and financial restraints for on-going training, we now see more higher education practitioners and administrators seeking online CoPs as a continued, sustained learning resource and a growing area for professional learning and contribution. When the CoP is being established within a digital habitat using emerging technology, the members steward the knowledge and technical tools as a team sport; that is, they share the work and/or roles, and help connect to other stewards from whatever community for support, to share ideas, and to innovate (Wenger, White, & Smith, 2009). What is not known is how this community development and stewardship of technology impacts an online CoP over time.

In using a netnographic approach to examine an academic advising professional CoP in higher education, we can better understand how this community creates a vision, identifies technological resources, and matures through their sustained practice. To further expand upon the empirical knowledge, we investigated how academic advising professionals utilize social media and digital platforms to enhance their (in)formal training, design self-directed learning opportunities, co-create knowledge, and build capacity for resource sharing within an online, occupational CoP.

3. Methods
This qualitative investigation of an online, occupational community was conducted using computer-mediated data collection techniques and semi-structured interviews. Although a number of our methodological steps fit into the standards of ethnographic research, we followed a similar process as Wesley (2013) to complete a netnographic study. Due to the nature of the digital data collection and our participation in online environments where this community exists, this research is a netnography, a type of virtual ethnographic research based on field work to examine digital spaces, artifacts, and intra-actions within an online community (Kozinets, 2015). To ensure the quality of this research method in examining this online CoP, we followed Kurikko and Tuominen's (2012) standards of netnography, which include “immersive depth, prolonged engagement, researcher[s] identification, and persistent conversations” (p. 13). For the past two years, we have been an active part of the #acadv chat community as part of our investigation. This includes contributing to the conversation using the #acadv hashtag on Twitter, moderating a chat topic, and/or observing the online interactions by members of this community.

Additionally, we practiced appropriate research ethics and member checking with participants involved in this study, and they were made aware of our presence and research observations. This netnography includes both participant observation and Twitter archival data (Kulavuz-Onal & Vasquez, 2013), as we sought to examine previous community interactions as well as participating in or facilitation of recent Twitter conversations with the #acadv hashtag. This netnography is bounded by the nature of observing and collecting data within the parameters of the #acadv chat community and it utilizes interview data from moderators and participants who are current/past members of this group (Savin-Baden & Major, 2013; Sloan and Quan-Haase, 2017).

This study examines four research questions:

RQ1

What are the origins of #acadv chat?

RQ2

What topics were included and discussed in organized Twitter chats using the #acadv hashtag?

RQ3

How did the #acadv chat develop into a professional networked community of practice?

RQ4

What lessons have been learned about sustaining this professional networked community of practice?

3.1. Data collection
As active participatory netnographers, we had the opportunity to contribute value and support the continuity of narrative to the #acadv chat community (Costello, McDermott, & Wallace, 2017). Our plans for data collection were designed to analyze this community; however, it was also to offer the #acadv chat community a historical perspective with a cataloged set of chat transcript archives and the means to collect future #acadv chats. Below is the process for our data collection, which included reviewing shared documents, a blog, third party applications/services, and utilizing an aggregator to collect tweets, alongside a set of semi-structured interviews with current/past community members.

3.1.1. The #acadv community and Twitter chats
Twitter is a social media space for those seeking networked connections and community with other professionals. As a microblogging site that allows users to optimize the platform by including a hashtag (#) to signal, track, and thread conversations around a particular interest, idea or topic, it is an excellent avenue for professional learning and development. Hashtags not only raise awareness about trends, news or issues; they also allow communities to form if they create their own designated hashtag.

One popular use of Twitter hashtags has been the emergence of Twitter Chats for professional learning and development. These online dialogues allow users on the platform to communicate around a shared topic that may be at a particular day, set time, or even on a semi-regular schedule. Since 2010, academic advising professionals in higher education have utilized a shared Twitter moderator account (@acadvchat) to facilitate weekly and bi-weekly conversations using the #acadv hashtag. This, in turn, has organically developed into a professional learning community, what we refer to as a networked community of practice. The professionals who participate in this space have a shared identity as academic advisors, and as will become evident in our analysis below, contribute to the practices and enhancement of the larger field of academic advising on college and university campuses.

3.1.2. Twitter archival data
We utilized the publicly available #acadv WordPress blog (https://acadvchat.wordpress.com/) and related community Google documents to gather historical information on the chat community. The Twitter chat transcript archives were collected over the seven-year time span of the #acadv chat. Some archives were available via the #acadv blog, others on a Storify public account (now closed as the platform has been terminated). Other chat archives were collected using a Twitter Archiving Google Sheet (TAGS) (https://tags.hawksey.info/). The TAGS archive started to collect tweets that included the #acadv hashtag on November 19, 2016 through to April 2018. This included all tweets occurring outside and during the official chat schedule. This Twitter data is important in understanding alternative uses of the hashtag, specifically to understand how occupational CoPs and professional competencies for learning occur in a hashtag community (Pasquini & Eaton, 2019). A total of 130 transcripts were available at the time of analysis. We cataloged basic descriptive data on the numbers of Twitter users in a particular chat, total number of tweets contributed per chat, and the number of shared resources (such as embedded URLs) provided during each discussion.

3.1.3. Interviews
We reached out to current and previous @acadvchat moderators and #acadv chat participants to request an interview. The 30-60-minute interviews were conducted via Skype, with audio files saved in a password protected folder. We developed a semi-structured interview protocol, affording us flexibility in asking questions of participants based on their role in the community (moderator or participant). All interviewees were asked questions centering on types of digital tools and social media platforms each used for personal and professional development, #acadv community engagement behaviors, the influence and impact of online practice(s) for their professional role, and overall reflections about navigating work in social networks. We asked all community members to reflect on the benefits, challenges, and motivations of contributing to the #acadv chat community.

In addition to the participant questions, we developed a specific set of interview protocols for the community moderators. We utilized Wenger et al. (2002) principles for creating CoP to frame questions about the community's origins, development, and sustainability, including:

•
In setting up this community, how did you decide on the digital platform or online space?

•
How did you determine the structure and/or leadership of this community?

•
How do you recruit people to support the moderation of this community?

•
How do you mentor new members (participants and moderators) to the community?

•
How do you determine what topics will be discussed during the scheduled chats?

•
What are the challenges and benefits of moderating a Twitter chat?

•
What improvement or advice would you give others interested in starting a networked community similar to this?

We interviewed a total of 17 current or previous #acadv chat moderators and participants. Interviews were transcribed through Trint and reviewed/corrected before analysis.

3.2. Data analysis
3.2.1. Twitter chat topics
We utilized official #acadv chat transcripts to code the topics and discussions that occurred during the scheduled conversations. As previously noted, official transcripts were available for 130 chats. Author A, alongside a doctoral research assistant, independently coded the data. We utilized an open coding process to develop basic descriptive codes. Following our initial open coding, we met to discuss the codes and reconcile potential differences. We collapsed the open codes into themes, covering both chat topics and thematic analysis of the dialogue from the chat transcripts (Saldaña, 2013; Savin-Baden & Major, 2013). In this paper, some of this data is utilized to describe the sustainability and innovation of this community. We also refer readers to Pasquini & Eaton, 2019 for additional insights into chat topics and their relevance to the field of academic advising.

3.2.2. Interviews
We imported 17 participant interview transcripts that consisted of 192 pages into Dedoose. We each open coded the transcripts, agreeing in advance to include descriptive codes centered on our research questions about community, chat history, and moderator insights. This is best described as a form of middle-range coding. We coded with particular themes in mind, while also creating descriptive codes of other important thoughts throughout the transcripts (Kozinets, 2015). Dedoose affords researchers the ability to examine transcript excerpts based on codes from multiple researchers in one data set. For this study, we utilized open codes such as “moderators,” “moderator expertise,” “advice for moderators,” “advice new community,” “challenges,” “moderator benefits,” “moderator actions,” “moderator role,” “moderator leadership,” and “chat topics.” Clicking on these codes within Dedoose allowed us to pull segments of interview text to address our research questions.

3.3. Limitations
Twitter accounts that are protected, that is set to private or locked, may not have their contributions included within the hashtag archive or in our review of the official chat transcripts. Thus, there is some risk that participants within this community, who do not maintain an open, unprotected account on Twitter, may not have their contributions to the Twitter chat captured in the archived transcripts or included within our data set for this study.

4. Results
4.1. The origins of #acadv chat
The origins of the #acadv chat are organic, grassroots, and serendipitous, which demonstrates the ways some early Twitter adopters harnessed the platform for dialogue and community building. As relayed to us by one of the initial participants, the process began with a “Tweetup” (an in-person meeting or gathering of Twitter users) at the 2010 annual conference of The Global Community for Academic Advising (NACADA):

It was really small, like 10 of us I think maybe tops… But from there what we decided to do, one of the main people who I personally and professionally look to as a mentor really kinda said, “Hey, I wanna do this more often. Not just a quick chat with you across Twitter, not once a year seeing each other in person at the conference but I wanna be able to talk about all of these things that we talk about in a really constructive way more regularly.” And that is really how the Academic Advising chat was born.

Another early participant referred to the #acadv chat as a “pie in the sky idea... [but] here we are, I think it's like 186 chats later, [and] there are people I never would've met were it not for the chat.” These early days of the chat demonstrate what Wenger et al. (2002) call “potential” (p. 69), where a group of individuals explore possibilities for creating a community of practice. Twitter was a natural platform selection to continue the dialogue, as the participants of the 2010 NACADA Tweetup were already connected in this virtual space.

In the earliest days of the #acadv chat, the initial participants needed to make critical decisions regarding how the chat would function. Initially, individuals were using “the full hashtag: #academicadvising.” It was soon discovered that #academicadvising “takes up too many characters when you have a 140 [character] limit.” The hashtag #acadv grew from working around the technological affordances of the Twitter platform at the time this community was incubated.

The community also made initial negotiations over the schedule and frequency of the chats. Initially, the chats began in the evening, but this soon proved to be a difficult time, as discussed by one of the early moderators:

we moved it to being in the middle of the day ‘cause it seemed to work a little bit better for folks so they could participate over their lunch break and not have to worry about family involvements in the evenings, and getting kids to bed and those sorts of things. We decided to move it to a bi-weekly because I think partially the group of people who are moderating were starting to get a little burnt out.

These early negotiations of time, practice, and technology use are representative of “coalescing” (Wenger et al., 2002, p. 69). #Acadv community members, recognizing the value of Twitter chats for ongoing learning and stewardship of professional practice, negotiated time and space issues for maximum inclusion of potential community participants. Presently, the synchronous chats occur for 60-min each Tuesday on a bi-weekly basis directly on the Twitter platform with the hashtag #acadv. As these chats primarily involve academic advising professionals and other postsecondary education staff from North America, they occur during the 12–1 pm Central Standard Time period. The schedule of the chats follows the academic semester (September through May) with breaks during the summer months (June through August) when colleges and universities are not offering a bulk of their courses and advising orientation events occur.

4.2. Chat topics and conversational content during #acadv chats
We utilized chat archives containing the full conversation (n = 130) from official #acadv chats to develop a set of themes. After reconciling codes, we settled on 22 main thematic topics discussed in the #acadv community. Table 1 shows these themes, and some of the common dialogue that occurred within the organized chats around each particular theme.


Table 1. Topics frequently discussed in #acadv Twitter chats.

Name of topic	Defining the topic
Time	Tasks, tips, organizing calendar, schedule, management, limited resource
Orientation	New students, transfer students, programs, resources
Model/structures	Models of advising, group, faculty-based, centralized/decentralized models
Communication	Strategies for students/families/parents/coworkers, negative information
Training/P.D.	Professional development, conferences, webinar, local training
Self-care	Work-life balance, time off, stress management, peer check-ins
Career advising	Careers exploration/development, connecting majors, alternative paths
Caseload	Workload management, number of students, work flow, peak time periods
Campus culture	Organizational dynamics, change, politics, norms, influences, expectations
Conferences	Preparation, presentations, attending, reflection, sharing resources from
Involvement	Contribution to campus, service to institution, beyond role requirements
Research	Reading, journals, books, common reading, evidence-based information
Service	Professional organization/association leadership, committees, involvement
Advising career	Roles, position, pathways, advancement, development, advice, improve
Knowledge sharing	Link, articles, resources, trends, news, ideas, brainstorm, URL, examples
Technology	Data, information, systems, student info., communication, social, control
Planning	Year-long strategy, advising syllabus, projects, department//unit goals
Personal learning	Individual goals, philosophy, personal development, learning networks
Student population	Needs, issues, veterans, undecided, high-achieving, financial aid, SES
Motivation	Individual morale, community support, learner objectives, philosophy
Campus partners	Other departments, collaboration, working with/supporting advising
Rapport	Building, relationships, introductions, openness, with co-workers/students
The #acadv community discusses a range of topics relevant to academic advising and student support in higher education. Common chats center on issues such as academic advising structures, workload or work environment issues, orientation, technology issues, personal or career planning, conference planning/attendance/recaps, and self-care/balance/motivation. Each of these topics is demonstrative of how this networked CoP is contributing to ongoing knowledge sharing and professional practice in the field of academic advising.

We utilized data from our interviews with moderators and participants to better understand how chat topics are decided, structured, and developed. The complexity of this process demonstrates how the #acadv chat matured (Wenger et al., 2002) into a sustainable community of practice. A complex, multidimensional, and democratic process has evolved over the history of the #acadv chat to allow for a variety of topics, ensure community participation, and develop engaging, robust, and intriguing questions for conversation. There is typically one lead moderator who serves as the central organizer to scaffold logistics of the chat (e.g., schedule, reminders, promotion, etc.) and this role may rotate once every 1–2 years.

The #acadv moderator team has developed a set of processes for deciding on chat topics. Following the conclusion of one chat, the lead moderator will reach out to the designated chat moderator for the next scheduled chat, seeking suggestions for potential topics. Once these are compiled, the lead moderator will “put those into a poll that the community online can vote on for what they want to see. And the leading topic of that week will become what we actually talk about” during the #acadv chat.

Once a topic has been decided upon, the core moderator group will crowdsource potential questions relating to the selected topic. Much of this work occurs through shared open resources, specifically Google Drive using Google docs and sheets. As described by the lead moderator/coordinator,

We use Google docs and I will send out…if the topic is ‘Flipped Advising Models,’ I'll say, “Hey, here's what we're talking about, here's the loose structure for the chat in a Google doc.” And I send it out to the entire mod[erator] team asking them to contribute ideas, resources, and questions related to the ‘Flipped Advising Model’ or whatever the topic might be that week. So, I like to do that with enough leeway that people have time to think and contribute ideas and questions and resources.

The advanced planning of questions, structure, and resources of each chat is a key component of its efficiency, user engagement, and ensures ease of moderating during the scheduled chat time. While one member moderates and facilitates the Twitter chat, the community's structure for organically crowdsourcing, filtering, and refining questions and compiling additional resources for chat participants ensures a variety of perspectives related to the selected topic, while also editing the questions to fit the requirements of Twitter (140 and now 280 characters) and keeping community members engaged during the synchronous discussion.

Another key component of preparing for a successful Twitter chat is effective promotion. In addition to setting up the voting poll for community members to select a topic, the lead moderator will utilize the @acadvchat Twitter account, the blog, the Facebook page, and personal social networks to promote the upcoming #acadv chats: “So one of the things that I do is log in on the handle and will say, ‘hey, here's what we're talking about. Be sure to join us next Tuesday for this upcoming chat.’”

4.3. Leadership structure: moderators
The #acadv chat emerged organically and has operated with a fully volunteer-based moderator team since 2010. Maintenance and sustaining of this networked practice relies on the leadership of the moderator team, who maintain the #acadv chat blog, Facebook page, and Twitter feed. It requires logistics to plan, organize, and moderate the bi-weekly chat; and it additionally requires a development pipeline for leadership and community engagement. During our data collection we interviewed several former and current moderators to better understand the development of the leadership structure of the #acadv chat. The voluntary nature of this work affords many possibilities, but also leads to challenges and limitations.

Since the origins of the chat, a team of moderators emerged, on a rotating basis, to allow new facilitators to lead the community and others to step down from this role about once a year. Overall, there have been fourteen volunteers over the last seven years, with approximately three to five moderators supporting the chats each year. The moderators we interviewed discussed the changes in frequency and breaks as an evolutionary process, meeting the needs of moderators, accounting for peak workload times for advising professionals, and balancing participation from wide swaths of people across different time zones.

The moderator team has formed a shared leadership model that is led by one central point person in the group. This organization of leadership is not formalized (e.g., there are no guiding documents, elections, or other structuring modalities associated with organized groups); rather, this distributed leadership model opens space for the group to negotiate their volunteer commitment, occupational roles in higher education, and personal priorities. This loosely structured approach to leadership is successful due, in part, to ensuring there are proper numbers of individuals engaging and contributing to the work required to moderate the #acadv chat community. As one moderator discussed, “even with a group of six or seven, we sometimes found it hard to staff some things.”

Many previous and current moderators discussed the importance of the lead moderator to assist with balancing responsibilities and roles to support the #acadv chat community with other work and life obligations and allowing for flexibility when work or life events arise unexpectedly. One moderator discussed that, given their work schedule, they only have time to facilitate the chat occasionally, and thus “volunteer for usually at least two per semester.” Another discussed how “I had to cancel an upcoming chat due to a training that I have to go to off campus, and someone else was able to pick that up.” This was possible only because the moderator team has “been very lucky in having people that have been engaged and wanting to be engaged in picking up the pieces.”

How the moderator team has grown, shifted, and changed membership over the history of the chat is an important part of understanding stewardship of the community (Wenger et al., 2002). One moderator discussed how they became a member of the moderator team:

I think it just kind of happened. I had been moderating, or I had been part of the #sachat leadership team, but the advising chat is more my home. And so, they were looking for extra people to moderate, and I was always doing the chats, so I figured I'd be happy to help. So that's how it happened, very organically.

Some members of the moderator team will sustain long-term engagement (e.g., 3–6 years), while others will cycle on and off the team in shorter time frames (e.g., 6–12 months). One moderator discussed that nobody should feel “like you have to do it forever. Commit to a year or six months or whatever and then you can kind of step away if you want to.” Still others, who have been members of the moderator team for a length of time recognize that, “eventually, for whatever reason, whether it's you know they move on to other things, so they retire as it were, you're going to need new people.”

The #acadv chat has developed several ways to ensure leadership succession and preserve moderation support for this community. Many moderators mentioned the importance of rotating the moderator role over time to avoid burnout and ensure sustainability of this community. So “the core group doesn't feel exhausted, because I think when you get a situation then you risk collapse, and no one is going to come in to take over and this thing will just die.” One method of recruiting new moderators for the team is monitoring those community members who regularly show up to participate in the chat sessions. “Who's showing up to the chat regularly, who seems excited to be here and is really getting a lot out of that.. .you might ask them, you know on Twitter or wherever you find them.. .‘hey, do you want to be a moderator, or do you want to sort of come in and help organize?’”

People within the moderator team also take on varying levels of responsibility. One moderator discussed how this “worked really well, especially in terms of accomplishing something for a group of people that were geographically distributed and had pretty different schedules and time zones and demands placed on their time.” Taking on varying levels of responsibility and individualized roles with specific tasks amongst the moderators ensures “everybody was willing to pitch in, and that was always a good feeling.. .because really we were just sort of like I said a group of people who were trying to come up with ways to do professional development and support and conversation on our own.” Over time, “people that take on different roles or progressed through the ranks laterally or however” end up taking on additional responsibilities or new ways to be involved in continuing this community.

Chief amongst these roles, with additional responsibility, is that of the lead moderator whose role centers on not only promoting the chat or assisting in chat preparation, but also in monitoring the community and thinking about long-term community management. One lead moderator discussed the cycle of preparing for the chat each calendar year, with the responsibility of planning, coordinating, and organizing a meeting amongst the moderator team during the summer break between semesters.

As we're getting started again for the fall, we review to make sure everybody's on the same page and then we also will try to talk some time over the winter months before we get the spring going…we're able to really say like, ‘Okay, here's what I've noticed hasn't been working lately and here's maybe something that we could just minimally change for the upcoming semester.’

Some of the lead moderators have been involved in supporting this CoP since its inception, and often meet one-on-one to dialogue about the state of the community. These conversations are also critical aspects of the leadership process for the community. As one lead moderator relayed,

we just go over some things and we talk certainly about the state of the chat as well and how it's changed over the years because both of us have been active participants, moderators, lead mod[erator]s since the beginning. So, we go over things like that as well just both of us having the historical perspective as well as such time and participation of our own invested in it.

Leadership in the community, reliant solely on volunteers, also presents some challenges. One moderator discussed that “in academic advising and student affairs” advising professionals are often “overburdened with work and with work/life balance.” As a result, taking on ad-hoc leadership roles within a professional learning community can introduce increased challenges that conflict with other occupational priorities. “You have to balance that against what you're doing to help your own students and make sure that you're getting your own jobs done on your own campus.”

Additionally, there are times when the moderator team will have to make difficult choices or have complicated conversations about people's commitments. As there is no formal leadership structure to the group, these conversations sometimes have to be assertive, but are centered in the needs of the community's vitality. One moderator discussed how it is important that leaders in such communities are not “afraid to tell people like, ‘thanks for your skills and abilities, but like, bye.’” These conversations need to occur when members of the moderator team are not fulfilling commitments or become incapable of dedicating the time needed to support their contribution to community leadership.

4.4. Sustaining the community
The #acadv chat community has been actively sustained for an 8-year period, with continuing strong involvement from advising professionals in the field. Evidence of this sustained interest is demonstrated in our analysis of descriptive participation data from 2017.

As documented in Table 2, in 2017 there were an average of 15 participants per organized chat, with an average of 141 tweets occurring during each chat session. In addition, the organized #acadv chat continues to be a space of resource sharing for advising professionals in the field. An average of 23 resources or external URLs were shared during each chat within this time period. This sharing contributes to the ongoing knowledge sharing and enhancement of practice in professional academic advising.


Table 2. #acadv participation patterns (Calendar Year 2017).

Chat #	Chat topic	# of participants	# of tweets	# of shared
180	Advising to transgress	12	134	13
181	Working as an advisor while	17	209	8
attending graduate school			
182	Motivational interview skills	21	137	15
183	Helping students develop plan B	16	232	7
184	Data analytics in academic	15	136	23
advising			
185	Flipped advising	10	88	9
186	7 habits of highly successful	17	214	25
advisors			
187	How to manage slower advising	19	34	7
periods			
188	Orientation advising	20	178	19
189	Employee onboarding	13	151	31
190	Advising mentorship	14	128	11
191	Undecided/exploratory Students	18	124	23
192	Advising Theories	12	153	24
193	When “life” happens in advising	12	122	52
194	#acadv collaboration	15	133	43
195	First generation college students	12	86	55
Average	15.1875	141.1875	22.8125
Moderators and participants provided insights about what sustains networked practice and scaffolds a networked CoP from a longitudinal perspective. Knowing the target audience and staying attuned to the needs of the broader community of professionals appears to be critical. As discussed earlier, this involves an active democratic process of involving the community by voting on topics of interest for potential chat topics. However, it also means that the moderators need to check “Twitter and checking [what] people have commented or posted new ideas or questions or things like that and what you might be able to do [to have it be] part of the conversation.” This might be from following other academic advising professionals and/or also reviewing what is posted on the #acadv hashtag during non-scheduled chat times.

Some individual moderators and participants discussed the importance of flexibility during the organized chat itself. Ensuring that people stay ‘on topic,’ so to speak, while also addressing needs of chat participants during organized chats is vital to ongoing participation from members of the broader academic advising professional community. As one moderator discussed,

the semi-structure of the advising chat that I love so much, is that it really is user driven in a way. We prepare for it to a certain degree and then if the conversation goes in a different direction organically, we help to facilitate that too.

Flexibility also aligns with simplicity. There is a consistent question and answer format, with prompts in between to offer a structure for this Twitter conversation. Ensuring the chat retains an overall tone and systematic approach was important for some individuals' ongoing participation, as detailed in this comment from one participant interviewee:

keeping it as simple as possible. As simple for new people to jump in and engage with when they're ready. And simple enough that it's there for the people who have been involved with it for six plus years. Simple that they know, even if they're away from it for a year for whatever reason, just their schedule gets too hectic, it'll be there when they come back. So, keeping it as simple, consistently simple, as possible for people to engage with, I think is very critical.

Flexibility of the community's structure, timing, and engagement practices has also facilitated the long-term sustainability of this community. The #acadv chat schedule has shifted its frequency (from once a week to bi-weekly; and from year-round to break during the summer months) and the time of day when it occurs (from evenings to mid-day) based on the community demand. Many of these changes occurred following a conversation amongst moderators. For example, one moderator discussed “sometimes [we] have those talks of like, ‘well, okay, participation has dropped off, should we change our format? Should we do something else?’” Often, such questions about interest and participation are proposed to the broader community, discussed, and a collective decision is made.

When we have made those changes…it's really been by collecting a lot of information potentially through a Google doc or a Google survey of participants that would be kinda saying like, ‘hey, we have this idea to make this change, is that better for you? Would that increase your participation or ability to participate?’

The commitment to ensure community participation as a collective decision-making process remains important to the long-term sustainability of a networked CoP.

The #acadv chat community also shows evidence of thinking transformationally, a key phase of development and sustainability for communities of practice (Wenger et al., 2002). Moderators and participants discussed the importance of expanding the community beyond the small populations of technologically engaged users within the academic advising field. One moderator stated that one should

try and capture your non-targeted audience to build your community. When #acadv chat started out it was very, very focused on Twitter users who were academic advisors, maybe part of the technology commission [chuckle]. But how do you capture participants in the process that are beyond your initial demographic, and how do you grow that…you have to have that growth in it, you have to have difference of opinions in it and you have to have interactivity between those in the medium in that particular instance.

Sometimes, growing the community also meant networking with other professionals inside and beyond the field of advising whose voices were missing to add value to the conversations and issues discussed within higher education. For some participants and moderators this would mean “tell[ing] your colleagues” about the #acadv chat and its benefits. For others, it means extending a personal invitation. Asking other advisors to join because “I'd love to hear what their perspective is on X, Y, Z issue. So, I think just making sure the word of mouth continues on even outside of those online communities,” was one way to extend the reach of the community according to participants and moderators.

Growing community also meant extending the dialogues beyond networked practice and the digital environment. As the #acadv chat began in an analog space during a professional conference, it served the #acadv chat community well to encourage face-to-face meetings and in-person dialogues to promote awareness of the chat where a few individuals decided to attempt ongoing conversation and professional practice beyond once-a-year professional conference. One participant noted the importance of face-to-face meetups:

I was really excited last year at the national conference I finally got to the #acadv chat Twitter group meet up. So, I think I did meet these people in person and that was so awesome because it was kind of like a reunion because you start to feel like you know these people…and [you] actually get into meet them and see them in person.

The role of networked practice helps to build and strengthen online relationships that often move into offline spaces. This is an important part of this community to engage current members and inform potential members of this networked practice.

5. Discussion
5.1. Networked, CoPs in higher education
We refer to the #acadv chat as a networked CoP, evidenced in the community's development and sustainability as outlined by Wenger et al. (2002). Many implications can be drawn by higher education professionals who seek to develop digital and networked communities of practice around a domain or functional area in higher education. The organic nature of this group's development, and its longitudinal survival, demonstrates the important role user-generated, collaborative technologies offer for ongoing learning and professional development. The #acadv chat functions as a CoP as defined by Wenger et al. (2002), in bringing together a group of like-minded advising professionals who wish to enhance their professional practice(s) on college/university campuses. The role of Twitter as a microblogging social media platform cannot be undervalued in the #acadv chat's long-term sustainability and success. While the Twitter platform has changed over time, the group of professionals who engage with #acadv chat have adapted and evolved to build a strong, vibrant, and diverse community.

The democratic nature of the #acadv chat appears important to its long-term viability, which we believe has implications for professionals in a variety of professional fields wishing to start and sustain networked communities of practice. Members of the community actively participate not only in the chat, but also in determining chat topics through online polling. One benefit of this approach is evident in the wide range of topics discussed within the group. While certain topics, such as orientation advising, time management, or self-care, circulate through the group with relative frequency, other topics emerge in response to sociopolitical issues (such as the economic downturn) or concerns raised by members of the group.

Wenger et al. (2002) discuss community member buy-in and engagement as vital to the success of a CoP. In #acadv chat, there is not forced participation, but an openness, flexibility, and embracing of shifting membership engagement. When the community appears to be disengaged, the moderation leadership work to discuss potential solutions to shift the community's focus or practice(s) to meet the needs of its members. Often this involves soliciting and obtaining insights from active members of this CoP and understanding the general conversation within the academic advising professional field. Leadership attempts to steward both knowledge sharing and digital participation for higher education professionals interested in discussing advising issues and topics.

Leadership has also been important for the long-term sustainability of this online occupational CoP. The volunteers who are part of the moderator team, and those who have taken on the responsibility of lead moderators, work to ensure the community maintains a web presence, stays relevant, and fosters a pipeline for others to take responsibility and ownership of the community. The non-hierarchical, loosely-coupled nature of this leadership structure provides the flexibility for people to volunteer their time when available, and step away when their personal or professional priorities shift and change.

5.2. Connection between analog and virtual space(s)
One important lesson gleaned from the #acadv chat community is the importance of understanding the entangled nature of analog and virtual space. For example, initially the community was having weekly chats, but this became unsustainable in people's week-to-week work, so they moved to bi-weekly chats, and eventually to taking the summers off. This emergence of the community, organically self-organizing and adapting to changing circumstances over time, is one reason the community has sustained itself.

Additionally, it is important to remember that #acadv chat began as a face-to-face meeting and conversation at an on-site conference. There was a desire to nurture connections between in-person relationships and online spaces. Events that engage community members beyond the screen, such as Tweetups at conferences, actually play an important role in maintaining and cultivating a thriving networked CoP. Professionals do not want to just sit behind a screen to converse; they are also seeking out professional relationships with people online who have similar occupational interests, needs, and goals. There is bidirectionality to the functioning of these networked CoPs. Offline relationships become online relationships, and vice versa. We heard this from participants across all of our interviews and find that sustaining networked practice requires this interplay of blending connection, rapport-building, and fluidity between the digital and analog.

5.3. Networked practices: implications for higher education professionals
The #acadv chat community is pushing the field of academic advising and student support in higher education in new directions by engaging peers in conversations with timely topics that impact the profession. Often the examination of such topics is not always discussed in formal training and professional development arenas; however, these issues necessitate an immediacy of action that cannot wait for the next webinar or conference meeting. For example, moderators may propose or host a chat focused on topics that are not typically discussed at conferences or training workshops. In our study, one such example was Chat #180, “Advising to Transgress,” which utilized bell hooks' (1994) notion of Teaching to Transgress to envision the role of academic advising in higher education as a space for social change. Other topics we conceive as pushing the boundaries of the profession include “Teaching Information Literacy as an #acadv” and “Flipped Advising.” Still other topics, such as “Economic Downturn and the Impacts on Students' Academic Decisions” open a space for advisors to dialogue about the impacts of larger sociopolitical issues on their work in higher education.

As we have argued previously (Eaton, Pasquini, Ahlquist, & Gismondi, 2018), analyses of networked practices in higher education may provide insights for professional associations, campus administrative leaders, and institutional coordinating bodies about the issues impacting staff, both personally and professionally. In our coding of #acadv chat topics and conversation, we learned about challenges academic advising professionals encounter in the postsecondary education workplace, paired with thoughtful solutions to these quandaries. For example, advising professionals often discussed the inconsistent flow of workload and time distribution. Academic advising is not a unique domain of practice in this regard. Many functional areas in student affairs and the broader functional areas of higher education (e.g., orientation, housing, student activities, alumni relations, etc.) experience periods of high and low volumes of work with various priorities, tasks, and administrative duties. The #acadv chat community often discussed these issues, providing insights into a range of ways professionals and institutions could potentially manage and capitalize on inconsistent work flows. In these ways, networked communities of practice provide a window into the lived experiences of higher education professionals and their evolving needs of within workplace environments.

5.4. Future research and ongoing challenges
As researchers, we are aware of the proliferation of networked practices amongst higher education professionals. We advocate for ongoing inquiry into the self-directed learning occurring in organic social media communities related to functional areas within the profession of higher education, and around social identities (e.g., race, class, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, religion, and their intersections). As networked CoPs continue to expand and thrive, it will be critical to continue further netnographies, digital ethnographies, and analyses of these digital communities to understand more about their motivation, function, and contribution to professional life. Partnerships should be forged between practitioners and scholars to further uncover how networked CoPs organize, lead, and sustain networked practices.

Professionals in the digital age continue to self-direct their learning and organically create networked practices for professional learning and development (Macià & García, 2017). This is why research needs to examine how the knowledge sharing and creation occur in these spaces. Additionally, what is not completely understood are the implications for how these networked communities of practice impact and improve a given occupation. For example, we know very little about how professionals translate digital networked learning into professional practice. We also lack understanding about how professionals' contributions to networked practices influences organizations and their occupational domain (e.g., at their institutions, within professional associations, and in formal publication distribution). We know even less about how employers and employees place value on self-directed learning and networked practice in networked CoPs. How are organizations rewarding, if at all, professionals who engage in these communities? How is the information learning and sharing of professionals, who engage in networked practices, ultimately translated during our human resource processes (e.g., annual evaluations, promotion, or merit)? As the nature of work and education is shifting in the digital age, we need more inquiry into how organizations account for networked learning, development, and practice.

Similarly, we need further research into what motivates professionals to participate in these networked practices or to contribute to these online occupational CoPs. This could include inquiries into patterns of involvement by professionals over time, which can come in the form of larger scale data inquiry, networked analyses, visualization methods, and qualitative research into individual motivation for joining and leaving a particular networked CoP. As we discovered in this study, there is also a need to better understand the voluntary nature of leadership in many of these communities, and the role of facilitation of a distributed group online. What are the challenges and benefits of participating in networked practice and learning through social media? How do leaders of these communities manage the additional workload or stress? What incentivizes leaders to maintain commitment to these networked CoPs? These types of questions will help professionals better understand the implicit and explicit benefits of these communities for professional learning, development, and practice.

Finally, the dynamic and shifting nature of sociotechnical systems and professional networked practice in higher education demonstrates an issue of stewardship. How do we keep track of this information in the digital age? Who is responsible for its upkeep, and ultimately, its archiving? What protocols, policies, guidance, training, and/or support surrounds these digital and social platforms? There is not much work being done to address the digitization of professional networked practices or how to capture this knowledge sharing or support information management. Thus, we wonder what may be ‘lost’ to digital black holes and how that will impact our ability to understand higher education development in the future. We encourage more work in the arena of digital curation, information management, and knowledge stewardship.

6. Conclusion
In this article, we have provided a thorough analysis of networked practice in higher education with the netnography of the #acadv chat community. We have traced the topics discussed by the community, its origins, leadership structure, and insights of participants and moderators in maintaining a strong, robust, and participatory networked CoP. The role of such communities in the ongoing learning and professional development of practitioners in higher education cannot be understated. The longitudinal nature of the #acadv chat community demonstrates an ongoing need and the willingness of advising professionals to self-organize and self-direct their occupational learning through networked practices.

