The purpose of this study was to investigate the predictive validity of teaching, cognitive and social presence from a cognitive load perspective when perceived learning satisfaction was under control. To serve this purpose, this study included hierarchical multiple regression analyses run on data collected in a fully online graduate program. The results indicated that the presences could statistically significantly predict intrinsic, extraneous, and total loads with a small effect size. Individually, cognitive presence turned out to be the best predictor of intrinsic load while teaching presence was the best predictor of extraneous and total loads. Even though social presence was not a best predictor on its own, it contributed to the presences prediction of cognitive load as a group. As a result, all these findings pointed to a small-size predictive power of the presences on cognitive load thereby providing evidence for their incremental predictive validity and the importance of perceived learning satisfaction.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Teaching presence

Cognitive presence

Social presence

Germane load

Intrinsic load

Extraneous load

1. Introduction
The strength of scientific theories or theoretical frameworks depends largely on scientifically testing them to see whether or to what extent their assumptions hold true. This is important for the development of scientific knowledge since theories impact not only research but also practice. Online learning or education is not an exception in this regard. For instance, Garrison (2011) highlighted the desideratum to find more detailed empirical evidence for the theoretical strength of the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework (e.g. Garrison and Akyol, 2013a, Garrison and Akyol, 2013b, Garrison et al., 2000, Garrison et al., 2001, Garrison et al., 2010). He further claimed that the CoI framework has the basic features of a scientific theory thus deserving the status of an emerging e-learning theory. Likewise, Garrison (2013) stressed the need for further “explicating and validating” the CoI framework (p. 2). All these points entail collecting more research-based evidence supporting the validity and reliability of the CoI framework.

Therefore, a legitimate question to ask is the following: What kind of evidence would be sufficient to provide research-based insights into the power of theoretical assumptions? Gutting’s (2012) answer to such a question is that the predictive power of a theory on data which we may not necessarily expect it to explain is the best evidence for that theory. This does not suggest that such best evidence would depend on data that are totally irrelevant to the theoretical insights in question. In other words, there should be a reasonable account of why and how one would expect certain theoretical assumptions to explain a data set. In this respect, the present paper identifies cognitive load, the amount of working memory capacity spent on performing specific tasks (Sweller, van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998), as a prediction variable of the CoI framework. Accordingly, the current paper first presents cognitive load theory (e.g., Ayres and Paas, 2012, Kalyuga, 2011, Leahy and Sweller, 2016, Leppink et al., 2015, Paas and Ayres, 2014, Sweller, 2010, Sweller et al., 2011) and the CoI framework briefly in addition to the relationship between cognitive load and three presence types, and reports results of three multiple regression analyses.

1.1. Cognitive load theory
Cognitive load theory is an instructional design theory focusing on design conditions or principles that enhance learning (Sweller et al., 2011). The assumptions of the theory are dependent on the aspects of human cognition. Specifically, cognitive load theory assumes that instructional design should address the limitations of working memory “which temporarily maintains and stores information” (Baddeley, 2003, p. 829). After all, working memory is the part of human cognition where “The central work of multimedia learning takes place” (Mayer, 2009, p. 62). The reason is working memory processes information before it is stored in long-term memory (Baddeley, 1992). Likewise, working memory selects verbal and pictorial information from sensory memory, organizes them, and integrates them with each other and prior knowledge (Mayer, 2009). Despite such a crucial function, working memory can process three to five information chunks at a time (Cowan, 2001, Cowan, 2010, Cowan, 2014). It also has a time limit as well which is “about 30 s [seconds] depending on the task” (Cowan, 2014, p. 204). These limitations of working memory, according to Paas and Ayres (2014), especially impact processing of novel information.

Consequently, one of the basic premises of cognitive load theory is that instructional design should optimize cognitive load at a level that does not hinder learning. In other words, the point is not to decrease cognitive load as much as possible but keeping it at a level that does not prevent learning (van Gog & Paas, 2008). Similarly, Paas, Renkl, and Sweller (2004) contended that both cognitive overload and underload do not promote learning. As a result, cognitive load theory has offered evidence-based instructional design principles focusing on three different cognitive load types. Intrinsic load or inherent complexity of learning content refers to the number of interacting information elements (Sweller et al., 2011) each of which is one single information unit working memory can process as a whole (Leahy, Chandler, & Sweller, 2003). Germane load is the amount of working memory capacity spent on dealing with intrinsic load (e.g. Kalyuga, 2011, Sweller et al., 2011), which results in learning. Finally, extraneous load stems from ineffective instructional design or presentation thereby causing unnecessary information processing (Sweller, 2010), which is the case in presenting corresponding textual and pictorial information far away from each other in time or space.

Supported by research findings (e.g., Leppink, Paas, van Gog, van der Vleuten, & van Merriënboer, 2014), more recent theoretical conceptualization includes extraneous and intrinsic loads only (e.g., Sweller, 2010) suggesting that total cognitive load consists of intrinsic and extraneous loads (e.g., Leppink & van den Heuvel, 2015). Therefore, “germane cognitive load was reconceptualised as a subtype of intrinsic cognitive load” (Leppink & van den Heuvel, 2015, p. 121). Depending on the level of intrinsic load, optimizing cognitive load would include decreasing extraneous load, which would in turn increase germane load thus achieving learning. The CoI framework can provide valuable insights into such an optimization of cognitive load through teaching, cognitive and social presence.

1.2. The CoI framework
The CoI framework emerged in asynchronous textual group discussions in computer conferencing at higher education level (Garrison et al., 2010). Having a social-constructivist orientation (Akyol and Garrison, 2011, Akyol et al., 2010, Swan et al., 2009, Swan and Ice, 2010), the CoI framework focuses on the process of learning (Akyol et al., 2009, Swan et al., 2009). This point suggests that the CoI framework is much more interested in how learning happens instead of learning outcomes (Akyol et al., 2009). Social constructivism “is a particular view of knowledge, a view of how we come to know” according to which learning is a byproduct of socio-cultural interaction and sense-making (Oldfather, West, White, & Wilmarth, 1999, p. 8). In other words, social constructivism assumes that learners do not passively absorb information from experience but make sense of it by interpreting and reinterpreting it (Werhane et al., 2011). Consequently, a community of inquiry, “a group of individuals who collaboratively engage in purposeful critical discourse and reflection to construct personal meaning and confirm mutual understanding” (Garrison & Akyol, 2013a, p. 105), is the tenet of the CoI framework. “Together, the two constituting notions of community and inquiry form a pragmatic organizing framework of sustainable principles and processes for the purpose of guiding online educational practice” (Swan et al., 2009, p. 45).

The CoI framework formulates those principles and processes through three presences. Teaching presence is “the design, facilitation, and direction of cognitive and social processes for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile learning outcomes” (Anderson, Rourke, Garrison, & Archer, 2001, p. 5). Design and organization component of teaching presence consists of planning online learning experiences as well as “providing guidelines and tips and modeling” (Anderson et al., 2001, p. 6). Facilitation includes enhancement of reflective and sustained discourse in addition to keeping learners engaged, and evaluation of the whole process (Anderson et al., 2001). Finally, direct instruction is the use of pedagogical content knowledge, solving technical problems and providing guidance for other resources (Anderson et al., 2001).

Cognitive presence is “the extent to which the participants in any particular configuration of a community of inquiry are able to construct meaning through sustained communication” (Garrison et al., 2000, p. 89). Cognitive presence has four phases the first of which is triggering an event. A triggering event provides a problem to solve. Exploration involves exploring how to solve the problem posed. The next one is integration of ideas created during exploration. The final step, resolution, includes evaluating proposed solutions and running the best one.

The third presence is social presence that is “the ability of participants to identify with the community (e.g., course of study), communicate purposefully in a trusting environment, and develop inter-personal relationships by way of projecting their individual personalities” (Garrison, 2009, p. 352). Social presence has three components as well: “emotional expression, open communication, and group cohesion” (Garrison et al., 2000, p. 99). Affective or emotional expressions constitute interpersonal communication (Garrison & Akyol, 2013a) thus serving formation of in-group relationships. Another part of interpersonal communication is open communication consisting of mutual and courteous communication exchanges (Garrison et al., 2000). Lastly, group cohesion refers to identification with the group based on a sense of belongingness thereby establishing and maintaining the group sense (Garrison et al., 2000). The CoI framework assumes that higher levels of teaching, cognitive and social presence result in better learning since instructors involve in learning experiences more effectively, and learners engage in more effective social interaction which fosters problem solving. Promoting learning involves increasing germane or effective load that stems from mental effort spent on learning, and decreasing extraneous or ineffective load invested in unnecessary information processing. These insights strongly point out that there could be a certain level of relationship between the presences and cognitive load.

1.3. The relationship between cognitive load and presence types
From the perspective of the CoI framework, enhancing learning suggests keeping learners cognitively active through sustained reflection and discourse thereby increasing their cognitive presence level. Accordingly, it is reasonable to assume that a high level of cognitive presence means investing more germane load in learning especially when the learning content has a high level of intrinsic load or inner complexity. This assumption concurs with the result of Joksimovic, Gasevic, Kovanovic, Adesope, and Hatala’s (2014) linguistic analysis that high levels of cognitive presence can be associated with high levels of cognitive load. Moreover, total cognitive load comprises intrinsic and extraneous loads (e.g. Kalyuga, 2011, Sweller, 2010), and it should not exceed limited working memory capacity in order not to hinder learning. Therefore, in a cognitive overload scenario including a high level of intrinsic load, it is important to reduce total cognitive load (Carlson et al., 2003, Sweller et al., 1998). On the other hand, when learning is not challenging enough, there can be a cognitive underload situation that can similarly harm learning outcomes due to a low cognitive presence level. Kozan (2015) suggested that teaching presence and social presence can address both cognitive overload and underload situations. For example, when there is a very challenging learning content, instructors’ scaffolding and guidance as well as learners’ collaboration with peers would be very helpful (Kozan, 2015). Likewise, instructors or peers can introduce new and more difficult challenges when learners experience cognitive underload (Kozan, 2015). Moreover, instructors can set up design and organization of learning experiences in such a way that it carries a low level of extraneous or ineffective load. Peer feedback or guidance can also add to this by helping learners pay attention to what is relevant instead of focusing on unnecessary learning content.

These ideas above suggest that teaching presence and social presence may help optimize cognitive load by securing an effective level of cognitive presence, which in turn entails a certain level of relationship between cognitive load and presence types. Supporting these claims, Kozan (2015) found a significant, negative relationship between (a) teaching presence and extraneous load (rs = −.567, p < .01); and (b) cognitive presence and extraneous load (rs = −.493, p < .01). However, there was not a significant relationship between social presence and extraneous load (rs = −.169, p > .05). Furthermore, there was a significant, positive relationship between (a) teaching presence and germane load (rs = .425, p < .01); (b) cognitive presence and germane load (rs = .593, p < .01); and (c) social presence and germane load (rs = .214, p < .05). Finally, only cognitive presence related significantly and positively to intrinsic load (rs = .232, p < .05).

Kozan’s (2015) correlational findings above align partially with previous research as well. For instance, Kirschner et al., 2009a, Kirschner et al., 2009b contended that collaboration or collective information processing in a learner group can decrease cognitive load due to shared responsibilities among the group members. In contrast, such factors as “the costs of communication and coordination between the group members, the so called cognitive and social transaction costs” can also increase cognitive load (Kirschner et al., 2009b, p. 308). Similarly, van Bruggen, Kirschner, and Jochems (2002) highlighted that asynchronous interactions can both reduce cognitive load because of more time available, and increase cognitive load due to the need for “coherence and consistency” (p. 134).

Consequently, one can assume that online courses can have a high level of intrinsic load due to their possibly difficult or complex content. Similarly, online courses can lead to extraneous load because of poor design and organization of instruction. In other words, online learning can result in cognitive overload that needs optimization. Teaching presence and social presence can help optimize cognitive load so that effective learning happens, which hypothesizes that there is a certain level of relationship between teaching, cognitive and social presence, and cognitive load. Kozan (2015) examined this hypothesis through bivariate correlations. Following Joksimovic et al.’s (2014) suggestion that more CoI framework research should focus on individual differences including cognitive load, and the reconceptualization of main cognitive load types as intrinsic and extraneous loads (e.g., Sweller, 2010), the purpose of the present study was to test the predictive validity of the presences on cognitive load in an online learning environment. For this purpose, the current research employed hierarchical regression analyses by controlling for two important variables, perceived learning and learner satisfaction that significantly relate to the presences (Akyol & Garrison, 2008).

Overall, the present research addressed the following research question: After controlling for learner satisfaction and perceived learning, how well can teaching, cognitive and social presence predict intrinsic, extraneous and total loads at the end of a fully online learning experience?

2. Methods
2.1. Research setting
The research setting in which data collection occurred was a fully online educational technology Master of Science (MS) program at a large public Midwestern university in the United States. The online program started in 2011 in addition to a face-to-face on-campus component. The overall aim of the program is to provide learners with enhanced skills of analyzing, designing, developing, implementing, and evaluating instruction with a purpose of promoting learning. The program offers eight-week long courses using a learning management system. The present study used five of these fully online graduate courses (three credits each). Four of these courses were elective while one of them was a required course. Table 1 presents short descriptions of these courses.


Table 1. Online graduate courses used in the present study.

Course	Content
1	A historical overview of the field as well as the foundational knowledge, skills and attitudes.
2	Motivation: its theory and applications in instructional design.
3	An introduction to the concepts and principles of distance learning.
4	A student-centered approach to the integration of the internet into learning and teaching
5	Design and development of hypermedia instruction coupled with theoretical and research insights.
2.2. Participants
There were 76 female (73.80%) and 27 male (26.20%) fully online MS students who participated in the present study (M = 37.40 years of age, SD = 9.30). Moreover, results of the participant demographic survey revealed that, on average, (a) they had taken eight online courses before the present study (SD = 5.40) over a 3-year period (SD = 4.14); and (b) they used Blackboard learning management system five days a week (SD = 2.33). Table 2 displays the descriptive statistics for the distribution of the participants among the five online courses. There were no duplicate cases meaning participants from each course were different.


Table 2. Descriptive statistics for multiple regression participation.

Course	Section	n	%
1	1	6	5.8
2	11	10.7
4	14	13.6
2	3	7	6.8
4	4	3.9
3	1	11	10.7
2	13	12.6
4	2	10	9.7
5	1	15	14.6
2	12	11.6
Total		103	100
2.3. Measures
The following sections present each data collection instrument used. The instruments are available upon request.

2.3.1. The CoI survey
The present study employed the original CoI survey Arbaugh et al. (2008) developed. The CoI survey has 34 items including 13 teaching presence items (e.g., [1] The instructor clearly communicated important course topics; [13] The instructor provided feedback in a timely fashion), 9 social presence items (e.g., [14] Getting to know other course participants gave me a sense of belonging in the course; [22] Online discussions help me to develop a sense of collaboration), and 12 cognitive presence items (e.g., [23] Problems posed increased my interest in course issues; [34] I can apply the knowledge created in this course to my work or other non-class related activities) based on a 5-point scale ranging from strongly disagree (0) to strongly agree (4). Earlier research has managed to reveal validity, reliability and factor structure of the original survey or its adapted forms (e.g., Arbaugh et al., 2008, Bangert, 2009, Carlon et al., 2012, Diaz et al., 2010, Garrison et al., 2010, Kozan and Richardson, 2014b, Shea and Bidjerano, 2009, Swan et al., 2008). Results of the present study indicated high levels of internal consistency or Cronbach’s Alpha for each subpart of the survey: .87 for social presence, .96 for teaching presence, and .95 for cognitive presence.

2.3.2. The cognitive load survey
Kozan (2015) adapted Leppink, Paas, van Gog, van der Vleuten, and van Merriënboer’s (2014, p. 37) cognitive load scale through a pilot study including eight American native speakers of English. The main purpose of the pilot was to determine and improve the comprehensibility of the survey items. The pilot resulted in rewording the survey items and scale labels. The adapted survey includes 13 Likert-type items based on a scale ranging from not at all (0) to completely (10). Four of the survey items serve measuring intrinsic load (e.g., [1] In general, the content of this course was complex; [4] The complexity of this course required me to invest a high degree of mental effort) and extraneous load (e.g., [5] The explanations and instructions in this course were unclear; [8] Unclear or ineffective explanations and instructions in this course required me to invest a high degree of mental effort) separately while five of them measure germane load (e.g., [9] This course really enhanced my understanding of the content that was covered; [13] Enhancing my knowledge and understanding in this course required me to invest a high degree of mental effort). Kozan (2015) revealed high Cronbach’s Alpha values: .93 for germane load and extraneous load, and .91 for intrinsic load.

Unlike Kozan (2015), the current paper did not use germane load items due to the recent claims that there are not enough evidence-based insights into measuring germane load factor using similar versions of the survey (e.g., Leppink et al., 2014), and that the germane load items can indicate personal judgment of learning instead (e.g., Leppink & van den Heuvel, 2015). Moreover, recent research interpreted the third or germane factor as self-perceived learning (e.g., Bergman et al., 2015, Hadie and Yusoff, 2016). After all, the present study has a separate perceived learning instrument. Given that items measuring the amount of mental effort invested may or may not be used (e.g., Leppink & van den Heuvel, 2015), the current study included the fourth intrinsic and eighth extraneous load items above. Finally, the present study produced high Cronbach’s Alpha levels for the survey: .93 for extraneous load, and .91 for intrinsic load.

2.3.3. Perceived learning and satisfaction survey
Based on Akyol and Garrison (2008), this study also employed a two-part survey focusing on perceived learning and learner satisfaction. The present study adopted the first learner satisfaction item ([1] Overall, I was satisfied with this course) from Akyol and Garrison (2008, p. 22). Likewise, the first perceived learning item ([1] I learned a lot in this course) was a slightly adapted version of the item used by Akyol and Garrison (2008). In order to eliminate any score range issues, perceived learning and learner satisfaction parts of the survey included four more items as well (e.g., [5] I was satisfied with what I learned in this course; [5] I learned a lot about my profession/work). All the survey items had a 5-point scale ranging from strongly disagree (0) to strongly agree (4). Cronbach’s Alpha values were .86 for satisfaction and .90 for perceived learning.

2.3.4. Instructor survey
The instructor survey mainly aimed at collecting information about instructors’ socio-epistemological orientation (Akyol et al., 2010) and online teaching experiences in the form of the number of online courses taught (Arbaugh, 2005b) and years of online teaching experience (e.g., [2] Which socio-epistemological orientation to teaching best describes your approach?; [5] How many online courses have you taught to date?; [6] Approximately how many years have you been teaching online courses?). Because none of the instructors had designed the course they taught, and differently from most of previous research, the basic purpose of the instructor survey was to gain descriptive insights into the instructors’ online teaching experience and expertise thereby complementing the findings from an instructor perspective.

2.3.5. Participant survey
The participant survey collected information about participants’ age (Akyol et al., 2010, Shea and Bidjerano, 2009), academic level (Shea & Bidjerano, 2009), gender (Rovai, 2002), number of online courses taken before (Mykota & Duncan, 2007), and weekly Blackboard use in terms of “the number of days a week” (Arbaugh, 2005a, p. 64). The purpose of the survey was to collect demographic information pertaining to the participants (e.g., [1] How many online courses have you taken to date?; [6] How many days per week do you use Blackboard for this course?).

2.4. Procedures
Procedures consisted of three main phases: data collection, preparation and analysis.

2.4.1. Data collection
Because each online academic semester included two sessions, data collection occurred in the second session of spring 2014 and the first session of summer 2015 semesters. The researcher employed the surveys, developed on Qualtrics, towards the end of each eight-week academic session. In other words, the participants had the chance to complete the surveys using the survey links given in the learning management system. Due to the concern regarding providing the participants with an adequate amount of time necessary to get familiar with the online learning environment and the courses (McQuaid, 2010), an eight-week period was thought to be enough. Following Akyol and Garrison (2008), perceived learning and satisfaction survey appeared at the end of the CoI survey. The participants filled the surveys in the following order: (a) cognitive load survey; (b) CoI survey with perceived learning and satisfaction survey; and, (c) participant survey. Finally, the instructors received the link to the instructor survey via email.

2.4.2. Data preparation
Before conducting the main regression analyses, preliminary analyses served to prepare the data set. In this regard, due to the large and significant correlation between perceived learning and satisfaction (r = .908, p < .001; rs = .896, p < .001), the researcher combined these two by averaging them thereby constituting a new variable entitled perceived learning satisfaction.

As for missing values, the following items had one missing value only (1% of the variable data): (a) the third, sixth, eleventh, and thirteenth teaching presence items; (b) the twenty-third, twenty-ninth and thirtieth cognitive presence items; (c) the seventh extraneous load item; and (d) the fifteenth and nineteenth social presence items. Further, the items with two missing values (1.9% of the variable data) were: (a) the fourteenth and twenty-first social presence items; (b) the second and third satisfaction items; and (c) the seventh and ninth perceived learning items. Due to very high Cronbach’s Alpha values (.96 for teaching presence, .87 for social presence, .95 for cognitive presence, .93 for extraneous load, .86 for satisfaction, and .90 for perceived learning), the mean of the other items pertaining to each subscale replaced the relevant missing values. After all, it is possible to deal with less than 5 % missing values applying almost any procedures (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2013).

Due to the violation of the normality assumption, the researcher applied some transformations. Specifically, extraneous load and total load scores violated the normality assumption as well as having a significant positive skewness value thereby entailing square root transformation. The rest of the variables violated the normality assumption and had a significant negative skewness level resulting in reflect and square root transformation. After the transformations, the researcher re-reflected the variables again. Only total load and intrinsic load scores achieved normal distribution after the transformations. However, the transformations resulted in improved kurtosis and skewness values for the other variables. According to Tabachnick and Fidell (2013), transformations may improve “the statistical evaluation of” data (p. 98) and “the analysis” (p. 86). The resultant skewness values ranged from − 0.443 (SE = 0.238) to 0.176 (SE = 0.238) while it was − 0.881 (SE = 0.472) to − 0.124 (SE = 0.472) for kurtosis. Finally, out of 121 original responses, the researcher used a total of 103 participants’ data for the analysis part due to the elimination of (a) four outliers; and (b) participants whose instructors did not return the instructor survey.

2.4.3. Data analysis
Because the researcher turned satisfaction and perceived learning into one single variable entitled perceived learning satisfaction, he also reworded the original research question (i.e., After controlling for learner satisfaction and perceived learning, how well can teaching, cognitive and social presence predict intrinsic, extraneous and total loads at the end of a fully online learning experience?) so that it incorporates perceived learning satisfaction as one single variable. In other words, data analysis addressed the following revised research question:

After controlling for perceived learning satisfaction, how well can teaching, cognitive and social presence predict intrinsic, extraneous and total loads at the end of a fully online learning experience?

Hierarchical multiple regression addressed the research question above. In this regression, the researcher chooses the entry order of variables into the analysis based on theory or logic (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2013). Therefore, depending on research aims, a researcher can enter either major or minor variables into the analysis first thereby holding them constant while checking others’ contribution to the prediction (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2013). Likewise, Field (2009) recommends relying on previous research with a strong methodology while deciding on the predictors and the order of their entry into the analysis. Field (2009) also claimed that there should not be either too many irrelevant or too few relevant predictors in a regression model. Consequently, the present study employed theoretically sound predictors only, and controlled for one important variable based on earlier research.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Descriptive results
This part provides the descriptive statistics as they relate to the results of the regression analyses.

3.1.1. Perception of a learning community
Using a scale range from one to five, Matthews, Bogle, Boles, Day, and Swan (2013) stated that the CoI survey items rated “less than 3.75, or slightly less than “agree” (4)” on average would not sufficiently refer to an effective learning community (p. 493). Determining an effective learning community based on the CoI survey is important since Garrison (n. d.) criticized accepting any blended or online learning experience as real learning communities despite low presence levels. Consequently, following Matthews et al. (2013), the current data analysis included checking whether there was an effective learning community involved in the present study. Because the survey scale used included a scale ranging from zero to four, three was the minimum rating point on average. This criterion suggests a minimum mean rating of 36 for cognitive presence, 27 for social presence and 39 for teaching presence regarding all the learners. Table 3 provides the relevant descriptive statistics.


Table 3. Descriptive statistics for the presences (N = 103).

Presence	Possible minimum	Minimum	Possible maximum	maximum	M	SD
Teaching presence	0	1	52	52	39	13
Social presence	0	10	36	36	30	6
Cognitive presence	0	0	48	48	39	10
Total presence	0	33	136	136	107.20	24
Table 3 strongly suggests that the participants marked three for each teaching presence item while it is 3.33 for social presence items and 3.25 for cognitive presence items on average. In other words, the participants reported quite high levels of each presence pointing to their strong perceptions of an effective learning community formed in the present study.

3.1.2. Perceived learning and satisfaction
The participants’ level of satisfaction with the online courses ranged from 0 to 20 (M = 15.50, SD = 4.51). Similarly, their perceived learning ratings ranged from 0 to 20 (M = 15, SD = 5). These reported means higher than the mean of the scale (i.e., 10) and close to maximum (i.e., 20) suggest high levels of satisfaction and perceived learning. This aligns with the finding that the participants reported the existence of an effective learning community.

3.1.3. Cognitive load
Table 4 below presents quite a high level of intrinsic load in addition to a low level of extraneous load.


Table 4. Descriptive statistics for the cognitive load types (N = 103).

Cognitive load	Possible minimum	Minimum	Possible maximum	Maximum	M	SD
Intrinsic load	0	5	40	40	27.64	8
Extraneous load	0	0	40	40	14	12.11
Total load	0	9	80	80	41.64	15.11
Note. Total load = intrinsic load + extraneous load.

Cognitive load ratings of the participants comply fully with their perception of an effective learning community and high learning satisfaction because (a) a high level of intrinsic load suggests that learning content and activities were challenging enough for learning to occur without overwhelming the learners; and (b) a low level of extraneous or ineffective load suggests that learners spent most of their time and mental effort on learning itself rather than irrelevant instructional design issues. After all, it is reasonable to expect a challenging learning context to impose a manageable level of intrinsic load that can be compensated by investing a similar level of germane load. Not dealing with a high level of extraneous or ineffective load would have also let the learners spend more germane or effective effort on learning itself.

3.1.4. Instructors’ insights
Nine of the all twelve instructors completed the instructor survey thereby contributing to the following results. Two (22.23%) of the instructors reported a constructivist-individual approach (Learners construct their own knowledge individually/independently [Akyol et al., 2010]). Likewise, two instructors indicated a constructivist-group approach (learners construct knowledge by working together [Akyol et al., 2010]). Further, three (33.31%) instructors reported having an objectivist-group approach (Content/knowledge is transmitted from both the instructor and collaborative peers to the learners [Akyol et al., 2010]). Finally, two instructors stated their own approach: (1) a constructivist approach with access to an instructor; and (2) a constructivist-individual and group approach. Overall, these findings imply that six instructors (66.67%) have a constructivist approach to teaching with an individual or group focus while three instructors (33.33%) have an objectivist approach.

Moreover, the instructors delivered the online courses designed by faculty members working at the university. Consequently, a complementary Likert-type question with a scale ranging from 0 (not at all) to 10 (completely) asked the instructors to indicate the extent to which the design of the course they taught aligned with their approach to teaching. Ratings on this item ranged from four to ten (M = 8, SD = 1.64) suggesting that the design of the courses aligned strongly with the instructors’ approach to teaching that was mainly a constructivist approach with a group focus. Lastly, the instructors had taught two to 23 courses (M = 9, SD = 7), and the number of years of online teaching before the current study ranged from zero to eight (M = 4.11, SD = 2.31).

3.2. Multiple regression analyses
The results below pertain to the main research question focusing on how well the presences can predict intrinsic, extraneous and total cognitive load while controlling for perceived learning satisfaction.

3.2.1. The prediction of intrinsic load
A hierarchical multiple regression with the presences as the predictors and intrinsic load as the dependent variable served to test how well the presences could predict intrinsic load while controlling for perceived learning satisfaction. Table 5 presents the basic results including the constant, the unstandardized regression coefficients (B), standard errors for the unstandardized regression coefficients (SE B), the standardized regression coefficients (β), and the squared semi-partial correlations (sr2).


Table 5. Results of the hierarchical multiple regression on intrinsic load (N = 103).

Model		B	SE B	Β	sr2
1	Constant	2.757	.421		
LS	.230	.120	.186a	.03
2	Constant	2.824	.458		
LS	.173	.259	.141	.003
TP	−.253	.108	−.377b	.05
SP	−.209	.135	−.196	.02
CP	.415	.173	.519c	.05
Note. Model 1: R = .186. R2 = .035. ΔR2 .025.

Model 2: R = .347. R2 = .12. ΔR2 = .084. R2 change = .086.

LS = Perceived learning satisfaction. TP = Teaching presence.

SP = Social presence. CP = Cognitive presence.

a
p = .059.

b
p = .021.

c
p =.018.

The first model suggested that perceived learning satisfaction would explain 3.5% (2.5% adjusted) of variance in intrinsic load, which showed a strong tendency to be significant, F (1, 101) = 3.64, p = .059. Further, the second model including all the variables could explain 12% (8.4% adjusted) of variability in intrinsic load, F (4, 98) = 3.35, p = .013. Upon controlling for perceived learning satisfaction, the presences explained approximately 9% of the variance in intrinsic load, Fchange (3, 98) = 3.18, p = .028. The second model also suggested that teaching and cognitive presence were statistically significant predictors, with cognitive presence having a higher beta value (β) of .52 (p = .018) than teaching presence (β = −.38, p = .021). These results suggested that the presences could statistically significantly predict intrinsic load both together with perceived learning satisfaction, and over and above it. However, based on “Cohen’s (1988) guidelines for effect sizes (small effect R2 = .03 [3%], medium effect R2 = .10 [10%], large effect R2 = .30 [30%])” (Canivez, Watkins, James, Good, & James, 2014, p. 673), the prediction of intrinsic load by perceived learning satisfaction and the presences has a small effect size. Likewise, the additional contribution of the presences themselves, as a group, to the prediction of intrinsic load is small.

Given that intrinsic load depends on the number of interacting information elements (Sweller et al., 2011) included in learning materials, the results above suggest that the presences can statistically significantly predict inner complexity of online learning contexts. Specifically, cognitive presence turned out to be the best predictor of intrinsic load with higher levels of cognitive presence associated closely with higher levels of intrinsic load. Because “cognitive presence focuses on higher-order thinking processes as opposed to specific individual learning outcomes” (Garrison et al., 2001, p. 8), the learners must have spent more mental effort on dealing with high intrinsic load. In other words, the current online learning context was challenging enough demanding a high level of cognitive presence on the part of the learners. Moreover, this would be essential since cognitive presence seems to be the main driver for effective and successful learning (e.g., Vaughan & Garrison, 2005).

However, teaching presence could negatively predict intrinsic load suggesting that teaching presence efforts may have helped to calibrate intrinsic load. In other words, it was not just learners’ cognitive efforts but also instructors’ teaching presence efforts used to ease intrinsic load in the present study. After all, teaching presence can also enhance cognitive and social presence through designing and facilitating instruction (Garrison et al., 2000), which may have contributed to the relationship between cognitive presence and intrinsic load as well. As for social presence, it could not significantly predict intrinsic load despite studies claiming that social presence functions as a mediator between cognitive and teaching presence (e.g., Garrison et al., 2010, Shea and Bidjerano, 2009), which requires social presence foster learners’ ability to “communicate purposefully in a trusting environment” (Garrison, 2009, p. 352). The current study does not have any data-based insights into why this would be the case. However, most of the social presence items used appear to focus on social interaction rather than purposeful communication, which can partly explain why social presence could not predict intrinsic load in the present study. Similarly, Lowenthal and Dunlap (2014) claimed that social presence items do not fully represent social presence indicators.

3.2.2. The prediction of extraneous load
The second hierarchical regression analysis tested whether the presences can predict extraneous load while controlling for perceived learning satisfaction. Table 6 displays the results obtained.


Table 6. Results of the hierarchical multiple regression on extraneous load (N = 103).

Model		B	SE B	Β	sr2
1	Constant	6.733	.554		
LS	−.972	.158	−.521**	.30
2	Constant	6.305	.594		
LS	−.229	.336	−.123	.003
TP	−.368	.140	−.362*	.05
SP	.336	.175	.208a	.02
CP	−.300	.224	−.248	.01
Note. Model 1: R = .521. R2 = .271. ΔR2 = .264.

Model 2: R = .595. R2 = .354. ΔR2 = .328. R2 change = .083.

LS = Perceived learning satisfaction. TP = Teaching presence.

SP = Social presence. CP = Cognitive presence.

a
p = .058.

⁎
p < .016.

⁎⁎
p < .001.

The first model revealed that perceived learning satisfaction could statistically significantly explain 27.1% (26.4% adjusted) of variance in extraneous load, F (1, 101) = 37.64, p < .001. The second model containing the presences and perceived learning satisfaction was able to explain 35.4% (33% adjusted) variance in extraneous load, F (4, 98) = 13.50, p < .001. Controlling for perceived learning satisfaction, the amount of variance explained by the presences became 8.3%, Fchange (3, 98) = 4.20, p < .009. Moreover, only teaching presence turned out to be a statistically significant predictor of extraneous load (β = −.362, p < .016). These findings imply that the presences can statistically significantly predict extraneous load both together with perceived learning satisfaction, and beyond it. As for the effect size estimates, perceived learning satisfaction and the presences, as a group, can predict extraneous load with a large effect size while the additional prediction of extraneous load by the presences themselves has a small effect size.

Extraneous load depends on ineffective instructional design or presentation of learning content (Sweller, 2010). The significant and negative β value of teaching presence suggests that higher levels of teaching presence associate with lower levels of extraneous load. In other words, teaching presence could negatively predict extraneous load. More specifically, teaching presence may have eased extraneous or ineffective load in the present study thereby serving learning. This finding aligns with teaching presence as a driver for social and cognitive processes to enhance learning outcomes (Anderson et al., 2001). Interestingly, teaching presence could negatively predict intrinsic load as well based on the first hierarchical regression run on intrinsic load. These two findings complete each other in that teaching presence can help to tackle both intrinsic load and extraneous load supporting the idea that teaching presence enhances online learning experiences.

Furthermore, the predictive power of social presence on extraneous load showed a strong tendency to be statistically significant (β = .208, p = .058). This finding indicates that social presence is positively associated with extraneous load thus relating high levels of social presence to high levels of extraneous load. It also complies with the interpretation that social presence, as it is measured in the survey employed by the present study, may reflect social interaction more. Such interactions might have produced unnecessary information to process by the learners thereby increasing the level of extraneous load.

3.2.3. The prediction of total load
Table 7 presents the results of the hierarchical regression run on total load to check whether the presences can predict total load while controlling for perceived learning satisfaction.


Table 7. Results of the hierarchical multiple regression on total load (N = 103).

Model		B	SE B	Β	sr2
1	Constant	7.640	.422		
LS	−.385	.121	−.303**	.09
2	Constant	7.432	.457		
LS	.006	.259	.004	.00
TP	−.329	.108	−.475*	.08
SP	.087	.135	.079	.00
CP	.032	.173	.039	.00
Note. Model 1: R = .303. R2 = .092. ΔR2 = .083.

Model 2: R = .421. R2 = .177. ΔR2 = .144. R2 change = .086.

LS = Perceived learning satisfaction. TP = Teaching presence.

SP = Social presence. CP = Cognitive presence.

⁎
p = .003.

⁎⁎
p = .002.

The first model revealed that perceived learning satisfaction could statistically significantly explain 9.2% (8.3% adjusted) of variability in total load, F (1, 101) = 10.20, p = .002. Likewise, the second model revealed that the presences and perceived learning satisfaction could account for almost 18% (14.4% adjusted) of variability in total load, F (4, 98) = 5.30, p = .001. When perceived learning satisfaction is under control, the presences could explain 8.6% of the variance in total load, Fchange (3, 98) = 3.40, p = .021. Overall, these results highlight that the presences could statistically significantly predict total load both together with and in addition to perceived learning satisfaction. The prediction of total load by both perceived learning satisfaction and the presences has a medium effect size while the presences, as a group, could additionally predict total load with a small effect size.

As for the predictability of total load by each presence, it was only teaching presence (β = −.475, p = .003) that turned out to be a statistically significant predictor. Total load includes intrinsic and extraneous load, and it should not exceed working memory capacity in order not to harm learning (e.g., Sweller, 2010). In other words, the present results showed that higher levels of teaching presence relate to lower levels of total load thereby supporting the assumption that teaching presence can help manage total load. This finding is not surprising given that teaching presence could also negatively predict intrinsic and extraneous loads individually in the present study. Therefore, it seems that as the level of teaching presence increases, the level of total load can decrease thereby increasing the chances that learning would occur.

4. Conclusions
Showing that the presences can statistically significantly predict cognitive load types and total load especially as a group together with perceived learning satisfaction, and over and above it, the present study produced some valuable theoretical and practical conclusions. First, the predictive power of the presences on cognitive load point to the predictive validity of the presences from a cognitive load perspective. Given that further work on the validity of the CoI framework is necessary (e.g., Garrison, 2013, Garrison and Arbaugh, 2007), and the CoI framework is relatively new (e.g., Garrison et al., 2000, Garrison et al., 2001), the theoretical contributions of the current study become significant. This contribution especially lies in the predictability of overall cognitive load as well as intrinsic and extraneous loads by teaching presence pointing to the importance of teaching presence for online learning. Instructors’ constructivist teaching approach with a stronger focus on collaboration, which they reported was supported by the design of the courses they taught, also complements this conclusion in that the instructors might have kept their teaching presence at a certain level to encourage more cognitive presence on the part of the learners.

From a practical perspective, the results also suggest encouraging cognitive presence on the part of online learners, which would result in more germane load or learning thereby dealing with high levels of intrinsic load. This may be the situation especially when intrinsic load is high or when learning content is significantly challenging. Because cognitive presence may function as a mediator between teaching and social presence (Kozan & Richardson, 2014a), facilitation of cognitive presence may also foster enhanced levels of social presence which focuses more on high-level thinking or germane load invested in learning. Simultaneously, teaching presence can ease extraneous or ineffective load thereby making it possible to spare more mental resources to be spent on intrinsic load. However, social presence might work in the opposite direction as long as it encourages social interactions only without supporting cognitive presence significantly. Therefore, online instruction may focus on using social presence as a driver for higher levels of cognitive presence, which might also increase the level of germane load further. Otherwise, the effectiveness of social presence may not be so high when compared to teaching and cognitive presence (e.g., Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005).

Readers should approach all the insights gained through this research cautiously due to some limitations. The data collection happened in one higher education online graduate program thus limiting generalizability. Therefore, further research would include both undergraduate and graduate programs in different disciplines. Moreover, the results pertain to the end of eight-week sessions not reflecting the period before it when a significant amount of learning can take place. Further research, consequently, can examine the predictive power of the presences on cognitive load during multiple times in a semester. Similarly, following the suggestion that the CoI framework can also inform different learning contexts other than online learning environments or discussions (e.g., Archer, 2010, Kozan and Richardson, 2014b), the relationship between the presences and cognitive load can be explored in different learning contexts ranging from face-to-face to blended learning. In addition, the small-size incremental prediction of especially extraneous and total loads by the presences becomes larger when perceived learning satisfaction joins them, which highlights the importance of perceived learning satisfaction as a variable for future research.

Finally, it is important to remember that multiple regression focuses on relationships not causality (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2013). Different variables and samples may result in different multiple regression results (Pallant, 2007). This point entails cross-validation of any findings obtained through current multiple regression analyses. Likewise, Tabachnick and Fidell (2013) asserted that even a strong relationship can potentially be due to other different factors that are not included in a regression. Closely related to the data analysis method used, the research data came from the CoI survey only, which limits the insights gained to the extent the survey measures the presences. Given the concerns regarding some of the survey items (e.g., Lowenthal & Dunlap, 2014), this critique becomes important. Therefore, as suggested by Lowenthal and Dunlap (2014), employing a richer data triangulation strategy can also strengthen the future research findings. Accordingly, the present results call for future cross-validation studies where the presences and cognitive load can function as powerful variables, which can help us design and implement better online learning experiences.

