The main purpose of this study is to examine relationships between the social abilities, perceived team learning, and the performances of students in a blended learning setting. The participants, 82 undergraduate students, worked in small teams on a research method task over one semester. The instruments used for this study included a five-factor social ability scale and a one-dimensional perceived collaborative learning scale. The results showed moderate significant relationships between students' perceived team learning scores and students' peer social presence scores as well as weaker relationships between team learning and two social ability subscales, written communication skills and instructor social presence. There appears to be an important effect of peer social presence that is linked to learning and performance. Using a blended learning model may have an important impact on increasing social interaction and learning with a team learning approach thereby helping students undertake comprehensive tasks and increase student learning.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Social ability

Team learning

Blended learning

Social presence

Collaborative learning

1. Introduction
Well-accepted instructional theories such as constructivism and social learning have emphasized the positive implications of collaborative, team-based strategies on students' learning (Gomez, Wu, & Passerini, 2010). Specifically, social learning theories indicate a strong relationship between interaction and learning experiences of students who actively and collaboratively participate in the learning process (Vygotsky, 1978). In regard to team/collaborative learning activities, in recent years, collaborative learning activities in higher education have become an interesting topic for researchers. The main goal of this paper is to investigate the association among social ability – that is critical for team interaction, perceived team/collaborative experience – that is critical for effective team work, and academic achievement – output of learning.

2. Context of the study
Bandura (1986), in his social cognitive theory, stressed triadic reciprocal causation of cognitive, environmental, and behavioral factors, and how learning process occurs based on the interactions of these factors with each other in an appropriate social setting. In this particular study, team/collaborative learning activities were organized for learners. In conjunction with social, constructivist, and active learning theories, team learning (TL) strategies can effectively provide students a comprehensive learning experience (Michaelsen, Knight, & Fink, 2002). Regarding those strategies, with the support of computer-mediated communication tools, students working in groups can share resources and discuss tasks with their peers in and out of the classroom (Gomez et al., 2010).

Also, considering the vitality of environmental factor of the Bandura's theory, a blended approach of both face-to-face and online delivery was applied, providing a balance of information and communication technologies that offer unique instructional flexibility by increasing students' interaction (Vaughan, 2007). Moreover, in terms of behavioral factors, actual team performance scores were used. The next section provides details about those factors.

2.1. Learning in teams
A team refers to two or more people assigned to particular roles in order to complete a common goal (Salas, Dickinson, Converse, & Tannenbaum, 1992). Many organizations have successfully applied team approaches to solve ill-structured or complex problems, to complete tasks that are too difficult to be managed individually, and to benefit from the collective experience, skills, and knowledge of team members (Cooke et al., 2004, Johnson and O'Connor, 2008, Michaelsen and Sweet, 2008). Moreno, Gonzalez, Castilla, Gonzalez, and Sigut (2007) emphasized the association between team success and social skills of the individuals in teams. Similarly, Johnson, Khalil, and Spector (2008) indicated the crucial effect of students' social and communication skills on team effectiveness and, consequently, students' learning. Thus, such learning experience, if used effectively, helps improve communication, discussion, problem-solving, decision-making, and creativity skills, as well as increasing the ability to work with others, an essential part of being in a social community (Johnson et al., 2008, Johnson and O'Connor, 2008).

2.2. Using team learning in blended learning settings
Blended learning (BL), also called hybrid learning, refers to the combination of online and face-to-face teaching approaches. A learning environment designed around the beneficial components of both instructional delivery methods provides the most effective setting for students and instructors (Atıcı and Türel, 2011, Dziuban et al., 2005). BL can enhance students' experiences by adding web-based collaborative tools, content delivery tools, asynchronous personalized instruction, synchronous web conferencing, and tutorials to face-to-face instruction (Singh, 2003). Thus, learners can be involved in the learning process out of traditional contexts and timeframes by discussing and sharing course-related issues with their peers and instructors. Furthermore, BL enables students and instructors to initiate interactions in a face-to-face setting and to maintain and enhance those interactions later via web-based tools in an online setting (Olapiriyakul & Scher, 2006).

Because of these advantages, BL helps teachers integrate instructional strategies that require more significant interaction, including TL. By leveraging the success of TL, instructors can observe, guide, and assess teams while students collaborate with each other and their instructor to complete common tasks via online tools in an extramural setting. Instructors can also provide additional online resources, create discussion forums, offer instant feedback, and help students build teams (Johnson, Top, & Yukselturk, 2011). Therefore, many researchers recommend supporting traditional face-to-face courses with online tools that enhance student interactions and social and communication abilities, which may have a substantial impact on both team effectiveness and individual learning (Alavi et al., 1997, Johnson et al., 2008, Williams et al., 2006).

With the rapid development and diffusion of online systems, some researchers have focused on social elements of learning in order to provide more interactivity and, as a result, have created more effective learning settings (Garrison and Anderson, 2003, Rovai, 2003). Although numerous online learning tools offer higher levels of interaction, communication, and collaboration, many researchers have stressed the lack of social presence as the main challenge of online learning (Arbaugh, 2000, Garrison and Anderson, 2003, Rovai, 2003).

2.3. Learning and social ability
Many learning theorists, including Bandura (1977) and Vygotsky (1978), have stressed that education is a kind of social practice and learning occurs through social interactions (Laffey et al., 2006, Wegner, 1998). Specifically, in BL settings in which team learning are implemented, learners need to have the appropriate skills to engage at the levels supported by the course design. In the current paper among those skills, only social ability skills were taken into consideration. In this study, social ability addresses students' perceptions about social interactions and capacities when learning via computer-mediated methods. When students work in groups (whether online or face-to-face), social interaction with teammates, instructors, and other classmates plays a key role in individual learning (Gomez et al., 2010, Williams et al., 2006).

In order to understand how students' social interactions, that are essential for their learning, contribute to overall learning experiences and outcomes, Laffey et al. (2006) have suggested the examination of social abilities in online learning settings. Social ability is a critical construct that helps educators to interpret perceived ongoing social interactions in online learning settings. In their first study, Laffey et al. (2006) defined the prominent constructs of social ability as social presence, social navigation, and social connectedness. Extending the initial construct of social ability provided by Laffey et al. (2006); Yang, Tsai, Kim, Cho, and Laffey (2006) reviewed the literature in regard to factors that influence social interactions and suggested that students' perceived privacy (comfort sharing personal information) and written communication skills are essential for the examination of social ability. They developed a 30-item construct consisting of five factors: peer social presence, written communication skills, instructor social presence, comfort sharing personal information, and social navigation. The following section explores each factor in details.

2.3.1. Peer social presence
Social presence refers to the sense of being in a learning context and belonging to a group and it can be used as an essential predictor of students' learning experiences and satisfaction (Gunawardena & Zittle, 1997). Social presence is often stressed as one of the main components of social interaction (Baek and Cho, 2012, May, Kim, 2011) and it is considered different from each other as peer and instructor social presence under social ability construct (Swan and Shih, 2005, Yang et al., 2006). According to Pollard, Minor, and Swanson (2014), both instructor and peer social presence were essential in elucidating the classroom community.

2.3.2. Instructor social presence
This factor of social ability refers students' perceptions about how responsive and accessible the instructor is during the learning process in particularly online settings. Palloff and Pratt (2003) stressed that strategies such as “posting regularly to the discussion board, responding in a timely manner to e-mail and assignments, and generally modeling good online communication and interactions” (p. 118) are necessary in terms of instructor social presence.

2.3.3. Written communication skills
Those skills refer to students' capabilities basically regarding the written language. Tsai, Kim, et al. (2008) and Tsai, Yang, and Laffey (2008) asserted that written communication skills are vital for students particularly who use both synchronous and asynchronous online communication. In these settings, text-based communication is the one preferred predominantly since most online communication tools (i.e., discussion forums, email, instant messenger) are text based. Thus written communication skills are considered a critical predictor of effective learning in online courses (Mandernach et al., 2006, Tsai et al., 2008a, Tsai et al., 2008b).

2.3.4. Comfort sharing personal information
It refers students' confidence and comfort about sharing information related to themselves which represents students' acknowledging their class as a learning community where they belong to (Swan & Shih, 2005). Swinth, Farnham, and Davis (2002) also pointed out that students' being comfortable in sharing their personal information foster the interpersonal relationships of students in their online communities (as cited in Tsai, Kim, et al., 2008).

2.3.5. Social navigation
It addresses students' perceptions and awareness of the actions of his instructor and peers and the effects of those actions on his own work throughout the course. Dourish (1999) defines the social navigation as an essential aspect of collaborative work since it refers students awareness of how others in a computer supported collaborative learning settings steer and construct the information-seeking process. Yang et al. (2006) emphasized the need for more research on students' perceptions regarding the effect of their peers' and instructors' actions and engagements to facilitate understanding of the social navigation construct.

2.4. Purpose of the study
Many researchers (Arbaugh, 2000, Gunawardena and Zittle, 1997, Laffey et al., 2006, Rovai, 2003, Swan et al., 2000) have examined the social aspects of learning and attempted to provide a solid basis for understanding the social abilities of students in online learning settings, while other studies have focused on TL experiences and aspects of team interaction in online settings (Gomez et al., 2010, Williams et al., 2006). Further, Kreijns, Kirschner, and Vermeulen (2013) encouraged scholars to pay attention to the socio-emotional aspects of social interaction, particularly in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environments. Although there seems to be a connection between the social abilities of students and their learning experiences, no study has yet been found that examined the relationships between TL and students' social abilities within BL settings. Unveiling these relationships may help researchers and instructors design more effective blended TL environments. Thus, drawing from the social ability factors of Yang et al. (2006) and Laffey et al. (2006), this study investigates the following research questions:

1)
Is there a relationship between students' perceived team learning (PTL) experiences, performances and their perceived social abilities in terms of (a) peer social presence, (b) written communication skills, (c) instructor social presence, (d) comfort sharing personal information, and (e) social navigation?

2)
Do students' social-ability-subscale scores explain a significant amount of variance in individual or group PTL scores in a blended course?

3)
Do students' social-ability-subscale and PTL scores explain a significant amount of variance in group project scores in a blended course?

3. Methods
3.1. Participants
The participants of this study consisted of senior pre-service teachers attending a government university in eastern Turkey. All participants were enrolled in a one semester blended course focusing on research methods and had computer and Internet access outside the classroom. None of them had any previous online or blended course experience. Of the 81 participants (48 male and 33 female), the average age of the participants was 22.3.

3.2. Learning environment
A BL environment was designed by using an open source learning management system (LMS), Moodle, for a 14-week (one semester) undergraduate research methods course. The main objective of the course was to provide prospective teachers with foundations of scientific research methods as well as experience planning, conducting, and reporting on a research study in a social sciences field. At the beginning of the semester, the researcher established tasks, reports, content organization, and a selection of communication tools. In the first week, the instructor introduced the requirements and context of the course as well as Moodle, the online learning setting (i.e., how to use discussion forums and chat features). Participants were asked to register for Moodle and create their own teams based on the criteria that each team consisted of three to five students. A total of 23 teams were formed. Teams worked collaboratively on basic tasks such as finding an appropriate research topic and related studies, determining a goal and research questions, and selecting appropriate data collection tools and analysis methods. Each team was required to submit a weekly progress report and a research paper at the end of the semester.

The main goal of the course is to teach scientific research methods. In the face-to-face setting, a lecture based instruction method which included direct instruction, questioning, and demonstration methods was used to develop students' knowledge and skills about following aspects: understanding the nature of scientific research, defining problems, determining appropriate hypothesis, writing research questions, conducting literature review, selecting suitable samples, instruments, and analysis methods, conducting research, interpreting findings and reporting. Students individually participated in class discussions about what they have learned in the face-to-face part of the instruction.

Students were also encouraged to actively participate and use the provided online communication tools.

Discussion forums: A weekly discussion topic was created related to course content and tasks, and students had permission to open new topics. All discussion forums were open throughout the semester, and students were encouraged to share their feelings, problems, solutions, and online resources.

Synchronous chat: A synchronous chat module was set up for online users on the course's main page in Moodle. This tool allowed students to have real-time interactions with their teammates, the instructor, and other classmates.

Email: Within the system, students could send private or general emails to team members, other teams, and the instructor. Students were encouraged to use the Moodle email system to track message traffic; when necessary, the instructor answered questions posed in student emails by responding to everyone.

Groups: The groups module was activated in Moodle to manage teams, facilitate communication, and follow and grade each team's progression.

Assignments: The assignments module was used to assign tasks and support team collaboration. For example, in order to create a draft questionnaire for their research topics, each team member uploaded specific items to the module. After discussing each item, students created a final questionnaire and shared it with other teams.

Zacharis (2015) emphasizes that the success of an LMS-based blended setting depends on the design and practice of “the provision of online tools and resources that promote engagement with content, collaboration with team-mates and connectedness with both peers and teachers” (p. 45). Instructor regularly posted to the discussion board, responded to the emails, checked assignments, and corresponded with students via synchronous chat in a timely manner to facilitate communication and interaction in online setting as suggested in the literature (i.e. Anderson et al., 2001, Dias et al., 2015, Palloff and Pratt, 2003).

3.3. Instruments
For this study, the Social Ability survey and the Perceived Team Learning survey were used. Both surveys are explained below. In addition, participants' group project scores were used as a measure of their team performance.

3.3.1. Social ability survey
The social ability survey was first developed by Laffey et al. (2006) and was expanded by Yang et al. (2006) into a 5-factor, 30-item questionnaire. Ozturk (2008) translated the extended version into Turkish and administered it to 160 undergraduate students at four universities in Turkey. After confirmatory factor and reliability analysis, she established a 5-factor, 27-item survey (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree) with the Cronbach's alpha value of 0.86, which was used for this study. Table 1 shows Cronbach's alpha coefficients as calculated by Ozturk (2008) and for the current study for each subscale and the total scale.


Table 1. Cronbach's alpha coefficients for social ability scale and subscales.

Factor	Subscale name	No. of items	Öztürk's study	Current study
1	Peer social presence (PSP)	6	0.76	0.88
2	Written communication skills (WCS)	3	0.88	0.93
3	Instructor social presence (ISP)	5	0.81	0.90
4	Comfort with sharing personal information (CSPS)	3	0.79	0.84
5	Social navigation (SN)	10	0.81	0.84
Overall	Social ability (SA)	27	0.86	0.92
According to the table, Cronbach's alpha coefficients for each subscale were over a good rate (> 0.8) for the current study.

3.3.2. Perceived team learning
In order to measure students' team learning perceptions, an adapted form of the collaborative learning criteria developed by Palloff and Pratt (2005) was used. Ozdamli and Uzunboylu (2008) provided a single factor, 10-item form of this survey in their study (Cronbach's alpha = 0.92), which examined the attitudes of students who worked in teams in a BL setting. Item scores ranged from “Always (5)” to “Never (1),” and sample items included:

•
As a team, we determined my common goals.

•
We had enough time and sources to perform my task.

•
I feel that I improved myself in this course.

•
I am satisfied with the benefit I obtained at the end of this semester.

For this study, Cronbach's alpha for the perceived team learning (PTL) survey was 0.83.

3.3.3. Group project scores
At the end of the semester, each team's final research paper was graded out up to 50 based on the required components. Those components were abstract, keywords, introduction, method, sample, results, discussion and conclusion, references, appendix, citations, and language and format as seen in Table 2.


Table 2. Evaluation criteria for team project scores.

Criteria	Point	Details
Abstract	5	General summary of paper, general info about method, participants and the most important result(s)
Keywords	3	Associated keywords (3–6)
Introduction	5	Introduction to topic, similar research studies, transition, purpose of study
Method	7	Research model, measurement tools, analysis
Sample	5	Description of sample
Results	5	Results of analysis
Discussion & conclusion	3	Interpretation of results and basic comparison with existing studies
References	5	Providing references based on APA style
Appendix	3	The questionnaire or survey used in the study, pictures, permissions (if applicable)
Citations	4	Using citations appropriately
Language & format	5	Using academic language correctly and appropriately without grammar errors
Total	50	
3.4. Data analysis
Descriptive statistics (i.e., means and standard deviations) were examined for the PTL and social ability scores as well as for each subscale of the social ability survey. To examine the correlation between students' perceptions about their team learning experience and their social abilities, Pearson correlation coefficients were analyzed. Multiple linear regressions were used to determine whether social ability subfactors explain a certain amount of variance in student or group PTL scores in a blended course. A multiple regression analysis was also applied to predict team project scores based on social ability subscales.

4. Results
The results of this study are presented below based on the research questions.

4.1. Relationship between social ability subscales and PTL individual scores of students
To provide a clear presentation of the relationships between individual social ability and PTL scores, Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated (see Table 3).


Table 3. Pearson correlation coefficients for individual scores.

Variables	M	SD	PTL	PSP	WCS	ISP	CSPS	SN	SA
PTL	3.87	0.64	1	0.50⁎⁎	0.26⁎	0.24⁎	0.08	0.16	0.35⁎⁎
PSP	5.31	1.28		1	0.22⁎	0.61⁎⁎	0.23⁎	0.73⁎⁎	0.86⁎⁎
WCS	4.86	1.59			1	0.23⁎	0.28⁎	0.10	0.42⁎⁎
ISP	5.61	1.28				1	0.39⁎⁎	0.56⁎⁎	0.80⁎⁎
SCPS	5.42	1.47					1	0.17	0.48⁎⁎
SN	5.19	1.02						1	0.84⁎⁎
Note: PTL: perceived team learning, PSP: perceived peer social presence, WCS: written communication skills, ISP: instructor social presence, CSPS: comfort sharing personal information, SN: social navigation, and SA: social ability (overall).

⁎⁎
Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

⁎
Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

No singularity between any two variables can be claimed, as no correlations exceeded 0.80 (Pallant, 2001).

Statistically positive relationships were found between PTL and the following variables: peer social presence (r = 0.50, p < 0.01), written communication skills (r = 0.26, p < 0.05), instructor social presence (r = 0.24, p < 0.05), and overall social ability (r = 0.35, p < 0.01). Moreover, a multiple linear regression was calculated to test whether social ability subfactors explain variance in PTL in a blended course. According to the results (see Table 4), the first subscale, perceived peer social presence, most accurately predicted students' PTL (R2 = 0.25, F(1, 79) = 26.20, p < 0.001).


Table 4. Multiple linear regression model for perceived team learning predicted by peer social presence based on individual scores.

Model	Unstandardized coefficients	Standardized coefficients	t	Sig.	CI (confidence intervals)
B	Std. error	Beta
1	(Constant)	2.54	0.27	–	9.51	0.000	[2.01–3.07]
Peer social presence	0.25	0.05	0.50	5.12	0.000	[0.15–0.35]
R = 0.50, R2 = 0.25.

F(1, 79) = 26.20, p < 0.001.

4.2. Relationship between social ability subscales and PTL group scores of students
On examining the correlations of group scores for each team, similar significant correlations were observed in this case (see Table 5).


Table 5. Pearson correlation coefficients for group mean scores including group project scores.

Variables	M	SD	Project	PTL	PSP	WCS	ISP	CSPS	SN	SA
Project	41.43	4.37	1	0.00	0.22	− 0.23	0.18	− 0.01	0.49⁎	0.29
PTL	3.86	0.37		1	0.53⁎⁎	− 0.06	0.05	− 0.08	0.07	0.20
PSP	5.27	0.76			1	− 0.03	0.59⁎⁎	0.18	0.63⁎⁎	0.79⁎⁎
WCS	4.90	0.94				1	0.18	0.09	0.04	0.28
ISP	5.61	0.81					1	0.32	0.62⁎⁎	0.83⁎⁎
SCPS	5.41	0.75						1	0.20	0.42⁎
SN	5.19	0.59							1	0.86⁎⁎
⁎
Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

⁎⁎
Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

As a result of the Pearson correlation analyses for group scores, a moderate positive correlation was found between PTL and perceived peer social presence (r = 0.53, p < 0.01).

After the correlation analysis, a multiple linear regression was applied to determine whether team scores of social ability sub-factors explain a certain amount of variance in PTL in a blended course (see Table 6).


Table 6. Multiple linear regression model for perceived team learning predicted by peer social presence based on group scores.

Model	Unstandardized coefficients	Standardized coefficients	t	Sig.	CI (confidence intervals)
B	Std. error	Beta
1	(Constant)	2.49	0.48	–	5.15	0.000	[1.48–3.49]
Peer social presence	0.26	0.09	0.53	2.88	0.009	[0.07–0.45]
R = 0.53, R2 = 0.28.

F(1, 21) = 8.28, p < 0.01.

Similar to the individual scores, it was concluded that the first subscale, peer social presence, significantly predicted PTL (R2 = 0.28, F(1, 21) = 8.28, p < 0.01).

4.3. Relationship between social ability subscales, PTL, and group project scores
In addition to individual scores, the correlation coefficients were calculated for teams' final project scores and found a moderate positive correlation with teams' social navigation (r = 0.49, p < 0.01). Interestingly, no correlation was found between project scores and PTL scores (see Table 5).

Another multiple regression analysis was applied to predict team project scores based on social ability subscales and found a significant regression equation (F(1, 21) = 6.64, p < 0.05), with an R2 of 0.24 (see Table 7).


Table 7. Multiple linear regression model for team project scores predicted by social navigation based on group scores.

Model	Unstandardized coefficients	Standardized coefficients	t	Sig.	CI (confidence intervals)
B	Std. Error	Beta
1	(Constant)	22.67	7.33	–	3.09	0.005	[7.44–37.91]
Social navigation	3.62	1.40	0.49	2.56	0.018	[0.70–6.54]
R = 0.49, R2 = 0.24.

F(1, 21) = 6.64, p < 0.05.

In this model, the social navigation subscale was the only independent variable that explained team project scores.

5. Discussion
Using online technologies and tools with a TL approach helps students undertake comprehensive tasks and learn together (Williams et al., 2006). From this perspective, a BL setting was used to increase social interaction and learning, as suggested by many researchers (Johnson et al., 2008, Johnson et al., 2011, Vaughan, 2007, Williams et al., 2006). Also, a BL environment in which students worked in teams on particular tasks that require participants and the instructor to be socially present and to perform their written communication skills during the semester was designed. The online section of such blended or CSCL environments promises meaningful and fulfilling interaction through Web 2.0 tools such as discussion forums and synchronous chat. According to Laffey et al. (2006), an appropriate use of these tools can motivate participants and sustain social benefits during the learning process. According to Hiltz (1994), the “social process of developing shared understanding through interaction is the ‘natural way’ for people to learn” (p. 22). Considering the evidence for effective learning through socialization, an attempt was made to measure social ability as a key component that relates to students' participation, interaction, and contribution in online learning environments (Laffey et al., 2006). To expand upon evidence that individual perceptions and abilities concerning social factors of learning settings have an effect on successful teamwork in blended and online courses (Gomez et al., 2010, Staples and Webster, 2007), the main effects of those factors were investigated by examining the relationships between students' PTL experiences, learning performances, and their social abilities in terms of peer social presence, written communication skills, instructor social presence, comfort sharing personal information, and social navigation.

According to the results of both correlation and regression analyses, this study suggested that peer social presence (PSP) did explain most of the variance for the PTL experiences of students. Based on its definition—the sense of being in a learning context and belonging to a group—PSP clearly had an effect on perceived learning as a team. Researchers such as Garrison and Anderson (2003) have observed the influence of social presence in the learning community, referring to feeling and recognizing others in a course. Thus, Laffey et al. (2006) considered the social presence factor to indicate the existence of other participants while also demonstrating students' perceptions about their peers during the learning process; they included this factor in their social ability construct.

Social presence is regarded as an essential element of the community of inquiry (CoI) framework introduced by Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (1999) to achieve a successful online higher education setting. Swan and Shih (2005) emphasized that social presence has to be examined under two separate dimensions: Peer (student) social presence and instructor social presence. On the other hand, Yang et al. (2006) did not directly examine the peer or instructor social presence, instead, they focused on students' perceptions about the existence of their peers and instructor social presences as two main constructs in their social ability framework. Many studies (i.e., Cobb, 2011, Picciano, 2002, Swan and Shih, 2005) found positive relationships between students' perceived social presence and the perceived learning experience. Thus, it can be concluded that students' perceptions about team learning are associated with how they feel about the presence of their peers in a learning context.

In other words, positive feelings or satisfaction about teamwork are related to how well social interactions are established, both among students and between students and instructor. Several studies, such as Gunawardena and Zittle (1997), Tsai, Kim, et al. (2008), and Tsai, Yang, et al. (2008) pointed out the relationship between perceptions of student interactions with both peer and instructor and satisfaction with collaboration and teamwork. In another study, Oztok (2013) discussed the importance of visible identity in online settings and suggested that when students feel seen and accessible by their peers, then they make their tacit knowledge available. Thus, in parallel with the findings of this study, it is recommended that instructors develop a sense of peer social presence for students in blended and online settings.

In this study, the relationship between students' perceptions about instructor social presence and TL was not as strong as for peer social presence. While peer social presence was significant for both individual and group score analysis, the instructor social presence relationship and TL was only significant for the individual score (see Table 3). Shea et al. (2010) asserted that instructor social presence has not been adequately investigated and they focused on the examination of the role of the instructor social presence in CoI framework in their study. They found a strong correlation between ISP and PSP as parallel to the findings of this study.

Based on the literature (i.e., Swan and Shih, 2005, Tsai et al., 2008b), it is expected to see a greater impact from students' perceived instructor presence, but, in this study, a weak positive correlation was found between instructor presence and PTL, which did not appear in regression analysis. Swan and Shih (2005) pointed out that students' perceived ISP has almost double effect than PSP on students' perceived learning experiences.

Garrison et al. (1999) suggested that students' learning experiences in online settings directly depend on how the online activities are designed, organized, and implemented. Similarly Arbaugh (2005) remarked that characteristics of a learning setting play a significant role on social presence. Thus, discrepancy in this study might be resulted from the way that instructor managed the blended settings during the learning process. Therefore, implementing the practices which strengthen the students' perceptions in this aspect or respect for working actively not only in design but also in administration of the online course will be beneficial. In addition, Borup, West, Thomas, and Graham (2014) argued the lack of instructor social presence in BL originated from sufficient instructor presence in face-to-face part of the course perceived by the students.

While instructors' presence is important to individual learning (Yang et al., 2006), the results from this study showed what might be a stronger impact from peer presence. Overall team interaction learning time was far greater than that of interactions with the teacher. While a teacher is critical, the team is the fundamental vehicle that engages with and develops knowledge, leading to greater development on the individual level.

Another relevant component stressed by Yang et al. (2006) is written communication skills in online settings—the most common online interactions involve written words (Lapadat, 2002, Tu, 2001). In several studies (Mandernach et al., 2006, Tsai et al., 2008a, Tsai et al., 2008b), it is emphasized that written communication skills in online settings are one of the important skills which are used to predict or affect learning process and outcomes. These skills are also necessary for students to use collaboration tools effectively and to share their ideas comfortably and clearly. For example, online discussion tools require higher order written communication skills in order for students to share their opinions, ask questions, and create social bonds in blended and online settings. Similar to instructor presence, a weak positive correlation was found between written communication skills and PTL. Online students feel the presence of others through asynchronous text traces that show what their peers think about a topic (Lapadat, 2002). These text traces require students to have not only typing but also reading and writing skills (Tu, 2001). Furthermore, Tu (2001) found that native Chinese speakers taking an online class in English felt motivated to improve their English communication skills. Lapadat (2002) also highlighted that students might selectively choose or avoid messages based on writing quality or skill. According to Tsai, Kim, et al. (2008) and Tsai, Yang, et al. (2008), students' low level of writing skills may cause difficulty in expressing their opinions and communicating with their peers and instructor in online settings since the lack of those skills may have negative effects on the social nature of learning (Mandernach et al., 2006).

Although it seems student written communication skills would be important to overall TL, the evidence to the findings is not very strong. Perceived communication skills may have been affected by face-to-face interactions, where spoken communication skills are stronger than written communication skills. In a blended course, spoken communication skills may compensate for deficiencies in written skills due to face-to-face opportunities, and overall performance may remain balanced. As this study did not specifically investigate this possible correlation, future studies should explore how students' written communication skills get affected by their spoken communication skills.

Based on the findings of this research, comfort sharing personal information was not correlated with PTL in consideration of individual scores, but it is correlated with peer and instructor social presence as well as with written communication skills. Tu (2002) defined feelings of privacy as a perception of respect across psychological, mental, cultural, and conditional boundaries and dimensions. For example, students may perceive an online discussion board as being less private than email (Tu & McIsaac, 2002), therefore, feel less comfortable sharing some information. Future research should involve revealing some personal information in order to test whether it affects participants' comfort level in sharing personal information.

Social navigation, or the perception and awareness regarding the actions of the instructor and one's classmates as well as the effects of those actions on one's own work throughout the course, presented no significant correlation to team learning. As expected, on the perceptual level of peer and instructor social presence, a significant strong correlation was found. Interestingly, the relationship between the group project scores also presented a moderate significant correlation. Perhaps a sense of awareness motivated teams to work hard or higher levels of confidence or team efficacy prompted greater performances (Cannon-Bowers, Tannenbaum, Salas, & Volpe, 1995). Picciano (2002) found a similar positive relationship between perceived social presence and individual written assignment scores.

A relationship was found between individuals' PTL and PSP. In addition, there were weak correlations between team learning and two social ability sub-constructs: written communication skills and instructor social presence. Further studies should verify these correlations as well as explicate the possible effects of the dimensions of social ability on team learning in blended and online settings. Since this study did not include a control group (i.e., students working only face-to-face), settings (i.e., face-to-face vs. online) were not compared; instead, the purpose was to explore the effects of social abilities on PTL in a custom-designed blended course. More qualitative research (i.e., content analysis of system logs or online discussions) would help reveal the underlying mechanisms of social ability and team interactions.

This study found a positive correlation between individual's experiences about team learning and social presence as well as experiences about learning and communication and instructor presence. Psychologically, presence has a positive perception on team learning. Students feel connected to the team, including the teacher, increasing learning benefits. The findings from this study addressed other potential benefits for teams and instructors, demanding a clearer understanding of the impact of social presence on the learning process. Once the role of social ability on learning is more firmly established, the function of human interaction on individual learning will be more easily understood.

6. Conclusion
With the findings from this study, it is plausible that social ability from individual group members has a relationship to team learning. More specifically, it was concluded that there was some level of relationship between team learning and peer social presence, written communication, and instructor social presence. In the delivery of courses, researchers and instructional designers need to consider the impact of social presence on learning and vice versa. This might assume that presence may have an impact on learning. If instructional strategies can support student and instructor presence, there could be a positive effect on the instructional gathering that might build both strong social ties and encourage further instructional interactions all of which may support team learning. As the team learning develops, this in return has an impact on presence and communication. This is much like the effect of team performance on team cognition and vice versa (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995).

Although self-reported instruments were mainly employed in this study to assess social interactions of students and instructors in BL settings, alternative tools such as CmapTools (Novak & Cañas, 2008) and models (i.e. Fuzzy Logic) as suggested by Dias et al. (2015) can be taken into consideration to facilitate and evaluate the collaboration and interaction for further studies.

The results from this research, while not overly strong, start the questioning about what specific underlying factors of social ability have on the learning process and outcomes. With a better understanding, teacher and instructors can make instructional decisions to better support the social dimension of learning to more efficiently support student learning.

