The study employed an embedded mixed-method design using reflective journals, survey and interview to investigate the impact of online automated feedback (OAF) on the quality of students' reflective journals in a 13-week English as Foreign Language (EFL) course at university level. One hundred and thirty-eight undergraduate students participated in the study, and they were divided into two groups: experimental (N = 82) and control (N = 56). Participants in both groups received the same instruction on reflective writing by the same teacher, but the experimental group could access a web-based classification system to generate OAF on their second and third reflective journals while the control group could not. Results show that the experimental group outperformed the control group in terms of the overall score for the final reflective journal, and the experimental group also demonstrated a significant improvement in scores across reflective journals. While data collected from an online questionnaire survey and focus group interviews generally support the value of OAF for reflective writing, a number of student concerns were noted. Overall, the findings of this study can contribute to a better understanding of the impact of OAF on reflective writing and provide a basis for future discussion on how to blend teacher feedback and OAF to support reflective writing.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Online automated feedback

Reflective journal writing

L2 reflective learning

Post-secondary education

1. Introduction
With the advance of artificial intelligence (AI) methods, online automated feedback (OAF) generated by writing evaluation systems is viewed as a powerful learning tool for supporting student writing (Grimes and Warschauer, 2010, Shermis and Burstein, 2013). Given a set of specific and measurable assessment criteria, computer programs can evaluate students' writing and provide timely, individualised feedback in an automatic manner. OAF opens up opportunities for students to take immediate actions to enhance their performance based on the computer-generated comments they receive. A key benefit focuses on OAF as a means of fostering learner autonomy in producing, evaluating and revising their own writing (Chen and Cheng, 2008, El Ebyary and Windeatt, 2010). Another benefit of OAF lies in its potential to respond to the challenge of assessing a large quantity of student writing on a regular basis (Warschauer & Ware, 2006).

OAF has attracted considerable attention in the field of second language (L2) education (Chen and Cheng, 2008, Li et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2013). Most of the previous research was designed to use web-based AWE systems for assessment of student essay, with an emphasis on offering corrective feedback about various rhetorical and formal aspects of writing. Some other research was conducted to facilitate the process of formative learning, with a focus on giving constructive feedback such as prompts and suggestions on multiple drafts of writing to develop learner autonomy. However, the current literature has documented very limited efforts in exploring the effects of online automated feedback on genres of writing other than essay.

One genre of student writing worthy of investigation is reflective journal. It can serve as a vehicle for students to reflect on personal thoughts, actions and experiences associated with learning and then gain new insights into self-awareness and learning practices (Boud, 2001, Thorpe, 2004). Reflective journal writing can help students to develop a sense of ownership of their learning, to construct meaning out of their experiences, to identify their areas of strengths and weaknesses, and to think about strategies for their future improvement (Chau and Cheng, 2010, Lee, 2007, Moon, 2006, O'Connell and Dyment, 2011). As a promising pedagogical strategy, reflective journal writing has been widely used across a range of academic disciplines such as L2 education (Yang, 2010), nursing (Epp, 2008), teacher education (Lai & Calandra, 2010) and information and communication technologies (Gleaves, Walker, & Grey, 2008).

Despite the widespread use of reflective journal writing in various disciplines, research has consistently found that most reflective journals were written at a superficial level. This finding suggests that students generally have a very limited understanding of how to critically reflect on their own learning experiences (Dyment and O'Connell, 2011, Findlay et al., 2010, Lai and Calandra, 2007, Power, 2012). To increase students' awareness of critical reflection and analysis, recent studies have focused on providing students with human feedback in forms of mentoring advice (Stevens, Emil, & Yamashita, 2010) and guidelines according to the standards set by an evaluation framework (Chau and Cheng, 2012, Hegarty, 2011, Ryan and Ryan, 2012). Nevertheless, there has been limited research in harnessing the potential of OAF to facilitate students' reflective journal writing. To fill this gap in the literature, this study aimed to explore the use of OAF to support the reflection of EFL students and to examine the impact of OAF on their reflective L2 learning skills. Two research questions guided this study:

•
Does the use of OAF improve the quality of students' reflective journals?

•
How do students perceive the use of OAF for reflective journal writing?

The findings from this study can advance our understanding of how students respond to OAF and the extent to which they subsequently improve their reflective L2 learning skills and writing performance.

2. Related research
2.1. Use of OAF in L2 writing
While acknowledging the importance of feedback in effective L2 writing (Hyland & Hyland, 2006), research has spelt out that feedback on writing is a time-consuming job and that it can be problematic for teachers to provide feedback to students on a regular basis (El Ebyary and Windeatt, 2010, Grimes and Warschauer, 2010). With technological advancement in web technology and natural language processing, OAF generated by web-based writing evaluation systems has provided a possible solution to the challenge facing teachers. Previous research on OAF has largely focused on how well automated scoring of student essays can replicate scores of human raters in a feedback report, but the findings are inconclusive. Some studies showed that there could be a high agreement between machine and human marking (e.g. Coniam, 2009, Dikli, 2006, Hutchison, 2007), but some others reported a different result (e.g. Huang, 2014, Toranj and Ansari, 2012, Wang and Brown, 2008). Such discrepancy may, in part, be attributable to differences in the choice of writing evaluation systems, essay types and student levels. Despite the fact that there could be a weak correlation between the scores of human raters and machine, students tended to show a positive attitude towards the use of machine feedback in their writing (Huang, 2014).

Another research focus is on the perceived and actual effectiveness of OAF as a pedagogical tool. For example, El Ebyary and Windeatt (2010) conducted a study to investigate the impact of OAF on the essay writing of pre-service EFL teachers at a university in Egypt. They found that OAF could effectively encourage students to revise their drafts, potentially help students to understand the areas in need of improvement, and ultimately lead to an overall improvement in the quality of students' writing. The findings are consistent with those of other studies in the L2 context (Dikli and Bleyle, 2014, Li et al., 2015). A likely reason for the positive effects of OAF could be that students, especially those with limited experience of L2 academic writing, can easily receive immediate guidance on the basic structure of their essay (Li et al., 2015). Another reason could be factors motivating students to improve their achievement, such as the heightened sense of competition engendered by the scores and comments given in the feedback (El Ebyary & Windeatt, 2010).

Kim (2014) carried out a study to examine the influence of OAF on EFL students' drafts at a women's university in Korea. The study showed that participants in both high- and low-achieving groups demonstrated a significant improvement in their revised drafts, illustrating the effectiveness of OAF as a tool for improving the writing of students at different English proficiency levels. It was also reported that while many participants found OAF useful in improving their writing, some said OAF could not provide detailed comments and identify their errors correctly. To enhance our understanding of the potential of OAF, there has been a call for more research into different ways of integrating OAF into the EFL context and into the extent to which OAF could impact upon L2 writing (Kim, 2014, Li et al., 2015).

2.2. Reflective journal writing and L2 learning
Reflective journals can be regarded as ‘written documents that students create as they think about various concepts, events, or interactions over a period of time for the purposes of gaining insights into self-awareness and learning’ (Thorpe, 2004, p. 328). Moon (2006) saw multiple benefits of reflective journal writing for student learning, including slowing the pace of learning, increasing the sense of ownership of learning, acknowledging the role of emotion in learning, encouraging metacognition and enhancing learning through the process of writing. Furthermore, she added that reflective journal writing has a great potential to promote conscious reflection on prior knowledge and experience from which new insights can be gained to guide future actions and decisions related to learning. That is, in part, the reason why reflective journal writing is recognised as an effective way of developing students' reflective thinking on their L2 proficiency (Hyland, 2003, Scott, 2005).

Research has provided empirical evidence on the advantages of reflective journal writing for L2 learning. For example, Chang and Lin (2014) conducted a study to investigate the impact of online reflective journals on reading comprehension. They found that students who were asked to write reflective journals significantly outperformed those who were not in terms of the performance of reading comprehension. Rassaei (2015) carried out a research into the effects of reflective journals on the interpretation and effectiveness of recasts. The study showed that students who were involved in reflective journal writing had a more accurate interpretation of recasts than those who were not. Wu and Lin (2015) examined the influence of reflective journal writing along with student-teacher conferencing on essay writing. They concluded that reflective journal writing could help students become more aware of their writing process and more concerned with the content and organisation of their writing.

However, research has also identified challenges associated with the implementation of reflective journal writing in higher education. Among them, an often-cited issue is the problem of superficial description evidenced in students' reflective journals (Dyment and O'Connell, 2011, Hegarty, 2011, Lai and Calandra, 2007, NcNeill et al., 2010, Power, 2012). This problem is likely due to a number of factors, including poor student understanding of critical reflection (Lai & Calandra, 2007), insufficiency of student training on reflective journal writing (O'Connell & Dyment, 2011), and lack of feedback on student reflection (Power, 2012). To address the problem, Ryan (2010) proposed a model for academic reflective writing to characterise different types of reflection. Based on the model, she argued that students could gain a better understanding of reflection by comparing and contrasting the key features of critical reflection with those of descriptive reflection. Power (2012) adopted a similar student-directed approach but with an emphasis on immediate teacher feedback on critical reflection sections identified by students. There is, nevertheless, limited research on the use of student-directed approach with OAF to support reflective journal writing.

3. Methods
3.1. Context of study
This study is the second phase of a two-year government-funded project, namely Automatic Classification Techniques in Virtual Environments (ACTIVE). The first phase of the project took place between September 2013 and August 2014, with an aim of developing a web-based automatic classification system to generate immediate and individualised feedback on students' reflective journals (Cheng, 2017). The second phase was designed to capitalise on the web-based system as an OAF tool and to investigate the use of OAF in supporting reflective journal writing at the English Language Centre (ELC) of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University between September 2014 and May 2015. The ELC has adopted a range of e-learning initiatives to promote independent learning for most of its English courses. An example related to this study is the web-based ePortfolio (http://eportfolio.elc.polyu.edu.hk) designed to help students develop, self-evaluate and reflect on their own L2 learning skills. Participants of this study were students enrolled on a 13-week, credit-bearing course entitled Advanced English for University Studies (AEUS). In the AEUS course, students are expected: 1) to plan, research for, write and revise a position argument essay, and 2) to present and justify views effectively in a mini oral defence. One assessment requirement of the course is to complete three reflective journals documenting one's English learning experience and achievement. The reflective journals should be submitted by weeks 3, 7 and 10, respectively. Each journal should have a minimum length of 170 words. Failure to meet the requirement will result in downgrading the overall course grade.

3.2. Participants
One hundred and thirty-eight first year university students (66 males and 72 females) enrolled on the AEUS course voluntarily accepted the invitation to take part in this study. Their ages ranged from 17 to 22 years (Mean = 18.3 and S.D. = 0.90). They came from six class groups and ten academic disciplines: Applied Science, Chemical Technology, Environmental and Sustainable Development, Food Safety and Technology, Hotel Management, Mechanical Engineering, Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Optometry, and Radiography. Prior to the study, all participants signed a form which stated the purpose of the study, solicited their personal information (e.g. name, programme and year of study, age, gender and public examination results), and gave their informed consent. Four class groups (with a total of 82 students) were randomly assigned to the experimental group while the remaining two (with a total of 56 students) were assigned to the control group. There was no significant difference between the experimental and control groups in the results of the English language public examination.

3.3. Research design
This study used an embedded mixed-method design (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011) to investigate the impact of OAF on the quality of students' reflective journals. In addition, it aimed to explore students' views on the use of OAF for reflective journal writing. The embedded design was selected to answer both quantitative and qualitative research questions. The independent variable in this study was OAF, which was generated by an online automatic classification system and could only be accessed by students in the experimental group but not those in the control group. The dependent variable was scores of students' reflective journals. Quantitative and qualitative methods included analysis of reflective journals, an online questionnaire survey, and focus group interviews with students. Data were collected at different points of time throughout the AEUS course.

3.4. Materials
3.4.1. Framework for classifying reflective L2 learning skills
As a framework specifically designed for classifying reflective L2 learning skills, the A-S-E-R framework (Chau & Cheng, 2012) was adopted to evaluate students' reflective journals. The framework features four key elements of reflective L2 learning: 1) Analysis, reformulation and future application, 2) Strategy application, 3) External influences, and 4) Report of events or experiences. There are four hierarchical levels for each element: levels 1 (developing), 2 (average), 3 (good) and 4 (competent). Each level has its own descriptor that sets out the key characteristics, as shown in Table 1.


Table 1. The A-S-E-R classification framework.

Elements of reflective L2 learning	Category	Descriptor
Analysis, reformulation and future application (A): To analyse, reformulate, and refocus the experience; comprehensive discussion of implications of the experience in the context of future applications	A4: Clear ability	Discuss implications of the experience in the context of future applications and explain how the experience would benefit future language learning
A3: Some ability	Evaluate the positive and/or negative impact of the experience on current language learning practices
A2: Limited ability	Explain how the experience is connected to the objectives or challenges of language learning
A1: Very limited ability	Describe and comment on the experience with little or no justification
Strategy application (S):
To analyse effectiveness of applied or alternative strategies for language learning	S4: Critical analysis	Analyse and evaluate effectiveness of applied or alternative strategies for improving language learning
S3: Logical explanation	Identify language problems and explain how applied or alternative strategies could address the problems
S2: Relevant discussion	Describe choice and application of strategies for language learning
S1: Superficial description	Briefly describe choice of strategies for language learning
External influences (E): To make comments about external influences (e.g., circumstances, others' perspectives) on the experience	E4: Insightful and constructive comments	Comment on how external influences could help change attitudes and behaviors towards language learning
E3: Constructive comments	Comment on how external influences could help identify language learning needs and ways to make progress
E2: Some comments	Comment on how external influences could help identify language learning needs
E1: Very few comments	Briefly comment on external influences with little focus on language learning
Report of events or experiences (R): To report significant aspects of events or experiences	R4: Detailed and analytical report	Report significant aspects of the experience and make connections between language knowledge and skills gained from the experience
R3: Detailed report	Report significant aspects of the experience and identify language knowledge and skills gained from the experience
R2: Coherent report	Report some aspects of the experience and highlight language learning issues arising from the experience
R1: Disjointed report	Briefly report the experience with little connection to language learning
(Adapted from Chau & Cheng, 2012).

3.4.2. Online automatic classification system
Prior to this study, a pilot study was carried out to ascertain the effectiveness of the A-S-E-R framework (Chau & Cheng, 2012). An online automatic classification system (Cheng, 2017) was developed to classify reflective L2 learning skills based on the A-S-E-R framework and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998). Essentially, the system analysed 748 annotated reflective journals and created a semantic space characterising the A-S-E-R elements. To generate an OAF on a reflective journal, the web-based system starts by reading through each sentence of the journal and counting the frequency of specific words (i.e. features). It will subsequently transform the journal into a vector of features and classify it into different categories (e.g. A1, S2) based on their similarity. The system will finally generate an OAF report covering four different parts: annotated entry, scoring and descriptors, remarks on total score and suggestions for improvement (see Fig. 1).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Layout of a sample feedback report generated by the online automatic classification system.

3.5. Measures
3.5.1. A-S-E-R scores
Each reflective journal was manually annotated in accordance with the A-S-E-R framework. The basic unit of annotation can either be a single sentence or a group of consecutive sentences signifying a category (e.g. A1). If a unit signifies more than one category (e.g. A1 and S2), it will be marked up with multiple categories. The score on an element (e.g. A, S, E or R) for a reflective journal is the weighted average of its scores over all identified annotation units. The overall A-S-E-R score for a reflective journal is the sum of the score on each element.

3.5.2. Online questionnaire survey
An online questionnaire survey was designed to collect student ratings of agreement on reflective L2 learning issues associated with OAF and their views on the web-based automatic classification system. Responses were either rated on a five-point Likert scale (Strongly agree = 5, agree = 4, neutral = 3, disagree = 2, strongly disagree = 1) or expressed in written comments. The following five questions comprised the main body of the questionnaire survey:

•
How much do you agree that the system's feedback could help you identify the strengths and weaknesses in your reflective L2 learning skills?

•
How much do you agree that the system's feedback could help you improve your reflective L2 learning skills?

•
To what extent are you willing to continue receiving the system's feedback on your reflective journals in near future?

•
What do you like most about the system?

•
What do you like least about the system?

In addition, a section was included to gather information about student behaviour, such as how many reflective journals were submitted and how often the web-based automatic classification system was used to generate OAF.

3.5.3. Focus group interview
Focus group interview sessions were held with a stratified random sample of experimental participants to further elicit their views on OAF, each lasting approximately 35 min. Qualitative data from the interview sessions were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, summarised and thematically categorised using thematic analysis. The data were used to cross-validate the results from the questionnaire survey. The guiding questions of the interview are shown below:

•
Do you think that OAF could help you improve your reflective writing?

•
What are the main differences between OAF and teacher feedback?

•
What do you like most and least about OAF?

•
Do you have any suggestions to enhance OAF?

3.5.4. Data analysis
In this study, all statistical data analysis was carried out with SPSS Version 21 for Windows. The quantitative data to answer the first research question were analysed using t-test and repeated-measures ANOVA. The t-test aimed to determine if there were significant differences in A-S-E-R scores between the experimental and control groups, whereas repeated-measures ANOVA was used to show if there were significant differences in A-S-E-R scores across three different reflective journals within each group. For qualitative analysis, students' interview data were analysed and emerging categories were identified. Conclusions were then drawn from these categories to answer the second research question.

3.6. Procedure
Participants in the experimental and control groups were taught by the same teacher. They all received the same instruction on academic and reflective writing in class. At the beginning of the AEUS course, all participants were introduced to the A-S-E-R classification framework and were provided with online materials (such as text and videos) about how to critically write a reflective journal. They were required to prepare a total of three reflective journals and to upload each to the web-based ePortfolio platform by weeks 3, 7 and 10. All reflective journals were manually evaluated by the principal investigator of this study using the A-S-E-R framework.

Starting from week 4, participants in the experimental group were given access to the online automatic classification system. They were asked to take into account the automated feedback generated by the web-based automatic classification system to enhance the quality of their second and third reflective journals. In contrast, participants in the control group were not allowed to use the system and they did not receive any automated feedback throughout the course. An online questionnaire survey was administered to all experimental participants via email at week 13, while three focus group interview sessions were held with a total of 12 experimental participants selected from different academic disciplines at week 14. Fig. 2 illustrates a summary of the research procedure.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (168KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Summary of the research procedure.

4. Results and discussion
An evaluation of reflective journals, in tandem with the results from the online questionnaire survey and focus group interviews, shed light on the two research questions. The answers to the research questions are presented and discussed in the rest of this section.

The first research question asked if the use of OAF improves the quality of students' reflective journals. This question was addressed by using statistical tests to compare the A-S-E-R scores for reflective journals between the experimental and control groups. Descriptive statistics and Levene's test results are shown in Table 2 and Table 3, respectively. Levene's test results suggest that the equal variances assumption holds between the two groups for the scores on A, S and R, but not for the score on E. To examine whether there were significant differences in the A-S-E-R scores between the two groups, independent samples t-tests were conducted for elements A, S and R while Mann-Whitney U tests were applied to element E. The results of the tests are shown in Table 4, Table 5.


Table 2. Descriptive statistics of the A-S-E-R scores from the experimental and control groups.

Experimental group	Control group
Reflective journal #1 (collected at week 3)	N	81	56
A (Mean, S.D.)	1.27 (0.76)	1.70 (0.87)
S (Mean, S.D.)	0.69 (1.11)	0.61 (0.87)
E (Mean, S.D.)	0.65 (1.00)	0.43 (0.74)
R (Mean, S.D.)	1.48 (1.27)	1.30 (1.20)
Overall (Mean, S.D.)	4.10 (2.02)	4.04 (1.87)
Reflective journal #2 (collected at week 7)	N	74	55
A (Mean, S.D.)	1.96 (0.87)	1.80 (0.80)
S (Mean, S.D.)	0.84 (1.11)	0.62 (0.97)
E (Mean, S.D.)	0.93 (1.08)	0.35 (0.84)
R (Mean, S.D.)	1.57 (1.24)	1.33 (1.09)
Overall (Mean, S.D.)	5.30 (2.17)	4.09 (1.91)
Reflective journal #3 (collected at week 10)	N	66	40
A (Mean, S.D.)	2.32 (0.96)	1.60 (1.01)
S (Mean, S.D.)	1.27 (1.06)	1.00 (0.99)
E (Mean, S.D.)	1.38 (1.16)	0.43 (0.75)
R (Mean, S.D.)	1.76 (1.16)	1.63 (1.17)
Overall (Mean, SD)	6.74 (1.86)	4.70 (2.00)

Table 3. Levene's test results of the A-S-E-R scores between the two groups.

Reflective journal number	Element	F	p	Equal variances assumed (p > 0.05)?
Reflective journal #1	A	0.024	0.877	Yes
S	2.856	0.093	Yes
E	8.031	0.005	No
R	0.726	0.396	Yes
Reflective journal #2	A	0.068	0.795	Yes
S	3.109	0.080	Yes
E	12.471	0.001	No
R	3.109	0.080	Yes
Reflective journal #3	A	0.152	0.697	Yes
S	0.363	0.548	Yes
E	20.757	0.000	No
R	0.137	0.712	Yes

Table 4. Independent samples t-test results of the scores on A, S and R between the two groups.

Reflective journal number	Element	t	df	p (2-tailed)
Reflective journal #1	A	− 3.030	135	0.003⁎
S	0.475	135	0.636
R	0.829	135	0.409
Reflective journal #2	A	1.066	127	0.288
S	1.171	127	0.244
R	1.146	127	0.254
Reflective journal #3	A	3.657	104	0.000⁎⁎
S	1.317	104	0.191
R	0.567	104	0.572
⁎
p < 0.05.

⁎⁎
p < 0.001.


Table 5. Mann-Whitney U test results of the score on E between the two groups.

Reflective journal number	Mann-Whitney
U	Z	p (2-tailed)
Reflective journal #1	2072.0	− 1.025	0.305
Reflective journal #2	1382.5	− 3.646	0.000⁎⁎
Reflective journal #3	721.0	− 4.223	0.000⁎⁎
⁎⁎
p < 0.001.

As can be seen from Table 4, Table 5, there were no significant differences in the mean scores on S (p > 0.05), E (p > 0.05) and R (p > 0.05) for the first reflective journal between the experimental and control groups. However, there was a significant difference in the mean score on A (p < 0.05) between the two groups. When taking a closer look at the mean scores on A for the first reflective journal in Table 2, it can be found that the experimental group (Me = 1.27) achieved a significantly lower score on A than the control group (Mc = 1.70). The results indicate that the experimental group initially demonstrated a lower level of analytical skills in reflective journal writing. Despite this, the experimental group later outperformed the control group in terms of the mean scores on A (Me = 2.32, Mc = 1.60, p < 0.001) and E (Me = 1.38, Mc = 0.43, p < 0.001) for the final reflective journal. Such differences in the A-S-E-R scores between the two groups at different points of time are illustrated in Fig. 3, highlighting the positive value of OAF for reflective journal writing.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (134KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The mean A-S-E-R scores of the two groups.

To further examine if there were significant changes in scores across the three reflective journals for each group, a repeated-measures ANOVA was performed for each group. The results indicate that there were significant differences in the scores on A (F[2, 130] = 45.984, η2 = 0.414, p < 0.001), S (F[2, 130] = 5.649, η2 = 0.080, p < 0.05) and E (F[2, 130] = 11.910, η2 = 0.155, p < 0.001) of the experimental group. The results of post-hoc pairwise comparisons listed in Table 6 further show that the score on A was significantly increased from the first to the second journal (Mdiff = 0.712, p < 0.001) and from the second to the third journal (Mdiff = 0.318, p < 0.05), and that the score on E was significantly increased from the second to the third journal (Mdiff = 0.485, p < 0.05). In contrast, there were no significant differences in the scores of the control group (p > 0.05). The results suggest that the use of OAF could improve the overall quality of students' reflective journals, especially in the areas of analysis, reformulation and future application (A) and external influences (E). This finding coincides with that of El Ebyary and Windeatt (2010), who concluded that L2 learners are likely to enhance the quality of their writing if they receive feedback on specific areas for improvement (e.g. analysis and development).


Table 6. Pairwise comparisons for the mean scores on A, S and E of the three journals.

Journal number	A	S	E
I	J	Mean difference (J − I)	p	Mean difference (J − I)	p	Mean difference (J − I)	p
1	2	0.712	0.000⁎⁎	0.227	0.881	0.288	0.299
2	3	0.318	0.016⁎	0.364	0.056	0.485	0.004⁎
1	3	− 1.03	0.000⁎⁎	0.591	0.001⁎	0.773	0.000⁎⁎
⁎
p < 0.05.

⁎⁎
p < 0.001.

The second question addressed how students perceive the use of OAF for reflective journal writing. To answer this question, data were collected from both the online questionnaire survey and focus group interviews. The online questionnaire survey achieved a response rate of 80.5% (66 out of 82 participants). Table 7, Table 8 present the results of student responses to the fixed-response questions and the open-ended questions in the online questionnaire survey. As Table 7 shows, the majority (70%) of respondents strongly agreed or agreed that OAF could help them identify the strengths and weaknesses in their reflective L2 learning skills. A similar proportion (64%) strongly agreed or agreed that OAF could help them improve their reflective L2 learning skills. Over half (55%) of respondents said that they are to a large or very large extent willing to continue receiving OAF on their reflective journals in near future, and only 3% said they are not willing to do so. The results indicate that most respondents realised the benefits of OAF and were positive towards receiving OAF on their reflective journals.


Table 7. Results of student responses to the fixed-response questions in the online questionnaire.

Question	Response	Number of respondents	Percentage of respondents
1. How much do you agree that the system's feedback could help you identify the strengths and weaknesses in your reflective L2 learning skills?	Strongly agree	2	3.0%
Agree	44	66.7%
Neutral	18	27.3%
Disagree	2	3.0%
Strongly disagree	0	0%
2. How much do you agree that the system's feedback could help you improve your reflective L2 learning skills?	Strongly agree	0	0%
Agree	42	63.6%
Neutral	22	33.3%
Disagree	2	3.0%
Strongly disagree	0	0%
3. To what extent are you willing to continue receiving the system's feedback on your reflective entries in near future?	To a very large extent	6	9.1%
To a large extent	30	45.5%
To some extent	22	33.3%
To a small extent	6	9.1%
Not at all	2	3.0%

Table 8. Results of student responses to the open-ended questions in the online questionnaire.

Question	Category	Number of responses	Example
1. What do you like most about the web-based automatic classification system?	Indication of areas for improvement	24	“It gives me a comprehensive feedback on each aspect of my journal for improvement.”
Provision of suggestions and examples	14	“It gives advices for me to improve my writing skills.”
Ease of use	14	“It is user-friendly and very easy to use.”
Feedback time	8	“It takes very short time to generate the report, so I can have the feedback immediately and make changes.”
No responses	6	–
2. What do you like least about the web-based automatic classification system?	Feedback quality	18	“Its explanation could be more detailed.”
Capability of understanding human language	14	“It cannot analyse some of my sentences…”
Scoring method	10	“I don't clearly understand how the scoring system marks my journal.”
Nil	10	“Nothing in particular”
No responses	14	–
Table 8 shows that there were 60 student responses on what they like most about the online automatic classification system. Among them, 24 (40%) were about the indication of areas for improvement, 14 (23%) about the provision of suggestions and examples, 14 (23%) about the ease of use, and 8 (13%) about the quick feedback time. When asked about what students like least about the system, 52 responses were received. Of these, 18 (35%) responses were about the feedback quality, 14 (27%) about the system's capability of understanding human language, 10 (19%) about the scoring method and 10 (19%) about nothing. The results suggest that the strengths of OAF lie in its attractiveness to students in terms of feedback content, convenience and speed. On the other hand, the results also indicate that it is desirable to enhance the accuracy of analysis and scoring as well as the depth of explanation in OAF.

As described earlier, 12 experimental students (S1 to S12) were invited to participate in the focus group interview to collect their views on the use of OAF for reflective writing. They all agreed that the use of OAF could help them develop their awareness of key aspects of reflective writing. As an interviewee (S1) shared:

‘It helps. The [online automated] feedback can provide guiding criteria and examples of what aspects should be considered. One key aspect namely external influence was overlooked in my first reflective writing. The system identified this problem and gave me an example of what that aspect means.’

All interviewees also observed that OAF could benefit students in two ways different from teacher feedback: 1) OAF could be quick and be generated multiple times; and 2) OAF could be archived as a pdf file, making it available for easy retrieval and comparison. Despite this, however, over half of interviewees (S1, S2, S4, S6 to S9) felt that teacher feedback could not be replaced by OAF because teacher feedback could give them a sense of care and encouragement but OAF could not. Moreover, almost all interviewees expressed a concern that OAF was less specific than teacher feedback. For example, the concern was echoed by an interviewee (S9):

‘I learned from online [automated] feedback that some of my reflective sentences were at the developing level, but it did not provide me with concrete ideas about which parts I need to revise in order to attain at a higher level. I think that teacher feedback would be more specific as it would give me suggestions on how to modify those sentences.’

When interviewees were questioned as to what they like most about OAF, several good features of OAF were noted. Almost all interviewees mentioned that they are in favour of quick feedback on multiple submissions. Half of interviewees (S1 to S3, S5, S7, S11) responded that it is good to have a four-category framework to guide their reflective writing, while over half (S1 to S4, S6, S10, S12) said that the examples given in OAF are easy to understand and follow. When asked what they like least about OAF, four interviewees (S8 to S11) commented that the scoring of reflective writing may have an adverse effect on the motivation to improve their writing, as shown in the following student quote (S8):

‘I was very disappointed that I was given a zero score in a few areas of my reflective skills. Although the low score could show me the areas where improvement was needed, it failed to provide any recognition of my achievements and efforts. I felt so discouraged and had no strong intention to revisit my reflection after reading the score.’

Besides, almost all interviewees observed that the web-based automatic classification system could not accurately interpret all sentences in their reflective writing and some sentences were marked up with ‘unclassified’ in OAF. A student quote (S2) shown below illustrates this point:

‘I found that some sentences were labelled unclassified. But those sentences described my English learning experiences in class. I tried to follow the examples given in the [online] automated feedback and made changes to the sentences, but unfortunately some of the revised sentences were still unclassified.’

Four interviewees (S1, S2, S8, S9) suggested two ways of addressing the concerns raised above: 1) replacing zero scores by the term ‘not applicable’ to better reflect the real situation, and 2) continuing to improve the classification accuracy of the system. Both ideas can be found in the following comments given by S8 and S2, respectively:

‘I think that all zero scores should be removed from the feedback and be replaced by NA. This change of presentation would give me a better feel for my reflection. Sometimes my personal experiences do not necessarily have external influences, so the criteria of external influences may not be applicable to my reflection.’

‘I hope that the system could be more intelligent and could better understand the meaning of my reflective writing.’

Taken together, it is confirmed that the use of OAF could significantly improve the quality of students' reflective journals in terms of A-S-E-R scores. The main reasons for the improvement include students' increased awareness of the key elements of reflective L2 learning, the immediate feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of students' reflective learning skills, the given examples of critical reflection. While the majority of students thought that OAF generated by the online automatic classification system is helpful, some questioned whether the system could accurately interpret their reflective writing. Another concern among students was whether the humanist role of teacher feedback (e.g. caring about students' feelings) could be undertaken by OAF. Some students were also stressed about the de-motivating effect of getting a very low score for their reflective writing. The overall findings of this study corroborate the results of previous research indicating that OAF can trigger students' motivation to critically think about their problems and seek ways to address them even though some problems are misidentified in OAF (Dikli and Bleyle, 2014, Kim, 2014). Given that OAF and teacher feedback have their own merits and limitations, how to effectively integrate both feedback types into the process of reflective writing would be one of the research topics deserving serious consideration.

5. Conclusion and implications
The purpose of this study two-fold. Firstly, it was designed to investigate the impact of online automated feedback (OAF) on reflective L2 learning skills of EFL university students. Secondly, it aimed at exploring students' perception of using OAF to support reflective journal writing. A four-element hierarchical framework, namely A-S-E-R, was adopted to evaluate students' reflective L2 learning skills by analysing their reflective journals. Prior to this study, a web-based automatic classification system was developed to generate OAF based on the A-S-E-R framework. The results from quantitative data analysis demonstrate not only that the use of OAF could significantly improve students' reflective L2 learning skills, but that participants' positive attitudes towards the usefulness of OAF. Several themes emerged from interview analysis reveal that OAF could benefit students through increasing their awareness of the key elements of reflective L2 learning, offering quick feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of their reflective writing, and giving good examples to illustrate critical reflection. Other identified themes show the limitations of OAF in three areas: technical effectiveness (classification accuracy of the online automatic classification system); affective issue (importance of care and encouragement from the teacher); and psychological effect (motivation to further improve reflective writing when a low score is given to it). The qualitative data indicate that both OAF and teacher feedback have their attractions and drawbacks, and that no single feedback type could meet all students' needs.

The findings of this study have two major implications for researchers and practitioners of reflective journal writing. First, this study helps to move towards a fuller understanding of the impact of OAF on students' reflective journals and the associated factors influencing their performance and engagement in reflective writing. A critical reflection on L2 learning would take place through considering those factors and implementing the features that students find most important and useful to reflective writing. The overall positive effects of OAF found in the study suggest the prospects for using it to facilitate reflective journal writing are promising. Second, this study adds evidence to support the view that OAF can foster students' learning autonomy (Chen and Cheng, 2008, El Ebyary and Windeatt, 2010). Given the online automatic classification system, students are empowered to take the initiative to generate OAF on their reflective journals, consider how to respond to the problems identified in the feedback, and take actions to address them. Through participating in this self-directed and performance-based learning process, students would assume more responsibility and control over their reflective writing.

Two main limitations to the study merit consideration. One limitation is that data were collected from only one English course offered by a university. Similar courses in other tertiary institutions can be studied to gain a more comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the impact of OAF on students' reflective journals. The second limitation is that this study was designed to focus on the use of OAF only. The results of this study, however, indicate that teacher feedback performed a unique role that could not be adequately replicated by OAF. Therefore, how to design an effective blended approach involving both teacher feedback and OAF for reflective journal writing is worthy of investigation.

