In today’s globalized world, possessing an intercultural communicative competence is important. For this reason, technology-assisted intercultural learning programs are widely implemented in all academic levels. However, most scholars reviewed studies on intercultural learning that were carried out in language learning context. We argue that there are many other learning contexts in which intercultural learning was integrated but they were neglected in related review studies. For example, intercultural learning was integrated in business, healthcare or tourism because it is important for students who study in these learning contexts to be interculturally competent and have abilities to smoothly interact and collaborate with colleagues, partners or customers from different cultural backgrounds in the future. Another example is when interculturally competent teachers can teach students from multicultural perspectives and respond to their needs based on appreciation for otherness and cultural difference. To address the existing gap in the field, we reviewed research on technology-assisted intercultural learning implementation in various learning contexts. We particularly focused on the following dimensions: (1) research focus; (2) theoretical foundation; (3) technologies; (4) learning contexts; (5) countries, languages and participants; (6) learning activity; (7) data collection; and (8) findings. Twenty-eight research articles were reviewed and the results were reported and discussed in the paper. The results of this study can be useful for educators and researchers who plan to integrate intercultural learning in various learning contexts.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The trend of globalization and the change of society, economy and culture have led to the migration of culture, which has made the culture of human groups appear with diversity of characteristics (Sanhueza Henríquez et al., 2012). In order to be able to work in a multicultural environment, people in every industry must have intercultural competence (Durko & Martens, 2021; Stefanova & Jiménez, 2019). For example, doctors who have good intercultural skills are able to communicate and treat their patients from different cultural backgrounds effectively (Drain et al., 2007; Edwards et al., 2004; Edwards et al., 2001; Wu et al. 2021). Teachers need to have a certain intercultural ability to respond to learner’s needs based on their appreciation for otherness and difference (Smolcic & Arends, 2017). Hospitality and tourism workers can encounter culture shock, especially in culturally diverse international environment (Wang & Hou, 2010). Therefore, raising intercultural awareness of professionals about the target country, culture or behavior, will help them better adjust to work environment (Durko & Martens, 2021; Limoges et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020). In order to enable professionals to work better in a multicultural environment, it is necessary to conduct intercultural education at all academic levels, which can enhance their intercultural competence (Duus & Cooray, 2014; Ghose, 2010; Stefanova & Jiménez, 2019).

An ideal program to develop someone’s intercultural skills is to immerse her or him in other cultures, especially in the target academic or professional environment, for a period of time and make her or him to interact with local people face to face (Yang, 2018). However, some resources such as time and money are not affordable for everyone and so the opportunity to go abroad (Shadiev et al., 2020c). Therefore, new approaches in intercultural education, especially in different contexts, are needed that are able to immerse intercultural learners into the target culture and academic or professional context to develop their intercultural competence (Brathwaite & Majumdar, 2006). One approach is to use educational technology. It enables people with diverse cultural backgrounds to collaborate on given projects. Technology-assisted learning activity does not require any logistical step, e.g. a person to visit a foreign country (Kang et al., 2018). There are several studies exist in which scholars reported their successful experiences on using educational technology to create intercultural learning environments around specific academic or professional contexts. For instance, Duus and Cooray (2014) allowed their participants to use a variety of communication tools (e.g. Facebook, Skype, Google Docs or email) to communicate on various topics related to local and foreign culture as well as to share their knowledge and understanding regarding various business environments in their countries, and to collaborate on different business-related projects. Leung et al. (2020) let their participants with different cultural backgrounds use ZOOM and email to conduct online discussion and group reflection on nursing cases.

The increasing attention to technology-assisted intercultural learning in various contexts calls for a systematically review of related studies to provide a guiding hand to educators and researchers, especially those who are new in the field. Many scholars who reviewed studies on intercultural learning supported by technology mostly focused on language learning context (Shadiev & Yang, 2020b). Considering that globalization will become a sustained and irreversible trend, there will be more and more kinds of jobs in various area that need talents with intercultural ability. Therefore, scholars from different learning contexts (i.e. other than language learning) attach more importance to intercultural competence. However, we do not have reviewed studies on technology-assisted intercultural learning in various contexts and so we have very limited understanding of this field. We do not know how many studies there are, their research focus, theoretical foundations and in what learning contexts intercultural learning projects were integrated. We also do not know demographics of these studies, their learning activities, data collection or findings. Therefore, the present study reviewed existing research on the use of technology to promote intercultural learning in a variety of contexts (e.g. business, healthcare or tourism). For example, intercultural skills enabled future doctors to effectively communicate with and appropriately treat patients of diverse cultural backgrounds (Wu et al. 2021) or students in hospitality and tourism sector were able to serve international customers without much difficulties such as cultural shock or language barriers (Wang & Hou, 2010). Therefore, the present study was set and the following research questions were addressed: What is research focus in reviewed studies? On what theoretical foundation reviewed studies were built on? What technologies were used in reviewed studies? What were learning contexts in reviewed studies and what was their connection to intercultural learning? What were countries, languages and participants in reviewed studies? What learning activities were designed in reviewed studies? What data was collected by researchers in reviewed studies? What findings were reported in reviewed studies?

The research objective of the present study was to summarize the current state of knowledge in the field of technology-assisted intercultural learning in various contexts. To this end, related articles were searched, selected and reviewed in the study with respect to the following dimensions: (a) research focuses, (b) theoretical foundation, (c) technologies, (d) learning contexts and how they were connected to intercultural learning, (e) countries, languages and participants, (f) learning activity, (g) data collection, and (h) findings in reviewed studies. Results of our review study have a potential to help educators and researchers in the field as they will be able to explore existing experiences related to technology-assisted intercultural learning in various contexts, to learn from such experiences, to improve their understanding of the field, and to design and implement their own studies. In addition, our review study may demonstrate the overall trends in the field and provide the knowledge which determines the effectiveness of technology-assisted intercultural learning in various contexts. For this reason, our study that reviews and summarizes current state of knowledge in this area is much needed.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we introduce the approaches and strategies to search, select and analyze related articles in the Method section. Then, results are reported with respect to above-mentioned eight dimensions in the Result section. Next, we discuss our results in the Discussion section. Finally, we make concluding remarks in the Conclusion section.

Method
The present study is a systematic review (Grant & Booth, 2009). We used preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) for the electronic search. PRISMA is considered by scholars to be a set of programs that facilitate researchers to prepare and report various systematic evaluations and meta-analyses (Moher et al., 2009). According to scholars, the PRISMA has been widely and successfully applied in educational research (e.g. Shadiev et al., 2020c; Shadiev et al., 2021). In addition to PRISMA, we followed the general guidelines for searching and selecting research articles proposed by Avgousti (2018) and Çiftçi (2016). The search and selection process is shown in Fig. 1. Articles were found through search on the Web of Science database. We used keywords such as intercultural, cross-cultural, technology, virtual, collaborative, global, competence, skill, exchange, sensitivity, understanding, knowledge, online, learning in different combinations, e.g. “intercultural online.”

Fig. 1
figure 1
The search and selection process

Full size image
A total of 46,517 papers were found from the search. Then we narrowed down the selection of the research articles based on the following criteria: articles that were (1) published during 2010–2021; (2) published in English; (3) belong to Education and Educational research; and (4) focused on use of technology to promote intercultural learning in different learning contexts (see Fig. 1). Two researchers screened each article individually and then excluded those articles in which scholars did not employ any educational technologies or scholars did not focus on promoting intercultural learning of participants in different learning contexts. It should be noted that studies with focus on language learning were not considered by the present research as this learning context already received too much attention in other review studies (see for example Avgousti, 2018; Çiftçi & Savaş, 2018 or Shadiev et al., 2021). The researchers discussed any discrepancies in their selection results until an agreement was reached. At the end of the selection process, twenty-eight articles were chosen for the review.

We proposed an analytical framework (see Fig. 2) to answer the research questions of the study and to better understand the research design of the reviewed studies and their realization and findings. We also used this framework to help us better review articles and regarded it as basis for coding the content of reviewed studies.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Analytical framework

Full size image
We used open coding method to carry out content analysis (Creswell, 2002) which can enable us to segment research content and to form categories of research content relevant to the phenomenon of interest. Based on the general recommendations of previous studies (Shadiev & Sintawati, 2020a, b and c; Çiftçi, 2016) about technology-supported intercultural learning, the following coding schemes were firstly formed: (a) theoretical foundation: the theories, models and hypothesis as a foundation for the research, (b) technologies: the tools and devices participants used for intercultural learning, (c) cultures, languages and participants: the characteristics of participants, such as their countries or academic level, (d) learning activity: tasks or assignments that participants were required to complete, (e) methodology and findings: strategies, methods, and processes of collecting and analyzing data to find new information or better understand a topic. Because we paid attention to technology-supported intercultural learning in different learning contexts, the following coding schemes were secondly formed: (f) learning contexts and how they are connected to intercultural learning supported by technologies, and (g) advantages and disadvantages reported in reviewed research on technology-supported intercultural learning in different learning contexts.

Two researchers were involved in the coding process. They read articles and coded content of articles according to the above coding scheme. After that, they categorized codes into categories and identified attributes for each category. If there were any differences in coding, the researchers re-examined a paper to resolve differences and then finally completed the coding phase. Interrater reliability was measured using Cohen’s kappa coefficient and the result was high (k = 0.903).

Result
Research focus
This part shows research focus of the reviewed studies. The data in Table 1 shows that the reviewed studies focused on seven aspects and they can be divided into two categories: one is intercultural learning, which includes several dimensions: i.e. intercultural competence (n = 20), intercultural sensitivity (n = 2), intercultural awareness (n=8), intercultural understanding (n=6), intercultural communication (n=2) and the other is professional training, which includes two dimensions: employability (i.e. competitiveness in the job market) (n=7) and learning contexts (n=2).

Table 1 Studies focus
Full size table
Next, with respect to the number of research focus, we divided the reviewed studies into three categories: one focus (n=13); two focuses (n=11); three focuses (n=4). According to the research results, there are thirteen studies with one focus, either intercultural competence (n=10) or intercultural understanding (n=3). There are eleven studies with two focuses (e.g., employability and intercultural competence), and there are four studies with three focuses (e.g., learning contexts, employability and intercultural awareness).

Theoretical foundation
This part shows the theoretical foundation of the reviewed studies. The data in Table 2 shows that a total of twenty-two theories were used. The most used theories are Deardorff’s Process Model of Intercultural Communicative Competence (ICC) (n=3) and Vygotsky’s Sociocultural theory (n=2). The rest theories were used only once.

Table 2 Theoretical foundation
Full size table
Technologies
This part shows the technologies of our reviewed studies. The data in Table 3 shows that a total of seventy-three technologies were used in the reviewed studies. We categorized technologies into six groups: online meeting system (n=23), social media (n=22), file sharing and content collaboration (n=12), asynchronous text communication (n=9), learning management system (n=6), and production tools (n=2). Among them the most frequently used technology was Skype (n=13) and e-mail (n=9), followed sequentially by Facebook (n=7), WhatsApp (n=5), Zoom (n=4) and Google Docs (n=4). Next on the list was messenger (n=2). Twenty-one techniques were used once, such as Dropbox (n=1), Edmodo (n=1), FaceTime (n=1), and Google Classroom (n=1).

Table 3 Technologies
Full size table
Learning contexts and how they connected to intercultural learning
This part shows learning contexts of the reviewed studies. The data in Table 4 shows that there were eight learning contexts which include twenty-six subjects involved in technology-supported intercultural learning. The most studied field was teacher education (n=8), followed sequentially by business (n=6), nursing (n=6), medicine (n=4), hospitality and tourism (n=3). There are three fields only studied once: computer science (n=1), international engineering (n=1), and apparel and textile (n=1).

Table 4 Learning contexts and how connected to intercultural learning
Full size table
Intercultural competence is important for above fields. For instance, in teacher education context, intercultural competence allows teachers be able to teach from multicultural perspectives (Cushner & Mahon, 2009), respond to learners’ needs based on their appreciation for otherness and difference (Smolcic & Arends, 2017), and help promote peace-building, conflict resolution, and respect for diverse perspectives in the classroom (Hammer, 2012; OECD, 2018). In business learning context, intercultural competence can ensure smooth interaction and efficient contributions of all persons involved to promote success in multi-cultural environment to make them more marketable.

Countries, languages and participants
This part shows countries, languages and participants of the reviewed studies. The data in Fig. 3 show that the most frequently involved countries in intercultural learning projects were the US (n = 15) and China (n = 7), whereas countries such as India, Indonesia, Brazil, South Africa, France, Mexico were mentioned less frequently. All reviewed studies only used English for communication.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Frequency distribution of country in the studies

Full size image
The data in Fig. 4 shows that most studies involved undergraduates (n=24), one study involved only postgraduates, and three studies involved both undergraduates and postgraduates.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Frequency distribution of academic level of participants in the studies

Full size image
The data in Fig. 5 shows that the number of participants in most studies is less than 50 (n = 13). In general, the number of studies decreased with the increase of the number of participants, and the number of participants in two studies is unknown.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Frequency distribution of number of participants in the studies

Full size image
Learning activity
This part shows learning activities of the reviewed studies. The data in Table 5 shows that most frequent learning activity was cooperation (n=22) and synchronous communication (n=20), followed sequentially by production (n=19), discussion (n=11), self-introduction (n = 10) and reflection (n=6).

Table 5 Learning activity
Full size table
Data collection
This part shows the data collection of the reviewed studies. The data in Fig. 6 shows that most frequently used data collection methods are reflection reports (n=13), scales (n=12) and open-ended questions (n = 12), followed sequentially by interview (n=8), posts (n=5) and assignment (n=3). There are two data collection method only used once, they are recoding (n=1) and observation (n=1).

Fig. 6
figure 6
Frequency distribution of number of data collection in the studies

Full size image
As the Table 6 shows, there are eleven studies used both qualitative (QL) and quantitative (QT) data, sixteen studies only used QL data and only one study only used QT data.

Table 6 Data collection
Full size table
Findings in reviewed studies
Various findings were reported in reviewed studies. Some benefits of intercultural learning integrated in various learning contexts included increase of domain and cultural knowledge, increase in intercultural communication competence, promoted intercultural communication skill and enhanced learning motivation to participate in the target courses and intercultural learning activity. Some disadvantages were also reported in reviewed studies. Some of them were, language barriers when students had difficulties to interact with each other. Other limitations are research relied upon self-reported data or few participants were involved in reviewed studies. These issue may limit generalizability of obtained results. Also some scholars reported that they had no control or comparison group and their intervention duration was very short. For these reasons results may have limited power (Table 7).

Table 7 Findings
Full size table
Discussion
Research focuses
In this section, we discuss the research focus of reviewed studies and our suggestions for educators and researchers. According to the results, we divided research focus into two categories: intercultural learning and professional training. There are twenty studies that only focused on intercultural learning, and eight studies that focused on both intercultural learning and professional training. The most frequently research focus was intercultural competence (n=20) as intercultural competence is a broader concept which includes multiple sub concepts: knowledge, skills, and attitude. There are eight studies focused on intercultural awareness and two studies focused on intercultural sensitivity. As intercultural awareness is intercultural cognitive aspect and intercultural sensitivity is intercultural emotional aspect, both of them can influence intercultural learning. There are eight studies focused on both intercultural learning and professional training. In reviewed studies, intercultural competence was regarded as the competitiveness of graduates in the market. Therefore, most of the intercultural activities were combined with the real environment of the work. For example, Duus and Cooray (2014) let marketing students to collect data from consumers to analyse and enhance the proposed enterprise and business offering.

Based on our results, we have several suggestions for educators and researchers. First, we suggest that researchers can focus on intercultural competence when students are not familiar with intercultural learning as intercultural competence includes many aspects and there are many effective instruments to test it such as the assessment of intercultural competence instrument (Fantini, 2009). Second, it is better to design intercultural activities related to real working environment when researchers focus on employability and learning contexts as intercultural activities separated from the real environment may not work well.

Theoretical foundation
In this section, we discuss the theoretical foundation of reviewed studies and our suggestions for educators and researchers. The most frequently used theories were the Process Model of ICC (Deardorff, 2006) and Sociocultural Theory (Vygotsky, 1978). The Process Model of ICC includes five main dimensions: (a) skill, (b) knowledge, (c) attitudes, and (d) internal and (e) external outcomes. ICC development is presented in the model as a cyclic and lifelong process. It starts with attitude and continue through inclusion of knowledge and skills as they allow a learner to achieve more effective and appropriate intercultural communication (Deardorff, 2006). In the process, development of ICC moves from attitude to the knowledge/skill and to internal and external outcomes. Sometimes the process could go from knowledge/skill directly to external outcomes. According to Deardorff, not all learners are able to achieve internal outcomes so it was suggested to skip one or more dimensions in the process. Deardorff suggested that it is important for learners to develop internal outcomes (e.g. empathy and flexibility) before they move to external outcomes in order to be more effective in intercultural interactions. The Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Theory is the foundation of peer learning (Vygotsky, 1978). It is assumed that peer learning is associated with deep approaches to learning rather than surface ones. Therefore, peer learning is more likely to facilitate such important higher learning skills in students such as critical thinking (Boud et al., 1999; Smith & Bath, 2006). Vygotsky argued that learning is taking place through social and cultural interactions when learners use and co-construct knowledge actively. According to Deardorff and Vygotsky, learning takes place because of social and cultural interactions.

Based on our results, we have several suggestions for educators and researchers. First, it is important to increase knowledge and skills of students as this will promote the development of ICC effectively. Second, peer learning is assumed more likely to develop higher learning skills, this is likely to promote internal outcomes in Deardorff’s process model of ICC. Therefore, it is suggested that intercultural learning process is designed based on elements of cooperation so that learners communicate and cooperate to achieve the purpose of intercultural learning. Third, we found that many researchers did not indicate what theory was used in their study and so we suggest that they indicate such information. In this case, we can have a deeper understanding of their studies and their theoretical foundation.

Technologies
In this section, we discuss the used technologies in reviewed studies and our suggestions for educators and researchers. Technologies were classified into six groups based on their main functions used in the reviewed studies: online meeting system, social media, file sharing and content collaboration, asynchronous text communication, learning management system, and production tools. Online meeting systems such as Skype or Zoom provide secure and reliable video platform for online meetings, webinars, and online events. Social media are interactive technologies, e.g. Facebook or WhatsApp, and facilitate the creation and sharing of information, ideas, interests, and other forms of expression through virtual communities and networks. File sharing and content collaboration are cloud-based platforms; the latter (e.g. Dropbox or Google Drive) enables saving files online, synchronize them to personal devices and share with other people, and the former (e.g. Google Docs or Wiki) enables creating and editing documents using a web browser without any special software installed. Asynchronous text communication such as electronic mail is a method of exchanging messages between people through electronic devices asynchronously. Learning management system is a software application that can be used for the administration, documentation, tracking, reporting, automation, and delivery of educational courses, training programs, or learning and development programs. Examples of learning management system are Edmodo and Google Classroom. Production tools are IMovie and PowerPoint. iMovie is an application for creating and editing video content and PowerPoint an application for creating electronic presentations with a series of separate pages or slides. Some scholars did not specify what exact tools were employed in their studies and such instances can be identified in the table as “unspecified”. For example, Wu et al. (2021) arranged the online networking sessions as a part of “internationalization at home” project for students from twelve international universities majoring in medical and global health education. Although the created online networking environment was the only space in which the students shared their ideas and discussed about important topics related to their culture and learning context so that their learning outcomes (e.g. cultural competency) were improved, the scholars did not mention what tools they employed to create such environment.

Based on our results, we may conclude that technologies can be used for: (1) promoting communication, sharing information and insight, discussing, and reaching agreements among learners; (2) offer a platform for sharing and collaborative tasks; (3) offer students the opportunity to engage in a mutually supportive learning environment. For example, Duus & Cooray (2014) used Skype to facilitate virtual face-to-face contact, Google Docs to share files and draft work and Facebook to discuss and share information. Arndt et al. (2021) used Canvas Catalog as a neutral learning management system (LMS) to share and gain insights across all groups.

Furthermore, as can be seen from the results, the top six tools used were Skype, email, Facebook, WhatsApp, Google Docs, and Zoom. According to our result, most of studies we reviewed used more than one technology, allowing students to use tools they prefer. As inappropriate use of technologies will cause obstacles we suggest that training on technologies are carried out in advance (Ambrose et al., 2017). In this case, students’ familiarity with the use of technology can bring positive results (Swartz et al., 2020).

In addition, almost all research used asynchronous tools (n=26). This suggests that asynchronous tools are good selection to build connection and relationship among participants from various cultures. For example, Ko et al. (2015) asked students to interact through tools such as email and social networking services to learn about their partners. The use of technology also brings some issues, e.g. we need to pay attention to the privacy of students as some technologies can collect user data (Gleason & Cherrez, 2021).

Based on our results, we have several suggestions for educators and researchers. First, allow students to use their preferred technologies but with accordance to pedagogical affordances of technologies and learning objectives. Second, give students a training on selected technologies which can promote the learning progress. Third, introduce various technologies to students based on learning activities and goals, e.g. asynchronous communication tools such as email to ice-break and build connection among participants at the beginning of learning activities. Later, when students know each other better, synchronous communication tools such as Skype or WhatsApp can be used by the students to exchange culture and learning context related information in real time. Third, always pay attention to student feedback on technology. For example, some students are unwilling to expose their privacy to technological companies, and in such case, other solutions can be found (e.g. to use open source software) to support teaching and learning process.

Learning contexts and how they connected to intercultural learning
In this section, we discuss learning contexts and how they are connected to intercultural learning. We also provide our suggestions for educators and researchers. According to our results, those learning contexts in reviewed studies need to deal with people and multicultural environments. We believe that the amount of research is related to the importance of intercultural competence in learning context. For example, in the reviewed studies, the most frequent learning context was teacher education, followed by business, nursing, medicine and hospitality and tourism. There are three learning contexts only studied once, they are computer science, international engineering, apparel and textile. With the deepening of globalization, more and more fields will realize the importance of intercultural competence, so we suggest to have more studies in unexplored or underexplored learning contexts to have more knowledge in the field.

Learning activity
In this section, we discuss learning activities of reviewed studies and our suggestions for educators and researchers. Cooperation activity was the most frequently used one in reviewed studies. In cooperation activity, participants from different cultural backgrounds cooperated to perform tasks. This learning activity is associated with deep approaches to learning rather than surface one. Therefore, it leads to the development of important higher learning skills in students such as critical thinking (Boud et al., 1999; Smith & Bath, 2006). Synchronous communication activity was also popular. Synchronous communication activity is the activity in which participants use synchronous communication software for communication, such as video conference (e.g. Skype or Zoom). Participants are able to synchronously interact and exchange information related to their culture, reflect on their experiences, and offer or receive comments in this activity (Shadiev et al., 2021). Production activity includes participants to make a product for the task or theme, such as video, review, report, etc. Production activity can improve students’ enthusiasm for participation (Wang et al., 2020) and also can be used as a way to collect data. Discussion is another activity; in this activity, participants from different cultural backgrounds discussed their cultures, such as life, education, etc. This activity can promote participants’ understanding of culture of both sides (Ko et al., 2015), give students the ability to compare their ways and values with the ways and values of other people (Stefanova & Jiménez, 2019). Self-introduction activity is a good selection to build participants’ connection. According to our result, the following ways can be used in self-introduction: making self-introduction video (Hur et al., 2020; Ferreira-Lopes et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2018), posting introduction information in platform (Arndt et al., 2021; Stefanova & Jiménez, 2019), making a video call (Leh et al., 2015), sending email (Limoges et al., 2019). The least used activity is reflection. This activity requires participants to reflect on their experiences. In reviewed studies, this activity was a good data source. Researchers coded content of reflection reports of students to understand their learning process and progress.

Based on our results, we have several suggestions for educators and researchers. First, we suggest to design self-introduction as the first step to build students connection, this can be a good start for the following steps of learning activities. In addition, we suggest using asynchronous communication tools such as email or Facebook in learning activities. This type of communication can let participants have more time to think about what to write or how to respond; also, participants will have enough time to read or watch communicated content to understand it better. Second, it is recommended to design cooperation activity to train students’ high-order thinking, such as critical thinking, which is very helpful to reduce students’ race centered consciousness. Third, we suggest using reflection activity which requires students to reflect on their intercultural activity experience. Such activity can deepen intercultural knowledge. In addition, in this way useful data can be collected to evaluate learning process or performance in intercultural learning.

Data collection
In this section, we discuss data collection of reviewed studies and our suggestions for educators and researchers. According to our results, most reviewed studies collected qualitative data which includes reflection reports, open-ended questions, interview, posts, assignment, recording and observation. The most frequently used qualitative data collection method was reflection reports. This method requires students to express their knowledge and experience about intercultural activity which includes many useful information such as feelings, suggestion, complaint, obstacle, etc. For example, some students thought language is the obstacle which influence their communication (Crawford et al., 2018) and some students thought usage of technologies make communication easier (Arndt et al., 2021). Another frequently used qualitative data collection method was a survey with open-ended questions. Open-ended questions have not standard answers as their aim is to get students’ real ideas and feedback. We suggest to give some examples of answers to open-ended questions which is useful for students to express real ideas. Interviews were also a good method to collect qualitative data. In our reviewed studies, interview included individual interview and group interview. Interview enables collecting more data that can objectively support the data obtained from other instruments.

Quantitative research is used in twelve studies. In quantitative research, most common data collection method is using a scale. This instrument is easy to administer to a large number of participants and is convenient to collect the data from a large number of participants. For example, Ko et al. (2015) used the Cultural Intelligence Scale to measure changes in the students’ cognitive, affective, and behavioral aspects of intercultural effectiveness and Swartz et al. (2020) administered the Intercultural Sensitivity Scale to investigate whether students increased their intercultural sensitivity through their participation in the learning activities. Some researchers combined quantitative research with qualitative method. This method was highly regarded for triangulating the data as it can get conclusion from different angle. We suggest researchers use various data collection method based on their research questions.

Findings
In this section, we discuss findings of reviewed studies and our suggestions for educators and researchers. Our results showed that the motivation of students to participate in activities deserves attention. Ambrose et al. (2017) reported the motivation of students includes curiosity, knowledge expansion, building relationships for professional and personal growth, innovative learning opportunity with global peers and developing intercultural awareness. In the research of Liu and Shirley (2021), students were active when making and sharing virtual tours. Crawford (2018) reported students lacked motivation in their activity and they suggested adding some rewards such as bonus points.

According to our results, the experience of living abroad will affect students’ intercultural competence, this experience would cause difference of experimental results. Eren (2021) reported that their experience explained 18% of the variance in intercultural competence. We suggest that before activity it is necessary to survey the cultural background of participants. In addition, this experience not only affects the results, but also affects the process of activities, for example, some students thought lacking intercultural experience is the obstacle to communicate with their foreign partners (Duus & Cooray, 2014; Kang et al., 2018).

Our result showed that intercultural activity could promote intercultural competence, intercultural knowledge, intercultural awareness, intercultural sensitivity and cultural understanding of students. After intercultural activity, some students realized the importance of intercultural competence for their profession. Intercultural experience eliminates their preconceived prejudices and stereotypes about other cultures. In interaction with foreign partners, they got the skills, understandings and knowledge, this interaction experience increases their confidence. Comparing is useful, by comparing, students can know similarities and differences between cultures which helps get more deep understanding of cultures.

Good activity design is the key to achieve good results. Considering more factors can help achieve better results. The usage of technologies is important, according to our results, improper use of technologies can lead to students’ anxiety. Potential technical problems include unskilled use, network problems, privacy exposes (e.g. Facebook), etc. Some students reported that rational use of technologies can make it easier in intercultural communication. We suggest let students to choose tools they prefer to use. Another import factor is the time-difference and schedule-difference. Time difference will affect the arrangement of activities, especially synchronous cooperative activities. Asynchronous activities can be worth considering as an alternative. Schedule difference is another issue to consider as different schools have different semester and curriculum arrangements, which requires both sides to find same free time. Language is also a potential problem especially when participants have no language in common so this and other issues need to be considered by educators and researchers.

Conclusion
In this study, we reviewed articles on technology-supported intercultural learning in different fields with respect to the following seven categories: (a) research focus, (b) theoretical foundation, (c) technologies, (d) learning contexts and how they connected to intercultural learning, (e) learning activity, (f) data collection, and (g) findings. Our results showed that most studies focused on intercultural competence which includes multiple sub dimensions. Most frequently used theories were Deardorff’s Process Model of ICC and Vygotsky’s Sociocultural theory. The Skype was the most frequently used technology. Teacher education was the most studied field. China and USA were the countries most involved in cross-cultural activities. All studies used English for communication. The academic level of most participants was undergraduates. The number of participants in most activities was less than 50. Cooperation, synchronous communication and production were the most used activity. All studies used qualitative research method, meanwhile, there were twelve studies used mixed research methods. Intercultural activities were proved to promote students’ intercultural competence though not all sub dimensions improved. Technical problems and time difference were the most mentioned problems.

This study is useful for researchers and educators who focus on implementing intercultural learning in various learning contexts. Theory is important to experiment, they can get to know which theories used in studies and use them for informing future research. In this study, we listed activities which can be used as references for activity design. Although only half of the studies used qualitative and quantitative mixed studies, we suggest use different methods to triangulate results and get more reliable conclusions. Technologies usage and time-difference are potential questions, it is better to do technical training and let students to select their preferred technologies. Asynchronous mode can be used as an alternative when a huge time difference exists. Finally, the problems reported by researchers in the above research can be taken into account when designing intercultural activities.

There are limitations in this study. First, we only searched papers in Web of Science database so others studies about technology-supported intercultural learning included in different databases could be ignored. In addition, this study only includes eight fields which is too little for all disciplines. In the future, scholars may address these issues.