The purpose of this research is to determine the quality of the digital stories developed by the primary school teacher candidates (PSTC) for primary school mathematics teaching and their experiences in the digital storytelling (DST) production processes. The study group of the research, designed as a case study, consisted of 30 PSTC. The data of the research were obtained from multiple data collection tools and analyzed through content analysis. As a result of the research, it was determined that the negative qualities were more than the positive ones in the digital stories. From the point of view of the process, it has been determined that the PSTC carried out some preparatory work before creating a digital story, pay attention to certain criteria while creating a digital story, and review their stories after producing their DST. In addition, PSTC encountered some problems in the DST production process and tried to find solutions to these problems. There are also some elements that facilitate the digital story writing process. However, the actions and strategies used by pre-service teachers in the process of creating digital stories are quite limited and they do not fully reflect the DST production steps.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Digital storytelling (DST) is the creation of oral and written stories that have been customary throughout history by enriching them with the technology brought by the current age. In addition, it is mentioned in the literature as the ability to transform one’s own scenario into a story with text, sound and music by using a computer and bringing together multimedia tools (sound, video, music) with a perspective and presenting it afterwards (France & Wakefield, 2011; Pala, 2020; Robin, 2008).

Although the digital story has started to be created in the world since the 1990s, it has attracted more attention in recent years (Hartley & Mc William, 2009; Wu & Chen, 2020). The reason for this may be that with the development and preference of technology over the years, creating digital stories has become easier. Such that special Web 2.0 tools (PowToon, Slidely, Tellagami, Story Jumper, iMovie) for digital stories have been developed and presented to users. In the mentioned vehicles, users can record their voices and music. You can choose what you want from the ready-made images available for use. They have the opportunity to benefit from the visuals that they have accessed online or offline, along with their own drawings.

DST writers/producers may or may not prefer to use the aforementioned easy-to-use tools. However, the writers/producers are advised to pay attention to certain criteria in the process of creating DST. The first of these criteria is to follow the steps to be followed from the decision-making process to the process of sharing the story. The second is to pay attention to the basic elements of DST. Although the stages of the DST production process differ in number in the literature (Barrett, 2007; Lambert, 2010), they basically all follow a similar process. Lasica (2006) created this process in ten steps in a longer way. Information about the steps is given in Fig. 1.

Figure 1.
figure 1
Digital Story Production Process Steps (Lasica, 2006)

Full size image
The details of the DST production process steps can be briefly explained as follows: In the step of “deciding on the story”, the DST writer/producer decides on the type of story (personal, historical, educational) to be told in 3–5 min. In the step of “compiling the materials”, he collects relevant photos, images and videos to use in the story. In the “scenario creation” step, as in every story, he creates the scenario of the story with short texts by paying attention to the introduction, development and conclusion parts, evoking emotions. He keeps the software, computer and various hardware to be used in the step of “preparing the tools” . Creates a board with the visuals, sounds, time and music details to be used in the “Creating a storyboard” step. “Digitizing tools” specifically scans hand-drawn or old photographs and digitizes them to a certain size limit, suitable for their preferred DST media. Performs audio recording with the tool specified in the step of “Sound recording”. At this step, it is recommended that the author voice the story as if he is speaking, not reading it. In the “adding music” step, he adds the music that suits the pace and emotion of the story. The DST author edits the story after adding all the multimedia tools that need to be added in the “Editing story” step. Finally, in the “sharing/publishing the story” step, he shares his story on the relevant platforms.

In order to create a more effective and qualified story, it is recommended to pay attention to the basic elements that make up the content and structure of the story. In the literature, the elements of DST are examined under seven titles (Bumgarner, 2012; Dinçer, 2019; Robin, 2008; Satterfield, 2009). Explanatory information about the DST elements is given in Table 1 briefly.

Table 1. DST’s Basic Elements
Full size table
As the information in Table 1 reflects, the formation of an original, high-quality story that is expected to be accepted by the reader depends on the simultaneous use of many variables. Therefore, in this process, the DST creators should take into account many variables and control these variables. This is an extremely labor intensive process.

Using digital story in education and mathematics education
DST is defined as an effective course material for teachers and students (Robin, 2008). It is stated that DST can contribute to the construction of knowledge by students and the easier understanding of lessons, and the development of students’ research and meaningful writing skills (Niemi et al., 2018). DST provides convenience to educators at the point of developing students’ 21st century skills (Cigerci, 2020). In the education system, DST is evaluated as entertaining and immersive, as well as improving students’ speaking, writing, technology use, and creative problem-solving, reflective thinking skills by creating their own story, and with this feature, it provides various advantages in terms of use in lessons (Ayten & Polater, 2021; Demirer & Baki, 2018; Duran & Özen, 2017; Özüdoğru & Çakir, 2020; Küngeru, 2016; Sarıtepeci, 2017; Yılmaz & Çelik, 2020). The DST process also fulfills the student-centered learning strategy in which cooperation and sharing among students are active (Demirbaş & Şahin, 2020; France & Wakefield, 2011; Wu & Chen, 2020). At the same time, it increases the academic success of students and contributes to the use of learning strategies (Çiçek, 2018).

With these positive aspects, DST is a material that is used at all levels from pre-school to higher education and has a positive effect (Rahiem, 2021; France & Wakefield, 2011). In the literature, it is noteworthy that studies on DST in education are carried out in different disciplines such as mathematics, science, language skills, but mainly focus on language skills in the use of digital stories in education. For example, a systematic review study conducted in recent years (Wu & Chen, 2020) shows that DST studies in education mainly focus on language and language skills, while studies in science and especially mathematics are limited.

The use of DST in mathematics is actually based on the use of storytelling didactics in mathematics. Some of the researchers, who acted on the reason that presenting the information in the context of a story, can help any individual in general, and students in particular, learn and remember information better (Bruner, 1986), and some of the researchers emphasized that storytelling can also be used in mathematics teaching. The use of stories can be considered as pedagogical tools that help students learn mathematics subjects and make connections between subjects (Goral & Gnadinger, 2006). Accordingly, a mathematics topic is embedded in a story within a context that interests the student. According to the researchers, through these stories, a meaningful context can be created for students to solve problems, mathematics can become more accessible and more interesting for students, and it can be easier for students to learn mathematics (Albano et al., 2020; Casey et al., 2008; Schiro, 2004; Zazkis & Liljedahl, 2009).

DST in mathematic teaching is the digitized version of storytelling. Digital stories can be considered as interesting and multimedia-based materials that can also be used in mathematics learning and teaching, and can be structured in relation to the subject of mathematics and achievement (Albano & Pierri, 2014; Albano et al., 2020). Studies in the literature that deal with DST in the context of mathematics show that digital stories contribute to the mathematics learning process. According to one of the experimental studies on the use of DST in mathematics (Niemi et al., 2018), the use of DST in mathematics learning makes students active and increases student engagement. In addition, it directs students to cooperative learning, increases students’ interest and motivation, and encourages them to use technology. Similarly, according to the case study conducted by Albano et al. (Albano et al., 2020), the use of DST shows that students are engaged in both motivational and mathematical terms, and it encourages students to produce hypotheses. Similarly, according to the case study conducted by Albano et al. (2020) the use of DST shows that the use of DST provides both motivational and mathematical engagement of students and encourages students to produce hypotheses. Teaching mathematics with DST is effective in increasing students’ intrinsic motivation (Çakıcı, 2018). Digital stories provide concretization of mathematics based on abstract concepts (Albano & Pierri, 2014). The use of DST contributes to students’ conceptual learning towards mathematics (Dinçer, 2019).

The emergence of these contributions depends on the quality of the digital story to be used in mathematics teaching/learning and the efficiency of the DST process. Designing a story for a specialty such as mathematics involves a process that requires a lot of effort and includes many factors. First of all, when a teacher wants to integrate technology into the lesson, he should bring together technological, pedagogical and content knowledge in a qualified way (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). A teacher who will design a digital story for mathematics teaching needs to employ technology-related factors such as “DS elements” and “DST processes”. The teacher should also use the content knowledge. Moreover, only the teacher's content knowledge about mathematics is not enough, the teacher should be able to transform this knowledge into a story in line with a pedagogical goal/benefit (İncikabi & Kildan, 2013). On the other hand, the teacher should not forget that the product he created is a language product and should consider the context. For this reason, the mathematical story he prepared should contain the story elements (time, place, people, problem, solution, reaction, etc.) and should be a consistent text reflecting the story structure (Albano & Pierri, 2014; Harris & Graham, 1996). The teacher should also use a language suitable for the level of the student, choose words and pay attention to the mechanical elements of the text as a model for the teacher (Istenic Starčič, et al., 2016). This is also true for mathematics candidates and PSTC who will work in the field of mathematics teaching in the future.

It is imperative that pre-service teachers who will train alpha generations, who are digital natives (Prensky, 2001) who were born in a technological environment, especially in professional life, create digital stories that will cover the aforementioned qualities as a whole. However, when the literature is examined, studies on DST and DST processes of pre-service teachers (mathematics and primary school teacher candidates) are limited. For example, İncikabi and Kildan (2013) examined the digital stories prepared by pre-service teachers in terms of the technology quality of the mathematics content they discussed. The researchers also evaluated at which stage of the lesson the pre-service teachers preferred to use the digital stories they created. Islim et al., (2018) investigated the factors affecting the choice of subject and tool in the DST process of primary school teacher candidates, and their views on the use of digital stories in education. Özpınar (2017) examined pre-service mathematics teachers' views on DST processes and the use of DST in education. In the context of the literature, there is a need for a study in which the mathematics-oriented DST production process of teacher candidates and the stories created at the end of this process are evaluated together. In this study, the quality of the DSTs prepared by the PSTC who prepared the mathematics-oriented DST was evaluated not only in terms of digital but also in terms of mathematics learning outcomes and story dimension. In addition to the digital story representing the product, the process of revealing this product is also discussed. It is thought that if the situation of teacher candidates who design DST for mathematics can be determined regarding DST products and their work on the process, intervention programs can be organized for future studies and thus contribute to the literature. In line with the aforementioned purposes, answers were sought to the following questions.

1.
What is the quality of the digital stories developed by the primary school teacher candidates for primary school mathematics teaching?

2.
What are the experiences of primary school teacher candidates in the process of producing digital stories?

Method
Research design
The present study aimed to determine the experiences of the PSTC regarding the writing/producing process and the quality of the stories they prepared, and this research was designed as a holistic single-case design; case studies; researcher's real life, a current situation, etc. This research collects detailed and in-depth information about the subject through multiple sources of information (Creswell, 2013; Hancock & Algozzine, 2006). In this research, pre-service teachers’ digital story writing processes and products constitute the holistic focus of the research. In addition, data in the study were collected through four different data collection methods.

Study group
The study group in the research was determined according to the criterion sampling method, which is one of the purposive sampling methods (Merriam, 2009). The following criteria were taken into consideration in the study: 1. Being a PSTC who will teach the alpha generation, 2. PSTC taking a mathematics teaching course. 3. Having experience in creating DST. In the study, digital stories were obtained from a total of 54 primary school teacher candidates aged between 20-22. The digital stories created by the pre-service teachers were evaluated by considering the criteria in Patton’s (2007) DST assesment rubric. In order to present a holistic perspective, the digital stories created by the pre-service teachers were classified. The digital stories of 10 low, 10, high and 10 middle-performing pre-service teachers were randomly selected. Thus, the stories of 30 pre-service classroom teachers were used in the study. Of the thirty teacher candidates, 16 are female and 14 are male. The data obtained from all data collection tools under the heading of data collection tools were obtained from 30 pre-service teachers.

Data collection
In the research, four different data collection tools were used: open-ended interview form, focus group discussion, reflective diary, and document. Data on 30 pre-service teachers' experiences in digital story writing processes were collected through structured interview form, focus group interview, and reflective diary. The data on their digital stories have been preserved as documents.

The first of the data collection tools used in the research is the structured interview form. These forms were preferred so that all participants could express themselves more easily. The second data collection tool is the focus group discussion. Within the scope of the research, focus group discussions were conducted with five PSTC. In these two data collection tools, answers were sought for the following two questions:

1.
What kind of experiences did you have about mathematics lesson/learning outcomes, writing/language use, digital story tool and yourself during the DST prepration stage?

2.
What kind of experiences did you have about mathematics acquisition/lesson, writing/language use, digital story tool and yourself during the DST process?

The third data collection tool used in the research is reflective diaries. During the digital story production process, pre-service teachers kept reflective diaries. In reflective diaries, pre-service teachers were asked to take notes of every action they took during the process of planning, producing, and evaluating the digital story. In addition, they were asked to record their feelings and thoughts throughout the process.

The fourth data collection tool is the digital stories created by 30 pre-service teachers. The digital stories prepared by the teacher candidates constitute the documents of the study.

In the research, pre-service teachers were first asked to convey their DST processes through diaries and create their digital stories. Then, interviews were conducted with the teacher candidates through structured interview forms. Finally, focus group discussion was applied. Pre-service teachers were given one week to create their digital stories and prepare their reflective diaries. In order to collect reliable data, pre-service teachers were asked to answer the questions in the structured interview form as soon as they sent their digital stories. Simultaneously, focus group interviews were conducted with 5 teacher candidates.

Data analysis
The data of the research were analyzed through inductive content analysis. In this direction, each piece of data was coded, then these codes were grouped and converted into categories (Merriam, 2009). A qualitative research program was used for content analysis. The analysis process started as soon as the digital stories were received from the teacher candidates. The analysis process took two months. Particular attention has been paid to carrying out the analysis process while the education is still in progress, so that opinions can be obtained from teacher candidates when necessary and possible threats can be reduced. The data obtained from the data collection tools were simultaneously subjected to content analysis. The researchers analyzed all the data twice. In the analysis of digital stories, a multidimensional perspective has been adopted in the context of the relevant literature. Thus, digital stories were examined from a multidimensional perspective in terms of technological elements such as digital story elements and steps, as well as pedagogical content knowledge related to mathematical learning outcome and story as a language product (story elements, coherence, mechanical elements, etc.).

Validity and reliability in qualitative research; credibility is ensured by criteria such as consistency, confirmability and transferability. In a qualitative research, the researcher should meet these four criteria by using different strategies such as participant confirmation, expert opinion, purposeful sampling, and triangulation (Creswell, 2013; Merriam, 2009; Patton, 2014; Yıldırım & Şimşek, 2013). In this study, triangulation technique was used and multiple data collection tools were used. In order to increase the transferability of the research, the experiences and stories of different participants are included in the quotations in the findings. In addition, data sources and participant level are presented at the end of the quotations. Quotations made in this direction; pre-service teachers’ reflective diaries (RD), interview form applied to pre-service teachers (IF), focus group interview (FGD), high-level performance (HP), medium-level performance (MP), low-level performance (LP) were presented using abbreviations. For example, the LP-P11 used in the research represents the low-performing pre-service teacher with code 11. Expert opinion was sought to increase the reliability of the research. First of all, qualitative data were analyzed together by the researchers. The codes and themes were then reviewed and analyzed by another expert. Experts were consulted for codes with disagreement among researchers.

Ethical procedure
Before the study, Ethics Committee Permission was obtained from the university where the application was carried out. Considering the criteria determined by Creswell (2013) and the sample form he prepared, the participant consent form was signed by the pre-service teachers. It was tried to give confidence to the participants about the confidentiality and security of the research by stating that their names would not be mentioned in any way during the reporting phase of the research, that they would be given a pseudonym and that the data would be kept confidential.

Findings
The aim of this study is to examine the quality of the digital stories produced by the PSTC and their experiences in the DST process. As a result of the findings obtained from the data collection tools 1024 codes emerged. The codes, categories and subcategories related to these are presented in Fig. 2.

Figure 2.
figure 2
Map of Digital Story Main and Subcategories

Full size image
The quality of digital stories
When the stories created by the primary school teacher candidates for a mathematics achievement are evaluated in general, it is seen that the negative qualities in the stories are more dominant than the positive ones. These qualifications consist of two categories.

Negative qualities of digital stories
The negative qualities of the digital stories of the PSTC are collected in 10 categories. 360 codes emerged related to these categories. These codes are presented in Fig. 3.

Figure 3.
figure 3
Map of Negative Qualities in Digital Story

Full size image
When the frequency distributions in Fig. 3 are taken into account, the negative features of DS produced by PSTC show intensities, especially in five categories. These are mechanical features (f=70), language and expression (f=67), mathematics (f=57), coherence (f=57) and visuals (f=37). The most common mechanical mistakes that PSTC’s usually make in their digital stories are; not making a paragraph (f=16), mistakes in the spelling of conjunctions (f=15), mistakes in punctuation marks (f=34), changing the writing style and font size in the text (f=15). From the point of view of language and expression, there are grammatical errors (f=52), and unnecessary affixes and word usage (f=15) in the sentences of the PSTC. In terms of mathematical problems, the mistakes that PSTC usually make are; being unable to design a story suitable for the learning outcomes of the mathematics lesson (f=19), not including the steps required by the outcome in the story (f=13), neglecting the operational symbol (f =10), lack of visuals suitable for the presented mathematical item (f=9), not concretizing the operation with visuals (f=6). In terms of coherence problems, common mistakes of PSTC are being unable to construct story elements (place, time, character, problem, etc.) (f=22), including sudden transitions in the story (f=20), expressing different parts of the text in a single paragraph (f=12), changing the story time (f=3). Using visuals that are not suitable for the text content (f=11), failing to provide the visual-text ratio (f=9), using images that are not suitable for cultural elements (f=5), using low-resolution images (f=2), figures -not paying attention to ground harmony (f=3), using disproportionate visuals (f=3), using different images for the same figure in different parts of the text (f=4) are also common problems of PSTC in this study.

In addition to these, the majority of PSTC did not include the elements of sound (f=17), music (f=17) and rhythm (f=14), which are the basic elements of DS. Some of the pre-service teachers who included these elements (f=8) could not use these elements in accordance with the story. Below is a section of digital stories that reflects some of these issues:

Figure 4 includes LP-P19’s digital story. LP-P19 “maps objects in two groups with less than 20 objects one-to-one and compares the number of objects in the groups. He uses “equal”, “more” and “less” when making comparisons.” He tried to design a digital story about his learning outcome. However, while a comparison should be made between the two groups according to the learning outcome, there are six color groups in the story. This shows that the story is not structured in accordance with the relevant mathematical learning outcome. In addition, although green kite and pink kite are mentioned in the text in the part of the story presented in Picture 2, pink or green kite is not used in the images. In other words, an image suitable for the text was not used. It is stated in the text that the yellow kite is less than the other kites. However, when the number of yellow kites is examined in the related visual, the number of yellow kites is equal to the number of purple kites. Although it is stated that six red kites are the most kites, the color of the kites with the highest number is different. This shows the inconsistency between mathematical expressions and visuals. In terms of coherence, there are sudden transitions in the text. While talking about the number of kites, it was stated that suddenly the children shared the kites among themselves and right after that they went to fly the kites. There is also no information on how the children share the kites. This causes incoherency in terms of sudden transitions in the text.

Figure 4.
figure 4
Example of Digital Story, LP-P19

Full size image
Positive qualities of digital stories
Although there are generally negative qualities in the digital stories of the PSTC, there are also positive ones. When the codes obtained were examined, the positive features of digital stories were grouped under six categories. A total of 212 codes have emerged in relation to these. These are presented in Fig. 5.

Figure 5.
figure 5
Map for Positive in Qualities in Digital Story

Full size image
As seen in Fig. 5, the digital stories prepared by the PSTC have positive qualities in some respects. It is seen that the categories in the positive qualities of the DS of the PSTC do not differ much in terms of frequency distribution. However, the area where they were successful compared to other categories was the mathematical dimension of the digital story. In this context, some of the PSTC structured the mathematics learning outcomes in a qualified way (f=7), processed the misconceptions that may occur in the students towards the acquisition of the story (f=4), and reflected the operational symbols on the stories (f=4), and used visuals suitable for operations (f=9). In addition, most of the PSTC (f=22) included purpose and dramatic questions in their stories. Some of the PSTC (f=10) paid attention to the story elements and included them, albeit at a partial level (names of characters, place names, etc.). Also, coherence throughout the story was provided. It is also noteworthy that most of the stories have originality (f=20). In terms of language expression (f=16) and mechanical dimension (page layout, writing style, spelling, punctuation, etc.) (f=17), some stories show successful qualities. The use of music (f=13), rhythm (f=13), sound (f=10) and visuals (f=19) of some PSTC throughout the story are also compatible and successful with the texts and characters in the stories. When the stories that use music are evaluated, music that is compatible with the rhythm of the story, slow or moving, suitable for the environment (sounds in the school garden, the sound of rain, etc.) is used. In the rhythm, the speed of the story was taken into account, and the appropriate vocalization was made and music was used. In the voice-overs, the voices were made in accordance with the excitement and rhythm of the story, clear, emphatic, considering the characteristics of the story characters.

In particular, the text of the HP-P3 coded student represents an exemplary digital story with many positive qualities. In his digital story titled Space Adventure, pre-service teacher with HP-P3 code “M.1.1.1.4. Counts forward by twos, by one and backwards by twos, to 20 (including 20).” took over the learning outcomes. Images of P3’s digital story titled Space Adventure are below: (Figures 6 and 7)

Figure 6.
figure 6
Example of Digital Story, HP-P3

Full size image
Figure 7.
figure 7
Example of Digital Story, HP-P3

Full size image
The story was written from a learning outcome-oriented perspective. P3 designed its acquisition as a condition for going into and returning from space. According to this, the story characters need to get on a 20-floor spaceship, the floors of which increase by two, to go to space and reach the last floor of the spaceship. In order to return from space, they must go down to the bottom floor by counting down two from the 20th floor of the spaceship. HP-P3 benefited from repetitions to reinforce the learning outcome. The story of HP-P3; includes details about the story elements. There is no mistake in the text in terms of coherence. The story of HP-P3 is an extremely successful text in terms of its fluency and originality of language and expression. In terms of visuals, as seen in Picture 2, HP-P3 took the colors of the space into account and used black in the space environment. He also presented the 20th floor, which “resembles an orange landscape”, which is described in other pages of the story, in accordance with its previous description in picture 2. In addition, it can be said that HP-P3 paid attention to the figure-ground harmony and the proportions of the images while using the images.

DST Production process
Data on the DST production processes of PSTC were obtained through interview form, focus group interview, and reflective diaries. When the DST production processes were examined, PSTC used some strategies during the preparation stage, paid particular attention to some issues during the writing/production process, and reviewed and evaluated their digital stories according to certain criteria. Additionally, in this process, they experienced problems related to themselves and the Web 2.0 tool and produced some solutions to them. They said that some elements facilitate the DST production process.

The preparation stage for DST
When the codes obtained were examined, the preparation stage was grouped under five categories. A total of 88 codes have emerged in relation to these. These are presented in Fig. 8.

Figure 8.
figure 8
Map of the Preparation Process for DST

Full size image
When the frequencies in Fig. 8 are taken into account, it is seen that the preparation for PSTC are concentrated in three basic categories: doing research (f=30), determining the grade level and learning outcome (f=26), and drafting (f=20). PSTC primarily decided on grade level and learning outcome. PSTC stated that it is not possible to create a digital story suitable for every grade level in terms of mathematics learning outcome, so they spend time while deciding on the mathematics learning outcome. PSTC conducted research on five focuses: The first one was on how the learning outcome can be taught. Some of the PSTCs (f=12) examined the resource books and articles related to the subject on how to teach the learning outcome, and benefited from the websites prepared for teachers. The second was visual research from the Internet. Since some of the PSTCs (f=10) could not find enough visuals about their story in the Web 2.0 tool they used, they searched for visuals they could use in their stories. Third, some of the PSTCs (f=4) conducted research on the use of the Web 2.0 tool. Even though the PSTC knew about the Web 2.0 tool, they watched videos about the Web 2.0 tool from the internet in order to fix potential problems. Third, some of the PSTCs (f=3) examined sample stories, thus stating that they tried to construct the story elements effectively. Only one pre-service teacher researched how to create a story by consulting the ideas of others. Within the scope of drafting, PSTC determined the story elements and examined the related images, and created several drafts on a Word file (f=19). However, this outline does not reflect the “story board” involved in producing a digital story. Only one of the pre-service teachers stated that they created a storyboard. In addition to these, some PSTCs did not create a written draft about their story, but produced ideas mentally (f=9). Some PSTCs (f=3) also examined the mistakes they made in their previous digital stories and tried to avoid potential problems. Some of the pre-service teachers’ quotes about the preparation phase are as follows:

“I watched a few lessons on YouTube to have a better understanding of the subject and my learning outcome. I examined the mathematics curriculum and mathematics textbooks. I also watched a video about the web 2.0 tool I used before.” (Doing research, HP-P6, RD)

“I prepared a draft to start my story. In this draft, I determined the characters, the time and the location of the story. I downloaded the images that I can use in my story from the internet, I edited them.” (Drafting, MP-P22, RD)

Focus at the stage of transforming into a DST
It was observed that pre-service teachers focused on some issues during the process of transforming their drafts or what they designed in their minds into digital stories. “Focus at the stage of transforming into a digital story” was gathered under eight categories. 120 codes for these have emerged. These are presented in Fig. 9.

Figure 9.
figure 9
Map of Focus at the Stage of Transforming into DST

Full size image
When the frequencies in Fig. 9 are examined, densities are seen in three categories. These are “suitability for the target audience, harmony of text and visuals, language and expression”. Regarding the suitability for the target audience PSTC paid attention to the subject(f=10), language and expression (f=21), the visuals used and the balance of visual-text (f=6), writing style and size (f=3), sound/music/rhythm (f=2) of their stories. The pre-service teachers took care to ensure that these elements were appropriate for the target group at the primary school level and at the determined grade level. In the context of the “harmony of text and visuals” category, PSTC paid attention to the following: the subject and the content were compatible with the images (f=12), the related text and the image were on the same page (f=5), and the images did not conflict with each other in terms of size (f=4). In terms of language and expression, teacher candidates tried to provide a short, clear and understandable expression (f=13), they avoided long sentences (f=3), descriptions (f=2), and incoherency (f=1). In the context of the text content category, some of the PSTCs emphasized that students might like (f=7), that they included topics that were suitable for their feelings, thoughts and spirit worlds, and that they paid attention to the fact that the subject was related to their daily life (f=6). In terms of mathematics, they took care not to go beyond the mathematics learning outcome (f=4) and not to include an element that could create a misconception (f=4). Pre-service teachers also tried to use a sound, music and rhythm suitable for the content and characters of the text (f=10); they paid attention to mechanical elements (f=6) such as spelling-punctuation rules. One of the PSTCs stated that they tried to include values of education as well. Some of the excerpts from the PSTC related to this sub-category are as follows:

“With the spring coming, I wanted to create my characters from bees. This was perfect for first graders … I tried to find lively characters in the app that would appeal to the eyes of the children.” (Relative to target audience, LP-P9, IF).

“In my story, the visuals had to be proportionally close to the real thing. The father and the little boy should not be big. They should be simple, not complicated. In other words, what I told on that page should be related to them, and there should not be any unnecessary visuals.” (Quality of images, MP-P19, FGD).

“The first thing that came to my mind was pizza, one of the favorite foods of children. I was going to explain the math using this topic. But I gave up on this idea. I chose to include the important day for the child, his birthday, that the child may love more. That’s why I replaced the pizza with a birthday cake.” (Relative to target audience, HP-P8, IF)

Reviewing and editing the digital story
When the codes obtained were examined, “reviewing and editing” was grouped under seven categories. 33 codes for these have emerged. These are presented in Fig. 10.

Figure 10.
figure 10
Map of Reviewing and Editing the DST

Full size image
When the frequencies in Fig. 10 are examined, the category of “reviewing without criteria” is more prominent than the others. In this respect, it is understood that the PSTC examines the digital stories superficially without adhering to a certain criterion (f=9). Further, it is understood that PSTC controlled their stories in terms of language and expression (f=6), visuals (f=5), mechanics (spelling rules, writing style and font) (f=6), misconceptions (f=1), sound-music-rhythm harmony (f=1). In addition, it is noteworthy that only four high-performing PSTCs reviewed and edited their digital story based on the feedback of others. However, these actions for review were limited. Some of the quotations for the relevant sub-category are as follows:

“I read and edited my sentences over and over. I rewrote the sentences with grammatical errors.” (Reviewing language and expression, LP-P26, IF).

“I checked to see if I there was any misconseptions in my text.” (Reviewing the misconception, MP-P11, RD).

“There were two primary school students in my neighborhood. I showed them my text and got generally positive feedback. They asked me to change some of the images in several places. I changed them.” (Review based on feedback, HP-P6, RD).

Problems and resources
“Problems and sources” are grouped under two main categories and seven subcategories. 140 codes for these categories emerged. These are presented in Fig. 11.

Figure 11.
figure 11
Map of DST Problems and Resources

Full size image
During the DST production process, the PSTC mainly had problems in finding visuals suitable for the story (f=27) and creating a story based on mathematics by deciding on the learning outcome (f=25). There were pre-service teachers (f=10) who had problems especially in finding symbols related to mathematics. In addition, it was seen that the PSTC, who did not know the language selection setting in the Web 2.0 tool, had problems (f=7) because the program converted the written Turkish text into English characters. There were also problems with language and expression problems (f=5) and sound-music-rhythm elements (f=4) in accordance with the level of the determined target audience. It was seen that the sources of the problems were related to both the user/pre-service teacher (f=26) and the Web 2.0 tool (f=46). Problems related to pre-service teachers are grouped under the headings of seeing oneself inadequate in drawing, using technology and writing a story, not having enough knowledge about Web 2.0 tool (especially not knowing how to add a voiceover element and choosing a language). The problems related to the Web 2.0 tool are that the tool is paid and limited, and when it is limited, the tool is visually inadequate. Some quotations from pre-service teachers about “Problems and Resources” are given below:

“I had a problem with the examples I gave in order to better understand the division operation in my story. I had difficulty in establishing the binding between the story language and the examples and keeping the story language while conveying the examples.” (Problems, HP-P10, RD).

“Sometimes, one’s biggest obstacle can be himself, unfortunately, from the beginning, I have never been confident in designing and writing digital stories. I don’t think I’m a creative person, so I haven’t been able to master the use of materials, which is especially useful in reinforcing an abstract subject like mathematics.” (Source from pre-service teacher, MP-P22, IF).

Solutions
The solutions are grouped under three categories. 31 codes for these categories emerged. These are shown in Fig. 12.

Figure 12.
figure 12
Map of Solutions

Full size image
When the frequencies in Fig. 12 are examined, PSTC produced solutions for visuals, fiction/scenario in the story and vocalization in the DST process. Expressing that they could not find images suitable for their texts in the Web 2.0 tool, PSTC tried to solve this problem mainly by searching the images on the internet (f=16). In addition to these, some pre-service teachers drew and designed the visuals suitable for their story (f=6). PSTC, who had problems with fiction/scenario, received help from friends (f=2) or analyzed sample stories (f=4). Two pre-service teachers, who stated that they had problems with the vocalization in accordance with the characteristics of the character, performed the vocalization together with the help of their relatives. Some quotes from pre-service teachers about “solutions” are as follows:

“I researched different stories and modeled them on to solve the fictional problems I faced while writing my story.” (Solutions for fiction, MP-P25, FGD).

“Since I could not find some images in my text in the application, I prepared the images myself and took their photos. I transferred those photos to the computer.” (Solutions for visuals, HP-P4, RD).

Factors facilitating the process
In its reflective diaries and interviews, the PSTC addressed some of the factors that facilitated the process. Accordingly, five categories and 40 codes emerged. These are included in Fig. 13.

Figure 13.
figure 13
Map of Factors Facilitating the Process

Full size image
When the frequencies in Fig. 13 are examined, the most basic category that facilitates the process is “to have experience in producing DST” category. Some pre-service teachers stated that they did not encounter any problems during the process because they had previously created digital stories with the Web 2.0 tool. In addition, PSTC emphasized that mathematics is a lesson related to daily life and that there are many mathematics achievements that can be turned into a digital story, and mentioned that creating a digital story in the mathematics lesson facilitates the process. It is seen that pre-service teachers who love to read and write stories and could transfer what they had learned in the children’s literature lesson to their stories, did not have difficulty in the process. In addition, the web 2.0 tool’s creation of a multi-modal with sound, music and visual elements was among the highlights. Some quotes from teacher candidates on the subject are as follows:

“It was a convenience for me to have prepared such a story for different lessons and this lesson beforehand.” (Experience, LP-P16, IF).

“I had no difficulty in writing a story in the math class. Because in daily life, for example, when we were making a cake or going to the grocery store, I did not have any difficulties because everything was mathematical. When we look at it in terms of mathematics achievements, it was easier to transfer it from daily life to events since all the gains were at the basic level.” (The connection of mathematics with daily life, HP-P8, RD).

Discussion and conclusion
The purpose of this research is to determine the quality of the digital stories developed by the primary school teacher candidates for primary school mathematics teaching and their experiences in the DST production processes. As a result of the research, both positive and negative qualities were found in the digital stories prepared by the PSTC for a mathematics learning outcome. However, it has been determined that the negative qualities are more than the positive ones. When the positive and negative features of the stories are evaluated as a whole, it can be seen that PSTC produce successful texts, especially in terms of “dramatic question” and “originality”. However, negative qualities are more dominant in the “mechanics (spelling, punctuation, etc.), language and expression, coherence, mathematics, visuals and sound/music/rhythm” elements of the story. From the point of view of the process, it has been determined that the PSTC carried out some preparatory work before producing a digital story, paid attention to certain criteria while producing a digital story, and reviewed their stories after producing their digital stories. In addition, it has been observed that PSTCs encountered some problems in the DST production process and tried to find solutions to these problems. There were also some elements that facilitate the DST writing process. Their experience in the process shows that PSTC had some awareness of the process of creating a digital story for mathematics. It is seen that PSTCs considered producing a digital story about mathematics in the dimensions of “technology”, “mathematics teaching” and “story” in the process, and they used some actions and strategies in this sense. However, the strategies used by pre-service teachers in the DST production process were very limited and they did not fully reflect the “DST production steps”.

In this study, it is thought that there may be five main reasons why the negative features are dominant in the digital stories of pre-service teachers and there are problems in the process: 1. The low self-efficacy perceptions of the pre-service teachers 2. The limited free version of the Web 2.0 tool 3. Creating a digital story for mathematics acquisition should have a structure that includes story structure and mathematics teaching as well as the technological dimension. 4. The teacher candidates’ lack of knowledge about the DST production steps or they have difficulty in putting their existing knowledge into practice. 5. The need of more support, training, guidance and time in the multi-faceted DST process. Each of these reasons is discussed one by one based on the findings and different studies.

The first of the reasons thought to be related to the results of the research was “the low self-efficacy perceptions of pre-service teachers” . The findings described in the “problems and resources” category in the study also reveal this situation. Under this category, PSTC stated that they had problems in producing a digital story especially for mathematics, synthesizing the story elements and mathematics, finding visuals (especially finding mathematical symbols), determining the language and expression suitable for the target audience, adding sound/music/rhythm elements. It turned out that most of these problems were related to their low efficacy in these subjects (especially in the use of technology and scenario creation/editing). As a matter of fact, Bingimlas (2009) stated as a result of the meta-analysis study that the main obstacle to the integration of technology into education is the lack of confidence and competence. Therefore, the failures of PSTCs in digital stories, especially in negative qualities such as “visuals, sound and music/sound/rhythm”, can be associated with their low self-efficacy in terms of technology. In addition, teacher candidates’ low self-efficacy in drawing and scenario creation may have affected the process. Besides, there are studies in the literature that reveal the low self-efficacy of teacher candidates in these subjects (Karataş et al., 2016; Ulum & Yalman, 2020). As a result, the low perception of self-efficacy may have affected the efficiency in this process and the quality of the works.

The second factor that caused the negative qualities in the process and digital stories is thought to be the “limitation in the free version of the Web 2.0 tool used” . Findings described in the “problems and sources” category of prospective teachers support this reasoning. Under this category, it was revealed that the source of the main problems experienced by the pre-service teachers in the process was due to the limitation of the Web 2.0 tool. Visuals are limited in the free versions of Web 2.0 tools (Tünkler, 2021). This limitation has pushed the pre-service teachers to search for some solutions. As stated in the findings presented in the “Solutions” category, the pre-service teachers solved the problem of finding images through “visual research on the internet” or “drawing/designing the relevant image themselves” . A limited number of pre-service teachers also solved the intonation problems they experienced in vocalizations with the support of their close circles.

It is thought that the third source that affected the negative qualities in the process and in digital stories was that “producing a digital story for mathematics learning outcome is multidimensional and requires effort” . It can be said that a digital story about mathematics has three basic dimensions. The first of these is “technology”, the second one is “story/text”, and the third one is “mathematics teaching”. The fact that pre-service teachers can create a successful digital story for teaching mathematics requires them to have knowledge about these three dimensions and to transform this knowledge in all into skills. In this respect, pre-service teachers should be able to use the technological elements of the digital story effectively and create a coherent narrative text that reflects the story elements. Also In addition, they should be able to synthesize all these elements with mathematics teaching (Albano & Pierri, 2014; Albano et al., 2020; Istenic Starčič et al., 2016). The pre-service teacher should be able to put into practice by integrating his knowledge of three areas in his working memory. The fact that the pre-service teachers could not work with all three factors at the same time may have caused problems.

In this study, although pre-service teachers had experience in writing digital stories, they had difficulty in producing a digital story for a mathematic learning outcome. As a matter of fact, the pre-service teachers under the category of “Problems and Sources” mentioned that it was difficult to both create a scenario and synthesize the story with a lesson teaching. The negative qualities of digital stories also reveal that pre-service teachers had difficulties in these three dimensions. Additionally, a limited number of pre-service teachers conducted a research on “text/story knowledge” and “mathematics teaching” during the preparation phase of the writing process, and focused on these two dimensions in the digital story production and review processes. This situation makes us think that pre-service teachers were inadequate in transforming their field and pedagogical knowledge into digital stories. As Giles and Kent (2016) emphasized, many new generation teachers have grown up using technology for gaming, social media and personal research, but they are not yet aware of how to use technology as a teaching tool and how to integrate it into teaching. For this reason, teacher training programs should guide pre-service teachers on how to use technology effectively for instructional purposes (Giles & Kent, 2016; Islim et al., 2018). The resulting situation shows that, in addition to the integration of pedagogical and content knowledge into technology, teacher candidates were also insufficient in terms of “text and story” knowledge. In their study, Ulum and Yalman (2020) stated that students had difficulties in determining the story elements, forming sentences and realizing the fiction. This situation suggests that teacher candidates were also insufficient in the current research, whether it is a digital or traditional story, story elements, coherence and language-expression problems.

It is thought that the fourth source that affected the negative qualities in the process and digital stories was “lack of knowledge about DST producing steps or having difficulty in putting their existing knowledge into practice”. In the present study, it was determined that teacher candidates did not have an awareness of creating a storyboard. As part of the preparatory work, pre-service teachers resorted to the ways of “creating a draft and mentally generating ideas” . However, these actions were very limited and did not meet the storyboard, which is one of the basic steps of the DST production process. In some studies (Çetin, 2021; Karakoyun, 2014) it is stated that users do not like to prepare a storyboard and see it as a challenge. However, in the current study, there was no finding that the participants saw the storyboard as necessary or unnecessary during this process. This shows that the participants in the current study did not have an awareness of the storyboard. It is thought that pre-service teachers also lacked knowledge and practices regarding the “reviewing/editing” step. In the context of revision, it was observed that some of the PSTCs edited their stories randomly without specifying any criteria. On the other hand, there were limited actions and strategies such as “reviewing mechanics (spelling, punctuation etc.)”, “reviewing language and expression”, “reviewing visuals”, “reviewing sound/rhythm/musical element”, “reviewing misconceptions” and “reviewing based on feedback”. It is thought that the being limited on these actions/strategies taken in line with the review causes the process and the quality of the digital stories to decrease. Actually, these actions/strategies were mainly applied by pre-service teachers with high performance. In addition, low-performing pre-service teachers did not apply them.

It is thought that the fifth source that affected the negative qualities in the process and digital stories was “need of more support, training, guidance and time in the DST process”. Since creating an educational digital story is different from creating a digital story, it is quite time consuming and pre-service teachers need to go through this type of training. In undergraduate courses, teachers are introduced to DST and begin to use these materials. However, instructors may consider DST more in the technological context in undergraduate courses and may not relate them to the field. On the other hand, due to reasons such as time constraints and crowded classrooms (Baştürk, 2015), instructors may not be able to give pre-service teachers enough practice and feedback on creating an educational DST specific to their field. For this, more practice studies should be conducted and more qualified feedback should be given in order for pre-service teachers to design digital stories specific to their fields.

In this research, it can be said that there are also some sources of positive qualities in digital stories and the process: 1. Some pre-service teachers’ performing some of the digital story steps indirectly, even if not directly, 2. DST writing/experience

Within the scope of the preparatory work, the pre-service teachers stated that they first determined the learning outcome. This was an indication that the step of “deciding on the story”, one of the steps of DST, had been carried out. PSTC conducted research secondly. The research was conducted in order to find a solution to the problem of finding visuals in the text that the pre-service teachers experienced in the process and to determine how to teach the learning outcome. These actions can also be interpreted as performing the steps of “compiling materials and preparing tools” from the steps of producing digital stories. In addition, other basic actions carried out within the scope of the preparatory work are drafting and idea generation. PSTC drafted their digital story on a word file or simply generated ideas from their minds. This suggests that pre-service teachers were in an effort to realize the “scenario creation” step. Other actions taken during the preparation process include error analysis. In line with the error analysis, some of the PSTCs analyzed the errors in the digital stories they had prepared before, and took care not to make the same mistakes. It is thought-provoking that the participants who made error analysis and reviewed their digital stories consisted of pre-service teachers with high-level performance, and that pre-service teachers with low and medium-level performance did not resort to these methods. It suggests that pre-service teachers who tried not to make mistakes in the digital stories they had created before produced more successful texts, while those who did not make error analysis produced more unsuccessful texts.

Moreover, in their findings in the category of “factors facilitating the process” , the PSTCs stated that they gained experience and considered themselves competent in this subject because they produced DST in many courses in their undergraduate education. This may have led to the emergence of positive results in digital stories and the process.

Limitations
This research had some limitations. First of all, this research was designed as a qualitative case study in order to present the current situation of prospective teachers preparing an educational DST in the context of mathematics in detail and to guide the intervention programs that can be applied in the future. As with all qualitative studies, this research is not generalizable, the research result is limited to the participants only. The research was carried out within the scope of a course on teaching mathematics and with PSTC. The criterion sampling method was also used in the study.

Recommendations
Considering the findings and limitations of the research, future research can be designed with different qualitative or quantitative designs. The research can be conducted with teacher candidates in different groups within the scope of different courses. It can even be conducted with teachers trying to integrate technology into their lessons. Unlike the current study, maximum sampling or outlier sampling methods can be used in different studies. For future studies, pre-service teachers should be taught the elements and steps of digital story, and their deficiencies in these subjects (especially speed, vocalization, music, point of view, storyboard creation, revision) should be eliminated. It should also be emphasized that creating a digital story for a learning outcome of mathematics course necessitates teaching mathematics. In this context, the processing steps of the pre-service teachers to the basic elements of mathematics. It should be ensured that teachers/pre-service teachers reflect their pedagogical content knowledge about mathematics on digital stories. In addition, it should be emphasized that the digital story is ultimately a story and that they should present the elements (time, place, problem, result, reaction, etc.) that should be present in a story in a qualified way. It is necessary for pre-service teachers to have knowledge on the basic subjects (language and expression, formal/mechanical features, etc.) that have problems and to be able to transform this knowledge into a skill. These issues should be included in the courses/trainings designed for the teaching of digital stories. Instructors should make pre-service teachers practice more in the courses they attend and give feedback to cover all dimensions of an educational digital story.