Numerous scholars are devoted to investigating the technology acceptance model (TAM) and its extensions, but a comprehensive TAM is still under investigation. This study aims to formulate a relatively comprehensive model by including personal investment and identify factors that influence students’ adoption of CCtalk-aided English as a foreign language (EFL) courses. This study tests the proposed model based on data collected from 771 participants in China using CCtalk to acquire EFL. Confirmatory factor analysis and exploratory factor analysis are conducted to identify the designed model measurement. Coefficients of determination and path analyses are adopted to access the model fit index and path hypotheses. This study reveals the following results: (1) Perceived ease of use (β = 0.033, P < .001) and perceived usefulness (β = 0.04, P < .001) of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influence attitudes towards using CCtalk-aided EFL courses; (2) Attitude towards using (β = 0.028, P < .001), perceived ease of use(β = 0.019, P < .01),and personal investment (β = 0.04, P < .001) in the use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influence behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses; (3) Self-efficacy (β = 0.061, P < .001), and relevance (β = 0.08, P < .001) of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influence perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses; (4) Social influence (β = 0.046, P < .001), personal investment (β = 0.074, P < .01), relevance (β = 0.069, P < .001), and perceived ease of use (β = 0.035, P < .001) of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influence the perceived usefulness of CCtalk-based EFL courses. This research may provide enlightenment to the future research of a comprehensive TAM.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The development of technology contributes to an unprecedented high speed of knowledge dissemination. Online learning leaning on technological systems and applications is one of the most crucial ways to gain knowledge that deserves attention. The increasing popularity of online learning on CCtalk is significant, whose downloads have exceeded 40 million (www.cctalk.com).

CCtalk, invented by the Internet Education Institution (Hujiang), is an online learning application equipped with many ingenious functions, such as cloud-class and group chat. The application is compatible with the Android / IOS system, Mac, Windows, and Website. The application store allows both students and teachers to download it effortlessly, and they can log into CCtalk via WeChat, Tencent QQ, and phone numbers. Afterward, they can attend classes by searching the Course ID offered by teachers. The students also have access to join the communicational groups by searching group numbers or the name of the discipline (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1
figure 1
Introduction to CCtalk

Full size image
CCtalk constructs the process of pre-class, in-class, and post-class to be an excellent and intact system. Before class, the related learning resources uploaded by teachers ensure every student is available to the document, video, and audio.

Teachers design their courses effectively based on the knowledge to be studied and students’ levels in the class. Whiteboard provided in the mobile application allows teachers and students to insert writing and notes anytime to supplement the content of the class. The use of a whiteboard of teacher-student enhances the frequency of teacher-student interaction. Moreover, students and teachers can interact by answering through the microphone, multi-video calls, and finishing online drills in class.

After class, the recorded classes with PPT and screen sharing are available for all students, especially those who do not understand or miss the course. The assignments are left to consolidate the knowledge they have gained. Besides, the students can consult teachers about what they do not understand after class in the communicational group. The teacher can also examine students’ attendance of the live class in the background.

Since its birth, CCtalk has attracted great attraction from students. Nevertheless, a slight emphasis and research were received from the academic world. It has been found that CCtalk is efficient in teaching and learning in terms of some skills, e.g., English reading (Hao, 2019), English Phonetics (Zhai & Han, 2016), physics (Jiao, 2020), mathematics (Wang et al., 2018), and the Japanese language (Cui, 2016).

From the students’ perspective, the easy operation of CCtalk enabled them to access a vast number of learning resources, which facilitated students to achieve better learning outcomes (Wu et al., 2019), improve class participation, and alleviate the degree of anxiety (Jiao, 2020). Moreover, CCtalk broke the restrictions of time and space and urged students to form the habit of self-direct learning and self-regulation (Deng, 2014). As for the teacher, CCtalk facilitated them to enrich the teaching methods through videos, animation demonstrations in-class (Zhai & Han, 2016). Besides, teachers could receive feedback from students dexterously to rearrange the class to satisfy students online (Cui, 2016).

Most researchers emphasized the importance and learning outcomes on CCtalk, contributing to the innovation of pedagogical approaches. However, few scholars adopted TAM to explore the determinants which influence students studying EFL on CCtalk. Besides, there was a lack of studies that included personal investment as an essential construct in TAM. Therefore, this study attempts to explore the predictors of users’ adoption of CCtalk based on TAM to fill this gap, formulate a CCtalk TAM by incorporating the construct of personal investment, and propose the following two research questions in the background of EFL: (1) Can the personal investment be of great significance in the students’ acceptance of CCtalk-aided EFL course? (2) Can this study extend TAM by including personal investment?

Literature review
Modern technology has been designed to cater to human work and study in the information era. Accordingly, investigating the users’ acceptance of a technology system becomes the focus of experts. During the last few decades, numerous studies have been conducted on a series of technology acceptance theories (Viswanath & Hillol, 2008; Chen, Jun, et al., 2017b; Chen, Xu, & Arpan, 2017a; Huang et al., 2017), and they have gone through many changes with many variables were identified and extended. Nowadays, TAM is widely accepted as one of the most influential models for predicting users’ acceptance behavior.

TAM
In 1989, Davis first proposed TAM evolved from the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA), in which perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness were core determinants of TAM. Accordingly, the two core determinants were also influenced by some external variables. However, these external variables were not identified apparently at that time.

Subsequently, many constructs have been integrated into TAM, which has contributed to the generation of TAM2, TAM3, UTAUT, and UTAUT2. In the framework of TAM 2, subjective norms, output quality, image, work relevance, and other external variables reinforced the construct of perceived usefulness (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000). Thereafter, Venkatesh et al. (Venkatesh et al., 2003) added performance expectations, social influence, facilitating condition, and effort expectancy as four core variables; gender, age, experience, and voluntariness were moderators which influenced the core variables. In 2008, Venkatesh and Bala formulated TAM 3, which contained most variables of TAM 1, TAM 2, and clarified the relationship between perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. Nevertheless, the model is still slightly insufficient today when applied to various fields, and a comprehensive TAM still needs to be studied urgently.

TAM in educational context
Thenceforth, TAM was widely used in various fields, e.g., education (Arpaci, 2017; Liu et al., 2009), business (Wang et al., 2021; Sejin & Leslie, 2009), and computer science (Raaij & Schepers, 2008). Under the circumstance of education, teachers incorporated the traditional classes with technologies to catch the trend of the informational era, which accelerated the research of TAM. Several variables were integrated into TAM constantly in the past decades to develop a comprehensive TAM.

Based on TAM and the published studies, some scholars examined many significant constructs in the experiment. Facilitating conditions and perceived usefulness significantly influenced teachers’ positive attitude to use technology; behavioral intention to use the technology was also determined by perceived usefulness and users’ attitude towards using technological systems. It confirmed that the above traditional factors were essential constructs of TAM to determine teachers’ adoption of technology in EFL classes (Sun & Mei, 2020). In K12 education, an extended TAM including the two new constructs, technology anxiety and family support provided more power to predict children’s behavioral intention to use tablet computers (Zheng & Li, 2020). Raza et al. (Raza et al., 2020) added the social factor of social isolation to extend TAM in the case of the Learning Management System.

Subsequently, the psychological factors of self-esteem and conformity behavior were integrated as two new complementary constructs in the TAM of the learning on WeChat (Yu, 2020). This study filled the gap of missing psychological factors. Besides, Hsu and Lin (Hsu & Lin, 2021) have examined other psychological factors, nonpreoccupation, nonhesitation, and nonvolatility, in mobile-aided language learning. Furthermore, these three factors significantly predicted users’ intention to adopt the learning tool. Dai et al. (Dai et al., 2020) also integrated new cognitive and affective factors (attitude and curiosity) into TAM and found a positive relationship between attitude and intention to adopt the Massive Open Online Course (MOOC); curiosity was also the strong predictor of the users’ desire to adopt MOOC.

In the educational context, the complexities of various technology systems, individuals, and context lead to the lack of a comprehensive TAM with integrated constructs predicting users’ adoption of technology systems. Meanwhile, personal investment, a construct of great importance, has been ignored by most scholars. Accordingly, this study attempts to extend TAM by including the new construct of personal investment and integrating self-efficacy, social influence, perceived security, relevance, perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, attitude towards using, and behavioral intention to use to predict users’ behavioral intention to adopt CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Traditional constructs of TAM
When it comes to the traditional constructs in TAM, Rahmiati et al. (Rahmiati et al., 2019) have proved that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness influenced attitudes towards using electronic money, respectively. Moses et al. (Moses et al., 2013) found that attitude towards using was influenced by perceived usefulness in Science and Mathematics education. Thus, this study attempted to formulate these hypotheses:

H1: Perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences attitudes towards using CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

H2: Perceived usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences attitudes towards using CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

H3: Attitude towards using CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

It was demonstrated that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness were two core predictors of learners’ desire to adopt WebCT in higher education (Sanchez-Franco, 2010). Nguyen et al. (Nguyen et al., 2020) believed that perceived ease of use influenced perceived usefulness positively; behavioral intention to use e-learning was predicted by the constructs perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use positively. Therefore, this study proposed the following hypotheses:

H4: Perceived usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

H5: Perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

H6: Perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences the perceived usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Self-efficacy
Recently, self-efficacy has been a critical theory of education (Siriparp, 2015). Bandura (Bandura, 1977) first proposed self-efficacy theory and once defined it as people’s subjective assessment of competence to conduct a task. According to Sultan Hammad (Sultan, 2020), it has confirmed that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness were predicted by self-efficacy positively in a learning management system. While Arpaci (Arpaci, 2017) further verified the conjecture by exploring students’ utilization of distance education tools and LMSs, and self-efficacy was a positive and crucial predictor of the perceived easy operation of LMS. Accordingly, hypothesis 7 was formulated:

H7: Self-efficacy of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Social influence
Social influence means the people around students will impact their choice of technology systems (Kripanont, 2007). In higher education, social influence significantly influenced perceived usefulness; the construct also significantly influenced learners’ intention to adopt the course guide tools (Atif et al., 2015). In the case of taking advantage of social networking tools to learn online, college students’ behavioral intention was developed by social influence, performance expectancy, and effort expectancy in Indian (Alvi, 2021). Thus, this study tried to propose the following hypotheses:

H8: Social influence of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences the perceived usefulness of CCtalk-based EFL courses.

H9: Social influence of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences behavioral intention of using CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Perceived security
Perceived security has received much attention recently because of the leakage of users’ information. Many scholars conducted studies to extend TAM to predict users’ acceptance of a system by integrating perceived security. Balapour et al. (Balapour et al., 2020) found that perceived security was an indicator of behavioral intention to use; they also influenced perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use in online educational systems. Besides, the effectiveness of perceived security can be improved by the security of perceived privacy of mobile applications or websites. Consequently, this study attempted to put the following hypothesis:

H10: Perceived security of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Relevance
Based on the traditional TAM, Venkatesh and Davis integrated perceived relevance to extend TAM in 2000. They found perceived relevance significantly and positively influenced perceived usefulness. Furthermore, in Doo and Bonk’s (Doo & Bonk, 2021) experiment of flipped learning, they adopted TAM 2 to explore if there was an influence between students’ cognitive instrumental processes and the constructs in TAM. It showed that perceived usefulness and intention to adopt the new way of learning were affected by perceived relevance. Therefore, this study tried to propose hypotheses 11 and 12:

H11: Relevance of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

H12: Relevance of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences the perceived usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Personal investment
Personal investment theory explains the question of when, how, and why people put money, time, and potency into an activity. Three main components are involved in personal investment theory (Van Mol, 2021). Facilitating conditions emphasized the importance of social influence (McInerney, 2008). As is the result shown, there was a connection between students’ achievement and support from people around them (McInerney et al., 2005). As for the perceived goals, various goals were involved during their engagement in school (King et al., 2019). In the aspect of the sense of self, students with higher academic self-concept got higher grades than students with lower academic self-concept. (Hansen & Henderson, 2019). Many studies have conducted experiments to examine some components of personal investment in the context of EFL (Atif et al., 2015; King et al., 2019; Yu & Yu, 2019). However, few studies integrated it as a new construct to extend TAM. Therefore, this study tried to extend TAM by integrating personal investment and propose the following hypotheses:

H13: Personal investment of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences the perceived usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

H14: Personal investment of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influences the behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses.

Research methods
In this part, this study applied the quantitative analysis method to validate the CCtalk TAM, and participants, research instruments are elaborated clearly.

Participants
The participants invited were the students who once attended the CCtalk-aided EFL courses. Questionnaires were delivered to members who were CCtalk-aided EFL courses learners in the QQ group and WeChat group by www.wjx.cn from June 28, 2021, to September 10, 2021. This study collected 771 valid questionnaires. Among them, 762 participants agreed that the data would be only used in this study and remain confidential, but 9 participants disagreed with the access to the results of their questionnaires. Finally, the authors contacted these 9 participants. They explained that choosing the answer No in the second question was caused due to carelessness, and they finally agreed that the data could be used in this study. All participants received meaningful gifts and rewards before completing the data and promised to fill in the questionnaire carefully. Table 1 demonstrates more details of participants’ information.

Table 1 Details of the Participants
Full size table
Research instruments
Given the previous achievement, this study adopted the above nine variables listed in the literature review part as the primary constructs of the proposed CCtalk TAM. The model measurement (Appendix) of our study included three parts. The first part included the agreement of attending the study, gender, age, city, and degree of education; the second part comprised 38 questions (adopted from (Kim et al., 2008; King et al., 2019; Ming, 2013; Salloum et al., 2019; Venkatesh et al., 2012)) to test the proposed CCtalk TAM, which was designed by five-point Likert scales (strongly disagree, disagree, I don’t know, agree, strongly agree). The last part included a subjective question about the suggestion to CCtalk.

Results
In data analysis, this study adopted Anderson and Gerbing’s (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988) two-step method: (1) evaluation of model measurement; (2) evaluation of structural model equation.

Evaluation of model measurement
Reliability
In the study, Cronbach’s Alpha of the model measurement is 0.954 (ideal if>0.7), which meets the requirements of greater than 0.7, suggesting the result is reliable.

Convergent validity
Convergent validity is an excellent strategy to test the validity of specific variables and their items. As is shown in Fornell and Larcker’s (Fornell & Larcker, 1981) study, three indicators were adopted to identify the convergent validity. In Table 2, items factor loadings (ideal if>0.70), composite reliabilities (ideal if CR > 0.5), and the average variance extracted (ideal ifAVE>0.50) are shown distinctly and valid. All the constructs meet the ideal requirement of AVE except for the construct personal investment containing 12 items, and it is hard to keep internal consistency due to the participants’ attention duration. Thus, the proposed model was modified appropriately and kept ten items left under the construct personal investment to keep the model fit well. Moreover, the items in personal investment in this study were taken from the previous study demonstrated reliable and valid (King et al., 2019).

Table 2 Convergent Validity
Full size table
Discriminant validity
As is shown in Table 3, the correlation coefficients between variables are always less than 0.5, and the diagonal coefficients are always more than the off-diagonal coefficients. Besides, the off-diagonal coefficients are always smaller than the square root of AVE. These data indicate that the results between the variables are satisfactory (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).

Table 3 Discriminant Validity
Full size table
Evaluation of structural model equation
Model fit index
The proposed model has reached the goodness of fit based on the collected data. In this study, CMIN/DF is 2.579 (ideal if<3); the root means square error of approximation (RMSEA) is 0.045 (ideal if<0.05; acceptable if<0.08); the comparative fit index (CFI) is 0.947(ideal if >0.90); the goodness of fit index (GFI) is 0.902 (ideal if>0.90) (Cangur & Ercan, 2015; Wu & Chen, 2016). In the second phase, this study applied the coefficients of determination and path analyses to test the hypotheses.

Coefficients of determination
In Table 4, all the R2 values of dependent variables are between 0.33 and 0.67, which is moderate (Chin, 1998). The results state that the structural model equation can reveal 53.3% of the variance in learners’ desire to adopt CCtalk-aided courses, 35.3% of the variance in learners’ attitude towards using CCtalk-aided courses, 49.6% of the variance in users’ believed usefulness of CCtalk-aided courses, and 32.8% of the variance in perceived easy operation of CCtalk (Cheung & Vogel, 2013).

Table 4 Coefficients of Determination of the Dependent Variables
Full size table
Path analyses
The standardized path coefficients calculated by AMOS 24.0 reveal the direction and relation of two constructs (Wixom & Watson, 2001). This study tested the correlations among the nine constructs by the path coefficients to guarantee the hypotheses. As shown in Table 5 and Fig. 2, hypotheses H1(β = 0.033, P < .001), H2(β = 0.04, P < .001), H3 (β = 0.028, P < .001), H6(β = 0.035, P < .001), H7(β = 0.061, P < .001), H8(β = 0.046, P < .001), H11(β = 0.08, P < .001), H12(β = 0.069, P < .001), H14 (β = 0.04, P < .001) are accepted at the significant level of P < .001; H5(β = 0.019, P < .01) and H13 (β = 0.074, P < .01) are accepted at the significant level of P < .01. Thus, the above 11 hypotheses are all accepted.

Table 5 Path Coefficients
Full size table
Fig. 2
figure 2
An Extended CCtalk TAM

Full size image
However, in path analyses, the hypotheses H4 (β = 0.028, P = 0.178), H9 (β = 0.026, P = 0.193), and H10 (β = 0.026, P = 0.12) are not accepted. The P values of H4, H9, and H10 are more than 0.05, which fails to meet the threshold of being less than 0.05, leading to unsupported results. Thus, the following 11 hypotheses are accepted except for H4, H9, and H10.

Discussion
CCtalk is becoming the most predominant learning tool in the e-learning era. The extended CCtalk TAM includes the new construct personal investment and identifies users’ behavioral intention to adopt CCtalk. The result (Fig. 2) also provides enough evidence as a solid foundation for the model.

Perceived ease of use
CCtalk can be downloaded on smartphones, laptops, and iPads easily from the application store. The popularity of electronic devices and wireless networks in China enables users to adopt them anywhere and anytime. What’s more, the operation of CCtalk is understandable, and the majority of users can search the learning resources easily with a simple click. As Table 5 shown, self-efficacy and relevance of CCtalk-aided EFL courses significantly influence perceived ease of use CClk-aided EFL courses, which supports Arpaci’s study (Arpaci, 2017). This result suggests that: users can decide to adopt a CCtalk-aided EFL course based on the criterion of perceived relevance. They can enhance their self-efficacy to perform a learning activity and strengthen their confidence, and then it will contribute to the improved level of perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses. The operator should optimize the technology system to provide students with relevant learning resources.

Perceived usefulness
Plenty of students can acquire English knowledge on CCtalk without limitations of time and space. They can preview the uploaded materials, including videos and documents, during their learning process. In class, they interact with teachers face to face without attention distracted. After class, students finish assignments and receive feedback on the schedule. As Fig. 2 shown, personal investment is the most vital determinant of perceived usefulness. It means perceived usefulness will go up with the promotion of users’ investment in CCtalk-aided EFL courses. Besides, other variables such as perceived ease of use and relevance cannot be ignored. They were seriously considered in previous studies (Atif et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2020). The result suggests that the operators should optimize the system, provide high-quality and relevant EFL courses, and form word-of-mouth publicity so that users can get the expected learning outcomes and truly accept the usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses. Students can learn efficiently by searching keywords, appealing to acquaintances, and making correct investments.

Attitude towards using CCtalk
This study includes attitude towards using as a construct in TAM. The two vital variables, perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, directly determine students’ attitudes towards using CCtalk-aided EFL courses. Personal investment, self-efficacy, relevance, and social influence positively influence attitude towards using. The result is identical to the study (Rahmiati et al., 2019) in the use of electronic money. It means students will hold a positive attitude towards using CCtalk EFL courses based on the following requirements: (1) CCtalk-aided EFL courses are easy to use, helpful, and highly relevant to their wanted learning sources; (2) CCtalk-aided EFL courses are recommended by the people around them and can achieve personal investment.

Behavioral intention to use CCtalk
Perceived ease of use, personal investment, and attitude towards using significantly influences students’ intention to adopt CCtalk-aided EFL courses. The result suggests that the operators should insist on the system’s easy operation direction. Besides, the instructor can consider personal investment and facilitating conditions, set appropriate mastery goals to achieve users’ expected learning outcomes. However, H4 and H9 are not accepted, which is inconsistent with the previous study (Atif et al., 2015). It may have been caused by the fact that behavioral intention to use CCtalk-aided EFL courses can be influenced by social influence through the perceived usefulness and attitude towards using.

Personal investment
Personal investment is a significant construct integrated into this study but ignored by previous studies (Arpaci, 2017; Davis, 1989; Rahmiati et al., 2019). Students always continuously invest time, money, and energy anywhere and anytime in the learning process. If students put more personal investment in the learning of EFL, they will receive more perceived usefulness, and they will intend to use CCtalk to learn English. Supposing that a person does not desire to invest more in the CCtalk EFL courses, they will not perceive the usefulness of the CCtalk EFL courses.

Self-efficacy
As Fig. 2 shown, the construct is a positive and significant predictor of perceived ease of use. The level of self-efficacy determines whether an individual performs the task effortlessly or not (Siriparp, 2015). The result indicates that the teachers should design their EFL courses based on students’ English competence and input the knowledge with a higher mastery goal to enhance their English competence and self-efficacy gradually. Furthermore, students can break the intricate English knowledge into small goals to acquire them and build confidence to achieve learning goals.

Relevance
Relevance significantly influences the perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. It means that the perceived ease of use of CCtalk-aided EFL courses and perceived usefulness of CCtalk-aided EFL courses go up with the increase of relevance of the CCtalk-aided EFL course. It confirms Venkatesh and Davis’s (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000) conclusion. It shows that the CCtalk operators should set the program to optimize the search engine and provide the content users want to learn by searching for course names, course content keywords, and teacher names. In terms of course content settings, it can target EFL learning and design the course from basic vocabulary, phrases, sentences, grammar, reading comprehension to writing. As for the grade level, the EFL courses can aim at students at different levels.

Social influence
Social influence is also an essential construct of TAM. Students’ perceived usefulness is positively affected by the social influence generated by their parents, peers, and teachers (Alvi, 2021). The result means people’s adoption of CCtalk around students will urge them to use CCtalk. For instance, teachers that students preferred to teach on CCtalk; teachers assign the drills on CCtalk; the teachers send the feedback on CCtalk will enhance students’ perceived usefulness of CCtalk, and then they will have a favorable view towards using and accepting to adopt CCtalk. The peers are also likely to discuss some unsolved questions in the group on CCtalk. Otherwise, they will be isolated. Thus, the operators should have established customers to promote courses to their acquaintances. Students can also get to know the valuable learning experience of CCtalk from the people around them.

Perceived security
Perceived security is considered a crucial construct of TAM in recent years due to the occurrence of criminal cases, and these may directly lead to invasion of users’ information security and personal safety. As shown in Table 5 and Fig. 2, H10 was not accepted, inconsistent with the previous study (Balapour et al., 2020). The following reasons can account for this inconsistency: Registration of CCtalk is easy, and students can log into the application by WeChat. Consequently, the perceived security usually is ignored. Thus, CCtalk operators should establish a sense of protecting students’ information and property, formulate a complete and concise user agreement, optimize protection systems of payment and information so that users can learn delightfully based on perceived security.

Conclusion
Major findings
In this study, the main theoretical contribution is integrating the construct personal investment to extend TAM. The major practical contribution is that eleven hypotheses are accepted based on the CCtalk-aided EFL courses, and the eight constructs can be significant and positive predictors to clarify factors influencing students’ adoption of CCtalk-aided EFL courses. Recently, numerous technology systems with various functions have provided opportunities for online learning, which led to the investigation of extended TAM to predict the users’ adoption or rejection of a system. This study provides further insight for the further study of TAM.

Limitations
However, participants in this study are limited to undergraduates, postgraduates, and Ph.D. students in China. Other educational levels students are not included, which may weaken the generalizability of the results. The analysis method is also restricted to quantitative analysis based on the collected data. Qualitative analysis such as interviews and observation are not demonstrated in the analysis process. Thus, this study cannot record the users’ mental processes, attitude towards using CCtalk, and their intonations during their learning process.

Future research directions
Future research could consider other educational levels of students and teachers for more comprehensive research and conduct a comparative analysis between students’ and teachers’ different adoption of learning systems. Furthermore, future research can combine quantitative analysis with qualitative analysis to explore the data collected from the interview, observation, and questionnaire.