This paper presents the Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix based on a review of thirty-eight recent papers from a search for the terms "educational technology" and "social justice." The papers were reviewed using the SJPACK Model (Dyches & Boyd, 2017) for social justice in education, and educational technology themes were generated from the reviewed papers. The Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix presents ways that the field of educational technology intersects with the SJPACK Model. This provides a powerful lens for educational technology researchers to explore and expand their use of social justice to promote activism and anti-racist education.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The terms "educational technology" and "social justice" are both used to mean a variety of things, and the ways in which these terms interact is particularly complex. Educational technology has the potential to be used as a force for justice. However, social justice often is a poorly defined construct that allows authors to say that because a technology might possibly benefit someone, it is supporting social justice (Rybakova et al., 2019). Instead, we need to look carefully at who is benefiting from educational technology and who is losing, what power structures are being reinforced or overturned, what culture is being tokenized or supported, how the history of oppression interacts with a particular technology, and how students cultivate agency. This paper presents the Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix (Table 4), a preliminary model of social justice in educational technology to provide clear language that helps to frame how we think about educational technology and social justice and shift the educational technology discourse to include issues of social activism and anti-racism.

I reviewed thirty-eight papers from the literature in social justice and educational technology from 2018 and 2019 and applied the model of Social Justice Pedagogical Content Knowledge (SJPACK) from Dyches and Boyd (2017). I chose SJPACK because of the complex nature of the model, which goes beyond surface-level references to social justice and provides clear definitions for how social justice can and should be applied to education. With SJPACK, I was able to explore how sub-disciplines of educational technology connect to social justice. This provides a powerful lens to understand how educational technology applies to social justice and to use the field of educational technology as a driver of social justice.

Five broad themes for educational technology are articulated: Media Literacy, Digital Democracy, Digital Divide, STEM/Makerspaces, and Online Learning/Instructional Design. These themes were generated from the reviewed papers themselves rather than a predetermined model of educational technology.

In this paper, I outline the social justice themes used by the reviewed papers and how they are connected to SJPACK. Then, I present the five themes of educational technology and how these themes connect to social justice. Finally, I suggest ways to extend these findings to help educational technology researchers and practitioners apply a social justice lens to their work.

It is important to note that this paper is not as criticism of any of the articles reviewed. Rather it is an attempt to get a broader view of the landscape of how social justice is being used in educational technology research. Thus, this paper should be read as a review of the field of social justice and educational technology, not of any specific paper.

Literature Review: Social Justice Models
In addition to Dyches and Boyd's (2017) SJPACK Model (see Theoretical Framework below), other models of social justice relate in different ways to the field of education. Several models described below can be used to dig more deeply into different aspects of social justice. These include focuses on the politics of schooling (Fraser, 2005; Keddie, 2012), anti-Black racism in conversations (Hytten & Warren, 2003), and culturally relevant pedagogy (Ladson-Billings, 2006).

Fraser (2005) and Keddie (2012) focused on the politics of schooling and how educators and educational policy makers can make education more equitable. While Keddie (2012) connected educational curriculum to social justice, this model applies best educational policy: "Amid this climate of uncertainty, what is certain is that we must continue to engage in an ongoing monitoring and critical examination of our presumptions for understanding and approaching matters of justice" (p. 277). Fraser proposed a three-dimensional model of justice: "… incorporating the political dimension of representation alongside the economic dimension of distribution and the cultural dimension of recognition" (p. 73). Fraser's (2005) model better frames studies that look at the way social justice principles apply in larger systems rather than in the classroom.

Hytten and Warren (2003) proposed a framework for social justice discussions in education, specifically ways that whiteness tends to be protected in those conversations through "Appeals to Self, Appeals to Progress, Appeals to Authenticity, and Appeals to Extremes" (p. 70). This powerful social justice model is distinct from SJPACK but overlaps in areas of Discourses, Theory, and History.

Other models do not connect directly to SJPACK but provide important lenses for combatting anti-Black racism. Boutte and Jackson's (2014) study of White allyship in teacher education suggested nine "understandings, knowledge, strategies, resources and ideologies that we think are helpful for interrupting racism in the academy and schools" (p. 10). Helms (1997) proposed a two-phase/six-part model of White identity development for being allies in anti-Black racism. These models would be more challenging to connect to the educational technology literature, but it would be fascinating to explore how educational technology fits with the various stages and strategies in these models.

Dyches and Boyd (2017) incorporate culturally relevant pedagogy (Ladson-Billings, 2006) in the category of Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge, often looking at educational practice through a multicultural lens. Although this is subsumed in SJPACK, viewing the research through a more detailed multicultural lens is also useful.

Any of the above models could be used to classify subsets of educational technology literature and could make valuable future studies, but I chose SJPACK for its broader scope and specific application to educational settings.

Theoretical Framework: The SJPACK Model
The Social Justice Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (SJPACK) Model by Dyches and Boyd (2017) aims to cultivate activism by fostering the content and pedagogy necessary to teach students how to be active participants in social justice. I chose SJPACK for the theoretical framework because of its direct connection to social justice in educational settings. Dyches and Boyd proposed their model based on Shulman's (1986) Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK), adding the dimension of social justice to the model to form SJPACK. Unlike PCK, Dyches & Boyd focused on the individual domains rather than on the overlaps. They divided nine categories into three domains (see Table 1).

Table 1 SJPACK Model
Full size table
Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge
The strongest connections to SJPACK in the thirty-eight papers reviewed were to the domain of Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge. Dyches and Boyd (2017) define this as specific politically-driven pedagogies that apply social justice to learning:

But because we see all pedagogical actions as politically-driven, we situate Shulman’s category in the domain of Social Justice Knowledge by naming explicitly, through equity-oriented approaches, ways to accomplish the goals of student learning. We augment this area of teacher knowledge to specifically include a range of pedagogies that position students to act for justice and recognize that all pedagogy…[is] political in nature, and fueled by a teacher’s relationship to Social Justice Knowledge. (p. 483)

Dyches and Boyd (2017) divide the domain of Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge into three categories that help students connect with their own and others' cultures (Culturally Accessing Pedagogies), view inequities in the world from a critical perspective (Critical Pedagogies), and act to fight those inequities (Agency-Inciting Pedagogies).

Culturally Accessing Pedagogies are "strategies that respect and integrate students’ cultures, such as culturally responsive teaching (Gay 2002) and methods based on integrating students’ and families’ funds of knowledge" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 484). These strategies also "honor through centralizing student voices" (Dyches & Boyd, p. 484). This includes a wide range of student-centered approaches that work to connect teaching to the culture and/or language of the students.

Critical Pedagogies connect beyond just culture and language and help students "become critical of the world around them…identify[ing] elements of hegemony and ideology" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 484). They help students to see inequities in the world through a critical lens.

"Agency-Inciting Pedagogies channel teachers’ sense of personal agency and invite students to action" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 484). This goes beyond learning about, from, and in the context of culture and understanding inequities to feeling empowered to take action to fight inequities. Agency-Inciting Pedagogies empower students toward action and educate them about their own power to take action.

Social Justice Knowledge
The domain of Social Justice Knowledge connected to a large number of the thirty-eight papers reviewed, particularly in the category of Agency. This domain is about the background information that teachers and students might know about inequities and systemic racism. Dyches and Boyd (2017) emphasized the interconnected nature of all the domains: "Social Justice Knowledge—an understanding of systems of oppression, privilege, and domination—courses throughout the SJPACK framework. Under SJPACK, all pedagogical and curricular decisions are rooted in one’s knowledges of social justice" (p. 480).

Dyches and Boyd (2017) divide the Social Justice Knowledge domain into four categories: Discourses, Theory, History, and Agency. This domain was not always explicit in pedagogically focused papers, so it is probably undercounted, but aspects of it inevitably served as background knowledge for the actors in the papers.

Discourses refer to ways that language and actions can be oppressive. Dyches and Boyd (2017) stated: "Discourses, which reflect social roles, values, beliefs, and attitudes, are 'ways of being in the world' (Gee 2014, p. 3) that provide individuals with identities to assume and communities to join. The social position, language, and behavior of a person are ideologically laden, and thus, these factors reflect one’s orientation to equity" (p. 480).

Theory is the basic understandings of critical frameworks: "They include philosophies under the umbrella of critical theory, such as feminist theories (Friedan 1963; hooks 1994), Marxist theory (Marx & Engels, 1848/1888), disability studies theories (Linton 1998), and critical race theory (Delgado & Stefancic 2012), each of which explains how the dominant group wields privilege over groups deemed inferior" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 481).

History looks at the way that injustice has been built up through the past, how social justice knowledge includes "familiarity with history and particularly the histories that have created and contributed to the types of oppression that social justice seeks to disrupt" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 482). Additionally, Dyches and Boyd, included the importance of counternarratives in the History category as an important way to look at history from other viewpoints, including those of marginalized individuals.

Agency is the category of the Social Justice Knowledge Domain that connected the most with the reviewed papers. Agency refers to reflecting on our own backgrounds to reach critical consciousness and understand how to move to action: "Agency is then a creative capacity, an ability to discern spaces for disruption…" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 483).

Social Justice Content Knowledge
Dyches and Boyd (2017) referred to the domain of Social Justice Content Knowledge as a way to honor the knowledge of traditional content areas while understanding that traditional knowledge is merely a canon developed over time by people and looking for ways to build on that canon. While Dyches and Boyd divided this into two categories, Traditional Content Knowledge and Critical Content Knowledge, the social justice aspects of this are all built into the Critical Content Knowledge category.

Methods
This research was based on Dyches and Boyd's (2017) taxonomic study (Onwuegbuzie et al., 2012), which created a taxonomy of ways that social justice is applied in classrooms. Using that taxonomy, I did a membership categorization analysis (Onwuegbuzie, et al.) to identify which articles in my study aligned with which categories of Dyches & Boyd's SJPACK Model. I followed this with a grounded theory approach (Corbin & Strauss, 1990) to develop the educational technology themes and build the matrix in Table 4.

To find articles for this study, I used Google Scholar and my library's database search engine powered by EBSCO-HOST, searching for the terms "educational technology" AND "social justice." In both searches, I limited the results to peer-reviewed scholarly journals. Additionally, I limited the search to articles published in 2018, 2019, and 2020. (At the time of the search, no articles had yet been published in 2020 that met my search criteria, so only 2018 and 2019 articles were used to develop the model and the matrix; however, during the review process additional articles from 2020 were searched and added to the matrix in Table 4.) The search yielded as one of the results the introduction to the International Journal of Multicultural Education Special Issue on Technology for Equity in Social Justice and Education (Marx & Kim, 2019) as well as some of the articles from that special issue. I included all seven articles from that special issue. After eliminating duplicates, I ended up with thirty-eight articles.

Each article was aligned with the nine categories of SJPACK (Dyches & Boyd, 2017), which are divided into three domains (see Table 1). The rating system consisted of a three-point scale (see Table 2).

Table 2 Rating System for Categories of SJPACK Model
Full size table
These ratings are subjective and were not triangulated with the authors or with other readers. Therefore, the ratings were not analyzed statistically and were only used for descriptive purposes. Because SJPACK is a specific model that largely applies to the work of classroom teachers in social justice, not all the papers reviewed fit neatly into that model, so my application of the model was not strict.

Results
The rating system is merely a tool to help tell the story of the articles. This is not a quantitative analysis, but a few summary statistics are useful. Table 3 summarizes the ratings of the papers. The left column lists the categories of SJPACK. The "Count" column lists how many of the thirty-eight papers connected to that category in some way. "Mean (contains category)" is the mean score (on the 1-3 scale) of those papers that connected with the category, and "Mean (all papers)" is the mean of all the papers on the 1-3 scale with those papers not connecting to the category counted with a score of 0.

Table 3 Rating Summary Statistics
Full size table
Of the thirty-eight papers reviewed, eighteen were from educational technology journals. All but one of the remaining articles were from general educational journals or journals of specific education fields. Thirty-two of the papers connected in some way with at least one category of SJPACK while six did not connect at all. See Appendix A for a complete list of scores for all the papers reviewed.

No Connection to SJPACK
Six papers did not connect to SJPACK at all. Zipke. (2018) and Aguilar (2018) primarily connected to social justice from a digital-divide perspective (see, for example, Stevenson, 2009, Hargittai & Hsieh, 2013). Two papers (Hodgkinson-Williams & Trotter, 2018; Lambert, 2018) connected to social justice through a political/policy lens based on Fraser (2005) and Keddie (2012). An unpacking of these ideas certainly connects in many ways to SJPACK, but these particular papers did not unpack them in that way. Similarly, Reinhardt (2018) reviewed literature about higher education distance learning in refugee camps. This is clearly a social justice topic, but it does not connect with SJPACK.

Three other papers (Williams & Beam, 2019; Cho, Hamilton, & Tuthill 2019; Greeson et al., 2018) had limited connections to social justice and not at the level of depth that would connect them to SJPACK.

Connections to SJPACK
Appendix A summarizes the connections of the reviewed papers to the categories of SJPACK. The two categories that had the strongest connections in the reviewed papers were Agency and Culturally Accessing Pedagogies. Critical Pedagogies and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies had the next strongest connections, with both of these as well as Culturally Accessing Pedagogies from the domain of Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge (SJPK); SJPK had the strongest connection to the reviewed papers of the three domains. The categories of Critical Content Knowledge, and History were moderately connected to the reviewed papers, and smaller connections were made to Theory and Discourses. Traditional Content Knowledge mainly fits with social justice when combined with Critical Content Knowledge, making up the domain of Social Justice Content Knowledge. Dyches and Boyd (2017) suggest that traditional content knowledge is an important basis for education, but it should be enriched by critical content knowledge.

Educational Technology Themes
To further make sense of the reviewed papers, I organized them by the perspectives from which they approached the social justice aspects of educational technology, categorized into five broad themes: Media Literacy, Digital Democracy, Digital Divide, STEM/Makerspaces, and Instructional Design/Online Teaching. These themes emerged from review of the papers themselves and were not predetermined. Each of these themes has a strong research base and literature. Some of the papers were steeped in that literature while others merely connected to that theme without being solidly positioned in that field. This section describes how the reviewed papers fit into each of the themes and how those themes connect to SJPACK.

The central finding of this paper is the ways that the educational technology themes intersect with SJPACK categories in the Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix (Table 4). Each reviewed paper is placed at the intersection of one or more educational technology themes and one or more categories of SJPACK. While some of the reviewed papers could have occupied many intersections, each paper was placed in the one, two, or three intersections that were most prominent. Because of the multi-dimensional nature of this model, readers are encouraged to use Table 4 to explore papers in different, such as exploring emergent Educational Technology Themes as represented by the columns of Table 4 or SJPACK domains and/or categories by exploring a single row of the table. Finally, one might choose to focus on a specific box of the table to dig more deeply into the ways that, for example, digital democracy connects with Agency.

Table 4. Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix
Full size table
The following sections explore the Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix on a column by column basis, taking one Educational Technology theme at a time and connecting the papers in that theme to SJPACK.

Media Literacy
Several of the papers reviewed took an approach based around media literacy as a way to connect with social justice. The theme of media literacy overlaps most significantly with Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge as a way to explore culture (Matloob Hahanikar 2019), as a way to critically explore media representations (Doerr-Stevens & Buckley-Marudas, 2019; Jackson, 2018 and Tettey, 2018), and as a way to incite action through media creation (Doerr-Stevens & Buckley-Marudas, 2019; Finucane et al., 2018 and Wargo & Clayton, 2018). While the reviewed papers connected less directly to Social Justice Content Knowledge and rarely to Social Justice Knowledge, Social Justice Knowledge provides important contextualization of media. Social justice in media literacy generally requires contextualization through some aspect of Social Justice Knowledge and one or more of the following: action via Agency-Inciting Pedagogies, study of media via Critical Pedagogies, and connections to culture via Culturally Accessing Pedagogies.

Many of the papers used student-created media as a tool of Agency-Inciting Pedagogies. Gleason and von Gillern (2018) looked at using social media for democratic practices. Wargo and Clayton (2018) connected social justice to youth-created PSAs. Doerr-Stevens and Buckley-Marudas (2019) explored students creating radio shows that focus on racial disparities. O'Byrne (2019) explored how the digital media use of activists can be leveraged to promote social justice in English Language Arts classrooms.

Wargo and Clayton (2018) studied a media production class that is used to help students explore injustice in their communities by recording sound. This work is at the intersection of media literacy/production and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies: "… it investigates how secondary students in a digital media elective course used video production and the modal resources of sound as a nexus for civic participation and (in)action" (Wargo & Clayton, p. 469).

Doerr-Stevens and Buckley-Marudas (2019) sit at the intersection of media literacy and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies by studying a project in an English class in which groups of students created short radio shows to explore how sound was used to tell their story, including one group that called attention to racial disparities in upper-level courses at the school.

Tettey (2018) described an undergraduate public health course that used season four of The Wire to connect students to the Social Ecological Model of public health, making a strong connection to SJPACK through Critical Pedagogies.

Finucane et al. (2018) described attempts to develop a First Year Seminar course around the themes of digital media and social justice. The course culminated in a final project in which the students worked with community partners exploring whether "the socially connected world, brought about by our uses of the Internet and participatory media, contribute to social, political, and economic justice" (Finucane et al., p. 150). In SJPACK, this largely connected with Agency-Inciting Pedagogies.

Jackson's (2018) called for the importance of social justice in education in light of "new social learning" in the Trump and Brexit era. It connected strongly to SJPACK in terms of Critical Pedagogies as it wrestled with the broad landscape of media, which includes problematic actors like Cambridge Analytica and their attempts to manipulate social media users.

Matloob Haghanikar studied the app Plotagon for video production "to offer [teacher education students] critical analytical skills necessary to understand systems of power and the tools to create change" (p. 213). The students created animated versions of scenes from multicultural young adult literature and were asked to include diversity elements within their videos. The paper's mainly connected to SJPACK through Culturally Accessing Pedagogies.

While Macgilchrist (2019) did not align directly with many aspects of SJPACK, the paper came from a similar philosophy of social justice. She looked at three narratives of people creating educational technology tools that incorporated some form of justice, including generating data to close the achievement gap, incorporating privacy into data collection tools, and using data to expose inequity in schools. She framed counternarratives that categorized these ideas as "cruel optimism" because of the limited ways they address larger systemic problems. She connected with the SJPACK categories of History and Agency, recognizing that the seemingly good tools she studied were not grounded in the history of racial inequities and did not connect with counternarratives of schooling that could disrupt inequities.

Digital Democracy
The role technology plays in democracy, democratic education, and democratic action made the widest range of connections to SJPACK. Digital democracy papers often called for social-justice action and were strongly connected to the categories of Agency (Chang et al., 2018; Uzum, Yazan, Avineri, & Akayoglu 2019; and Hodgkinson-Williams & Trotter, 2018) and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies (Gleason & Von Gillern, 2018; Wargo & Clayton, 2018; Morales-Chicas et al., 2019; and Heath 2019). Digital democracy is also a mechanism for both ensuring equitable access and for understanding digital citizenship through a critical lens (Emejulu & McGregor, 2019; Chang, 2019; Heath 2019; and O'Byrne, 2019). Finally, papers made strong connections between digital democracy and Culturally Accessing Pedagogies by trying to ensure equitable access and by connecting cultures (Ahmad & Hoter, 2019 and Rybakova et al., 2019).

Heath (2018) epitomized the overlap of social justice with a digital democracy perspective. She reviewed literature around three definitions of digital citizenship: responsible citizenship, participatory citizenship, and justice-oriented citizenship (Westheimer & Kahne, 2004). The last category gets directly at the concepts of social justice in terms of Critical Pedagogies and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies. Heath stated: "Reframing conceptions of digital citizenship as active civic engagement for social justice pushes the scholarship, and its attendant implications for practice, in a proactive direction aimed at dismantling oppression" (p. 344).

Emujulu and McGregor (2019) redefined digital citizenship from a critical perspective, examining how technology is often used to reinforce existing disparities and asked that digital education openly oppose this. In the same spirit of Heath's (2018) stance of justice-oriented pedagogy being central to digital citizenship, Emujulu and McGregor state:

We define ‘radical digital citizenship’ as a process by which individuals and groups committed to social justice critically analyse the social, political and economic consequences of digital technologies in everyday life and collectively deliberate and take action to build alternative and emancipatory technologies and technological practices. (p. 140)

This positioned this study in the camp of digital democracy, intersecting with several categories of SJPACK, most noticeably Critical Pedagogies.

O'Byrne (2019) discussed how to employ activism in the English Language Arts (ELA) classroom, starting with a clear definition of social justice:

"Social justice education is defined in this research as a process and a goal, where educators focus on the development of a democratic environment in which learners are empowered to engage actively in their education, understand the roles that power and privilege play in systems, and reflect on opportunities to challenge or disrupt these systems." (p. 645)

O'Byrne connected with all areas of SJPACK and most significantly with Critical Pedagogies.

Greenhow, Gleason, and Staudt (2019) approached social-justice ideas by exploring ways that social media impact educational research and recognizing the different levels of access and different experiences that different people might have with social media. They also discussed social media as a way to bring different voices in the public conversation. Finally, they raised the importance of social justice: "In short, before social scholars interested in applied scholarship can address intractable social problems … they need to consider how the design of research practices and processes can serve societal needs by infusing equity and justice into the work" (p. 11). They have alluded to the ideas from SJPACK of Agency as "discern[ing] spaces for disruption" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 483) and the importance of Critical Content Knowledge.

Chang et al. (2018) measured elementary and junior high school students' "cyberspace virtues" (p. 106) through a factor analysis of survey results. The factor analysis method allowed them to develop a full description of what they meant by social justice, based on survey items, such as "I make use of the Internet to help disadvantaged people" (p. 107) and "I make use of the Internet to improve our society" (p. 107). It connected most directly to Agency from the perspective of connecting social justice to democratic ideas:

The Net generation might bravely challenge the inherent power inequities in cyberspace.… Amichai-Hamburger and Furnham (2007), and Bao and Xiang (2006) pointed that justice and care may be more easily achievable in cyberspace. Young adolescents should realize that every Internet user can change cyberspace by caring about others, helping the disadvantaged and taking part in public affairs. (p. 109)

Hodgkinson-Williams and Trotter (2018) based their exploration of social justice on Fraser's (2005) political framing of social justice. They explored the use of open education resources (OERs) and open education practices (OEPs) that impact education in the Global South. Their political framing from Fraser blends nicely with the SJPACK's look at Agency (as well as Critical Content Knowledge, Theory, and Discourses) because of the focus on the value of the OEPs of conceptualization, creation, curation, and circulation of OERs and who gets to participate in those processes. This also connects well to a second-level digital-divide perspective in which it is not simply the access to the technology and/or resources that makes the difference in the effectiveness.

Gleason and Von Gillern (2018) described how students can use social media as a form of political activism. While this study could fit under a media literacy frame, it is focused most on political activism and, thus, connects most with digital democracy. The paper is not explicit about its social justice stance, but it is clearly coming from a social justice framework: "Commitments can be thought of as simultaneously both individual and collective, meditated through sociotechnical practices inherently social (e.g., the hashtag), and informed by larger histories, practices, and systems of oppression…." (p. 209). Its mainly connected to SJPACK through Agency and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies as it showed how students can have agency in the political process.

Morales-Chicas et al. (2019) reviewed the literature around culturally relevant education (CRE) in computing. They generated six themes of the intersection of computing and CRE: Heritage Culture Through Artifacts, Vernacular Culture, Sociopolitical Consciousness Raising, Lived Experiences, Community Connections, Personalization. The most powerful connection to SJPACK was through Sociopolitical Consciousness Raising, which falls into the area of digital democracy. In this theme, students were urged to take on computing projects that help to understand and/or solve inequities, such as using GIS systems to map out the location of food deserts.

Uzum et al. (2019) used positioning theory (see Davies & Harré, 1999) to explore ways that small groups interacted around social justice topics. The classes were located in the U.S. and Turkey and formed connections through telecollaboration (Author, 2012). The authors explored how the students (preservice teachers) did and did not go beyond surface level topics and how they made generalizations about culture or described the diversity of culture.

Through intercultural tellecollaboration, PTs [preservice teachers] can gain strategies for engaging in authentic intercultural discussions, including understanding or observing another culture and critically examining those cultures in relation to one’s own experiences, biases, and identities. This could move the intercultural conversations from interviews that may invite cultural descriptions to critical intercultural conversations that engage around complex social justice issues. (p. 99)

Uzum, et al. hoped that students would engage in conversations about social-justice topics, such as the treatment of women and religious minorities but only found that in limited ways. Thus, this study was hopeful that it would intersect digital democracy and Agency.

Rybakova et al. (2019) reviewed all the English Language Arts (ELA) articles from the previous seventeen years in the Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education (CITE) journal and connected them to Pope and Golub's (2000) model of technology in ELA education. Pope and Golub include seven principles, and Rybakova, et al. looked at all of them, but paid special attention to "Principle 7. Emphasize Issues of Equity and Diversity in Technology Accessibility" (Pope & Golub, 2000, p. 94) and even elaborated on that by asking how the reviewed papers promoted equity and social justice as the second of two research questions. They focused on the ways that ELA education lacked the strong connection to social justice they were seeking:

By adding critical to the lens of dialectical pluralism, we lived [sic] into the notions of representing equity and diversity in digital pedagogies and literacies because our focus extended from which articles represent one or more of the seven principles (Research Question 1) to what challenges remain in attending to the seven principles, particularly in voicing concerns for marginalized communities (Research Question 2). (p. 555)

They connected to digital democracy by exploring ways that technology can make classrooms more democratic, such as giving students voice and leveling power relations in the classroom. This connected to SJPACK through Culturally Accessing Pedagogies among other categories.

Chang (2019) looked at two educational technology non-profits: one that takes a mainstream/non-critical approach to technology and another that takes a critical approach. He outlines the idea of the "politics of redaction" (Chang, p. 289), illuminating how the more critical approach was looked on less favorably by funders pushing all non-profits away from critical approaches. This is not a paper about pedagogy but connects to SJPACK through all the Social Justice Knowledge categories, especially Agency and connects to digital democracy through the ways that our democratic system shapes the kind of work that is funded.

Digital Divide
Digital divide is a prominent social-justice theme in educational technology. In the simplest formulation, digital-divide work tries to level the playing field between haves and have-nots, an attempt to give more access to digital technology to people who currently have less. However, digital-divide research now looks beyond issues of access and explores complex ways that individuals' social status interacts with the ability to benefit from digital technology (e.g., Zillien & Hargittai, 2009). Macgilchrist (2019) stated, "Simply providing fast broadband or high-quality hardware and software has not created a ‘pipeline to prosperity’ (Eynon and Huw in press). Instead, it has exacerbated entrenched inequalities and created new challenges …." (p. 77).

Papers about open educational resources [OERs] took a second-level digital-divide stance by showing how OERs do not always improve, and sometimes make worse, issues of equity. For example, Hodgkinson-Williams and Trotter (2018) stated: "More worryingly, the continued proliferation of digitally mediated OER may, in some ways, unintentionally contribute to a 'digital education divide' and inadvertently reinforce economic inequality" (p. 210). Additionally, Hill and Lawton (2018), claimed the "massification and digitization of higher education" (p. 599) has not led to equity. Frameworks like this are important for social justice and most prominently connected to SJPACK via History and Agency (Hill & Lawton, 2018; Hodgkinson-Williams & Trotter, 2018; Macgilchrist, 2019) and Culturally Accessing Pedagogies and Critical Pedagogies (Laiti & Frangou, 2019; Rybakova et al., 2019 and Strom & Porfilio, 2019).

Hill and Lawton (2018) were grounded in the History category of Social Justice Knowledge, laying out a counternarrative for what is perceived as the positive impact of the "massification and digitization of higher education" (p. 599). Counternarratives are "those histories shared by marginalized individuals that differ from the commonly accepted and objectified 'truth'…" (Dyches & Boyd, 2017, p. 482).

Lambert (2019) provides a case study of Siyavula, an OER company that produced physical and online texts in South Africa. The goal of this study was to explore how the OER textbooks did or did not provide equity. This falls into the digital divide research in that it is about providing access to resources in under-resourced areas mainly as a way to connect traditional content knowledge to students who might not have access to it. The company also had a model collaborative authoring system "…for the purpose of shaping the most inclusive and relevant book for both city and regional South African learners" (p. 284).

Laiti and Frangou (2019) also approached educational technology from a global digital-divide perspective. Laiti and Frangou explored a programming course for Sámi students that used Sámi pedagogy and Sámi language as much as possible. Additionally, the authors thought about ways that Sámi pedagogy could be used in online environments. Other than bringing programming to native populations, the social justice aspects of this paper were the use of the native pedagogy and native language and the recognition that the old system of education, in which Sámi children were sent to boarding schools was problematic, which might give rise to more online learning while the children remain home. This connected to Culturally Accessing Pedagogies.

Rybakova et al. (2019) connected technology to social justice through the digital divide by asking how unequal access of students to technology impacts the equitable education of all students in the ELA classroom. This was largely through a lens of Culturally Accessing Pedagogies but included several other categories of SJPACK.

Strom and Porfilio (2019) completed a self-study of their teaching in a social-justice-oriented Ed.D. program. They explored how their use of online and hybrid technologies enhanced or distracted from their social justice themes. As their pedagogical philosophy was a student-centered approach to teaching, this was largely an exploration about how to convert student-centered approaches to online and hybrid teaching, such as how to demonstrate "teaching presence" (Garrison et al., 2003) in a forum discussion. While the student-centered approach was grounded in Strom and Porfilio's social-justice framework, outside of the content of their courses, their most direct connection to social justice came from a digital-divide perspective as they explored how the text-based nature of the class interfered with some students' learning, including deaf students, students who are not as strong in writing, and student who are not as adept at the technology, causing a social justice issue for their own teaching, which they approached from their Critical Pedagogies perspective.

STEM/Makerspaces
Four of the articles reviewed fell into the theme of STEM/Makerspaces and each connected to SJPACK via Social Justice Pedagogical Knowledge. This is not surprising as the STEM/Makerspaces field is largely a pedagogical application. STEM curricula and Makerspaces are now fairly commonplace innovations in schools, but their applications to social justice are underexplored. The few papers that connected STEM/Makerspaces to social justice hint at powerful ways these areas can intersect, including bringing culture to the classroom (Searle, Tofel-Grehl, & Breitenstein 2019), connecting to STEM professions (Shaw, Fields, & Kafai 2019), and as ways to bring activism to the community (Kier & Khalil, 2018 and Tan & Calabrese Barton, 2018).

Tan and Calabrese Barton (2018) made a strong connection to social justice through STEM/Makerspaces by having youth work in community ethnography to help them create maker projects that benefited the community. They built a sense of agency among the students.

By talking with members of their communities, the youth became more cognizant of these axes of oppression that played out in their lives, and also in other, as well as their own agency to act against these axes. In this way, their making involved a process of learning more about how their own everyday experiences were tied into broader systemic narratives." (p. 57)

They also explored the idea of how maker spaces can exclude youth, women, and people of color and connected to all areas of SJPACK.

Two articles used the idea of e-textiles as a form of Culturally Accessing Pedagogies (Searle et al., 2019; Shaw et al., 2019). E-textiles are a way to connect computer science and STEM concepts to students and can be used to make computer science [CS] more relevant to cultural and gender identities that are underrepresented in the CS (Shaw et al., 2019). Shaw, et al. used portfolios and self-narratives as ways to connect students to computer scientist identities, but they hoped the portfolios could do more. Searle, et al. also viewed e-textiles as a form of identity formation, connecting the students' identities with science identities.

Kier and Khalil (2018) looked at a professional development opportunity for STEM teachers to work with minoritized professionals in the field to use "Critical Race Design (CRD)" to build Engineering Design Challenges that help to solve problems of social injustice in their communities. They used technology to connect a community of practice and engineers to the teachers, and they used technologies with students as tools for empowerment and tools for seeing culturally diverse examples of STEM professionals. This was a powerful overlap of STEM and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies.

Instructional Design/Online Teaching
Instructional design/online teaching connects to social justice in exploring ways that our instructional designs and methods of teaching can be exclusionary, favoring certain learning styles, cultures, genders, dis/abilities over others. Most of the articles in this theme were studies of online courses that were related to social justice (Blanchard et al., 2018; Goldstein Hode et al., 2018 and Strom & Porfilio, 2019) or were concerned about online pedagogy's effects on diversity (Sato et al., 2019) and connected to SJPACK through Culturally Accessing Pedagogy. Bradshaw (2018) looked at the connection between the events in the history of instructional design and events in the history of social justice and connected to SJPACK on a theoretical level through Social Justice Knowledge.

Blanchard et al. (2018) studied teaching culturally responsive pedagogy to pre-service teachers online and connected to the category of Culturally Accessing Pedagogies. A key part of this paper was the goal of creating an environment that promotes reflective learning, specifically looking at which of the online methods used helped to elicit both tension and growth as a way to more deeply connect students to other cultures.

Sato et al. (2019) explored an online kinesiology course, exploring social justice as a way of working with diverse peers, thus connecting to Culturally Accessing Pedagogies. Because the students were online, they did not know the race or gender of their classmates, which seemed to make it easier for students to use racially insensitive language and stereotypes. This drew attention to the need for diversity training in the field of kinesiology, largely in terms of cultural competence.

Bradshaw (2018) looked at the Instructional Design & Technology (IDT) Timeline and explored events in that timeline in relationship to social justice events happening around the same time. She also encouraged finding ways to use IDT to promote social justice, asking: "How does the instruction system itself reinforce structures of inequity, injustice, and oppression? How can my designs disrupt systems of oppression?" (p. 343). This is one of the few papers reviewed that connects with SJPACK through History as well as several other categories, including Agency and Critical Pedagogies. She offered a powerful way to think about instructional design through the lens of the history of oppression.

Discussion
The field of educational technology (and technology, in general) has a long history promising to equal the playing field while more often reifying the status quo or making inequities worse. Toyama (2015) empathized how important it is to pay close attention to the impacts of technology on social justice:

Low-cost technology is just not an effective way to fight inequality, because the digital divide is much more a symptom than a cause of other divides. Under the Law of Amplification, technology – even when it’s equally distributed – isn’t a bridge, but a jack. It widens existing disparities." (p. 49)

Because of a lack of clarity of what is meant by social justice in the educational technology literature, models like SJPACK and the proposed Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix (Table 4) are important for interrogating educational uses of technology and how they are promoting social justice.

The five educational themes that emerged have natural connections to social justice, and each should be used to dive deeply into the different aspects of SJPACK. The Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix can be used to strengthen future studies, particularly studies that look at classroom applications of educational technology and social justice. Authors can identify the educational technology theme from which their work derives and then focus on the particular ways that theme intersects with SJPACK. This will help authors to make more explicit their connection to and model of social justice.

In the area of media literacy, neither Social Justice Knowledge nor Social Justice Content Knowledge were prominent in the reviewed papers. However, media literacy is steeped in both these areas. Making the connections explicit will serve to strengthen future studies and support their pedagogical work.

The intersection of digital democracy and social justice is most powerfully represented in the SJPACK categories of Agency and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies. These are a natural fit as democracy education is about learning to act and promoting the power of the people. But, of course, Table 4 shows strong connections to SJPACK in a number of areas. Future studies are encouraged to continue to explore the wide ranges of ways that digital democracy in education is a powerful tool for social justice.

Digital divide literature was weak in the categories of Agency and Agency-Inciting Pedagogies. The digital-divide framework encourages us to pay careful attention to ways unequal results with technology overlap with the inequality in society. This is a perfect opportunity to look backward at how existing uses and deployments of technology are causing inequality and/or are undermined by inequality. And digital divide research has an opportunity to look forward and explore how technology creators and technology users can take action and push back against technologies' tendency to further inequality.

The empowering nature of the STEM/Makerspaces theme makes it ripe for social-justice research. My only warning is that researchers not fall into the educational-technology trap of thinking that simply having these new opportunities will make the difference and level the playing field.

Not only was the theme of Instructional Design/Online Teaching underrepresented in the papers reviewed for this study, but the connections to social justice tended to be limited. This calls for a more intentional look at the way our instructional design and online pedagogy currently promote inequality.

This paper is a call to be more explicit about what we mean by social justice in educational technology. All themes of educational technology can benefit from first, clearly defining what they mean by social justice, and second, making explicit what they can do to promote social justice in their research and in the classroom.

Limitations and Future Work
I started this work using SJPACK as a theoretical model, generatively building a model of the overlap of SJPACK and educational technology into the Educational Technology Social Justice Matrix (Table 4). Future work could look more deeply into one or more sub-fields of educational technology and connect the foundational literature of those sub-fields into social justice. Limiting this study to recent work was an intentional decision to get a current snapshot of the field. However, explorations into specific sub-fields of educational technology could cover a longer timeframe of research (see, for example, Rybakova et al., 2019; Heath, 2018; and Choi, 2016). More work along these lines will expand the ways that educational technology is viewed as a field that is intertwined with social justice for good and for bad.

Conclusion
Social justice is a very important area of study and practice, and the field of educational technology has a great deal to contribute to the social justice literature from a variety of approaches. This paper focuses on the SJPACK Model (Dyches & Boyd, 2017) of social justice and finds ways that various sub-fields of educational technology connect to that model. This serves as an important foundational grounding for researchers interested in the overlap of social justice and educational technology and various approaches to studying that overlap. Additionally, it foregrounds social-justice ideas, such as social activism and anti-racism, that need more exploration in the context of educational technology.