Paper certificates are difficult to carry, easy to lose, easy to forge and with other security issues, which were not solved until the emergence of blockchain technology. Blockchain technology uses one-way hash functions, asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, consensus mechanisms and smart contracts to achieve decentralization, non-tampering and non-repudiation. Various universities have invested in studying blockchain-based diploma systems. However, the current blockchain diplomatic system still has some defects in terms of security. Most systems can only guarantee that the diploma is true and not forgery, but it cannot be confirmed that the diploma holder is the true recipient, and also cannot guarantee that the issuer is recognized by everyone. In this study, cryptography and biometrics are used to strengthen the connection between the diploma and the recipient, and a blockchain deployment framework composed of educational authority and institutions is proposed to make the identity of the diploma issuer credible. In addition, the Hyperledger Fabric application channel is also used to realize access control among organizations in the consortium. Compared with other researches, our research can not only prevent forged diploma, but also can prevent fake educational institutions and bogus recipient. In addition, this study utilized the channels of the Hyperledger Fabric to design access control for different roles in the consortium. Compared with Ethereum using smart contracts to control access rights, Hyperledger Fabric controls access rights by adjusting the configuration of channels, which makes it more flexible to deal with the changes of access rights.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
A certification indicates that a person possesses specific skills or knowledge in a certain profession or technology. Therefore, many careers require a certificate, especially a diploma, to prove a person has gained job-ready skills. A diploma is a certificate issued by an educational institution, which proves that the recipient has successfully completed a course in a specific subject and enables a person to apply for various jobs in his/her field of study. Traditional diplomas are paper-based, which is not only inconvenient to carry, but also easy to forge. Therefore, when a diploma holder applies for a job or an advanced degree, the organization usually needs to verify the authenticity of the diploma and call the institution issuing the diploma for confirmation. Because it is difficult and time-consuming to verify diplomas, criminal acts of forging and tampering with diplomas begin to appear (KTBS.com, 2021). It seems that the problem of forging diplomas has not improved, which leads to a decline in trust between employers and job seekers. In view of the various shortcomings of paper certificates, some institutions have issued e-certificates. Compared to paper documents, electronic documents are easy to carry and are not easy to lose. However, the most important issue, that is, verifying authenticity, has not been solved yet. Because the authenticity of diplomas is so important, there are few educational institutions issuing electronic diplomas. With the emergence of blockchain technology, digital diplomas can be realized, because the characteristics of blockchain provides a possible solution to the problem of verifying the authenticity (Abreu et al., 2020; Aini et al., 2020; Alam, 2021; Ataşen & Aslan, 2020; Caldarelli & Ellul, 2021; Capece et al., 2020; Castro & Au-Yong-Oliveira, 2021; Chaniago et al., 2021; Karamachoski et al., 2020; Rahardja et al., 2020; Vidal et al., 2020a, 2020b; Xie et al., 2020). The concept of blockchain technology was put forward in 2008 and was applied to bitcoin transactions. Blockchain technology is an emerging technology formed by combining decentralized, non-tamperable, security, and privacy concepts with technologies such as decentralized ledger, cryptography, consensus algorithms, smart contract, distributed computing, and various networking protocols (Kshetri, 2017). In recent years, blockchain technology has undergone tremendous changes, from the initial cryptocurrency to smart contracts, and then to the combined applications of Internet of Things, big data, and artificial intelligence.

Currently, there are a few known and popular blockchain-based platforms for digital diploma. The Blockcerts developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) is probably the first. Blockcerts enables students to be the custodian of their own diplomas and to decide with whom to share their diplomas. After downloading the Blockcerts Wallet app, students will be given their public-private key pair. The public key is sent to MIT, and the private key is stored on the student’s mobile phone to prove ownership of the diploma (Caldarelli & Ellul, 2021; Vidal et al., 2020a, 2020b). Inspired by Blockcerts, the Blockchain Lab of Birmingham University has created an authentication infrastructure, called BTCert, by using blockchain and cryptography, which has solved some weaknesses of Blockcerts. University of Nicosia has also developed Block.co as a platform for managing blockchain certificates. Block.co creates and issues digital certificates using information such as student name, degree name, graduation year, university name and issue date. The certificates are signed with the issuer’s private key, so it is only necessary to query the blockchain to verify the contents of the certificate, without contacting the issuer for verification. Another blockchain-based platform related to education is EduCTX (Turkanović et al., 2018). As a global credit platform for higher education, EduCTX has designed ECTX tokens to represent the credits obtained by students after completing ECTS (European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System) course. EduCTX uses a consortium-type blockchain framework, and allows multiple signatures of participants, issuers, and recipients (Caldarelli & Ellul, 2021; Dongre et al., 2020; Vidal et al., 2020a, 2020b).

Some researchers started to use the Blockcerts framework to develop their digital certificate system (Capece et al., 2020; Vidal et al., 2020b), and some researchers put forward their own blockchain-based architectures or systems for issuing, verifying, sharing and revoking digital certificates. Most of them use Ethereum as underlying technology (Abreu et al., 2020; Ataşen & Aslan, 2020; Chaniago et al., 2021; Karamachoski et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020). Due to the immutability of Blockchain, the risk of falsified diploma can be reduced, and the diploma can be confirmed uniquely and verified instantly (Alam, 2021; Castro & Au-Yong-Oliveira, 2021; Rahardja et al., 2020). In addition to forging certificate, the problem of academic fraud also includes counterfeiting educational institutions and impersonated recipient of certificate (Bapat, 2020; Baldi et al., 2019). The problem of fake university means that a non-legitimate education institution fabricates an apparently valid academic certificate, and the problem of impersonated recipient means that someone pretends to be the true recipient of a valid academic certificate. However, these two issues are seldom concerned in the above studies. A public key certificate issued by a certification authority (CA) seems to be a possible solution, but CA will not verify the recipient of the certificate. That is to say, non-legitimate education institutions also can get CA certificates. Besides, a person with bad intentions may sell their diploma to others, and the buyer will naturally get the true public key. Therefore, showing the public key can only prove the ownership of the diploma, but it cannot be concluded that the person is the true one. Apart from academic fraud, authority management is also an important issue. Each role should have a different level of access control in place based on their authorities. Most studies mainly focused on three roles related to diplomas: students, educational institutions, and verifiers. In fact, education authority also plays an important role in academic credentials. Although the education authority is not directly responsible for issuing diplomas, it is responsible for supervising schools at all levels. Xie et al. (2020) showed that the Ethereum-based digital certification system can achieve access control with smart contracts. After the smart contract is written, it must be deployed on the Ethereum blockchain before it can take effect. Once the smart contract is deployed, it will always exist, unless the owner activates the self-destruct function in the smart contract (Antonopoulos & Wood, 2018). When a new organization joins and makes the access right change, the smart contract needs to be self-destructed, rewritten for the new access control, and re-deployed to take effect. Therefore, Ethereum lacks the flexibility to adjust access control dynamically. It is very important to adjust access permissions dynamically because the composition of educational institutions may change at any time. Compared with Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric is more flexible in maintaining access control and privacy protection. Hyperledger Fabric is a permissioned consortium-type blockchain platform and places great emphasis on the control of access rights to the ledger and the safety and reliability of data transmission. Hyperledger Fabric designs channel and private data as the access control mechanism in the architecture. When a new organization joins or an old organization quits, the Hyperledger Fabric can dynamically adjust the access control structure by using these two mechanisms. The joining of the new organization will not have an operational impact on the original consortium members. In contrast, Ethereum needs to destroy, rewrite, and redeploy the smart contract.

The aim of this study is to develop a blockchain-based digital diploma system and employ facial recognition to solve the problem of impersonated certificate recipients. In addition, this study advocates that education authority and educational institutions should form a consortium and adopt Hyperledger Fabric to solve the problem of fake educational institutions. Finally, this study will demonstrate a feasible Raft-based multi-host deployment with access control for members of the consortium. More specifically, this study attempted to answer the following research questions:

RQ1: How can facial recognition be used to prevent bogus recipient of diploma?

RQ2: How can Hyperledger Fabric be used to guard fake education institution?

RQ3: How can Hyperledger Fabric be used to define access control for different roles?

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, blockchain technology, some known blockchain-based digital diploma frameworks, and biometric identification are reviewed; besides, some literatures are surveyed, and research gap analysis is provided; in Section 3, the general framework of the proposed digital diploma system and the blockchain network deployment are described in detail; Section 4 provides implementation of the framework; and finally, conclusions are provided in Section 5.

Related works
Blockchain technology
In 2008, the concept of blockchain first appeared in the white paper of Bitcoin. This is a distributed ledger using cryptography and consensus mechanisms (Nakamoto, 2008). Transactions and a unique hash value are written into a block, so it is impossible to change or tamper with the block without being discovered (Wang & Kogan, 2018). Therefore, even if the distributed ledgers are recorded on an untrusted network, all participants can reach consensus without the intervention of a third-party center. In addition, the blockchain network uses computer programs, called smart contracts, to control the read and write permissions the ledgers.

Initially, as a platform supporting electronic payment, the Bitcoin blockchain is public and permissionless. Then, people found that the application context of blockchain can be more extensive, not limited to electronic payment. Later, private and consortium-type blockchains emerged. Public blockchain is open to anyone, which means that anyone can access, receive, transmit and validate transactions. Therefore, each transaction requires all participants to reach a consensus before the transaction is completed. The problem of efficiency and expansion make the public blockchain difficult to meet the requirements of enterprises. A private blockchain is completely private, which means that the access to read and write is controlled by one organization. Therefore, private blockchain is easier to manipulate. The degree of decentralization of the consortium blockchain is between that of the public blockchain and the private blockchain. Reaching a consensus is the responsibility of the endorsing node, and usually, people outside the consortium cannot access to the blockchain. The permissions to read, write, and access the ledgers are determined by the organizations within the consortium. The difference between a consortium blockchain and a private blockchain is that the former serves for inter-organizations, while the latter serves for the intra-organizations (Sharma, 2020).

Hyperledger Fabric is an open-source enterprise-level permissioned blockchain platform, which is developed under the umbrella of the Linux Foundation. Compared with other commonly used distributed ledger platform, Hyperledger Fabric offers some key functions. First, it is a highly modular and configurable architecture, which can provide innovative use cases in various industries, such as bank, insurance, medical care, …, etc. Secondly, Hyperledger Fabric is the first one that supports writing smart contracts in a general-purpose programming language, such as Java, Go, and Node.js, rather than in a specific programming language. Therefore, most companies already have the skills required to develop smart contracts and do not need additional training to learn new programming languages. Third, participants are not anonymous and may be both cooperative and compete, and Hyperledger Fabric can establish protocols for all participants. In addition, one of the most important features is that it supports a pluggable consensus mechanism, which enables enterprises to flexibly select the appropriate consensus mechanism. Finally, since Hyperledger Fabric does not require tokens to activate expensive mining or to execute smart contract, the operating cost to deploy the platform are roughly the same as that of other decentralized systems (Hyperledger, 2020). Because of these unique features, Hyperledger Fabric has become one of the well-known permissioned blockchain platforms. This study intends to design a feasible multi-host deployment scheme based on Raft. Raft is a new ordering service module since Hyperledger Fabric 1.4.1. Ordering service is responsible for receiving endorsed transactions, verifying and arranging them in sequence, and packaging them into a block, so it plays an important role in Hyperledger Fabric blockchain network.

Blockchain-based diploma platforms
The rise of blockchain provides an opportunity for the digitalization of diplomas. Several universities strive to develop digital diploma systems, as described below.

Blockcerts
At present, the most well-known blockchain-based digital diploma system is Blockcerts developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). In the summer of 2017, 111 graduates got their diplomas through the mobile phone application, Blockcerts Wallet. MIT has become the first one of universities in the world to issue digital diplomas. Actually, Blockcerts is the product of cooperation between the MIT Media Lab, led by Philipp Schmidt, and Learning Machine company. Shmidt’s team designed prototypes, and the Learning Machine developed Blockcerts accordingly. Considering security first, the Learning Machine uses the Bitcoin blockchain, even though it is not so good in speed, cost, and ease of use. Anyone who needs to apply for a diploma must download the Blockcerts Wallet application and use it to generate a pair of public and private keys. The public key is sent to MIT, and the private key is stored on the user’s mobile phone. MIT does not record the diploma information on the blockchain but record the hash value and creation timestamp of the diploma. Finally, digital diplomas attached with their own public key will be issued to students, who can prove their ownership via their own private key. In addition, students can use Blockcerts Wallet to decide with whom to share their diplomas. For example, they can share their diplomas with their employers when they apply for a job or share their diplomas with a school administration when they pursue further study. In other words, Blockcerts gives students the right to independently manage their diploma and share their diplomas with people they want to share in a secure manner (Capece et al., 2020; Caldarelli & Ellul, 2021; Castro & Au-Yong-Oliveira, 2021; Vidal et al., 2020a). Blockcerts benefits students in various aspects. First, diplomas are available anytime and anywhere and continue to exist as long as the blockchain exists. Secondly, personal privacy can be guaranteed because only the compressed cryptographic hash of the diploma is stored on the blockchain. Finally, Blockcerts achieve time and cost savings for students in diploma acquisition, in managing academic credentials for education institutions, in verification process for verifiers since the diploma becomes digitized (Bapat, 2020). However, Baldi et al. (2019) found that it was possible to impersonate the issuing institution and concoct a valid academic certificate because Blockcerts will not check if the public key is actually owned by a legitimate issuer.

BTCert
After MIT released the Blockcerts project, it realized the use of blockchain technology to protect the authenticity of diplomas. Later, the Blockchain Lab of Birmingham University proposed a digital certificate system, BTCert, and solved the problem of Blockcerts by using cryptographic methods. For example, BTCert uses multiple signatures to improve certificate authentication, designs a secure revocation mechanism to improve the reliability of certificate revocation, and establishes a secure federal identification to confirm the identity of the issuing institution. Students and graduates can log in to the system with their username and password registered at Birmingham University and apply for or view their certificates. In addition, students can share their own certificates with a third party for verification. For institutions, administrators can approve students' applications, generate digital signatures for the certificates, or approve the revocation of certificates through the system (Caldarelli & Ellul, 2021; Vidal et al., 2020a). Like Blockcerts, BTCert issues digital certificates by attaching the hash value of certificates to a Bitcoin transaction. In addition, the Merkle root corresponding to a group of certificates is recorded in the transaction. By comparing the hash value on the Bitcoin blockchain with the local receipt, the authenticity of the certificate is verified. The system architecture of BTCert consists of four parts: verification application, issuing application, Blockchain, and local database. The main function of the issuing application is to merge the hash value of the certificate with a Merkle tree, to send the Merkle root to the Bitcoin blockchain, and to deal with the revocation of certificates. The verification application is responsible for checking the authenticity of the certificates by acquiring the transaction message and comparing it with the authentication data from the digital receipt. The Blockchain stores the authentication data, and the local database is used to manage JSON-based certificates (Li & Wu, 2018).

Block.co
The University of Nicosia (UNIC) issued blockchain diplomas to graduates of the spring graduating class in 2017. This may be the first institution in the world to issue digital diplomas based on the Bitcoin blockchain. Students' digital fingerprints are recorded on the Bitcoin blockchain, and students can provide a verifiable electronic PDF diploma document to others by using the verification tool. The verification is immediate, and the operation cost is minimized. Block.co solves the problem of forging diplomas and promotes secure and fast transactions between students, issuers, and employers. Besides, the time required to issue a diploma is greatly reduced, and the cost of re-issuing nears zero if the diploma is lost. Block.co issues diplomas using a list of recipients and a template form. The digital fingerprints of the diplomas are recorded on the blockchain to avoid forgery or tampering. Everyone can easily verify the diploma, and the diploma can also be passed quickly and conveniently (Block.co, 2021; Caldarelli & Ellul, 2021).

OpenCerts
OpenCerts is also a blockchain-based platform, which supports issuing and verifying tamper-proof certificates and transcripts. It is a national-level initiative project led by SkillsFuture Singapore (SSG) and Government Technology Agency (GovTech). Graduates can download the digital certificate and transcript attached in the e-mails sent from NTU. When applying for work or further study, they may send them to third parties, such as potential employers or other institutions of higher education. Anyone who receives this digital certificate and transcript can check them by placing the documents in the verification section of the webpage, so as to verify the authenticity of the digital document on the OpenCerts platform. If the document can be viewed successfully without any error message, the document is verified as authentic. (Nanyan Technological University, 2021).

Literature survey
Research method
In this paper, we follow the systematic literature review (SLR) process proposed by Kitchenham (Kitchenham, 2004). The SLP process consists of three phases: planning, conducting, and reporting. The planning phase is to determine the objective of the SLR and a review protocol, the conducting phase is to execute the protocol and filter articles according to inclusion and exclusion criteria, and the reporting phase is to disseminate the obtained results. In this and next subsections, we present the practices of the three phases.

(1)
Phase 1: Planning

In this review, the objective is to explore existing literature and find out research gaps related to the blockchain-based digital diploma system. We searched for academic articles in Google Scholar because Google Scholar can search across many sources, such as academic publishers, online repositories, …, etc. Considering our research objective, we searched papers with the term “blockchain” in the title and also with “diploma”, “diplomas”, “certificate”, “certificates”, or “certification”. The final search string set in Google Scholar was “allintitle: diploma OR diplomas OR certificate OR certificates OR certification "blockchain"”. Articles published before 2020, written in languages other than English, and whose full text is not available were excluded, and articles relevant to education and system development were included.

(2)
Phase 2: Conducting

Initially, 339 articles were filtered based on the search string mentioned above. After eliminating articles before the year 2020, 179 articles were rested. Excluding articles written in non-English and without full text, the number of remaining articles was 60. Then, the results were further refined to consider articles relevant to education and system development, leaving 28 articles. In the last step, we read these articles and evaluate their quality. Finally, seven articles were selected for literature review.

(3)
Phase 3: Reporting

The final phase of the SLR is to report the findings about the research objective based on the retrieved articles. We presented the reviewing results in the next subsection.

Review report and gap analysis
In late 2018, The University of Rome “Tor Vergata” began to study the possibility of issuing digital diplomas using the Blockcerts framework. After surveying 26 repositories of the Blockcerts project, the team selected three tools, cert-tools, cert-issuer, and cert-viewer, from the Blockcerts toolbox to simulate and test the whole procedure of issuing certificates. Then, they selected a sample of students to participate in the test and found that it is not difficult to fully implement the program for all students who are about to graduate (Capece et al., 2020). Also in 2018, University Fernando Pessoa in Portugal started the CertEdu project to build a prototype of a blockchain-based diploma management system. They studied several related tools and finally chose Blockcerts to realize the prototype. This project adopted four Blockcerts tools, cert-tools, cert-issuer, blockcerts-verifier, and cert-wallet, to create a blockchain-based digital certificate system. This system provides mobile application with three functions: generating and sending the student’s public address, storing the digital certificates, and sharing the digital certificates (Vidal et al., 2020b). Some researchers put forward their own blockchain-based system and adopted Ethereum as the underlying technology. Ataşen and Aslan (2020) developed a blockchain-based digital certification platform, called CertiDApp, to help educational institutions store certificate data on Blockchain and students can request their certificate data using CertiDapp. Chaniago et al. (2021) made the diplomas and transcripts of the students into a pdf file and store the fingerprints of pdf files on Blockchain. Therefore, a student can send a pdf file directly to the verifier, and the verifier can submit the pdf file to the system to check if it is a valid document. These researches mainly focused on three roles related to diplomas: students, educational institutions, and verifiers. In fact, education authority is also an important role related to academic credentials. Though education authority is not directly responsible for issuing diplomas, it is responsible for supervising schools at all levels. In addition, each role should set up different level of access control according to their authorities. Abreu et al. (2020) added the role of Government to their proposed architecture, but just like the above research, they did not design access control for each role. Karamachoski et al. (2020) did not consider the role of educational authority, but they utilized user wallet to distinguish different roles and gave different read/write permissions to different roles. Xie et al. (2020) mentioned an administrative role, whose duties are similar to education authority. Their system adopted Ethereum to develop a blockchain certificate system, and all functions were realized by smart contract. The functions of the system include certificate issuing, certificate verification, certificate revocation, and certificate management. The function of certificate management is responsible for checking authorities and giving corresponding data access permission. Although the study of Xie et al. showed that smart contract is a feasible way to achieve access control for Ethereum-based certification system, as mentioned in the previous section, it is not flexible enough to adjust access control dynamically. Because Blockchain keeps identical copies of data in the form of a distributed ledger, these systems are not vulnerable to natural and man-made damage. The immutability of Blockchain can reduce the risk of fake diplomas, and the diplomas can be confirmed uniquely and verified instantly (Alam, 2021; Castro & Au-Yong-Oliveira, 2021; Rahardja et al., 2020). However, storing data on Blockchain does not solve the problem of fake issuers and recipients. In short, the current research gaps are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Gap analysis of literature survey
Full size table
Our contributions to current literature
Based on the above research gaps that have not been sufficiently addressed by existing literature, this study intended to make the following contributions. Firstly, in addition to using the private key to prove ownership of the certificate, this study also uses facial recognition to prevent someone from using the legitimate private key to impersonate the true holder of the certificate. Secondly, the public key of the issuer, i.e., the educational institution, will be stored in the Blockchain, and the verifier can check it to identify fake issuer. Thirdly, this study proposes that education authorities can be added to the alliance and uses the channel mechanism of the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain network to properly configure access permissions. In this way, the problem of fake universities can be prevented more. Fourthly, this study clearly depicts the system process and network deployment to show how various technologies work together to prevent frauds of fake diplomas, fake universities, and fake recipients.

Biometric identification
Biometrics refers to the computer technology that uses the biological characteristics of the organism to distinguish individual organisms. Biological characteristics can be divided into physiology and behavior. Physiological features include fingerprints, face, iris, and finger veins, while behavioral features include voice, signature, and gait (Jain et al., 2004). In recent years, most mobile phones have the functions of fingerprint recognition and facial recognition. Because the user-side application of this study is developed on mobile phones, fingerprint recognition or facial recognition can be considered in this study. The commonly used fingerprint scanners have optical and capacitive ones. Most smart phones use capacitive touch sensors to collect and identify fingerprints. The convex and concave patterns on the fingerprint are unique, but errors may occur when a 3d fingerprint is collected and becomes a 2D plane. The fingerprint collected may be seriously deformed, especially when the plane of the fingerprint scanner is very small. Also, some people have very few fingerprint features, so it is difficult to collect fingerprints. In addition, intentional criminals may steal fingerprints from smart phones, make a silicone model of the finger, and then log into the system using the silicone models. Therefore, compared to fingerprint recognition, facial recognition is desirable in this study. Facial features can be collected in a contactless way. Face recognition in a broad sense includes a series of activities, including face image acquisition, face location, facial recognition preprocessing, identity confirmation and search. In a narrow sense, facial recognition refers to the technology or system of recognizing or discovering identity on the face. Facial recognition is similar to the way human beings recognize individuals. It is not easy for individuals to notice being measured, so face recognition may reduce the chance of pretending and cheating (Dabbah et al., 2007).

The general framework of e-certificate system
Application scenario
For the sake of explanation, let us first introduce the symbols to be used:

i: educational institution issuing a diploma

r: recipient of the diploma

v: a person that needs to verify the diploma, such as employer

D: diploma

rsa_pku: RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) public key of role u

rsa_sku: RSA private key of role u

ecc_pku: ECC (Elliptic Curve Cryptography) public key of role u

ecc_sku: ECC private key of role u

DSu: digital signature of role u

TS: a timestamp

Enc(m, k): encryption function, which encrypts message m with key k

Dec(m, k): decryption function, which decrypts message m with key k

H(m): SHA-256 hash function, which generates digital digest of message m

From the system user’s point of view, the scenario involves three roles: issuer, recipient, and verifier. The issuer is the institution responsible for issuing a diploma. The recipient is a person, usually a student, who applies for and receives the diploma from the institution, and the verifier, perhaps an employer, is a person who needs to verify the recipient’s diploma. Figure 1 illustrated the detailed procedures of the application scenario and answered our first research question. We have divided the procedures into four stages, which are explained as follows.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Procedures of the proposed system

Full size image
Pre-work
(1)
At the beginning, a pair of public and private keys of issuer i, namely ecc_pki and ecc_ski, is generated. Then, ecc_pki is recorded into the blockchain, and ecc_ski is privately saved by the issuer i.

Issue
Diplomas are issued at the request of recipients. When a recipient applies for a diploma from an institution, the following procedures are required. Finally, the digital diploma D, ecc_pkr and facial recognition model of r will be recorded in the blockchain, so that the recipient can claim the diploma and provide it for verification in a secure way.

(2)
The recipient r submits application form and his/her face image to the issuer i.

(3)
The issuer i produces the diploma D on demand and builds the facial recognition model according to the face image of r. The diploma D and facial recognition model are recorded into the blockchain.

(4)
The issuer i sends a set of account and password to r. The recipient r downloads the app and login with the account and password received from i. For the sake of security, the system will ask r to answer some identity-related questions and change password after login.

(5)
The recipient r uses the app to generate a pair of ecc_pkr and ecc_skr. The ecc_pkr is sent to i and recorded into the blockchain.

Claim
When applying for a job or planning to study further, the recipient r will need to claim the diploma and prompt it to the verifier v.

(6)
The recipient r generates a one-time key pair, rsa_pkr and rsa_skr, and sends rsa_pkr to i.

(7)
The issuer i queries the diploma D of r from the blockchain.

(8)
The diploma D is encrypted with rsa_pkr and signed with ecc_ski. More precisely, Enc(D, rsa_pkr), DSi = Enc(H(D), ecc_ski), and a timestamp TS are calculated and send to r.

(9)
The recipient r queries ecc_pki from the blockchain, and then, calculates H(Dec(Enc(D, rsa_pkr), rsa_skr)) and compares it with Dec(DSi, ecc_pki). If the comparison reveals no difference, the authenticity of the diploma D and the issuer i can be ensured.

Verify
Only when necessary, the verification is carried out, and the digital diploma and the necessary digital signatures will be provided by the recipient.

(10)
The recipient r generates a QR code with expiry from D, DSi, DSr, and TS, where DSr = Enc(H(D), ecc_skr).

(11)
The verifier v queries H(D), ecc_pki and ecc_pkr from the blockchain. Then v authenticates the diploma D and the institution i via comparing H(D), Dec(DSi, ecc_pki), and Dec(DSr, ecc_pkr). If the comparison reveals no difference, the authenticity of D and i can be ensured. Note that if the QR code is expired, the recipient r has to re-generate the QR code and provide it to v again.

(12)
Except for authenticating D and i, the verifier v also needs to confirm the diploma provider is not a bogus recipient. Therefore, the verifier v collects the facial image from the diploma provider.

(13)
The face recognition model of r is queried from the blockchain to recognize the facial image. If the facial image passes the recognition, the verifier v can ensure the diploma provider is the correct recipient.

System architecture
The digital diploma system proposed in this study was constructed on Hyperledger Fabric, which is a blockchain platform of consortium type. The applications interact with the blockchain network through the Hyperledger Fabric SDK, as shown in Figure 2. The users of the system include educational institutions (issuers), students (recipients), verifiers, and the education authority. With this system, educational institutions can issue and revoke diplomas, students can apply for diploma, verifiers can verify diplomas presented by students, and education authority can check the diploma issuance records of each educational institution. The Fabric SDK is the communication bridge between the application and the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain network. The application uses the Fabric SDK to submit transactions to the ledger or query the content of the ledger. Every organization belonging to the consortium can use the Fabric SDK to develop its own applications, so as to provide end users with necessary functions to interact with the blockchain network. The blockchain network is composed of multiple service nodes, which provides services such as ordering, fault tolerance, transaction simulation and endorsement, transaction verification, and querying or invoking the ledger. The simulation and endorsement of transactions are performed by a chaincode, which is a program used to access the ledger. Before a chaincode is ready to be used, it has to go through a process of installation, approving its definition by organizations, and committing its definition to the channel. The completion of this process means that the organization has reached an agreement on how a chaincode to be operated on a channel.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Illustration of interactions between users and the system

Full size image
The deployment of the blockchain network includes an ordering service cluster and a consortium composed of educational institutions and education authority, as shown in Figure 3. All educational institutions are under the jurisdiction of the education authority, so the issuance of diplomas in each educational institution must be checked by the education authority, but each educational institution should maintain its own data privacy. Therefore, every educational institution needs to share the information about diploma issuance with the education authority, but it cannot be shared with other educational institutions. Making the educational institutions and the education authority to form a consortium and operate on the Hyperledger Fabric network can answer our second research question. Since the education authority supervises educational institutions, and Hyperledger Fabric does not allow new organization to join the consortium without the consent of existing members, it is impossible for false educational institutions to join the consortium. In other words, all educational institutions belonging to this consortium can be trusted.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Architecture of Hyperledger Fabric multi-host deployment

Full size image
The blockchain nodes include endorsers, committers, orders, and certificate authorities (CAs). Orderers are responsible for ordering transactions, packaging blocks, and the function of crash fault tolerance (CFT). The CAs are responsible for the issuance and revocation of digital identities and public and private keys. Each service node in the blockchain network needs an identity certificate, so the ordering service cluster and every organization have their own certificate center. Endorsers are responsible for the operation of chaincodes and for reviewing and endorsing the transactions. Committers are responsible for maintaining the blockchain. The services of endorsers and committers are provided by organizations participating in the consortium. This study plans to build at least two peer nodes for each organization to achieve the backup effect. Each peer node acts as an endorser and a committer at the same time. As an endorser, it performs the simulation and endorsement of transactions, and as a committer, it is responsible for maintaining ledger data. Each organization also designates a peer node as the anchor node, which is responsible for the communication between organizations. The channel is a mechanism designed by the Hyperledger Fabric, which is used to define access control of the ledger. There are two types of channels: one is system channel and the other is application channel. In principle, the ledger used to record system configuration belongs to the system channel, and the ledger used to record the application transactions belongs to the application channel. The service nodes belonging to the same channel have the same access rights to the ledger in the channel, while service nodes belonging to different channels cannot obtain each other’s data. Since the education authority supervises the educational institution, the peer nodes managed by an educational institution and the education authority join the same application channel. Therefore, the education authority can obtain the diploma information of the educational institution. Different educational institutions will form their own channels with the education authority, and these application channels are independent of each other. Therefore, different educational institutions cannot access each other’s certificate data, thereby ensuring the privacy of certificate data. Hyperledger Fabric can manage the data access rights through the application channel mechanism. With the application channel, the consortium can define a subset of members sharing private and confidential transactions. Therefore, each educational institution has its own application channel with education authority, but each educational institution will not communicate with each other on the same application channel. Therefore, Fig. 3 also answers our third research question.

Implementation results and discussions
System functions and interfaces
As described in section 3.1, there are three roles involved in the system. Next, we will introduce the system interface of the issuer side, the recipient side, and the verifier side, respectively. The interface of the issuer side is web-based, and that of the recipient and verifier side are mobile apps.

Issuer side
After logging in, the institution administrator can see the webpage as show in Figure 4(a), which has four functions: viewing the list of applications to be processed (Figure 4(b)), produce a diploma (Figure 4(c)), modify diploma content (Figure 4(d)), and browse historical data.

Fig. 4
figure 4
The interfaces of the issuer side

Full size image
Recipient side
The recipient-side interface of the system is mainly based on mobile applications. The recipients use this app to submit their diploma applications and generate the ECC key pair. Figure 5(a) is the interface for uploading face images and the recipient’s ECC public key. The recipient needs to upload three face photos from different angles in order to build a good facial recognition model. If the recipient claims the diploma, the content of the diploma will be displayed, and a QR code with the diploma and digital signatures of the institution and the recipient will be generated (Figure 5(b)).

Fig. 5
figure 5
The interfaces of the recipient side

Full size image
Verifier side
The verifier scans the QR code using the App, and the scanned data will be verified according to the procedures mentioned in section 3.1. If verification is successful, the recipient’s diploma information will be displayed, as shown in Figure 6(a). The verifier can click on “identity verification” (the red box in Figure 6(a)) to take a picture of the face of the recipient. Then, the face image is recognized with the recognition model on Blockchain. If the verification is successful, the face photo uploaded by the recipient at the first time will be displayed, as shown in Figure 6(b). Therefore, the verifier can confirm that the person is the true recipient of the diploma.

Fig. 6
figure 6
The interfaces of the verifier side

Full size image
Experimental results
The core operation of the proposed system is to read and write the blockchain, that is, to query and invoke the ledger in the terminology of the blockchain. Regardless of whether the reading target is a public key or a diploma, for the blockchain, all are performed by the query method. The same is true for writing to the blockchain. Regardless of whether the writing target is a public key or a diploma, for the blockchain, all of these are executed by the invoke method. Therefore, this research carried out a system test for reading public keys and writing diplomas to show the experimental results of querying and invoking the ledger. The Hyperledger Fabric version used in this study is 2.1.1. The test environment is a Raft-based multi-host deployment with 5 orderers and 4 peers. The parameter configurations are BatchTimeout = 100 ms and MaxMessageCount = 10, where BatchTimeout is the amount of time to wait after the first transaction arrives for additional transactions before cutting a block, and MaxMessageCount is the maximum number of messages to permit in a batch (Hyperledger, 2020).

Reading public keys
In this study, three different tests were prepared, each of which sends a different number of readings to the blockchain to measure the transaction time of query method. In addition, each test is repeated 30 times to collect transaction time. Table 2 shows the statistical data of the mean, standard deviation, maximum and minimum values of 30 times for each test.

Table 2 Statistics of test results of reading public keys (unit: second)
Full size table
Writing diplomas
This study also prepares three different tests, each of which sends a different number of writings to the blockchain to measure the transaction time of invoke method. In addition, each test is repeated 30 times to collect transaction time. Table 3 shows the statistical data of the mean, standard deviation, maximum and minimum values of 30 times for each test.

Table 3 Statistics of test results of writing diplomas (unit: second)
Full size table
Discussions
This study investigates the acceptance and willingness to adopt blockchain digital diplomas compared with traditional paper diplomas. We used three variables in the current study: perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and intention to use. The perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use were measured by four items respectively, and each question item measures the difference in a comparative way, e.g., “Compared with the traditional paper diploma, how does the blockchain digital diploma system perform in the process of receiving and issuing?” Therefore, respondents were asked to express their opinions on a five-point scale, in which -2 = “much poorer”, -1= “poorer”, 0 = “the same”, 1 = “better”, and 2 = “much better”. The intention to use was measured by a nominal scale, which asked the participants to answer a question ‘If you have two kinds of diplomas, which would you prefer?’ According to the three roles in Figure 1, the questionnaire was sent to students, graduate alumni, school staffs, and employers. A total of 102 questionnaires were collected, of which 40.83% were students, 35.83% were alumni, 5.83% were school staffs, and 2.5% were employers. Paired sample t-test was used to test whether there are significant differences in the perception of usefulness and ease of ease, and z-test was used to compare the difference between proportions of intention to use a paper diploma and intention to use a blockchain digital diploma. Table 4 displays the test results, and the results show that there are statistically significant differences between the respondents’ perception on the usefulness and ease of ease. In addition, the sample statistics of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are positive, which means that the usefulness and ease of use of blockchain digital diplomas are better than traditional paper diplomas. As for intention to use, the proportion of respondents who prefer to use the blockchain digital diplomas is higher than that of respondents who use traditional paper diplomas.

Table 4 Descriptive statistics and test results of the research variables
Full size table
Conclusions
A certificate is a proof of a person's professional ability. However, the existing paper-based certificate has some drawbacks. First, much manpower and time are required for examining the applicant's qualifications. Second, the examination is too concentrated on a single unit, usually the academic affairs office, which leads to an increase in the risk of issuing false certificates. Third, even if more time and manpower are spent in the process of application and verification, the risks of forgeries, fakes and counterfeits still exist. In addition, the paper certificate is inconvenient to carry and easy to be damaged, lost and stolen.

In order to solve the above shortcomings, this study proposed a digital diploma system based on Hyperledger Fabric. Our system allows students to apply for a valid diploma through mobile phone without having to go to school personally. Considering the problems that may arise in the process of using diplomas, we have adopted different methods to solve them. First, it is necessary to generate the digital signatures of the student and the school and attach them with the diploma. Secondly, asymmetric cryptography scheme is used to protect the data transmission and verify the data source. Thirdly, and the most importantly, with facial recognition of our system, the verifier can not only verify the diploma, but also prevent anyone from pretending to be a true diploma recipient. Nowadays, most digital diploma systems associate ownership to the private key held by individuals. In this way, the authenticity of the diploma and the recipient and the security of transmission can be guaranteed.

To sum up, our contribution has two aspects. First, based on the trust and access control of blockchain technology, this study further strengthens the authentication of diploma ownership by biometric technology. Second, this study proposed a Raft-based Hyperledger Fabric multi-host architecture corresponding to physical education governance system. In practice, as the highest administrative institution, the education authority has the right to check the diploma issuance of each educational institution, while one educational institution has no right to obtain such information of other educational institutions. With the help of the mechanism “application channel” provided by Hyperledger Fabric, the above data access control scheme can be easily implemented.