A data-driven model where individual learning behavior is a linear combination of certain stylized learning patterns scaled by learners’ affinities is proposed. The absorption of stylized behavior through the affinities constitutes “building blocks” in the model. Non-negative matrix factorization is employed to extract common learning patterns and their affinities from online learning data ensuring meaningful non-negativity of the result. The empirical learning patterns resulting from the actual course interaction data of 111 undergraduate university students are connected to a learning style system. Bootstrap-based inference allows to check the significance of the pattern coefficients. Dividing the learners in two groups “failed” and “passed” and considering their mean affinities leads to a bootstrap-based test on whether the course structure is well balanced regarding the learning preferences.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Structured assessment of learning preferences in an online learning framework builds a basis for course improvement and offers possibilities for creating a productive learning environment with a potentially pronounced effect on the learning quality as e.g. [10]. Informing learners about their learning styles based on their course interaction data may enhance their awareness of the materials that suit best for their learning progression [16]. Though the individual learning strategies vary, they are assumed to share some common components, termed learning styles [9]. These styles are expected to be reflected in the actual course interactions through stylized patterns in the data, characteristic for each learning style. The resulting stylized behavior is absorbed through individual preferences. When linked to behavioral patterns from the observable learners’ data, those preferences are parameterized by what I term here as affinities towards each pattern. These individual affinities measure how pronounced the stylized pattern is reflected in the observed learner’s behavior.

In this paper, I propose a coherent data-based model, where individual learning behavior is represented as a linear combination of certain stylized learning patterns personalized through individual affinities. The absorption of stylized behavior through these affinities constitutes in the model “building blocks” for individual learning behavior and facilitates the understanding of how the learning styles could conceptually “flow in” the overall personalized learning process. The proposed model is consistent with the widely recognized learning style model of [8], where according to [7] learners’ behavior may possibly reflect all learning styles with different strengths due to its time- and context-varying nature. It is useful to connect the estimated stylized patterns to a coherent learning style model to derive recommendations for course improvement based on the model estimated from data.

There exist a variety of learning style models that potentially build such a basis, see [9] for a survey thereof. In this analysis, I use the most referenced (according to the authors in [9]) learning style classification of [8]. Though developed in the late 1980s, this model is still relevant for numerous modern applications. For instance, [28] and [19] use Felder-Silvermann based learning style model for exploring student behavior in massive online open courses. [23] apply the learning style categorization for optimizing team formation. [11] use the learning style model as a basis for an automatic learning content adaptation. The learning style classification incorporates four levels: processing (active/ reflective learners), perception (sensing/ intuitive), input (visual/ verbal), and understanding (sequential/ global). One more dimension regarding the learning attitude can be found in [2] separating i.a. surface and achieving learning styles.

The following properties characterize the learning styles mentioned above. Whereas active learners learn by trying out, applying concepts, and tend to collaborate with others, reflective learners prefer to work along reflecting the material. Sensing learner learns best by examples and like standard tasks, intuitive style determines preference for abstraction and generalized principles. Visual versus verbal styles regard the form of the learning material preferred. Step-by-step learning identifies sequential learner and the need of big picture and the vice versa characterizes the global type. Finally, low engaged learners or surface learners, put only enough afford to complete or pass the course, whereas the achievers desire highest grades [9].

The models of learning styles provide questionnaires to determine the learning preferences through the explicit feedback of the learners. This approach was termed collaborative by [3] and is often criticized as inconsistent. [22] denounces the reliability and validity of self-report based learning style detection as being dependent on a particular time point of self-reporting and the criteria used, which is supported by the empirical investigations of [33]. To overcome this shortcoming, the automatic approach as [3] aims at identifying the learning styles based on the actual behavior. [32] distinguishes, thereby, a data-driven and a literature-based approaches. In the data-driven setting learning styles are extracted from the data using an appropriate algorithm, which combines the input data to output learning styles by optimizing its loss function. Literature-based approaches give simple rules on calculating learning styles from particular behavioral features (see e.g. [15, 27]). In this paper I follow the data-driven approach. The resulting learning patterns are then related to the learning styles mentioned above based on their behavioral characteristics.

Many authors, who attempt to extract behavioral patterns corresponding to the learning styles in the data-driven setting, use supervised techniques such as classification to obtain a model matching the actual behavior to the prespecified learning style labels, obtained through questionnaires, interviews or expert opinions. For instance, [32] determine the learning styles based on the guidance of [8] for the observed learners and use decision trees to combine the observed features in order to forecast the learning preferences. [12] employ questionnaires to match the learning style and use Bayesian networks to fit a predictive model and to obtain the probability of each learning pattern. [26] compare several data mining techniques as decision trees, random forest, naive bayes and bayes net for learning style classification. [35] train an ensemble of three classifiers. [37, 14], and [11] among others employ deep neural networks for learning style detection based on predetermined labels. I refer to [36] for further proposed approaches to supervised learning style prediction.

A drawback of supervised methodologies is the requirement to provide some learning style reference as ground truth, normally obtained by filling out questionnaires, interviews, self-reporting, etc. These labels are not always available or reasonable and may be error prone [18, 22]. [21] combine self-reported learning styles and those derived from data using data mining with a decision tree algorithm for content adaptation to compensate the disadvantages of questionnaires.

Another option is to use a purely unsupervised technique (also referred to as implicit modeling in [18]) to extract the common behavioral patterns directly from the observed behavioral data based on minimizing some self-sufficient loss function (e.g. squared error of the approximation).

For instance, [34] use k-means clustering as an intermediate step to map the data to some known learning styles. [20] previously adopt the same technique. However, k-means assign membership to only one cluster. Consequently, each learner can only belong to a single group. That is, no one-to-one relation of their clusters to the original learning styles can be established. The resulting clusters rather comprise frequent combinations of learning patterns present in a considered group of students. Transferring k-means results to another group of students may be problematic. To overcome this problem, [4] use expectation maximization clustering and later [1] apply fuzzy c-mean clustering for unsupervised detection of learning styles. The authors then inspect the resulting clusters and label them according to the model of [8]. Their cluster centers can be interpreted as the behavioral prototypes of the learning styles and the degrees of cluster memberships correspond to the strengths of the individual preferences. Similar approaches is taken in [6] and [18]. However, the formation of individual learning behavior (as a combination of the cluster memberships) lacks comprehension in such a model. [31] use dimension reduction via principal component analysis (PCA) to model common students’ learning patterns and monitor temporal changes therein. The actual behavior is approximated as a sum of principal component loadings (learning patterns) scaled by the respective scores. As a result, PCA offers a generative model for the observed learners data, where each learner can exhibit preference to more than one dominating learning style. The later addresses another common criticism of learning style approaches [22]. However, because both principal component scores and loadings are allowed to be positive and negative, the resulting components are sometimes added and sometimes subtracted. This fact complicates the interpretation of the result in terms of learning patterns as “building blocks” for the observed learners and possibly negative scores as individual affinities.

In this paper, I use another technique - non-negative matrix factorization - to extract the common learning patterns and the corresponding affinities in order to ensure the non-negativity of the both. Compared to the PCA method of [31], it offers the advantage that the extracted learning patterns and the preferences are non-negative and can be easily interpreted as suitably scaled additive “building blocks” determining the individual learning behavior.

I apply the model to extract the common learning patterns and the corresponding affinities from learning interaction data of 111 undergraduate university students of an online statistics course. Course interaction data on the intensity and the duration of content usage combined with quiz completion and quiz scores forms the basis for the analysis. The resulting empirical learning patterns are connected to the learning styles mentioned above. It is possible to construct a statistical test using mean per-pattern affinities of two groups “failed” and “passed” to get the insights on whether the course structure is well balanced regarding learning preferences, which is also demonstrated. The proposed methodology is not restricted to a particular learning management system and can be adopted whenever individual interaction data reflecting different patterns in content usage is available.

The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, I describe the statistical model for extracting persistent patterns of learning behavior and respective affinities from data and introduce non-negative matrix factorization as the underlying approach for finding the unknown parts of the model. The section, where I briefly address the course framework, the available data, and the preprocessing steps, follows. I also present the extracted learning patterns and the corresponding affinities and show how to use them to check whether the course structure is well balanced to meet the needs of different learners in this section. Finally, I conclude on the findings.

Model specification and estimation
To begin with, assume that each learning style of the adopted learning style system is reflected in the respective unambiguous stylized learning behavior, which is typical for it. Learners’ course interactions arise then as a result of combining the stylized behavior patterns of their preferred learning styles. These stylized patterns are thereby common to all learners. However, since learners’ preferences differ, also the importance of the respective stylized patterns for the formation of their individual learning behavior vary. I refer to the stylized behavior in further as to (common) learning patterns and to the linked individual importance as to affinities thereto.

Moreover, assume that the observed individual learning behavior can be approximately represented by a linear combination of the common learning patterns according to their individual affinities. Those patterns build, in a sense, stretchable and shrinkable blocks, which can be put on top of each other. Each individual learning pattern in this model is composed out of these “building blocks” stretched or shrunk by individual affinity to the respective pattern as illustrated in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Illustration of approximating observed behavior described by five variables v1,…,v5 (left) as a linear combination of the two patterns, pattern 1 (middle left) and pattern 2 (middle right), with the respective affinities of 0.5 and 0.25. The resulting approximation is shown on the right panel

Full size image
Let X further denote a p×n-matrix where the columns contain p observed course interaction measurements for each of n learners. The aim is to approximate X by a product of a non-negative p×K-matrix P, containing the unobserved common learning patterns, and a transpose of a non-negative n×K-matrix A, likewise unobserved, holding the individual affinities in its columns. Formally, X can be written as:

X≈PA⊤,
(1)
where all elements of P and A are non-negative. The non-negativity constraint ensures that both the learning patterns and the individual affinities thereto contain only entries that are either 0 or positive facilitating their interpretation. Moreover, as X contains inherently non-negative data (measurements of interaction with course content are either zero or positive for all learners), the non-negativity constraint also ensures, that its approximation PA⊤ does not encounter any negative values.

Note that (1) presents an approximation of the observed learning behavior measurements. On one hand, some behavior (e.g. content queries outside of course system) cannot be observed. On the other hand, not all quantified actions can be represented perfectly by the learning styles, since also other individual factors, such as personal time constraints, affect the observed learning behavior.

The number of columns K in P and A corresponds to the number of common learning patterns that can be detected given the particular course data. In further I assume that K is known or its value can be reasonably specified by the researcher. For example, it can be determined using the number of different learning styles in a learning style model as reference. Ideally, all learning styles of the assumed learning style system materialize in one of the common learning patterns. However, sometimes the related stylized behavior is not captured in the data and the corresponding learning patterns will not show up in the data, and thus cannot be extracted. The choice of K rests, therefore, on the learning styles system and on the available data.

The main objection is to compute the unknown part of (1) from the data given K, that is:

common hidden learning patterns based on observable aspects of learning behavior, which are the columns of the hidden matrix P,

individual weights giving the personal affinity towards each learning pattern, contained in the columns of the hidden matrix A,

such that both P and A are non-negative and the approximation is best in squared error sense:

minP∈Rp×K+,A∈Rn×K+||X−PA⊤||2F,
(2)
where ||M||2F denotes the squared Frobenius norm of a matrix M and is equal to the sum of its squared elements. The minimization problem in (2) corresponds to the non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) of X. This technique originally proposed by [25] is used here to model the learning patterns and the respective affinities.

figure a
The alternating non-negative least squares (NNLS) algorithm [13] is used to obtain the actual decomposition in P and A given K and is presented in Algorithm 1. The NNLS()-Routine can be found in [24], p. 161, and is available as nnls  function in package nnls [29] in R [30].

The decomposition resulting from Algorithm 1 is identifiable up to a scale factor. It can be rescaled without changing the overall approximation as:

PA⊤=(PS)(S−1A⊤)=PSA⊤S,
(3)
using a diagonal matrix S=diag(s1,s2,…,sK) with sk, k=1,…,K as scale factors. For example, after obtaining the decomposition in K learning patterns in P and the respective affinities in A, one can scale the entries of A to [0, 1] for each pattern on order to make them comparable.

With P and A obtained for a particular K<p the model can be interpreted as a dimension reduction for the columns of X. Its p-dimensional columns (learners) can be represented by their K-dimensional individual affinities to the respective learning patterns. For instance, consider a learner with a behavioral pattern as in Fig. 1 (learner #1) and with affinities (0.5, 0.25) regarding pattern 1 and pattern 2 respectively, each consisting of five variables. If there is another learner (learner #2) exhibiting affinities (0.1, 0.8) regarding the same patterns, then both learners can be compared by just looking on their two-dimensional affinitiesFootnote1. The comparison becomes more straightforward as when using the original data of five variables for each learner.

In general, instead of considering all p measurements of learners’ behavior, one can use the corresponding K affinities for exploring the data e.g. for clustering and visualization. Let Mi,j denote the ijth element and M⋅,j the jth column of matrix M. Then, the observed behavior of learner j in the data matrix X can now be approximated as:

X⋅,j≈PA⋅,j=∑i=1KAi,jP⋅,j.
(4)
The distribution of the affinities among learners provides new insights on prevailing learning patterns and, given some additional information as the final performance of the learners, can be used to determine the role of the affinities therein. I explore this fact further in the results section.

Results and discussion
In this section, the proposed model is applied to actual course interaction data. I describe the data and present the resulting decomposition in common learning patterns and corresponding affinities. Finally, a test strategy for checking the learning style balance of the course is proposed and the results are discussed.

Course interaction data
The analysis is conducted as a part of an observational study and is based on the data of 111 undergraduate university students of a statistics course during one academic semester. The course was a follow-up to a prior basic course and took place completely online due to pandemic contact restrictions. The course interaction data is obtained from the Moodle learning management system. The analyzed data contains only the measurements of the learners who actually completed the course and took the final exam as later their grade is used as a group indicator. The structure of the course includes ten topics each scheduled to be completed by a particular due date. There were all together about 180 materials available. In particular, each topic included lecture summaries, videos with lectures and examples, links to online resources, practical exercises, and quizzes for each topic.

Table 1 List of the 21 features computed from the course interaction data with the intended style identification
Full size table
The questions in quizzes were drawn randomly from a larger question pool or filled with random numbers. The number of visits to the quizzes was not limited: students could repeat their attempts as often as they wish. The incorporated Q&A Forum served as a communication tool. Besides the materials available in the online course system, synchronized online lectures took place, for which no attendance information is available.

Based on the stylized data patterns for each learning style and the recommendations regarding their identification given in [16], I compute 21 features from the course interaction data (Table 1) to reflect the stylized behavior patterns in quizzes, content retrieval, task completion, and other aspects of stylized behavior of the mentioned learning styles. As seen from Table 1, learning behavior concerning the input dimension (verbal and visual learning styles) cannot be quantified from the data. The provided course materials are rather mixed, containing both visual and verbal content. Therefore, the corresponding stylized behavior patterns are not reflected in the gathered course interaction data. Under this consideration, the input dimension is excluded from further analysis. Based on the data from the course and the computed variables of learning behavior in Table 1, I should be able to identify the common learning patterns connected to the learning styles: active / reflective, sensing / intuitive, sequential / global, and surface / achieving.

Decomposition of the data in P and A
To find P and A of the approximation in (1) using Algorithm 1, one has to specify K, the number of common learning patterns supposedly prevalent in the data. I choose K=8 based on the eight learning styles, which stylized behavior I capture with the measurements in Table 1: active, reflective, sensing, intuitive, global, sequential, surface, and achieving.

Prior to starting the optimization, I scale the (21×111) data matrix by dividing the rows by their maxima to bring the variables on the same scale [0,1]. The scaled data (denoted as X) becomes then the matrix to approximate with the product of P and A⊤. Applying the algorithm for non-negative matrix factorization to X returns the actual decomposition. The extracted K learning patterns are contained in the resulting matrix P and the corresponding individual affinities are contained in A. The entries of A are then rescaled to be between 0 and 1 by left-multiplying it with S−1, where S is diagonal containing the row means of A on the diagonal. The affinities towards each of the patterns are then on the same scale. P have to be now right-multiplied with S, so that the overall approximation does not change, as given in (3).

To relate the obtained patterns in P to the eight learning styles above, let us inspect the coefficients in the columns of P. Significant coefficient magnitudes, distinguishing particular patterns from the others, indicate, combined with the entries of Table 1, possible links to the adopted learning style system. The extracted patterns are presented in Figs. 2 and 3, where they are labeled according to the stylized behavior expressed by the coefficient magnitudes.

The first and the second patterns must correspond to active / reflective styles as they discriminate between such action loaded behavior as solving quizzes, doing optional exercises, posting comments in forum (active, red) and isolated learning by studying and overthinking the available materials in the reflection mode (reflective, blue). The third and the fourth patterns seem to address the sensing versus intuitive learning behavior. The third pattern weights such measurements as time in quizzes, average scores and scores on standardized tasks the most (sensing, green), whereas the fourth emphasizes visits to lecture notes, the scores in theoretical questions and quiz completion rate suggesting an intuitive approach (pink).

Fig. 2
figure 2
The extracted leaning patterns related to the learning styles active / reflective and sensing / intuitive. The bars’ lengths correspond to the coefficients (horizontal axis) of the respective features (vertical axis)

Full size image
The fifth pattern, labeled as sequential, gives significant weights to on time or earlier submissions and completion rate (violet) as opposed to the global strategy, where reviewed materials, late submissions, and attempts on final quizzes are distinguished (olive). Finally, achieving learners glance with best scores producing the largest coefficients (gray) wheres the surface pattern (orange) gives the highest importance to the proportion of questions left without any answer by average quiz scores and in the presence of (first-time) queries to the materials while trying to solve the exercises, indicating shallow learning afford just enough to pass.

Fig. 3
figure 3
The extracted leaning patterns related to the learning styles sequential / global and surface / achieving. The bars’ lengths correspond to the coefficients (horizontal axis) of the respective features (vertical axis)

Full size image
As seen from the Figs. 2 and 3, the extracted patterns are rather sparse: numerous measurements get zero-weighted imposing irrelevance to the particular pattern. Some other features get a positive weight with small magnitude suggesting they might be also dispensable. To get a more systematic understanding of the importance and stability of the patterns, I construct confidence intervals for their coefficients using non-parametric bootstrap [5, 38] with B=104 replicationsFootnote2. The confidence intervals help to verify whether the coefficients, used to connect the patterns to the learning styles, significantly differ from zero. The resulting 99% point-wise confidence intervals are depicted in the next Figs. 4 and 5.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Bootstrap means (circles) and 99% confidence intervals (lines) for the learning patterns related to the learning styles active / reflective and sensing / intuitive. The features used for linking the patterns to the styles are highlighted

Full size image
Inspecting Figs. 4 and 5 reveals that low coefficients often do not significantly differ from zero and may indicate features of low importance for the pattern. The high-weight “pattern defining features” used to connect the patterns to the learning styles (highlighted in the respective colors), are all significant. Thus, checking the confidence intervals ensures that the linking of the extracted patterns to the learning styles is substantial.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Bootstrap means (circles) and 99% confidence intervals (lines) for the learning patterns related to the learning styles sequential / global and surface / achieving. The features used for linking the patterns to the styles are highlighted

Full size image
Let us also inspect the entries in A representing the individual affinities. Their summary statistics for each pattern are given in Table 2. They reveal, that numerous learners have zero affinity to either active, reflective, global, or surface styles. On the other side, most learners show positive affinity to sensing, intuitive, sequential and achieving patterns. Especially, affinities towards the intuitive pattern are far from zero for many learners, which could indicate, that this pattern reflects a combination of a general factor such as “understanding of theoretical concepts” and the actual intuitive pattern. The later suggests that to identify an intuitive learner, one have to observe a very high affinity value towards the pattern.

Table 2 Summary statistics for the obtained learning pattern affinities in A. q^k,p denotes the empirical p-quantile of the kth pattern affinities and μk denotes their mean
Full size table
Fig. 6
figure 6
Example 1. Top panel shows the original (left) and the modeled behavior (right) as X⋅,1≈0.06P⋅,1+0.3P⋅,2+0.42P⋅,3+0.64P⋅,4+0.19P⋅,5+0P⋅,6+0P⋅,7+0.21P⋅,8. Bottom panels show the learning patterns (light bars) scaled by the affinities (dark bars)

Full size image
The behavior of each learner is now approximately obtained by adding up the pattern coefficients multiplied by the respective affinities as written in (4) and visualized in Figs. 6 and 7. Moreover, since patterns in P are common to all considered learners, each of them can be sufficiently represented by the affinities. Instead of considering all 21 features for assessing their learning behavior, we can use the corresponding 8 affinities for exploring the data e.g. for clustering and visualization.

Fig. 7
figure 7
Example 2. Top panel shows the original (left) and the modeled behavior (right) as X⋅,2≈0.34P⋅,1+0.11P⋅,2+0.09P⋅,3+0.8P⋅,4+0.56P⋅,5+0.32P⋅,6+0.02P⋅,7+0.44P⋅,8. Bottom panels show the learning patterns (light bars) scaled by the affinities (dark bars)

Full size image
Consider the following two constructed examples of learning behavior and its approximation through the learning patterns and the affinities in Figs. 6 and 7. In the first example, the learner is represented by the vector of affinities (0.06,0.3,0.42,0.64,0.19,0,0,0.21)⊤. In the second example, another vector of affinities (0.34,0.11,0.09,0.8,0.56,0.32,0.02,0.44)⊤ is relevant. To compare the two learners, one can now compare their affinities to the learning patterns. For example, the first learner appears to follow the reflective learning strategy most of the course (the affinity of 0.3 is above average for k=2, see Table 2), the second learner shows more inclination towards the active style. In the first case, the sensing style is more pronounced. In the second case, the affinity for the intuitive style is above average, whereas the sensing one falls below. Consequently, one would rather count the first learner to the sensing and the second one to the intuitive learners.

The proportion of the explained variance for the model is 89.1%, which indicates quite a good fit for a factor model in the social science domain [17]. This data-driven criterion combined with the results in line with the adopted theory of learning styles, speaks for a strong empirical support of the proposed model and its general validity. Moreover, the reliability of the study is verified through the bootstrap inference, showing similar results across different runs and revealing statistical significance of the components. The considered time interval of one semester appears to be long enough to ensure the time consistency of the obtained patterns.

The model can be applied to a wide range of educational settings, where it is possible to construct behavioral features that reflect the assumed learning style patterns. Moreover, the proposed framework is not restricted to a specific learning style model. The premise is that one is able to construct features describing behavioral aspects of the learning styles chosen as a basis.

The following steps are needed to apply the model:

1.
Choose a learning style model

2.
Identify the learning patterns typical for each of the learning styles and compute the features, reflecting those patterns.

3.
Apply the NMF framework described above to the data matrix with the computed features setting the number of components K equal to the number of learning styles.

4.
Verify the consistency of the obtained factors (by bootstrapping and inspecting their confidence intervals) and use the respective coefficients to connect them to the adopted learning styles.

The results can be used to test various hypotheses regarding learners’ affinities. In the next section, a test for an instructional course balance based on the obtained affinities and the final grades is proposed.

Checking the learning style balance of the course
A learning style balanced course describes an instruction, where learners of all learning styles are addressed, which is a leading idea of course improvement in [7]Footnote3. Under the assumption that learning styles are independent of learners’ abilityFootnote4, one can explore, whether some learners failed to succeed just because of missing suitable learning tools. Therefore, we divide all learners in two groups “p” (passed) and “f” (failed) based on their performance in the final examination. The groups are somewhat unbalanced: the “f”-group constitutes about 27% of all students.

Table 3 Means (μ^k,g) and pooled standard deviations (σ^k,pool) of the resulting affinities in matrix A computed separately for the two groups (g∈{f,p}) with “p” passed and “f” failed in the final examination and for k=1,…,8 learning patterns. Larger means are bold
Full size table
The resulting means and standard deviations of the per-group and per-pattern affinities are shown in Table 3. Comparison of means differences under consideration of the pooled standard deviations in Table 3 suggests that on average being more active, reflective, intuitive, or achieving could payoff in final exam score. And the other way around, being on average less sensing and less affine to surface learning could result in better performance on the final exam. Whereas surface and achieving factors are rather related to personal motivation, the group comparison of sensing / intuitive affinities may indicate possible deficiencies of the learning materials in the course.

The differences in means give an idea of how different the average affinities are between the two groups. Significantly different means of the two groups for some patterns indicate, that the affinities to these patterns may play an important role in determining whether a learner succeeds in the final examination or not. It is to expect, however, that some patterns as achieving or surface, which have to do with the motivation of a learner, do play an important role, but are rather uninteresting for the course improvement. Other patterns relating to active/ reflective, sensing/intuitive or sequential/ global (ideally) should not exhibit any significant difference in the mean affinities of the groups in a balanced course.

Using again non-parametric bootstrap [5] with B=104 replications, I test the significance of the differences in score means by bootstrapping the data, estimating Pb and Ab for each bootstrap replication b=1,…,B, and computing group differences for the mean affinities while randomly permuting the groups.

Table 4 p-values for the three hypotheses sets obtained by bootstrapping the difference in means with B=104 bootstrap replications; p-values lower that 10% are given in bold, statistical significance is indicated by * (10%), **(5%), ***(1%)
Full size table
Consider the following possible hypothesis sets and each k=1,…,8:

1.
H0:μk,f=μk,p against HA:μk,f≠μk,p

2.
H0:μk,f≤μk,p against HA:μk,f>μk,p

3.
H0:μk,f≥μk,p against HA:μk,f<μk,p

μk,g denotes the population mean of the affinities of group g∈{f,p} to learning pattern k=1,…,8. The resulting p-values are reported in Table 4. The differences in means appear statistically significant for the patterns sensing (k=3, hypothesis sets 1,2), intuitive (k=4, hypothesis sets 1,3), surface (k=7, hypothesis sets 2), and achieving (k=8, hypothesis sets 1,3). Especially the result for k=3 and hypothesis set 2 indicates the need for course improvement concerning the sensing learners.

I conclude that I should try to re-conceptualize the course to improve the support of sensual learners, e.g. by integrating more real world examples with practical applications, providing some guidance for solving also non-standard problems, and encouraging to concentrate on understanding and not memorizing.

Conclusions
In this paper, I propose a data-driven model where individual course interactions are linear combinations of common stylized learning patterns personalized through individual affinities. The model allows to coherently approximate the observed behavior (X) as composed of “building blocks” learning patterns (P) absorbed in the actual data through individual affinities to each pattern (A). Using non-negative matrix factorization of X, the unknown parts P and A are found preserving the non-negativity of both, which is useful for their interpretation. The setup can be easily adjusted to another learning style system and to any available course interaction data by computing suitable features and changing the number of the components (K) depending on which stylized behavior can be captured by the present features. The researcher can explore the resulting learning patterns by relating them to the learning styles and checking their stability through confidence interval construction using bootstrap. The resulting affinities represent learners behavior in lower dimensions and facilitate further usage e.g. for visualizations and clustering. Moreover, using the affinities, a statistical test for differences in means of distinct groups based on their performance (e.g. “failed” and “passed”) is available. The results are useful for ensuring a learning style balanced instruction.