Learning systems are widely adopted as educational tools. The success of a learning system depends on the level of acceptance by instructors and learners. Research has identified Education as a Service (EaaS) as a resource that enables instructors and learners to access a new kind of service for learning system, containing: (1) support tools and services, (2) curriculum, and (3) cloud service. This paper aims to develop an adoption model to understand the causal relation and predict the effect of personal characteristic (Perceived usefulness and Perceived ease of use) and quality characteristics (Service quality, System quality, and Information quality) on the continuous intention to use EaaS from instructors and learners, which is critical to success. A total of 1570 participants were involved in the survey, including instructors and learners in Thailand’s universities. The Structural Equation Model (SEM) was employed to test the causal relation, while the Neural Network (NN) model was employed in the prediction of EaaS adoption with 72.9% accuracy.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Advancement in Information Technology (IT) is becoming embedded in everything, which leads to a new business model for education: Education as a Service (EaaS). EaaS can transform and modernize higher education as well as effectively manage learning across borders of time and space (Prifti et al., 2017b). EaaS is an IT-based learning and teaching resource delivered as services (Mohapatra & Rath, 2017). There is a significant impact on the quality of learning and teaching outcomes in higher education institutions because institutions are now adopting strategies to enhance IT-enabled learning and teaching as a high priority. The concept of the EaaS model can be explained as smart education focused on educational services by using modern technologies example of cloud computing, internet of things (IoT), mobile technology and also ubiquitous technology to ensure learning and support of academic achievement in the twenty-first century. (Kuppusamy, 2020). Instructors and learners are now looking for non-traditional forms of acquiring knowledge based on discrete demands. EaaS can provide a suitable platform for learning where instructors and learners can identify specific competencies which will be separate from the study program being offered conventionally. Therefore, EaaS creates a revenue model which can supplement on-demand programs in universities for all degrees. This model intends to help businesses and universities by delivering customized learning opportunities for instructors and learners while providing education services as additional learning programs that are not aligned to institutions’ programs (Kuppusamy, 2020). This could allow learners to develop their skills for the competencies needed by the companies for which they intend to work. Therefore, the EaaS model enables more active student engagement with personalized subject matter, which then results in deeper learning experiences. It also allows instructors and learners to learn their preferred topics using EaaS platforms, which could help enhance their performance as a whole by allowing them to share their study materials, enabling access to study the documents, and also providing opportunity for interaction over cloud computing services from anywhere at any time. Increasingly, higher education institutions need to implement a new kind of service offering in the education sector for the “learner-centric” evolution of education (Coleman, 2019). The success of this implementation is highly dependent on the level of satisfaction and adoption to use EaaS by instructors and learners. Therefore, identifying the key determinants influencing instructors’ and learners’ level of satisfaction and adoption is very important (Islam, 2015; Islam & Azad, 2015; Salem & Salem, 2015) to design learning platform for EaaS and find the proper way to develop professional skills in order to continune learning throughout life. Instructors and learners play a key role in EaaS for learning and teaching. However, it is noticeable that there is minimal empirical study and research on the adoption model for EaaS in higher education institutions (Qasem et al., 2018). Therefore, the problem of determining the factors that influence user intention to use EaaS needs to be addressed. Leading to the adoption models, the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) by Davis (1989) and Information Systems success model (IS success model) by Delone and McLean (2003) are the theoretical base of this study, which are related to understanding users’ intentions and system readiness for new technology adoption (Ain et al., 2016). To explore further, Davis (1989) proposed a TAM model with personal characteristics comprising Perceived usefulness and Perceived ease of use, while Delone and McLean (2003) proposed an IS success model using quality characteristics comprising Service quality, System quality and Information quality. These two models propose the influencing factors of EaaS adoption being employed in this study. Thus, the research objectives are threefold. Firstly, the study attempts to fill existing research gaps by developing a new adoption model through integrating the TAM and IS success models from instructors’ and learners’ perspectives to understand and predict new technology adoption of EaaS. Secondly, the proposed adoption model was tested statistically using Structural Equation Modeling (SEM). Finally, all determining factors of the adoption model were prescribed as inputs to Neural Network (NN) model to predict the instructors’ and learners’ EaaS adoption in higher education institutions established in Thailand. The research methodology to test data by using SEM and to predict data by NN is in line with the recommendations of various studies (Chan & Chong, 2012; Chong, 2013a, 2013b; Hew et al., 2016; Liébana-Cabanillas et al., 2017; Tan et al., 2014a) which have recommended causal analysis (SEM) and predictive analytics (NN) in order to enhance the degree of theory building and testing (Chong, 2013a, 2013b; Shmueli & Koppius, 2011). The remaining part of this paper is organized into six sections. Section 2 defines the research objectives. Section 3 reviews the relevant literature, including technology adoption models, EaaS and research model. Section 4 presents the research methodology, while Section 5 interprets the results. Section 6 proposes theoretical contributions and practical implications. Finally, Section 7 provides the discussion and conclusion.

Research objectives
This study aims to (1) develop an adoption model for Education as a Service (EaaS) by integrating TAM and IS success models, (2) test the adoption model of EaaS by Structural Equation Modeling (SEM), and (3) predict instructors’ and learners’ adoption of EaaS by Neural Network (NN). The results will provide an empirical study on the adoption model for EaaS, which fills the research gaps from the literature review.

Literature review
There have been several studies aimed at understanding individual adoption towards using new technology (Kim et al., 2010), but user adoption of Education as a Service (EaaS) has seldom been examined (Qasem et al., 2018).

Technology adoption models and theories
Technology adoption has been studied in several fields of science and social science (Sabi et al., 2018). Figure 1 presents an overview of the adoption models and theories of technology acceptance.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Overview of adoption models and theories

Full size image
IS success model
The information system success model (IS success model) was first proposed by (DeLone & McLean, 2002, 2003). This model included factors for the success of information systems such as service quality, system quality and information quality that affect users’ intention and satisfaction. Although there is some evidence from the aforementioned studies that IS success has been employed (Sharma et al., 2017), it is desirable to understand users’ intention regarding the continuous use of EaaS.

Theory of reasoned action (TRA)
The Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) was proposed by Fishbein and Ajzen (1977). This model included factors to predict and explain human behavior based on users’ attitudes (unfavorability or favorability), subjective norms (social influence), and intentions (individual’s decision). Subsequently, it became the foundation for investigating individuals’ IT usage behavior, as a clear understanding of these factors is a crucial issue (Kuo et al., 2015).

Theory of planned behavior (TPB)
The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) is an extension of the TRA model by adding a factor termed perceived behavioral control (PBC) (Ajzen, 1991). Therefore, four factors in the TPB model are used to explain that human behavior comprises attitudes, subjective norms, intentions, and PBC. However, attitudes towards information technology in the TPB model will not be applicable if a computer system is not accessible (Taherdoost et al., 2011a, 2011b).

Theory of interpersonal behavior (TIB)
The Theory of Interpersonal Behavior (TIB) contains all factors of TRA and TPB and also obtains some factors called habits (frequency of past behavior), facilitating conditions and affect (motions) in order to improve the prediction power of human behavior. However, the disadvantage of the TIB model is its complexity and the lack of a simple procedure for an operational definition of factors compared to TRA and TPB (Misbah et al., 2015).

Technology acceptance model (TAM)
The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is derived from the TRA model due to the uncertainty principle in the TRA model. The TAM model has eliminated a user’s subject norms (Muk & Chung, 2015) and obtains motivation factors termed perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, which impact a user’s attitude. These can be determined as unfavorable or favorable towards the system. TAM has been the most widely cited model in the field of technology acceptance in recent decades. It has also received substantial empirical support (Wu, 2009).

Extension of TAM (ETAM)
Extension of TAM (ETAM)) is an extension of the TAM model by additional factors in order to improve explanatory power (Maillet et al., 2015). ETAM has been studied in two domains. The first study focused on the factor of perceived usefulness (TAM2) by adding social influence (subjective norms, image and voluntariness), and cognitive instrumental processes (job relevance, output quality and result demonstrability). The second study focused on the factor of perceived ease of use (TAM3) by adding adjustments (enjoyment and objective usability) and anchors (computer self-efficacy, external control, computer anxiety and computer playfulness).

Igbaria’s model (IM)
Igbaria’s Model (IM) is an extension of the TAM model by replacing the factors termed perceived ease of use with perceived fun as an intrinsic motivator that influences users’ attitudes (level of satisfaction). There are three motivators of IM, namely perceived fun, perceived usefulness and social pressure. These motivators influence the acceptance or rejection of new technology (Igbaria et al., 1996).

Social cognitive theory (SCT)
Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) was proposed by Bandura (1978). This model included factors to understand human behavioral change comprising behavior, personality, and environment. All three factors constantly influence one another, reciprocally regulating each other.

Diffusion of innovations theory (DOI)
The Diffusion of Innovations Theory (DOI) was proposed by Rogers (2010). This model included factors to examine a diversity of innovations. The DOI model integrates three major components including adopter characteristics (early adopters, innovators, laggards, late majority, and early majority), characteristics of an innovation (relative advantage, compatibility, complexity, trialability, and observability), and the innovation-decision process (confirmation, knowledge, implementation, decision, and persuasion). However, the DOI model has less power in explanatory processes and is less practical for the prediction of outcomes compared to other adoption models (Sila, 2015).

Perceived characteristics of innovating theory (PCIT)
The Perceived Characteristics of Innovating Theory (PCIT) is an extension of the DOI theory by identifying three additional factors including Image, voluntariness, and behavior. The results show that the adoption rate is related to each factor that affects users’ decisions to reject or accept innovation (Hameed et al., 2012).

Motivational model (MM)
The motivational model (MM) was proposed by Davis et al. (1992). This model included factors for motivation including perceived usefulness as extrinsic motivation and perceived enjoyment as intrinsic motivation. These factors have an impact on behavior intention for system use.

Uses and gratification theory (U&G)
The Uses and Gratification Theory (U&G) was proposed by Grellhesl and Punyanunt-Carter (2012). This model included three main factors comprising motivations (actions of people for their requirements), behavioral usage (such as the extent of use, duration of use, and type of use) and gratifications (satisfaction). It focuses on the social and psychological aspects of users.

The model for PC utilization (MPCU)
The Model of PC Utilization (MPCU) was proposed by Triandis (1977). This model included factors containing job fit, complexity, long-term consequences, affect toward use, social factor, and facilitating conditions. The MPCU considers the theory of human behavior in connection with technology acceptance.

Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT)
The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) was proposed by Venkatesh et al. (2003). This model was developed by tailoring integration from the acceptance model and theories consisting of TRA, TPB, TAM SCT.DOI, MM, and MPCU. The significant factors were performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence and facilitating conditions, while the moderating factors were gender, age, experience and voluntariness of use. This theory, however, has been criticized for having too many independent variables for predicting intentions and behavior (Bagozzi, 2007).

Compatibility UTAUT (C-UTAUT)
Compatibility UTAUT (C-UTAUT) is an extension of UTAUT by adding a factor called compatibility beliefs in order to improve explanatory power (Bouten, 2008). This model aims to investigate the relationship between compatibility beliefs and behavioral perceptions.

Extension of unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (E-UTAUT)
The Extension of Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (EUTAUT) is an extension of UTAUT by adding factors called hedonic motivation, price value, and habit. These factors were integrated in order to tailor the consumer technology use context. This theory includes age, gender and experience as moderating factors. However, voluntariness which is one of the moderatorating factors in the original UTAUT has been ignored (Venkatesh et al., 2012).

The Adoption model was derived by diversity of theories. IS success model is based on Shannon and Weaver’s classic communication theory on how the information system can be improved by increasing satisfaction of quality (Mason, 1978; Shannon, 2001). TRA containing TPB, TIB and TAM is developed from psychosocial theories (Bouten, 2008; Gagnon et al., 2006) which prove the effectiveness in predicting and explaining human behaviors whereas SCT relies on bidirectional nature of causation (Carillo, 2010). It is integrated with the notion of perceived outcomes when forecasting behaviors while DOI and TAM focus on beliefs about the technology. With these, the reason for choosing TAM and IS success model to investigate the adoption of EaaS is because TAM is one of the most widely used adoption models in predicting user acceptance of new technologies and IS success model has been used to understand the user acceptance of various information systems.

Education as a Service in Higher Education Institutions
Currently, Higher Education Institutions (HEI) and universities have adopted and recognized the platform of EaaS with potential implementation (Qasem et al., 2018; Sultan, 2010). The new term of EaaS can provide the following: (1) blended learning environment which allows learning online and face-to-face; (2) integrated platform with different learning resources (Chang & Wills, 2013). An advantage of EaaS in HEI is high flexibility for learning in terms of location, time, and learning speed. EaaS supports active interaction and motivation for learners’ self-learning and self-understanding (Ktoridou, 2014). Also, it assists instructors with easy management of learning resources, design of learning activities, tracking learner progress and sharing academic content (Wang et al., 2014). Both instructors and learners have their own online workplace, interactive teaching, and learning communities, online applications (examples of file storage, file synchronization, document creation, collaboration tools) (Ashtari & Eydgahi, 2017).

Education as a Service (EaaS) is a cloud service for education. The service was designed to provide real-time insights on learner and institutional performance, enhance research effectiveness and alleviate the constraints of learning resources (Deepa & Sathiyaseelan, 2012). EaaS consists of three main components including (1) support tools and services (2) curriculum, and (3) cloud service. Figure 2 presents the main components of the EaaS model.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Main component of EaaS (Prifti et al., 2017a)

Full size image
Users can access the EaaS platform provided as a cloud service (online community and collaboration), and curricula (content management and virtual classroom) can be carried out with theoretical and practical learning material in order to complete a course. There are support tools and services, e.g. a training session, professional development program and resource library.

Adoption model for education as a Service in Higher Education Institutions
Concerning this study, the adoption model for EaaS is affected by factors influencing the ability to explain individual behavioral intentions to use a system. Regarding the literature review, the TAM model has been widely used by many researchers to explain the adoption of internet-based technologies (Awamleh & Fernandes, 2005; Fernandes & Awamleh, 2006; Gefen et al., 2003; Moon & Kim, 2001; Sabi et al., 2018). Also, Shin (2013) further investigated the acceptance of cloud computing services and found that usefulness and ease of use are significant factors. To be detailed in cloud computing service for learning, teaching and researching in HEI, many pieces of research have proposed the TAM model controlled by two factors (Perceived usefulness and Perceived ease of use) (Alharthi et al., 2015; Masud & Huang, 2012; Dhabliya & Sharma, 2019; Shana & Abulibdeh, 2017). Therefore, the TAM model is considered to be the most researched model when considering an individual’s acceptance of new technology and information systems (Ashtari & Eydgahi, 2017; Behrend et al., 2011; Bhatiasevi & Naglis, 2016; Lee et al., 2003) and is reliable for predicting technology acceptance (Bhatiasevi & Naglis, 2016; Yarbrough & Smith, 2007). The TAM model posits two main factors containing Perceived usefulness and Perceived ease of use, which influence attitude towards using new technology. Perceived usefulness refers to the degree to which an individual believes that the use of a system will improve his or her performance. Perceived ease of use refers to the degree to which an individual believes that using a system will be easy (Davis, 1989). However, Agarwal and Prasad (1998) and Hu et al. (1999) argued that TAM fails to provide more meaningful information concerning the opinions of users about the system. According to them, there is a need for TAM to be integrated with other factors in order to improve its specificity and explanatory utility (Lu et al., 2003).

To improve the prediction power regarding user intention for the TAM model, this study extended the TAM model by adding quality factors from the IS success model, such as Service quality, System quality and Information quality. Service quality refers to responsiveness, convenient operating hours, reliability, and ease of communicating with service providers. Zeithaml et al. (1996) also established that Service quality is a key antecedent of customer satisfaction. Service quality has played a key role in the user satisfaction of IS. As in the context of EaaS, higher Service quality of EaaS will have a higher level of satisfaction and, in turn, lead to continuous usage. System quality refers to the access speed, ease of use, navigation, and web interface design of an information system (Delone & McLean, 2003; Zhou, 2013). A high-quality system will lead to a higher level of satisfaction towards the continuous usage of EaaS. Information quality refers to the main characteristics, namely, relevance, accuracy, timeliness, completeness, understanding, and accessibility of the system outputs (Tam & Oliveira, 2016). Information quality plays a significant role in the continuous usage of EaaS and is perceived as the output of the system (Al-Busaidi & Al-Shihi, 2012). High Information quality of the EaaS scan increases the satisfaction level.

The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and IS success model are both appropriate theories for technology adoption because it is not possible to apply a single theory to all types of innovations (Qasem et al., 2018; Zmud, 1982). Therefore, an incorporated model of theories is desirable for use. The proposed research model (see Fig. 1) contains five factors and is intended to address the adoption of EaaS in HEI (Fig. 3).

Fig. 3
figure 3
Research model for EaaS adoption

Full size image
Many studies have examined the adoption of EaaS from HEI perspectives. Selected studies, along with their objectives, models, and findings, are presented in Table 1.

Table 1 Past studies on EaaS adoption
Full size table
Methodology
Structural equation modeling and neural network
This study performed research using a two-step multi-analytical approach by Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) and Neural Network (NN) analysis. The SEM technique allows for a set of complex relationships between independent variables and dependent variables that can be either factors or measured variables. SEM has proven to be an effective tool in many pieces of research, especially in education (Mei et al., 2018; Sánchez-Mena et al., 2019; Scherer et al., 2018). However, SEM can only identify linear relationships (Leong et al., 2013; Tan et al., 2014b) and sometimes the adoption model is complex with a nonlinear relationship. Therefore, the NN analytical approach was identified to test the nonlinear relationship between adoption factors and behavior intention for use of Education as a Service (EaaS). The NN also makes it possible to achieve more precise prediction in comparison to using a typical linear relationships technique (Chan & Chong, 2012; Chong, 2013a, 2013b; Tan et al., 2014b) because it simulates human brain function containing an interconnected neurons network for processing units that can be able to learn thing (Leong et al., 2015; Leong et al., 2013; Zorins & Grabusts, 2015). Further, it is highly robust and adaptable (Sim et al., 2014). There is a two-step approach in this study: (1) SEM was applied to verify the factors that have a significant influence on EaaS adoption, and (2) NN was applied to analyze the prediction of substantial factors obtained from SEM analysis. SEM approaches to understand causal relationships and the NN approaches to predict the behavioral intentions are based on the proposed factors. The two-step SEM-NN approach provides further holistic comprehension and significant methodological contribution through the analytical viewpoint because NN analysis can solve the weak points in linear and compensatory SEM analysis (Zabukovšek et al., 2019).

Sample and procedure
Data was collected from a questionnaire distributed to users in private & public universities in Thailand. The survey questionnaire was designed and distributed by simple random sampling technique to different departments (science and social science). In order to avoid response bias in the survey, respondents were randomly sampled from a name list based on clusters (academic year) of specific subject areas. The data collection process was conducted using online survey (web-based questionnaires) as well as offline survey (paper-based questionnaires). 1570 participants including instructors and learners in Thailand’s universities were involved in the survey.

Measurement of factors
The questionnaire was adapted and modified in accordance with the EaaS context. There are five factors in the questionnaire comprising Perceived usefulness, Perceived ease of use, Service quality, System quality, and Information quality. The questionnaire items have five questions for each factor. Therefore, a total of twenty-five items were constructed to measure the intention to adopt EaaS. The questionnaire was divided into two sections: Section one focused on participant and university demographics, while Section two covered the main study questions regarding EaaS adoption rated on a five-point Likert scale to measure the level of agreement for every item, ranging from “strongly disagree” (1) to “strongly agree” (5). The survey questionnaire was reviewed and validated by experts knowledgeable in the study field.

Results
Digital learning has been growing in higher education since the advancement of new technology and the outbreak of the COVID−19 pandemic. Cloud computing technology is assisting in the development of the learning and teaching environment. Therefore, it is important to determine the factors of user intention and to predict user adoption in using Education as a Service (EaaS) for higher education institutions. This research is an attempt to integrate the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) by Davis (1989) and the Information Systems success model (IS success model) by Delone and McLean (2003). Therefore, personal characteristics (Perceived usefulness, Perceived ease of use) and quality characteristics (Service quality, System quality and Information quality) are examined as influences on user intention and system readiness.

Education as a Service (EaaS) provides a large number of benefits for instructors and learners as well as Higher Education Institutions (HEI). It can assist instructors to manage and share their academic knowledge and resources. There are support tools & services as well as curriculum for learners. The success of EaaS depends on user intention to use EaaS among instructors and learners and their recommendations. This study examines the impact of personal characteristics including: Perceived usefulness and Perceived ease of use and quality characteristics containing: Service quality, System quality, and Information quality that influence the continuous intention to use EaaS. Based on a survey conducted at private & public universities in Thailand, the findings demonstrate that the quality characteristics are the key factors for instructors’ and learners’ satisfaction with the EaaS platform.

The Structural Equation Model (SEM) study was employed to determine the causal relationships among factors (Hair Jr Joseph et al., 2009). The results showed that Service Quality (SQ) was the key factor for instructors’ and learners’ intention towards continuous use of EaaS. This finding was consistent with Roca et al. (2006), Al-Busaidi and Al-Shihi (2012) and Almarashdeh (2016), who studied learner satisfaction with e-learning systems. According to them, HEI should ensure the system has high-quality services for the successful implementation of the EaaS. However, it was found that there was a less statistically significant impact of Perceived Ease of use (PE) in our study, so it may be considered an immaterial factor. In further detail, the Service Quality (SQ) had the highest significant positive effect on the intention to use (CU: Continuous intention to Use) of EaaS. This indicated that faculty members place emphasis on service quality issues (i.e. good customer service and technical support). System Quality (SYQ) significantly affected Continuous intention to Use (CU) EaaS. This finding required suitability of design in the EaaS system such as stability to use, full functionality, and compatibility with other systems, as well as user accessibility and privacy settings. These are important EaaS features that influence user attitudes toward EaaS. The Information Quality (IQ) significantly influenced appropriate multimedia use (easy to understand, update in real-time, complete picture of content, gets right to the point and reliable). The Perceived Usefulness (PU) also played a significant role in the acceptance of EaaS. The findings suggested that instructors and learners recognized the benefit by connecting with experts and relevant resources. Therefore, they would like to have more intentions to use EaaS for learning and teaching development. Statistics calculated with SEM and model data fit provided Chi-square/degree of freedom: χ2 /df as 2.9, CFI as 0.99, GFI as 0.96, AGFI as 0.95, RMSEA as 0.035 and SRMR as 0.027. The goodness of fit indexes obtained in relation to the model demonstrated a good fit with the observed structure (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4
figure 4
Structural equation model

Full size image
As mentioned in the methodology, Neural Network (NN) Analysis is used in the second phase of analysis to predict behavioral intention towards EaaS adoption. Significant predictors from SEM with important effect size (PU, SQ, SYQ and IQ) are utilized as input to NN as a prediction model. In this research, a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) backpropagation feed-forward method is adopted. MLP is the most commonly used and popular NN method (Liébana-Cabanillas et al., 2017; Zabukovšek et al., 2019). The NN analysis modeled by using SPSS is comprised of three layers: input layer, hidden layer, and output layer. The input layer includes PU, SQ, SYQ and IQ. Two hidden layers are automatically generated and an activation function (sigmoid function) is utilized. The output layer is the prediction result of EaaS adoption (−1: no adoption, 0: no decision 1: adoption). To avoid over-fitting, problem data is divided into two parts, from which 90% is for training and 10% is for testing (Chong et al., 2015; Liébana-Cabanillas et al., 2017; Ooi & Tan, 2016). The result of NN shows that the predictive accuracy is 72.9% (Fig. 5, Table 2).

Fig. 5
figure 5
Neural network model

Full size image
Table 2 NN results analysis
Full size table
From the above, the findings suggested that Perceived Usefulness (PU) and quality characteristics (SQ, SYQ and IQ) impact the Continuous intention to Use (CU) EaaS. The study results clearly indicate that the SEM model for EaaS is theoretically sound and that the NN model can be used to predict instructors’ and learners’ intention towards continuous use of EaaS in the HEI environment. The findings provide evidence for the TAM and IS success models in explaining instructors’ intention to continuous use of the EaaS.

Theoretical contributions and practical implications
The theoretical contributions of this research include adoption modeling by hybrid SEM-Neural Network approach to Education as a Service (EaaS). This serves to understand the causal relationships and predict the behavioral intentions based on the proposed factors from targeted users, including instructors and learners in Thailand’s universities. Also, it enables us to understand the linear and nonlinear relations between adoption factors and behavior intention for EaaS use. The research attempts to extend causal statistical linear modeling towards a nonlinear model. This research is conducted in a developing country where no study has previously been conducted concerning the prediction of EaaS adoption. It will provide a better understanding of important factors affecting EaaS adoption. With this, this study provides a theoretical model that can be used as a prototype (or baseline model) for other researchers attempting to study EaaS adoption, especially in the context of developing countries.

In terms of practical implications, EaaS has the potential to improve the quality of student achievement by extending the opportunity to learn out of an institution because of easier resource sharing and collaboration with expertise from an outside institution. Also, there is flexibility to create personal learning or research tailored to the learners’needs. This implies that employing EaaS should support and encourage higher education by designing authentic learning environments and scaffolding learners in using such services. Higher Education Institutions (HEI) should develop their own policies and cloud-based applications to maximize the benefits of such services. More importantly, instructors should employ blended learning strategies that require EaaS in order to promote the system because there are many reasons for enforcing HEI to adopt EaaS due to the high cost of resources such as storage, servers, software, and hardware. After deploying cloud service, institutions have reduced the cost by about 55–65% (Munjal & Engineering, 2015). Also, it increases the availability and reliability of service due to the resources and service provided according to service level agreement with enhancing availability and reliability by reducing the downtime and making services or resources accessible for instructors and learners at all necessary times. Finally, it provides scalability to handle the needed amount of resources for workload sizes. The obvious benefits of EaaS in HEI are (1) ease of access, as services and resources can be accessed by users from any place and at any time, and (2) minimum maintenance and technical support from institutions in getting support from a cloud provider. With this service, learners have free space to store, access, and share documents. It implies that higher education institutions can promote the effective use of these services for group projects in which learners work together on a document. It enables learners to share ideas and files with peers and classmates. Learners can then apply and transform such knowledge and experience for problem-solving and decision making. However, there are clear advantages to the use of EaaS. Some risks need to be identified before adoption. Perceived security and privacy are related to the attitude to use EaaS. Also, some institutes find all their data and service are tied to a specific provider, which may make it difficult to migrate to another (Tweel, 2012). The compatibility issue of hardware and softeware involves integrating the large amount of existing data structures and the entire system with EaaS. There are also some concerning issues of financial concerns to the service fee and operation concerns in case a cloud-based education system cannot be customized as a requirement (Mircea & Andreescu, 2011). Therefore, the gradual adoption of EaaS is recommended by starting with the most appropriate systems for cloud computing. Email, e-learning system, learning management system are a good starting point for EaaS adoption.

Implementing EaaS in Thailand called Application for Academic Connections (AcaNects) as shown in Fig. 6 requires key partners such as software, hardware and infrastructure providers. Also, content co-creators are important. According to the activities, system setup, technical maintenance, running a support infrastructure, train-the-trainers, curriculum support and curriculum development are vital activities. According to the resources, the institution needs to prepare reliable IT infrastructure, software licenses, staff qualified for relevant support and curricula. The main focus of EaaS is teaching, training and research in HEI. Therefore, the value proposition is that EaaS provides modern teaching scenarios (online community service) and a quick start to innovative topics with cost-effectiveness (content management service). Also, EaaS offers personal support for instructors and learners as well as co-creation in development and improvement with academic research or curricula (professional development service) as a knowledge exchange platform. With these, the revenue model of the subscription fee is appropriate for EaaS because learners may need time to stay on the system as long as needed without time pressure and with foreseeable cost.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Application for Academic Connections (AcaNects)

Full size image
Discussion and conclusion
Education as a Service (EaaS) is a cloud service for education which enable new services that are used for learning and teaching purposes. Apart from this, institution can generate revenue stream by pay-per-use or a subscription fee where the learner can pay for special education services such as additional learning materials, mentoring or research assistance. In fact, it is a set of cloud services and offers designed to assist education systems leverage predictive analytics to get real-time insights concerning learner and institutional performance, enhance researcher effectiveness and alleviate constrained lab resources for learning. This research extends the new technology acceptance based on Neural Network (NN) technique, which is traditionally based on the Structural Equation Model (SEM) technique. The findings of the NN model generally verify the results obtained by SEM.

The purpose of this study was to develop and test the adoption model for EaaS and then predict instructors’ and learners’ adoption of EaaS. The test results of SEM confirmed that the adoption model contains four factors including (1) Perceived usefulness (2) Service quality, (3) System quality, and (4) Information quality, which presented a good fit to the observed data from instructors’ and learners’ perspectives. It was also revealed that all four factors are important in adopting EaaS. Predictive adoption calculated with NN gave 72.9% accuracy, which provides good prediction to the adoption of EaaS.

The theoretical research proposes a set of factors that affect the adoption of EaaS. The distinctive research methodology involves the use of a multi-analytical two-step SEM-NN approach since SEM is only able to examine linear relationships; it may sometimes oversimplify the complexities involved in the human decision-making process (Leong et al., 2015). To solve this issue, NN is incorporated to identify the non-compensatory and non-linear relationships in the research model as it is able to learn complex linear and non-linear relationships. The significant determinants from SEM analysis were employed as input variables for NN analysis in order to confirm and predict the findings obtained by SEM. With this approach, the use of SEM-NN analysis can provide a more holistic understanding and have a significant methodological influence from a statistical point of view because NN analysis can complement the weakness of linear SEM analysis (Leong et al., 2015).