This study examined the effect of using computer simulation on students’ interest in algebra. A quasi-experimental design was employed. A sample of fifty-four students (age range: 12-14years old) drawn from two schools constituted the subjects for the study. Two JSS 2 classes in each school were assigned through balloting to experimental and control groups. The subjects were taught by their regular mathematics teachers that served as an assistant in the research. Both groups (experimental and control) were pre-and post-tested. The Algebra Interest Inventory (AII) was the instrument utilized for data collection for the study and it has a reliability coefficient of 0.76. Data collected were subjected to analysis using SPSS software. The mean and standard deviation were used for reporting the research questions and analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was for testing the hypotheses at .05 level of significance. Analysis of the results showed that the mean interest scores of students taught algebra with computer simulation was significantly higher than those taught with the conventional method. The result also showed that there was no significant difference between the mean interest scores of male and female students taught algebra with computer simulation. The study made some recommendations and one of them is that the use of computer simulation in mathematics lessons should be encouraged in the mathematics teaching and learning process especially as it arouses students’ interest.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The fact that mathematics is an important subject is not contested. Even an ordinary man on the street will agree to this fact. Indeed, mathematics is an important and mandatory subject for students at the primary, special education and secondary school levels (Federal Republic of Nigeria, 2013). In time past, mathematics scholars have recognized the causes of learning difficulties in mathematics. Some of these impediments students face when studying mathematics could be accredited to the following: tactics to which the mathematics contents are being taught to the students, overcrowded classroom, the abstract nature of mathematics concepts, absence of learning materials, poor foundation, strictness while teaching mathematics and lack of interest (Karigi et al., 2015; Jameel & Ali, 2016; Kumah et al., 2016; Wachira, 2016; Evans et al., 2019).

Interest is attention that is given to or received from an individual or something. Interest can be described as the concentrating of the sense organs on some person, activity, situation or object and it could either result or cause motivation (Essien et al., 2015). Kahu et al. (2017) stated that interest is conceived as a motivation and an emotion. Wong and Wong (2019) defined interest as the affective state of students being involved in mathematics teaching and learning process with enjoyment. Immediately the interest of students is fueled, they will maintain the temple to learn in as much as the mathematics tutor can sustain it. Therefore, interest is an attraction that compels students to react to a certain stimulus. In other words, students develop interest if a certain stimulus is appealing to them.

Interest is said to be a significant factor in the teaching and learning process because when an individual is interested in an activity, such an individual may likely perform positively well. Generally, there is a low interest in the study of mathematics and mathematics-related courses at all levels of education in Nigeria (Ugwuanyi, 2014). The low interest exhibited in mathematics could be a result of fear or anxiety. The anxiety learners have for mathematics causes them to lose interest in the subject. The chief examiner’s report of West Africa Examination Council (2017-2018) suggested that mathematics teachers should assist students to develop an interest in the subject and also help them improve in their achievement of mathematics by decreasing the abstractness, and by eliminating their indifference and fear of mathematics. To this end, researchers and mathematics scholars have come up with varieties of teaching methods educators of mathematics are utilizing in teaching mathematics, in an attempt to find out if they truly affect students’ interest in mathematics.

However, many instructional strategies have been proposed, such as learning by doing, guided inquiry, problem-solving and so on, but in Nigeria, emphasis is placed on the utilization of guided discovery instructional strategy (National Open University of Nigeria, 2006). Guided discovery is an activity-based instructional strategy that involves practical demonstration. During instruction, the mathematics teacher guides the learners by leading questions and materials for them to discover mathematical concepts. Despite this, the guided discovery instructional strategy, which was supposed to improve mathematics instruction, has not been satisfactorily utilized (Egara et al., 2019). Current studies about strategies students adopt to learn about science and science-related subjects are shown to be effective. One of such innovative instructional strategies is the computer simulation approach (see Akpan, 2002; Lunce, 2006; Tambade & Wagh, 2008, Odo & Odo 2016).

Computer simulation could be perceived as a computer programme that tries to simulate or imitate an abstract model of a system. Computer simulation as described by Akpan (2002) is a computer program inhibiting a manipulable model of a real or theoretical system. The computer simulation program (software) allows the learners to alter the state of the model to a required target state by ordering it across several intermediate states. As a result, the computer simulation program receives commands from the operator, the simulation programme alters the state of the model, and when appropriate the simulation programme displays the new state.

According to Ton and Wouter (2007), characteristics of educational computer simulations are:

1.
Model-Based: Computer simulations are based on a model. In other words, the calculations and rules working the simulation are programmed.

2.
Interactive: Students work interactively with a computer simulation's model to input information and then observe how the variables in the computer simulation change, based on the output.

3.
Interface-driven: The value changes to the influenced variables and the observed value changes in the output. As a result, the influenced variables are found in the computer simulation's interface.

4.
Scaffolded: Computer simulations designed for educational purposes should incorporate support features or scaffolds that would assist the learners in order to make the learning experience more valuable.

Egara et al. (2019) stated that there are three ways to use the computer for simulation activities: running a simulation programme on the computer – which is the major focus of this study; utilizing a simulation on the World Wide Web; an enhancing simulation with the computer. In other words, one can display images and pictures on the computer screen to add reality to many simulations. According to Lunce (2006), the purpose of computer simulation is primarily to motivate the students to involve in problem-solving. This author also stressed that computer simulation is based on an internal model of a real-world system or phenomena in which some elements have been simplified or omitted to facilitate learning. Computer simulations can be used in the classroom to help students to gain additional insight into the phenomena. Computer simulations are also beneficial for offering more extended practice in thinking about a wide variety of examples (Tambade & Wagh, 2008).

When compared to other modalities, computer simulations have several drawbacks. First, because computer simulations are frequently used in conjunction with problem-based learning methodologies, they encourage students to immerse themselves in a challenging scenario and try out various solutions (Heinich, et al., 1999). This form of learning may take a lot longer than other teaching approaches. Second, studies have demonstrated that "discovery learning" from computer simulations is ineffective without mentoring (Min, 2003; Heinich, et al., 1999). Third, constructivists claim that computer simulations oversimplify the intricacies of real-life circumstances and provide the learner with a false sense of security (Heinich, et al., 1999). Finally, the creation of computer simulations may necessitate extensive planning and significant expenditure of time and money. Another important variable of interest to this research is gender.

Gender signifies the socially structured roles, behaviours, activities and attributes that a particular society considered appropriate for men and women (World Health Organisation (WHO), 2011). These distinct roles and behaviours ascribed by the society or culture give rise to gender inequalities (WHO, 2011). Gender also means the cultural differences required by society/culture of men and women according to their sex (Oparanozie, 2016). Therefore, gender can be seen as a behavioural, social and cultural attribute associated with sex. In this study, it will be worthy to note the influence of gender on using computer simulation to arouse students’ interest in algebra.

Related works and Theoretical Basis
Computer simulation has been proven to be effective as applied in various areas of the discipline. For instance, Odo and Odo (2016), conducted a study on the effect of the simulation approach on secondary students’ interest in programming language and the result revealed that students taught with simulation achieved higher results over the taught without simulation. Nkemakolam et al. (2018) investigated the effect computer simulation would have on the academic achievement of students in chemistry and the study result showed that students taught computer simulation got higher achievement in chemistry than their counterparts taught with lecture method. Sreelekha (2018) conducted a study to determine the effectiveness of computer simulations on senior secondary school students’ achievements in practical skills in physics and the study revealed that students in the computer simulations group had a higher mean in achievement and acquisition of practical skills than their counterparts in the control group. Akhigbe and Ogufere (2019) conducted an experiment on the effect of computer simulation instructional strategy on students’ attitude and achievement in genetics and the findings revealed that the utilization of computer simulation as a pedagogical tool enhanced the achievement of students significantly and bolsters their attitude towards biology. Similarly, the findings also made known the instructional use of computer simulation improved the achievement of low ability learners who recorded higher mean gains than the medium and high ability groups respectively. Egara et al. (2019) conducted an experiment on the effectiveness of computer simulation on students’ achievement in algebra and the result of the study showed students who were taught algebra topics with computer simulation had higher mean achievement scores than their counterparts taught without computer simulation.

However, despite the significant results recorded in the studied areas and the advantages derived from computer simulation as outlined above, evidence shows that little or nothing has been done in the use of computer simulation as a teaching strategy in mathematics education and specifically in algebra as it affects students’ interest. Therefore, there is a need to investigate the effect of computer simulation on secondary school students’ interest in algebra, especially in male and female students.

Gender is an important factor to consider in this study. Duyilemi et al. (2014) conducted a study on the effects of computer simulation package on male and female students’ attitudes towards biology. They found no significant difference and concluded that both sexes benefited equally. In the study of Odo and Odo (2016), they reported that the male and female students showed the same positive interest levels in programming language when computer simulation was used. Akhigbe and Ogufere (2019) in their study on the effect of computer simulation instructional strategy on students’ attitude in genetics showed that male and female students exhibited the same positive attitude when taught with computer simulation. From the foregoing, it is clear that computer simulation improves the interests and attitudes of both male and female students. As a result, when computer simulation is employed, it is vital to determine whether male and female students responded similarly or differently to their interest in algebra.

This research is guided by Jerome Bruner's theory of instruction proposed in 1966 (Bruner, 1966). Bruner was interested in how different ways of thinking express and organize knowledge. Bruner hypothesized three modalities of representation in his studies on students’ intellectual development. Bruner's theory has three modes: Enactive (in which a person learns about the world by acts on objects); Iconic (in which a person learns about the world through models and pictures); and Symbolic (which refers to the ability to conceive abstractly).

Bruner's core idea for teaching and learning is that more effective learning requires a blend of concrete, visual, and symbolic activities. The teaching-learning process begins with a concrete experience, then move on to visuals, and lastly to symbolic representation. Bruner's theory can be used in mathematics teaching and learning in that it incorporates discovery, preparedness, intuition, and analytical language. As a result, it can be applied to motivate and inspire students to be curious, explorative, innovative, and to engage in self-discovery during the learning process. The computer simulation approach is developed in such a way that it ensures that students’ curiosity is aroused, and they can develop the skills of self-discovery and innovativeness.

Purpose of study
The major purpose of this research was to investigate the effect of computer simulation on students’ interest in algebra. The study specifically seeks to (1) determine the effect of computer simulation on the mean interest scores of students in algebra, and (2) determine the effect of computer simulation on the mean interest scores of male and female students.

Research questions
The following research question guided this study

1.
What are the mean interest scores of students taught with computer simulation and those taught with the conventional approach as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII)?

What are the mean interest scores of male and female students taught using computer simulation as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII)?
Hypotheses
The following hypotheses were formulated and tested at the 0.05 level of significance:

1.
There is no significant difference between the mean interest scores of students taught with computer simulation and those taught with the traditional method as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII).

2.
There is no significant difference between the mean interest scores of male and female students taught using computer simulation as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII).

Methods
Study Design and Sample
The quasi-experimental design was employed for the investigation. According to Nworgu (2015), a quasi-experiment is an experiment where the random assignment of subjects to experimental and control groups is not possible rather intact or pre-existing groups are utilized. The investigation was done in Isoko North Local Government Area Education Zone of Delta State. There are eighteen (18) secondary schools in Isoko North Local Government Area. Out of the 18 secondary schools, three (3) are single-sex schools comprising of two (2) males and one (1) female school while fifteen (15) are co-educational. The population of the study comprised of 2,520 Junior Secondary School Two (JSS 2) students in Isoko North Local Government Area Education Zone. The sample consisted of 54 students (age range: 12-14years old) drawn from two single-sex schools (male and female schools respectively). Individual students provided informed assent before participating in the study.

A purposive sampling technique was employed to sample 2 single sex schools. This is because only the two single-sex schools have computer facilities and electricity. The two schools selected had up to two streams of JSS 2 students and from each school, one class was chosen through simple random sampling with a flip of a coin to represent either the experimental or control groups. The data collection instrument used for the study was the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII) adapted from Math Interest Inventory developed by Snow (2011). The AII is a 20-item inventory that has a modified 4-point Likert-type scale. The scale’s response option consisted of; Strongly Agreed (4), Agreed (3), Disagree (2), and Strongly disagree (1). The instrument was validated by two experts in Mathematics Education and one in Measurement and Evaluation in the Department of Science Education from the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. The reliability of the instrument was determined utilizing Cronbach's Alpha method. The internal consistency of the AII was calculated to be 0.76 using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software.

Experimental procedure and data analysis
The experimental groups were taught utilizing the computer simulation approach whereas the control groups were taught the same topics using the conventional method by their regular mathematics teachers who served as research assistants for the study. The mathematics teachers received one-week training from the researchers on the use of computer simulation in teaching algebraic topics selected for the study. After the training programme, they were given lesson notes as a guide. Two lesson notes were prepared to be used for the study by the researchers, one for the experimental group and the other for the control group. The Algebra topics include Equations by the balance method, Equations with brackets and Equations with fractions. The lesson notes for the experimental group contained the demonstration using computer simulation software (Microsoft Math). The subjects were pretested and the PRE-AII was administered before the actual study. The actual teaching was done in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th week while the POST-AII was administered in the 5th week. The PRE-AII was reshuffled to give the items a different look and to avoid memory effect before its usage for the posttest. The scores from the posttest were recorded and used to provide information on students’ interests across gender and treatment groups. Data collected were used to report the research questions using mean (x¯¯¯) and standard deviation (SD) and formulated the hypotheses were tested at 0.05 level of significance utilizing analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). We used Mcgraw and Wong’s (1992) common language effect size (CLES) statistic to compute the effect size of the experiment. The CLES is based on the odds that a score randomly sampled from one distribution will be greater than a randomly sampled score from a second distribution (Dunlap, 1999).

Results
The results of the study are presented according to the research questions in Tables 1 and 2 while the test of hypotheses is presented in Tables 3 and 4.

Table 1 The mean interest scores of students taught algebra using computer simulation and the conventional approach
Full size table
Table 2 The mean interest score of male and female students taught algebra using computer simulation
Full size table
Table 3 Summary of ANCOVA result for AII
Full size table
Table 4 Summary of ANCOVA result for AII for male and female students taught with computer simulation
Full size table
Research Question 1
What are the mean interest scores of students taught with computer simulation and those taught with the conventional approach as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII)?

From Table 1, it is observed that the interest score of the experimental group had mean (x¯¯¯) score of 2.7407 and standard deviation score of 1.05948 in the pre-test (PRE-AII), and mean score (x¯¯¯) of 3.5926 and standard deviation score of 0.50071 in the post-test (POST-AII). For the students taught with the conventional method (control group), it was observed that they had mean (x¯¯¯) interest score of 2.4074 and standard deviation score of 0.93064 in the pre-test, and mean (x¯¯¯) interest score of 2.6667 and standard deviation score of 0.96077 in the post-test. The higher mean (x¯¯¯) interest score for the experimental group when compared to the control group indicate that the experimental group showed more interest in algebra content taught than the control group [effect size (CLES)=0.804].

Research Question 2
What are the mean interest scores of male and female students in the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII)?

Table 2 revealed that on one hand, the male students had mean (x¯¯¯) interest score of 3.5833 and standard deviation score of 0.51493 in the pre-test, and mean (x¯¯¯) score of 3.6667 and standard deviation score of 0.49237 in the post-test. On the other hand, their female counterparts had mean (x¯¯¯) interest score of 2.0667 and standard deviation score of 0.88372 in the pre-test, and mean (x¯¯¯) score of 3.5333 and standard deviation score of 0.51640 in the post-test [effect size (CLES)=0.574].

Hypothesis 1
There is no significant difference between the mean interest scores of students taught algebra with computer simulation and those taught with the conventional method as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII).

The result in Table 3 above showed that treatment was significant. Thus, the null hypothesis of no significant difference in the mean (x¯¯¯) interest scores of students taught algebra with computer simulation and their counterparts taught the same topics using the conventional approach was rejected.

Hypothesis 2
There is no significant difference between the mean interest scores of male and female students taught with computer simulation in algebra as measured by the Algebra Interest Inventory (AII).

The result in Table 4 showed that gender was not significant. Thus, the null hypothesis of no significant difference for gender was not rejected since it was not significant.

Discussion
This study aimed to examine the effect of using computer simulation on students’ interest in algebra. The result showed that there was a higher mean interest score for students taught with computer simulation compared to students taught with the conventional approach. Also, the first hypothesis determined whether there existed a significant difference in the mean interest scores of students taught algebra utilizing the computer simulation approach and their counterparts taught the same topics using the conventional approach. With regards to the hypothesis, the analysis in Table 3 showed that there was a significant difference in the mean interest scores of the students taught utilizing computer simulation. The finding is in agreement with the result of Odo and Odo (2016) whose study revealed that learners taught with computer simulation exhibited more interest in course contents than their counterparts taught using the conventional approach. The significant difference of between computer simulation group and the conventional approach group in the algebra topics taught could be attributed to the fact that the computer simulation approach could provide such properties as interaction. As such, the students participated actively and worked interactively with the computer simulation programme, thereby, increasing their interest and awareness in the lesson.

The result showed that gender was not significant at .598 which by implication means that male and female students exhibited an equal interest in algebra using computer simulation. This non-significant difference may be due to the effect of the simulation software used in the teaching of algebra. This simulation software motivated both male and female students in taking an active part in the learning process. The finding corroborates with the finding of Odo and Odo (2016) that both male and female students had the same positive interest towards course content when computer simulation was used. The finding also agrees with the findings of Duyilemi et al. (2014) and Akhigbe and Ogufere (2019) that male and female students exhibited an equal level of positive attitudes when computer simulation was used.

This research paper is not without limitations despite the positive result it has revealed. The researchers acknowledge that the sample size for this study was small and it incorporated only JSS 2 students of Isoko North Local Government Education Zone of Delta State, Nigeria. As a consequence of this, the study can be regarded as a preliminary one. Therefore, prospective studies have to incorporate large samples and inclusion of students from other classes or levels to determine if the results are generalizable. Another limiting factor is that the effect of using computer simulation on students’ interest in algebra was assessed utilizing only quantitative data. Prospective studies should incorporate the utilization of qualitative data such as structured interview schedules and students’ opinions. Another limitation of this study was not taking into consideration of the moderating effect of the demographic variables such as age and location. Prospective studies should as well delve into how the demographic variables may moderate the effect of computer simulation on secondary school students’ interest in algebra.

Given the findings of this study, the following recommendations are made. The use of computer simulation in algebra lessons should be advocated in schools by education authorities. The state and federal ministries of education should invest in massive acquisition and distribution of computers machines and mathematical software to secondary schools. There is a need for the establishment and equipment of Educational Resource Centres in each education zone of the state. Such Centres will provide avenues for the collection of computer simulations in various mathematics topics that are relevant and suitable in the teaching and learning of mathematics. Professional organizations like the Mathematical Association of Nigeria (MAN) should organize workshops, seminars and conferences to train mathematics teachers on the importance and usage of computer simulation in rousing students’ interest in mathematics.

Conclusion
The use of the computer simulation approach significantly enhanced students’ interest in algebra topics taught more than the conventional approach. This was observed in the mean interest score of the experimental group being higher than that of the control group. Gender had no significant influence on student interest in algebra topics taught. This implies that the superiority of computer simulation in fostering students’ interest in mathematics topics was the same for both male and female students.