Learning object oriented programming (OOP) has been a daunting and challenging task for students across tertiary institutions in Nigeria. Various literatures have suggested the use of technology as a way to improve students’ understanding of the subject. In this study, the overall aim is to investigate the effect of Imikode- a virtual reality (VR) game amongst students of higher educational institutions in Nigeria studying object oriented programming courses and whether there is a positive correlation in their understanding of the subject on one hand and also an improvement in their programming skills on the other hand. First year computer science students across tertiary institutions in Nigeria were recruited to play the game after which the usefulness, satisfaction and ease of use questionnaire was administered. The results of the survey showed a positive correlation in their understanding of the subject and a further booster in their programming skills. Furthermore, the qualitative data analyzed showed how the Imikode tool motivated students in learning OOP concepts and thus, enabling more engagement with the technology as a veritable tool for learning OOP concepts.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Virtual Reality (VR) games have been used as teaching and learning tools since the early twenty-first century. The growth of simulation games, particularly VR games was recognized by prior studies in different field of studies, such as training in healthcare industry (Wang et al, 2016), drills and training in mechanical training (Curry et al., 2015) and awareness for emergency training (Feng et al., 2018). VR games enable individual training in a new process where the skills are the keys to achieving innovation (Ferguson et al., 2020). The situations which are impossible or difficult to be performed in the real world can be done via VR and increase motivations for people to learn new topics that they will not be focusing (Davidekova et al., 2017). VR has been turned to be a part of learning, for instance robots are being controlled remotely in assembling and production works, simulating surgical process, flying training for pilots, lecture-based learning or e-learning which are suitable to apply VR in education.

There are three important aspects related to VR, which are visual realism, interaction and immersion. The surroundings with virtual technologies and tools allow immersion created for the users, by using virtual glasses, gloves with movement sensors. At the same time, VR also simulates the physical presence of the user in a virtual context, and creates a 3D spatial immersive experience when the users perceive it to a simulated world (via VR game) (Martin-Gutierrex et al., 2017). Real-time interaction is necessary so that the users receive on-time feedback of their movements, positions and sensations. Visual, aural, and haptic output devices should create a realistic illusion and virtual scenario. Hence, virtual technologies have the potential of enabling students to feel more motivated and committed.

Unlike conventional instructions for programming learning, VR is motivating and students may have an attitude that is positive towards utilizing VR in the process of learning. VR technology increases students’ engagement and immersion as a result of the challenging and exciting way of manipulating, interacting and creating objects in a virtual environment, which allows visualizing objects and processes. Moreover, constructivist approach can be integrated in programming learning via a holistic student-centered learning experience since they are main performers when practicing and experimenting with virtual objects in VR games (Winn et al., 2002). VR games also encourage students to become active learning because decision-making skills can be promoted when students interact with the virtual environment, autonomous exploration, learning by doing, creating new experiences and understanding concepts complexity (Martin-Gutierrex et al., 2017).

Indeed, there are a lot of studies on development and application of educational games which is aimed at boosting up students’ motivation and engagement when they learn. Active engagement and immersed in a learning activity have revealed that they are beneficial for learning. The engagement and immersive environment facilitate exploration; students acquire knowledge via their experience. However, the acceptance of VR games in students’ learning may have some challenges due to fact that these games have complex user interfaces (Virvou & Katsionis, 2008). Furthermore, there are some issues like unwillingness to change from conventional learning environments to integrated educational innovations, lecturers’ resistance to adopt new technologies out of their safe shelter, as well as the development and maintenance costs of these technologies (Martin-Gutierrex et al., 2017). The utilization of VR is more affordable and feasible for institutions of higher learning, therefore it is pertinent to explore and understand the advantages and disadvantages of using VR technology, particularly VR games in Object Oriented Programming Learning from the students’ acceptance level.

In this research, our focus is to investigate the effect of virtual reality technology such as the Imikode VR tool on students’ understanding of object oriented programming concepts in Nigeria’s context. Hence we pose the following research questions:

1.
What is the effect of utilizing Imikode VR tool in learning object oriented programming concepts?

2.
How does Imikode VR game motivate student in OOP learning?

We structure other sections as follows: Section 2 talks about the review of related literature. While Section 3 discusses the research design, Section 4 discusses the result of the study, Section 5 is all about the discussion of the findings and finally Section 6 talks about the conclusion and future direction of the research.

Literature Review
Virtual Reality (VR)
The advent of highly immersive virtual reality technology can be traced back to the 1960’s, designed to captivate audience attention (Merchant et al., 2014). VR has since then been applied to various fields and disciplines. For instance, Nedel et al., (2016) designed and use VR simulators to assess capability for safe behavior among workers. Chittaro and Buttussi (2015) utilized VR to educate passengers about aviation safety, simulating a serious aircraft emergency experience with the goal of surviving it. The study of Feng et al. (2010) also used VR to find a solution for the problem of scene investigation and reconstruction, to promote the development of criminal technology, observe crime scene from multi-angle and improve the efficiency and the accuracy of judgment. Some other fields of VR application include engineering (Vergara et al., 2017; Wolfartsberger, 2019), business (Farshid et al., 2018; Loureiro, et al., 2019), tourism (Adachi et al., 2020; Yung & Khoo-Lattimore, 2019), agriculture (Jimenez et al., 2021; Zang et al, 2010) among others.

While VR has been adopted across fields, it has been widely utilized in the educational sphere. A recent study by Pottle (2019) asserts that VR is a powerful educational tool for defined learning objectives and implementation. In the same vein, Román-Ibáñez et al., (2018) asserts that VR technologies have been in existence for long to support the teaching–learning process in articles of educational scope. This is also corroborated by the systematic review findings of Kavanagh et al., (2017) that indicates virtual reality increases the intrinsic motivation of students and refer to a narrow range of factors such as constructivist pedagogy, collaboration, and gamification in the design of their experiences. The utilization of VR has become widespread across all educational levels from K-12 (Alfadil, 2020; Fransson et al, 2020) to higher education institutions (HEIs) (Cook et al., 2019; Ogbuanya & Onele, 2018) which is connected with advent of new and more efficient technologies (Román-Ibáñez et al., 2018). Conclusively, a meta-analysis on VR effectiveness on the performance of both K-12 and HEIs shows an improvement in learning.

Even though VR has been in existence in education realm for over a century, its widespread adoption is still yet to occur (Kavanagh et al., 2017). Similarly, Oyelere et al., (2020) found in a recently conducted systematic review study that there is absence of VR educational games on the African continent. This suggests more research and contribution to knowledge especially in the developing context, especially Africa, hence the need for the present study utilizing Nigerian HEIs students. This study focuses specifically on the effect of VR game in learning object-oriented programming (OOP) in Nigeria. The remainder of this section is made up of three sub-sections which include brief review on the challenges and potentials of using VR for teaching and learning, VR game in tertiary education and VR adoption in teaching and learning OOP concepts.

Challenges of Teaching and Learning OOP Concepts
Object oriented paradigm revolves around the creation of objects by modeling real life objects such as cars, houses, computers, students, airplanes e.t.c. which facilitates the design, development and deployment of complex software systems which is used in today’s world. However, with the enormous capability of this great technology; it has since become difficult for students to grasp the intrinsic properties of this new domain. For example, in a research conducted by Sunday et al. (2020); the authors discovered a high rate of failure in object oriented programming courses and found out that the reasons for the massive failure which has led many students to drop out of the computer science programme were manifold. One particular reason that stood out was that objects been created using either python or the java language was never seen unlike the real life objects they encounter on daily basis. This abstract creation of object usually pose a challenge when undertaking the following task: creation of object using the new keyword, object initialization, function calls, method invocation and garbage collection. According to the researchers, new technology that will expose the students to the visual concept of objects will go a long way of creating a mental picture of objects in their memory which will facilitate code creation. A study conducted by Oroma et al., (2012) discovered that students spend more energy and time writing simple OOP programs and these category of students often found it difficult getting the syntax right especially when using objects to invoke methods. This was collaborated by Winslow (1996) in his research. According to him, it usually takes 10 years for a novice programmer to become an expert in the field; this is because the syntax, semantics and flow structure of OOP usually does not favour rote memorization but in understanding of the concept.

With the above stated challenges and difficulty often experienced by students at tertiary institutions in Nigeria studying introductory programming courses, the authors of this paper decided to deploy the VR tool to support students understanding of the concepts and improve their skill set.

Challenges and Potentials of Using VR for Teaching and Learning OOP
By comparing VR to pedagogical practices and theories, Bricken identified three challenges: costs, usability and technology fear (Bricken, 1991). Huang et al., (2016) identified the attribute of the individual understanding and willingness to integrate the technology into their learning as a challenge. Even though OOP is fit in the construction of large and complex software, teachers consider OOP's teaching difficult, and so students find it difficult to understand (Kölling & Rosenberg, 2001).

Even with all the development, VR still has to overcome numerous education challenges in general (Sipilä, 2020). Language issues may also be problematic, mainly if VR is designed for younger people's education. This is because most apps use English as their language, which is related to a general lack of content. Hence, this might be a bigger problem for children that are young and still a challenge for students that are older (Fransson et al., 2020). According to Rasheed et al., (2015) disorders are also a problem that can affect learning. Besides, they emphasized that even orthography errors can influence the learning process.

The initial learning barriers associated with new technology are always present. Understanding virtual reality and the various VR apps used will take some time for both teachers and students (Fransson et al., 2020). They emphasized that switching between different VR devices and applications can still be challenging. However, the majority of mainstream VR devices are designed for entertainment and typically necessitate a high level of skill to operate as suggested by (Jensen & Konradsen, 2018). As a result, using VR devices will require the teacher's technical expertise to utilize the device, let alone use it in teaching. Furthermore, professional assistance and time will be needed to learn virtual reality equipment and apps by the teachers before deploying them in the classroom (Fransson et al., 2020).

Several authors have reported the potentials of using VR technology for teaching and learning of OOP concepts, we briefly discuss some of them.

According to Segura et al. (2020) VR aids in the development of algorithmic thinking and attracts people to the world of programming. The VR prepares students to adapt to future technological discoveries and inventions which will in turn necessitate their exposure to new environments (Abulrub et al., 2011; Liang, 2019). According to Chuah et al., (2010), Lee and Wong (2008), virtual reality enables on-demand, real-time visualization and interactive features across various 3D virtual worlds that are incredibly alike to scenarios in the real-world.

In the research carried out by Halabi (2020), he stated that VR improves the cumulative project grade, while also increasing student engagement and motivation and achieving better course outcomes. He also stated that when compared to the traditional approach, the VR approach improved communication and problem-solving skills. According to Bell and Fogler (2004), when VR is integrated into modern-day education, it provides a new method of reaching out to higher number of students and also provides educators with new tool. The VR will motivate, enhance and encourage students to participate in certain events while also providing students the opportunity to learn (Bricken, 1991; Shim et al., 2003). Hussein and Nätterdal (2015) believe the VR has a unique method of providing virtual information that cannot be reproduced by other instruments used in education today. VR can offer a great deal of help for students and educators when used in the proper context. A study conducted by Freina and Ott (2015) found that VR is most useful in difficult or not physically experienced situations. These included traveling to historical periods or places that were impossible, such as space and planets.

In a virtual environment better suited to the context, teachers could present their teaching (Allison, 2008). Theoretically, we could have an unlimited number of equipment and devices of all kinds in a VR environment. Students can use their skills to develop new VR environment competencies; although it is imperative to stress that the process is not entirely the same in real and virtual worlds (Jiang et al., 2018). According to them, virtual reality practice is safe and can easily be replicated in experiments. There may also be a particularly dangerous or ethically problematic situation and training in VR without risk (Freina & Ott, 2015).

In this study the authors presented an Imikode VR technology to students studying introductory programming courses across some institutions in Nigeria in order to address the challenges just highlighted. This VR game was designed with an easy to use user interface. Several interesting OOP concepts such as method overloading, method overriding, function invocation, object creation and garbage collection amongst others were incorporated into the VR design considering the students peculiar challenges with regards to OOP concepts. The game was also designed with easy to understand steps during game play and finally the ease in creating functions by using a humanoid character in the 3D environment was apt thus, enabling users to quickly take control of the virtual environment in learning OOP concepts as much as possible. In particular, the VR game was able to address the aspect of object creation, method invocation, method overload/overriding, function creation and garbage collection. When the students create object in the 3D environment, the object appears and the students get the feeling of how OOP functions behind the hood. This mental picture often keeps the students going when it comes to code creation.

VR game in Tertiary Education
As mentioned earlier, VR technologies have been applied in many sectors with the rapid emergence of smartphones, including education. Educational institutions have benefited from VR technology, which makes the possibility to teach in a virtual environment, that is impossible to visualize the physical classroom, such as virtual laboratories, visualize machine, industrial plants, and even in medical context such as surgical processes (Martin-Gutierrex et al., 2017). The easier way to access this technology makes the potential to break the boundaries of formal education in schools. VR has been taught in learning management system (MOODLE), in which students explored practical ways of developing virtual environments and applications in Unity 3D, worked with panoramic camera and created mixed reality and augmented reality via this course (Vostinar et al., 2021). VR gaming enables students to experience being in a 3D environment which facilitates interaction during playing of games.

twenty-first century skills are vital fundamentals in the learning process, which are critical thinking, creativity, problem-solving skills (Gretter & Yadav, 2016). Thus, there is an application of VR in educational and training settings, which are capable of engaging and motivating students, it also assist students in cognitive process and knowledge transfer (Araiza-Alba et al., 2021). From the prior studies, VR improves academic performance, motivation, and cognitive skills of students (Araiza-Alba et al., 2020). Furthermore, VR also works as a veritable tool for learning and practicing problem-solving skills, because of the VR’s ability to present the information in a more realistic manner and further stimulate the senses of the student, less cognitive load on students’ minds, understand and remember information that is presented via VR. Besides that, VR game, named VR-ENGAGE was utilized to teach geography via a virtual reality adventure game (Virvou et al., 2002). VR games are among the most popular games for kids and adults. These researchers have studied the likeability, usability, and effectiveness of VR games. They also found that usability problems of VR games may distract students from the main educational goals of the VR games (Virvou & Katsionis, 2008). Another VR game, for teaching educational environmental narrative also offer high-fidelity and rich environments which are interactive and immersive storytelling experience for teaching purposes (Ferguson et al., 2020).

Adopting VR in Teaching and Learning OOP Concepts
A two game modules for object-oriented programming (OOP) and binary search teaching was developed by Stigall and Sharma (2017) in which their result shows that approximately 75 percent of students found the OOP module easy to use, and 92 percent believed it is adequate to help them learn OOP. The result of the study conducted by Sharad et al. (2015) on a game-based instruction module to teach student OOP have shown that the students increased their understanding of OOP concepts and found the module easy to use.

For object-oriented analysis and design learning, Inayat et al., (2016) introduced a multidimensional (3D) game. The research shows that students learned through practical experience using the proposed 3D games, eventually improving their learning result and their knowledge of software process concepts, which they found propitious when they concluded the project. Similarly, Iordan and Panoiu (2010); Agbo et al., (2020) used Unified Modelling Language (UML) to develop a smart learning environment scenario-based requirement for concept learning within the VR environment.

According to Pan et al. (2006), applications of virtual learning environment (VLE), in particular for events for which the conventional notion of education has proved inappropriate or challenging, maybe a means to increase, motivate and encourage students' understanding. By incorporating Video Capture VR technology into a classroom, Yang et al. (2010) designed and developed a physically interactive learning environment, the PILE system. The findings showed a significant positive effect on the long-term learning of students. The surveys showed that the system has enhanced the learning motivation of the study students and the short Feedback Questionnaire (SFQ).

The virtual reality desktop has been shown to positively affect academic achievement, student learning, and student engagement in electronics technology. To enhance laboratory learning and teaching of electronics technology in Nigerian universities, they suggested the adoption of virtual reality (Ogbuanya & Onele, 2018). A research by Hamza and Home (2006) examines current developments in VR technologies and describes an integrated approach in the academic curriculum of integrated environment students. The study shows the clear commitment to providing the foundation for a broader collaborative working environment when current VR technologies are appropriately integrated within the built-in academic environment.

In practice, learning occurs via repeated actions under certain conditions, leading to an objective sought after a short repeat (Schunk, 2012). In this kind of teaching, VR can help since it provides an environment for repeat applications. Of course, learning can also occur in the actual world, but VR provides an environment even if physical or other constraints may limit education (Alfaro et al., 2019). For instance, in remote teaching with the VR simulated classroom, it could be well used with VR teachers. The HMDs offer an immersive first-person experience which eliminates interference factors and makes VR a tool that is unique for constructivist teaching (Alfaro et al., 2019).

Regardless of the teaching method or learning theory employed, the use and the adoption of VR offer several benefits.

Research Design
In this study, our focus is to investigate the effect of virtual reality game- Imikode for computing education in Nigeria context. A recent survey on the use of VR in learning objected oriented programming in the Department of Computer Science in a Nigerian public university shows that more than 90 percent of the students are not aware that VR game could be used in enhancing their programming skills and further boosting their academic performance in a programming class. Hence we structure this section as follows: The first section is about the research model and hypothesis. The second section involves the preliminary usage of the VR game in class, the third section talks about the implementation environment and the final section involves the design of an object oriented VR game.

Proposed Research Model & Hypotheses
In this section our proposed research model & hypotheses is presented. Figure 1 represents the research model investigated in this study which is an extension of the research instrument where the four constructs of the USE questionnaire were used to gather data from the students in order to study the effect of the VR tool on student’s understanding of programming and to know whether there is a positive relationship between the VR game and its acceptability by the students. We hypothesized that positive relationship exist between the utilization of the VR game and students’ understanding of object oriented programming.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Proposed Research Model

Full size image
Preliminary Usage of VR for Computing Education
In this section the researchers explored the usage of VR game in a class room setting. A total of one fifty three (153) computer science students comprising 103 students from the North West region of the country and 50 students from the North East region undertaking introductory programming courses participated in playing the Imikode VR game. A brief lecture on basic object oriented programming concepts and use of VR technology to first-year computing students was delivered in each institution, the researchers also discussed the configuration of smartphones on the VR headset and also taught the students the very act of playing the VR game in a simulated environment which all lasted for 30 min. After the lecture, the student posed some questions in order to be clarified on some discussed issues during the lecture such as “what is a simulated environment”, “how will a student create an object in the simulated environment”; “what happens if an object dies in the virtual environment” and finally “how do I clear the items on the white board if I make a mistake during the process of creating an object or initializing a variable in the virtual environment?” the lecturer went ahead and discussed the answers to the questions raised by the students. To the first question, he explained that a student can create an object by instantiating the object using the new keyword which is followed by a call to a constructor which typically initializes the new created object in the virtual environment. However, a student will click on any item he/she feels is the correct option in a virtual space and it is appended automatically to the whiteboard; this will continue until the correct object is created which typically appears in the simulated environment. To the third question, he explained that when an object dies; it is collected by the garbage collector which is a process by which automatic memory management is performed. In this instance, unused objects are deleted in order to free up space in memory. To the final question, the lecturer explained that if a student commits an error in the process of object creation or variable declaration, such student simply clicks on an empty space in the whiteboard in order to clear the board and restart the process. After the question and discussion session which lasted for 45 min, the students then took turns to play the Imikode VR game and this lasted for two weeks (30 min per student) due to the limited number of the VR headset. After the game play by each student, the USE questionnaire was administered and filled by the students in order to gather data regarding their experiences of the VR technology in learning object oriented programming and this also lasted for two weeks (15 min per student). It should be noted however, that the participation of the students in this task was voluntary as no incentive was given to the student for playing the game and filling the questionnaire. Figure 2 shows the procedure of the research while Fig. 3 shows the students learning object oriented programming by playing the VR game and finally, Fig. 4 shows the snapshots of the VR headset, the Bluetooth controller and the Smartphone device been used by the students.

Fig. 2
figure 2
The procedure of the research (Sunday et al., 2021)

Full size image
Fig. 3
figure 3
Imikode VR technology been used to learn OOP concept using VR headset

Full size image
Fig. 4
figure 4
a-c: Snapshots of the VR headset together with the bluetooth controller and smartphone device

Full size image
In Fig. 3a, the students played the Imikode VR game in a class room setting in order to enhance their skills and knowledge in programming. Other students however, were glued to their phones viewing the game & taking notes of their observations while waiting for their turn to play the game. Similarly, Fig. 3b depicts the playing of Imikode VR game by some students during their leisure period just for the fun of it. This is because the Imikode VR game was designed with simplicity which was factored into its design coupled with the ease of use of the game in such a way that students could also learn programming anywhere without been guarded by an instructor.

Figure 4a shows the VR headset together with the bluetooth controller. The controller is used for controlling events in the simulated world. Figure 4b shows the process of inserting the Smartphone into the headset for proper usage while Fig. 4c shows both the VR headset, the Smartphone device mounted in its casing and the bluetooth controller.

Implementation Environment
The VR game used in this study was designed with the following features:

Smartphone:

Processor: Octa core[2.0 GHz]

RAM: 3[GB]

OS: Android SDK

Game Software:

Unity 3D

Language:

C#

Design of an Object Oriented VR game
VR game is becoming popular in educational institutions as a means of boosting the academic performances of students. In our research we designed the Imikode VR game in order to boost the programming skills of students with respect to object oriented programming which is now the building block of sophisticated software which is been used in today’s world. A recent survey we conducted among students in tertiary institution shows that students without adequate grasp of the fundamentals of object oriented programming performed poorly in programming courses hence the VR game was designed based on this fundamental concept of OOP. The steps in the design process is presented in Table 1. 

Table 1 Steps in the Design Process
Full size table
The flow chart of the game is represented in Fig. 5 while Fig. 6 & Fig. 7 show the representation of some scenes in the game.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Flow chart of the VR game

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure 6
A. Welcome interface B. Variable assignment C. Object instantiation

Full size image
Fig. 7
figure 7
A. Function call (fox.walk()) B. Function call (fox.die()) C. Method getters

Full size image
Figure 6a shows the first interface of the Imikode VR game which is an empty virtual environment with a welcome message prompting a user to click using the bluetooth controller in order to be launched into another environment. Figure 6b shows the variable assignment where students learnt how to assign a value to a variable while Fig. 6c presents object instantiation where students learnt how to create an object using the new keyword. It should be noted however, that the created objects appear in the virtual environment similar to the real objects we face in our natural environment as displayed in the figures. What is more, Fig. 7a shows a function call on the created object thus making the Fox to walk. However, in Fig. 7b, we displayed Java’s garbage collection mechanism such that a function call was invoked on the created object in order to dispose it and reclaim memory space. Finally, Fig. 7c presents the getters function in which students learnt how to get the position of a particular object in the virtual world.

Results
The Effect of Imikode VR Game on Students Understanding of OOP Concepts
In order to support further analysis of the research hypotheses, the researchers administered a 7 point Likert USE questionnaire to undergraduate computer science students across tertiary institutions in Nigeria. This quantitative research method utilized was designed according to the USE questionnaire of Lund (2001) and has 30 items. The four construct of the USE questionnaire include usefulness, ease of use, ease of learning and satisfaction. There is provision for open ended questions in the questionnaire just below the 30 items in order to provide qualitative data which will be juxtaposed with the quantitative approach so as to have a well rounded and refined outcome. It should be noted however, that the students were properly guided on how to fill this questionnaire according to their experiences in playing the VR game. After analysis, our results from the two institutions show that over 80 percent of the students confessed that their programming skills have been greatly improved as a result of playing the VR game and have agreed to accept it as a way to further improve their skills. This is evident in both the qualitative and quantitative feedback received. Table 2 shows the reliability statistics using the cronbach's alpha while Table 3 shows the student responses, where each student provided feedback using the open ended question in the questionnaire. Furthermore, all the constructs according to the regression analysis we conducted shows a positive correlation among them. The validity analysis performed further shows that all construct satisfies the validity criteria as all constructs exceeded the threshold of 0.7. While the reliability analysis conducted on the constructs displays a great satisfaction of reliability as the Cronbach’s alpha shows that all variables exceeded the minimum threshold of 0.7 thus suggesting a satisfactory level of reliability.

Table 2 Reliability Statistics
Full size table
The result of our research shows that the students across the tertiary institutions under consideration alluded to the fact that their understanding of programming concepts were enhanced through the very act of playing the Imikode VR game as shown in Fig. 8 where the average score was 0.85. In this figure, all the constructs of the USE questionnaire used in gathering data across tertiary institutions in Nigeria provided greater insight on enhancement of students learning. This is evident as the correlation scores for each construct exceeded the benchmark of 0.7. This is in tandem with extant literature reviews conducted where authors came to the conclusion that deploying VR technology in education goes a long way in improving the academic results of students.

Fig. 8
figure 8
Correlation value for the research model

Full size image
How does Imikode VR game motivate student in OOP learning?
We attempt to proffer solution to this research question by analyzing the qualitative feedback form of the USE questionnaire. We therefore, present the feedback form in Table 3 which we grouped into the various USE variables in the first instance. In the second instance, we present the OOP concepts, Traditional Approach, VR intervention and student assessment (see Table 4).

Table 3 Positive Feedback from the students
Full size table
According to Table 3, the students responses as captured using the open ended questions show that the students in each region were satisfied with the technology as a means of improving their skills and performances in programming; besides, the general acceptance of the VR game by the students further alluded to the fact that more of such games are needed in Nigeria’s tertiary institutions in order to bridge the skills gap among students. Table 4 shows the various OOP concepts, the traditional approach of coding, VR intervention and student assessment on the VR technology.

Table 4 OOP concepts, Traditional Approach, VR intervention and student assessment
Full size table
Table 4 clearly shows the responses of the students with regards to using the VR technology in learning OOP concepts. From the table, the students described the VR intervention technique as a way to enhance their understanding of OOP concepts which usually pose a challenge to them during classes. Furthermore, their understanding of these concepts especially the area of method overriding/overloading was greatly enhanced using this technology. In fact, some of the students got more understanding with method overloading/overriding which would have been difficult ordinarily. Furthermore, they alluded to the fact that in creating an overloaded method, studying the syntax and using such syntax in the VR environment goes a lot way in enhancing their coding prowess. This has made a lot of students to be syntax conscious simply because, the Imikode VR device relies on a well formulated syntax in order to visualize any created object/invoked method. In addition, the very act of having the syntax right all the time has motivated them to frequently study the syntax of coding before using the device. This has further enabled them to acquire great skills in programming.

It should be noted that these concepts are fundamental to the learning of OOP concepts and the success or failure of any student in a programming class (OOP) at advance level often depends on their understanding of these basic concepts. However, like every other technology which has some drawbacks; we present some setbacks/shortcomings of the VR technology in Table 5 as captured using the questionnaire.

Table 5 Draw backs of the VR technology
Full size table
From Table 5; it is clear that both regions alluded to the same setbacks of this technology. It is worthy to note that most of the student’s responses regarding the setbacks apply to the use of the VR headset and not the application per se. However, we are confident to categorically state that the positive effect of using this technology clearly outweigh the setbacks. Besides, only five students from each region responded to the open ended question as others were fully satisfied with it.

From the USE questionnaire in Table 6; it is very clear that the questionnaire contains both qualitative and quantitative data items. This Mixed method of data collection provides a well rounded and refined data acquisition (Hariyanto et al., 2020). We also present the various constructs against the various items stated and also the 7- point Likert scale was also represented for each of the questions with the aid of a radio button where a student will have to choose only one option as his/her choice and finally, there is also a section ‘N/A’ representing ‘Not Applicable’ in the item under consideration.

Table 6 The USE Questionnaire under study
Full size table
Discussion
This study investigated the effect of playing Imikode VR game by first year computing students in tertiary institutions in the North West and North East region of Nigeria in learning object oriented programming. As a result of the general lack of awareness on the effect of VR technology on students learning behavior as depicted in earlier survey and the massive failure of programming courses as carried out by Sunday et al. (2020) which has led several students to drop out of the computer science program; the authors decided to intervene by presenting an Imikode VR game designed to facilitate the learning of OOP concepts and to further investigate this approach on students understanding of OOP concepts. The authors presented the USE questionnaire to gather both quantitative and qualitative feedback from the students on whether there is an improvement in their understanding of the subject under consideration. It should be noted however, that the authors used the convenience sampling technique to gather data for the research. This means, the students willingly gave their consent to use the device and fill the USE questionnaire which has already been validated using exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis by (Sunday et al., 2021). Furthermore, they also validated the scale using composite reliability and average variance extracted (AVE). To answer the research questions, the authors analyzed both the qualitative and quantitative feedbacks of the students after they must have played the Imikode VR game and filled the USE questionnaire which lasted for 30 min per students. The result of our analysis shows that the cronbach alpha values for the USE questionnaire satisfied the reliability scale of 0.7 (see Table 2). Furthermore, the result of our hypothesis shows an enhanced understanding of OOP concepts by the very act of playing the Imikode VR game as the average score happens to be 0.85 (see Fig. 8). In addition, the qualitative feedback analyzed in order to answer the second research question shows that the VR technology was able to tackle the difficulties been experienced by the students. Difficulties such as object creation, method invocation, method overloading/overriding, constructors, garbage collection were demystified through the use of the device. In fact, the VR device served as a practical environment where students formed the habit of learning the syntax of programming so as to practice their skills using the VR device. This is because the syntax of coding is necessary in order to use the device as the created object in the virtual world will not appear until the syntax is coded rightly in the simulated world. This kind of approach usually motivates students to further updates their coding skills before using the device so as not to spend too much time trying to get the syntax right when using the Imikode VR tool. After a successful game play, the students would now be so acquainted with the coding syntax and will find it difficult to forget what they have learned as a result of the mental picture they visualize anytime they code.

Conclusion and Future work
In this research, the authors presented Imikode VR game to students in tertiary institutions in Nigeria and we allowed them to play the game for 30 min (per student). We adopted the USE questionnaire in order to gather both qualitative and quantitative data following the path of Pierre et al., (2020), Lund (2001) and Hariyanto et al., (2020). The VR game developed by Bouali et al., (2019) was used to test the hypotheses. The reason the Imikode VR game was chosen for this study was the features it embodied such as a sleek user interface, incorporation of several interesting OOP concepts such as method overloading, method overriding, function invocation, object creation and garbage collection amongst others. The game was also designed with easy to understand steps during game play and finally the ease in creating functions by using a humanoid character in the 3D environment was apt thus, enabling users to quickly take control of the virtual environment in learning OOP concepts as much as possible. The result of the hypotheses shows a general acceptance of the Imikode VR game in enhancing teaching and learning of programming courses with respect to OOP across the selected tertiary institutions in Nigeria. What is more? the students alluded to the fact that their programming skills were greatly enhanced anytime they play the Imikode VR game as it gives them a feeling of what object oriented programming really is. Our target in this study however, is not to use VR technology to supplant classroom teaching of OOP concepts but as an additional means of deriving more insight of OOP concept. Our next line of action will be to deploy the game with more advance features such as artificial intelligence integrated with more advance OOP concept in order to analyze erroneous statements and provide real time feedback during the learning process.