This systematic review provides an overview of existing evidence regarding the effect of touchscreen technology on young children’s learning. Using PRISMA principles, we identified 53 studies in our review. The literature generally advocated positive effects of touchscreen devices on young children’s learning with 34 studies reporting positive effects, 17 studies obtaining mixed findings, and 2 articles reporting negative effects. The factors/conditions of touchscreens affected young children's learning were classified into five categories including app features/contents, applied pedagogical approach, adult mediation, instructional grouping, and child age and previous experience/familiarity with touchscreens. Our finding has implications for different stakeholders by giving them insights into the impact of touchscreen devices on young children’s learning under different conditions.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Technological advancements in the 21st century have created a remarkable shift in learning experiences for young children (Kim et al., 2021; Kucirkova et al., 2019). The ubiquity of technologies in our daily lives has exposed children to a wide array of digital devices from an early age. This high exposure has turned the 21st century children to digital natives who naturally use technologies as the components of their everyday lives in both formal and informal settings (Sharkins et al., 2016). According to a nationwide survey conducted in the U.S. in 2017, 98% of children aged 0-8 years had access to mobile devices in their home environment, and 42% of them owned their personal tablets. These rates indicate the high popularity of digital devices, especially touchscreen devices, among young children (Holloway et al., 2013).

The lightweight design and tactile‐based digital interface of touchscreens allow even very young children to interactively engage with the digital content (Plowman et al., 2012). Moreover, the potentials of touchscreens to facilitate personalized, flexible, and mobile learning experiences, as well as individualized assessment and rich communication (Mehdipour & Zerehkafi, 2013), have led to the introduction of these devices into school settings for educational purposes (McLean, 2016). The increasing uptake of touchscreens by young children both in formal and informal settings highlights the importance of giving special consideration to the effects of these technologies on early childhood learning.

To provide an overview of the existing evidence regarding the impact of touchscreen devices on early childhood learning and shed light on the current research trend in the field, it is required to conduct a systematic review. In our systematic review, the research questions include: (1) What are the trends of research on touchscreen technology and early childhood learning? 2) What is the effect of touchscreen technology on early childhood learning?, and 3) What factors/conditions account for the variability in obtaining the optimal learning outcomes during young children's learning with touchscreen devices?

Literature review
Technologies have an undeniable role in twenty-first century education. Further, since the twenty-first century children are experiencing a fast-changing era of digital technologies and are grown up as digital natives, the consideration of these shifts in education is a matter of significant importance, especially in early childhood literacy. The high exposure of the young generation to a wide array of technologies has made a great shift in their learning experiences and resources. Thus, there is a need for the reconsideration of the traditional model of education involving the transmission of knowledge (Harrell & Bynum, 2018) to keep this young net generation engaged and equip them with 21st century skills.

Constructivism has been widely recognized as a framework to address the importance of active participation of the learners including young children in a discovery-oriented process within an authentic meaningful setting (Bruner, 1977). To support these main tenets of constructivism, affordances of technologies has been reported in the literature (e.g., Reeves et al., 2017). The integration of technology into educational settings is ascribed to the process of utilizing the potentials of technological tools and resources to improve and support the teaching and learning processes.

Touchscreen devices provide unique opportunities for learning via physical experience and/or actions by allowing for sensorimotor interactions and physical manipulation of the items displayed on the screen (Wang et al., 2016). During the past decade, there has been a growing body of studies aiming to explore the impacts and potentials of touchscreen devices for young children's learning. Cordes and Miller (2000) argued that digital technologies could negatively affect children’s academic achievement and communication with other children. They noted that the use of digital technologies by young children could influence their intellectual skills, such as creativity and language development, resulting in poor concentration and imagination.

Concerns about the screen time and nature of digital media (e.g., violent contents) and their effects on children's sleep quality and behaviors are also addressed in the literature (Garrison & Christakis, 2012; Vijakkhana et al., 2015). The American Academy of Pediatrics (2009) has warned about the exposure of young children to violent content through digital technologies and their consequences, such as “aggressive behaviour, desensitization to violence, nightmares, and fear of being harmed” (p. 1495). Screen time has been also reported to be weakly associated with children's mental well-being (OECD, 2019). However, a large body of research investigating the impact of screen time on well-being among children has adopted a correlational design, which cannot guarantee a cause-and-effect relationship.

It should be noted that the literature mostly entails concerns about the impact of digital technologies. This is while touchscreens owing to their affordances and features cannot be considered the same as other common digital technologies. As acknowledged by OECD (2019), "active interaction with touchscreens can generate dynamic stimulation, and, if used appropriately, may be just as engaging and cognitively stimulating as traditional toys or books" (p. 45). The personal, interactive, and mobile nature of touchscreens has labeled these devices as promising tools for educational purposes. Touchscreens have been argued to have the potential to enhance collaboration, motivation, engagement, social interaction, multimodal literacy, and individualized learning (Bird & Edwards, 2015; Burnett, 2010; Churches & Dickens, 2012). Moreover, the ubiquity of touchscreens enabling access to educational information anywhere and anytime has improved the learning experiences for young learners (Johnson et al., 2011).

In short, these studies have reported a mixed set of findings. While several studies have dealt with the harms of these learning media regarding learning, development, and health issues, numerous others have reported the positive potentials of these devices to improve children’s learning experiences and development (e.g., Miller, 2018). In other words, despite the growing trend of using touchscreen technologies in teaching and learning, the effective integration of touchscreen technologies into early childhood education has remained complex.

Therefore, the variability of research findings targeting the impacts of touchscreen devices on early childhood education necessitates the implementation of a review to provide different stakeholders with a general view of the effect of these educational tools on young children's learning from different perspectives. There are several review studies which investigated the impact of digital technologies on different aspects of early childhood learning, such as cognitive, social, and emotional development (e.g., González-González et al., 2019; Hsin et al., 2014). However, we noticed that there are only few review studies specifically investigating the effect of touchscreen technologies on early childhood learning outcomes.

For example, Herodotou (2018b) reviewed 19 studies examining the touchscreen learning effects on children aged 2-5 years and reported a generally positive effects on literacy, mathematics, science learning, problem-solving skills, and self-efficacy. In addition, Xie et al.’s (2018) meta-analysis reviewed 36 empirical articles on the learning achievements of touchscreen mobile devices for young children aged 0-5 years. Their results indicated a positive effect moderated by child's age, learning domain, experimental environment, and comparison group. Except these works, there is still a need for a more recent comprehensive review of the effects of touchscreen technologies on early childhood education.

Method
To address these issues, we employed a systematic review to review the effect of touchscreen technologies on early childhood learning. A systematic review facilitates the synthesis of data in an unbiased and impartial manner. Accordingly, it has a set of studies to achieve pre-specified conclusions since it involves a review of the relevant literature employing explicit, systematic, and accountable methods (Gough et al., 2012). To answer the research questions, both aggregative and configurative review methods were employed. An aggregative review approach facilitates responding to tightly specified questions using quantitative methods and empirical observations, while a configurative method is suitable for answering more open questions using qualitative data (Gough et al., 2012). The former method is used for the first and second research questions, whereas the latter well suits the third question.

Although the PRISMA model has been commonly applied in the field of health sciences, it has been also adopted in systematic reviews in the field of educational technology (e.g., Boon et al., 2020; Crompton & Burke, 2020). Using PRISMA principles (Liberati et al., 2009), the relevant studies published between 2010 and 2020 were systematically searched using different databases, including the Web of Science, ERIC, EBSCO, JSTOR, and Google Scholar, as well as university libraries. We used the following keywords: "technology", "touchscreens", "iPads", "tablets", and "mobiles" in combination with "early childhood learning", "child learning/education", "preschoolers", and "pre/kindergarteners". In addition, the reference lists of the included studies were manually searched to identify the additional relevant records.

The peer-reviewed studies with the following inclusion criteria were included in our systematic review: presenting quasi-experimental or empirical data; involving children aged 2-8 years; investigating the use of touchscreens in school or home setting; examining the educational outcome of touchscreen technologies in early childhood learning; using a systematic approach to measure the outcomes; being published in English language; and being published between 2010 and 2020. The reason for the selection of 2010 as the starting point was that it marks the date that iPads, as significant touchscreen technologies, were introduced to the market. The exclusion criteria included inadequacy of data, secondary resources (e.g., book chapters, meta-analysis and systematic reviews, and magazines), and non-availability of the full- text version. The initial search involving screening the titles and abstracts resulted in the retrieval of 1,065 studies.

The studies identified via database searching (n=1,065) were subjected to further screening. After the removal of duplicate articles (n=36), the abstracts of the articles were screened against the inclusion criteria. In case the abstract had inadequate information to ensure article eligibility, the method section of the study was investigated. As a result of abstract screening, a total of 940 cases were excluded from the study due to their study design, investigation of non-touchscreen technologies, participants' age range, examination of participants or adults' perceptions of technology use, investigation of touchscreens for assessment purposes, and examination of touchscreens for early childhood educators. After reviewing the full-text version of the articles, 46 studies were found eligible to be included in the study. After removing the duplicates (N=36) and screening the articles against the eligibility criteria (N=940), the manual searching of the reference lists of the included articles resulted in the addition of 7 more studies. Finally, 53 articles were included into the review process. The process of article selection is illustrated in a PRISMA flowchart presented in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
PRISMA Flowchart of the Study Selection Process

Full size image
The quality of the included studies was assessed by the two authors using the CASP tool with an inter-rater agreement of 98%. According to Long et al. (2020), this tool provides a good judgment of the procedural aspects and details of the research, compared with different appraisal techniques. Accordingly, we evaluated each study against such criteria as methods, rigor, credibility, and relevance. To guarantee precision, an external reviewer was employed to assess the quality of almost a third of the studies (N = 18). This assessment resulted in an agreement of 98%, which indicates a good inter-rater agreement. A consensus on discrepancies was reached through discussion between the raters.

After reading each article thoroughly, the following information was identified and transferred to the generated Excel sheets as recommended by Miles et al. (2014): publication year, research setting, research objective, research design and method, sample size, participants' age, learning outcome (i.e., dependent variable), intervention session/duration, type of touchscreen technology, and key findings. To extract data from the eligible studies, we developed a codebook on an Excel sheet as a guide throughout the data extraction procedure. The two authors independently extracted data in separate Excel sheets to minimize bias and error. Any discrepancy was discussed until reaching a consensus.

Findings
Trends of research on touchscreen technology and early childhood learning
With respect to the publication year of the included studies within the 10-year period (2010-2020), the majority of the research (85%) has been conducted within the recent 5 years (2015-2020). Regarding the geographical distribution, over half of the studies (N = 30, 57%) had been conducted in North America, including US (N = 26, 49%) and Canada (N = 4, 8%). Furthermore, 17% of the reviewed studies (N = 9) had been performed in the European countries, including Greece (N = 2), France (N =1), Sweden (N =1), Netherland (N = 2), Switzerland and Germany (N =1), United Kingdom (N =1), and England (N =1). The Asian (Dubai [N = 1], Indonesia [N = 1], Japan [N = 1], and China [N = 2]) and Australian studies also constituted 9% and 1.6% of the articles, respectively. Only one study was conducted in South America, Argentina, and there was no study having been performed in Africa. Moreover, the geographic region was not clearly indicated in five articles.

Out of the 53 reviewed articles, 36 cases had a true experimental design, and the rest were either quasi-experimental (N = 16) or pre-experimental (N =1). The sample size largely varied across the studies, ranging from 3 to 389 cases. A total of 4,387 children had been investigated in the reviewed articles. Furthermore, the age groups of 4 and 5 years equally had the highest frequency. Given the nature of the included studies, each study involved at least one intervention, the effect of which was compared between or within participants. Almost one-third of the studies (N = 19) were limited to one or two interventional sessions, lasting 5-40 mins. In addition, 9 studies involved 3-10 sessions (5-40 mins). However, there were also studies with 11-20 interventional sessions (N = 5; lasting 10-40 mins) and 21-60 interventional sessions (N = 6; lasting 10-40 mins) performed throughout the school year/semester as an integral part of the formal curriculum (e.g., Mowafi & Abumuhfouz, 2021). The number of the interventional sessions was not clear in 14 studies.

The reviewed studies addressed the effect of touchscreen devices on different subject domains, skills, and learning outcomes. The majority of the articles targeted one specific subject domain or skill (N = 40), while others (N = 13) investigated a combination of both or more than one subject domain. The subject domains investigated in the articles included mathematics (N = 19), literacy (N = 13), science (N = 5), and art (N = 2). The rest of the articles (N = 14) addressed other skills or a combination of different domains and skills (e.g., examining both mathematic skills and literacy).

All articles, including these targeting one domain or multiple domains, mathematics (N = 24) and literacy (N = 24), were equally the most frequently investigated subject domains. Further, the skills addressed in the reviewed studies were executive functioning, prosocial skills, and imitation skills (N = 1, for each). The other learning-related outcomes examined were engagement (N = 5), attention (N = 2), and motivation/self-efficacy (N = 1). Regarding the findings of studies, most of the studies (N = 34) reported the positive learning effects of using touchscreens on young children’s learning. While 17 studies obtained mixed findings (a combination of negative, neutral, and positive effects) with mostly neutral and positive findings, there were only two articles reporting purely negative learning effects.

The effect and factors of touchscreen technology on early childhood learning
Literacy
The effect of touchscreen technologies on literacy development among children aged 2-8 years was examined in a total of 24 studies, including 19 experimental studies and 5 quasi-experimental studies. The reading literacy domain investigated in the articles included letter learning, phonological awareness skills, decoding (Larabee et al., 2014), reading fluency (Puspitasari & Subiyanto, 2017), story comprehension, vocabulary (Walter-Laager et al., 2017), print concepts, letter-sound knowledge, numeral letters, and word recognition. Neumann (2018) and Patchan and Puranik (2016) noted the impact of a touchscreen literacy program on young children’s emergent writing literacy, particularly print concepts and writing names, letters, numbers, and uppercase letters.

A total of 10 studies examined the effect of digital books on early childhood literacy skills. These studies presented a mixed set of findings regarding the impact of touchscreen books on literacy skills. Most of the studies confirmed the effectiveness of digital books on comprehension. While some studies indicated the superiority of eBooks over print books in improving comprehension (e.g., Shirley, 2018), other studies reported the effectiveness of these modern tools was equal to those of the traditional tools. For instance, in a study comparing story comprehension of 4-year-old children using e-books and print books, O'Toole and Kannass (2018) found that the touchscreen books were as supportive as the traditional print books for the study participants. Similarly, by comparing the effect of a digital storybook with a print book read by a teacher for 4- to 5-year-old preschoolers, Zipke (2017) observed no difference between the two groups in terms of story comprehension.

However, Parish-Morris et al. (2013) argued that these results may be age-dependent effects. Also, they obtained relatively different results compared with previous studies (Xu et al., 2021), which indicated the positive effects of eBooks on lower level of comprehension skills (e.g., character and event identification) but the negative effects on the higher level comprehension skills (e.g., story structure and details). This result was ascribed to the presence of distracting features (e.g., games, sound effects, hotspots) in the digital books in terms of the flow of the story.

Drawing upon this age-dependence hypothesis, Piotrowski and Krcmar (2017) investigated how hotspots in eBooks as interactive features of touchscreens positively affected the attention and story comprehension of a group of Dutch preschoolers aged 2-5 years. Also, using eBooks purposefully embedded with animations and interactive features congruent with the plot, Zipke (2017) observed that the children using an eBook with more interactivity features developed higher level story comprehension than those working with an eBook equipped with few interactivity features. However, it should be noted that the quality of the hotspots and their relevance to the story flow determine their contribution to child's story comprehension. The inclusion of irrelevant hotspots or games could lead to cognitive overload, thereby inhibiting child's story comprehension (Bus et al., 2014). For example, Krcmar and Cingel’s (2014) study reported that a digital book caused an increased cognitive load on the child’s story comprehension.

Regarding other literacy domains, all other studies addressing eBooks, except one, indicated the higher effectiveness of touchscreen books over the print books in terms of vocabulary knowledge (Teepe et al., 2017), reading ability (Masataka, 2014), and word recognition (Zipke, 2017). By examining the influence of book type (i.e., digital or print) on alphabetic knowledge among 4-year-old children, Willoughby et al. (2015) reported a similar improvement in their phonological awareness, letter-name, and letter-sound knowledge.

Nine studies targeted the comparison of the effectiveness of iPad versus non-iPad resources in early literacy skills. In a quasi-experimental study, Reeves et al. (2017) compared a set of literacy skills (i.e., phonological awareness, print knowledge, vocabulary knowledge) between two groups of preschoolers exposed to either iPads with guided instruction or a traditional Pre-K curriculum without iPads. The results of their 7-month study revealed a significant improvement of phonological awareness among the children using iPads although there was no significant difference regarding print and vocabulary knowledge in the two groups.

Several studies investigated the efficacy of touchscreens in improving literacy learning achievement of students with special needs (e.g., sight word fluency, see Musti-Rao et al., 2015). Chai (2017) observed the impact of a researcher-developed iPad app in enhancing phonological awareness among young children with mild developmental delays. D'Agostino et al. (2016) study also noted the effectiveness of an iPad app in word sounds, letter identification, text reading, vocabulary, and concepts about print among 6- to 7-year-old children identified as struggling readers. Further, Musti-Rao et al. (2015) and Zipke (2017) reported the impact of iPads on fostering independent learning in children’s literacy development.

Mathematics
A total of 24 articles, with experimental (N = 14), quasi-experimental (N = 8), and pre-experimental (N = 1) designs, addressed the impact of touchscreen use on children's mathematics learning compared to traditional manipulatives. The investigated mathematics skills included counting and sorting (e.g., Brown & Harmon, 2013; Outhwaite et al., 2019), computational skills (e.g., Disney et al., 2019), numeracy concepts (e.g., Miller, 2018; Spencer, 2013), spatial relationships and patterns (e.g., Mowafi & Abumuhfouz, 2021), number-object correspondence and comparing quantity tasks (e.g., Schacter & Jo, 2016), addition and subtraction (e.g., Outhwaite et al., 2019), time (e.g., Wang et al., 2021), and subitizing (e.g., Broda et al., 2019).

The majority of the selected literature (N=22) reported the effectiveness of touchscreen interventions by comparing children's mathematics achievement in traditional non-touchscreen methods (see Miller, 2018; Reeves et al., 2017). For example, Schacter and Jo (2016) investigated mathematics performance of 273 preschoolers aged 4-5 years after attending tablet-based math instructions for 15 weeks. They demonstrated an almost 12 times higher gain in their mathematics skills (e.g., numeral sequencing, cardinal principle, comparing quantities, matching numerals to quantities), compared to their counterparts in the control group of regular mathematics curriculum. After the 4-month intervention, the results obtained by Mowafi and Abumuhfouz (2021) also indicate the higher efficacy of the touchscreen-based mathematic lessons over the existing mathematics instruction in improving young children's understanding of numeracy and spatial relationships and patterns. This finding is in line with the results reported by Disney et al. (2019). They investigated the impact of iPad-based games on numeracy learning of 3- to 4-year-old children who attended a 2-week intervention implementing five developmentally appropriate iPad numeracy apps. The use of iPads in a play-based setting resulted in the enhancement of children’s numeracy scores. Further, Spencer (2013) obtained the long-term impact of iPad in improving young children’s numeracy learning.

Broda et al. (2019) allowed a group of 18 4- to 5-year-old preschoolers to independently interact with an app targeting early number sense for 4 weeks. Their results demonstrated that preschoolers’ interactions with the touchscreen app resulted in a significant increase in their speed and accuracy when performing subitizing tasks. This improved accuracy in responding to mathematic problems was also observed in a study conducted by Shanley et al. (2020) when the instructional cueing and self-regulation supports were added to the tablet-based intervention for 5- to 6-year-old children with mathematics difficulties.

On the contrary, there are the increased number of mixed findings (N=4) on the positive, neutral, and negative effects of touchscreen devices. Mattoon et al.’s (2015) study reported the impact of touchscreens on the computational skills of 4- to 5-year-old preschoolers compared to traditional manipulatives such as plastic bears, candy hearts, cubes, and dice during math instruction. The results of the Early Mathematics Ability test administered after the 6-week intervention revealed a significant increase in the computational skills of both groups.

Several studies involved the comparison of the effect of different types of digital technologies (e.g., tablets, computers; N = 2) and modes with touchscreens (e.g., playing, watching; N = 3), or specific touchscreen app with other apps (N = 2) on young children’s mathematics learning. The results of the studies comparing the impact of tablets with computers advocated the higher contribution of tablets to the enhancement of young children's mathematics learning. For instance, Papadakis et al. (2016) compared the impact of tablets with computers on mathematics learning of 256 children aged 4.5-5.5 years during a 14-week intervention. Although the children in both groups showed a progress in their mathematical skills, the higher improvement in the tablet group was reported.

Drawing upon this finding, Papadakis et al. (2018) further investigated the comparison of the impact of tablets with those of computers on mathematics learning of a larger group of students (N = 365) in three groups (i.e., tablets, computers, control) during one academic year. The tablet group obtained the highest score of mathematical comprehension, followed by the computer group, and then control group. This is likely because touchscreen devices revealed such affordances as higher portability, personalization, haptic feedback, and functionality, resulting in facilitating the implementation of a wide set of pedagogical activities.

The examination of the studies also reveals that the comparison of modes of playing touchscreens with modes of watching touchscreens showed the interactivity feature effect of the touchscreen apps on near and far transfer of the mathematic concepts. For example, in Aladé et al.’s (2016) study, 60 preschool students in two intervention groups and one control group were exposed to the same app content by either playing an interactive tablet-based game or viewing a non-interactive video. Participants in the intervention groups outperformed those in the control group in the overall knowledge transfer task. However, the follow-up analysis of the overall score according to difficulty levels of the transfer task revealed mixed findings. Although participants playing with interactive games performed better in near-transfer tasks, those viewing the non-interactive videos showed better outcomes in far-transfer tasks. The authors noted that this finding may be related to the similarity between the tasks used during training and testing. They concluded that interactivity might be effective in transfer tasks that are highly similar to the training tasks.

This finding is consistent with the results reported by Schroeder and Kirkorian (2016). They investigated the effect of game interactivity (i.e., watching or playing) and character familiarity in young children's mathematics learning (i.e., numerical cognition) and learning transfer. The 3- to 5-year-old children played a couple of tablet-based games in either condition of playing or watching. It appears that these games were effective depending on the children's age and the difficulty level of the game regardless of the game interactivity. This transfer of learning using touchscreen devices was also examined by Wang et al.’s (2016) study in which a group of 5- to 6-year-old children (N = 65) learned using one of these tools: an iPad, a toy clock, or a drawing of a clock. The results revealed the efficacy of touchscreens in young children’s learning about time. Also, the children exhibited positive transfer of learning from iPad to iPad and physical toy clock. Achieving this transfer of learning was particularly difficult when participants learned the concept of time using a drawing of a clock. These findings could be explained by the presence of similarity between the iPad and the physical toy clock. Wang et al. (2021) also investigated the transfer of learning by comparing iPad with video in teaching the concept of time to 123 preschoolers, resulting in better effectiveness of iPad in participants’ understanding of the concept of time and the positive transfer of learning after using iPad.

In most of the selected literature, features of touchscreen devices in affecting children’s mathematics learning appear frequently. To identify the efficacy of a tablet app, Math Shelf, in enhancing young children's number sense, Schacter et al.’s (2016) study assessed mathematics learning of 100 low-income preschool children using either the Math Shelf or the most downloaded math apps for preschoolers. Participants in the group of Math Shelf app performed better than the other group. This finding is consistent with the results reported by Brown and Harmon (2013). However, several studies indicate that children’s different responses to educational apps depend on children's age (Bullock et al., 2017).

Science
The effect of touchscreens in children’s science learning is discussed in 5 studies, resulting in mixed findings. Furman et al. (2019) investigated the impact of touchscreens on science learning of five-year-old children by incorporating tablets into an inquiry-based science teaching approach. After a six-week intervention, significant improvements were observed in science learning for all students in both the tablet and non-tablet groups. The analysis of the reviewed studies also reveals that the learning effect of a touchscreen mobile game in understanding scientific concepts (i.e., projectile motion See Herodotou, 2018a; growth See Schroeder & Kirkorian, 2016) was age dependent.

Kwok et al. (2016) also compared the effect of a touchscreen-based instruction with a face-to-face instruction in learning information about animals among 4- to 8-year-old children. The results revealed a significant improvement in the learning task of both groups; nonetheless, they showed no significant difference between the two groups' rate of learning. By investigating the impact of a touchscreen intervention on science achievement among 3 groups of children, including children, ESL children, and special needs children, Lee and Tu (2016) showed an improvement in the science learning of all three groups. These findings again indicate the affordance of touchscreen technologies for improving the learning condition and outcomes of children with special needs.

Arts
Two of the included studies examined the impact of touchscreens on children’s emerging drawing skills. By comparing drawings using a pen with fingertips on touchscreens, Picard et al. (2014) observed the positive effect of pen and paper compared to touchscreen in elementary school participants’ art learning. This is likely because it could require more training in finger movements on touchscreens. In a recent study, Kirkorian et al. (2020) examined the efficacy of touchscreens in improving the drawing skills of preschoolers in 3 conditions (i.e., marker on paper, stylus on a touchscreen, finger on a touchscreen tablet). However, unlike Picard et al.’s (2014) findings, they found the positive effect of finger drawing on a tablet compared to the marker and stylus conditions.

Other learning areas
The enhancement of children's engagement using touchscreens is also investigated in 5 studies. The engagement evaluation methods employed in these studies included observation logs, a momentary time sampling approach within specific time intervals (e.g., 10 seconds), coding of children’s engagement during the videotaped sessions, or calculating the percentages of on-task time during the intervention sessions. For instance, Musti-Rao et al. (2015) examined how self-mediated iPad instructions could influence the academic engagement of a group of at-risk 6- to 7-year-old children during a period of independent sight word learning. Their results indicated the iPad condition led to higher level of children’s engagement compared to the independent print book reading condition. Larabee et al. (2014) also assessed on-task behaviors of three first-grade students during practicing decoding skills using either iPad or standard materials. They observed higher task engagement in the iPad condition. Xu et al. (2021) measured young children's reading engagement based on behavioral, emotional, and verbal dimensions. Touchscreens with hotspots increased children’s emotional engagement. This finding is consistent with Willoughby et al.’s (2015) study, resulting in improving children’s engagement using alphabet eBooks with letter and object hotspots.

Although several studies used the terms engagement and motivation interchangeably as "motivation is an antecedent to engagement" (Bond et al., 2020, p. 3), one study in the reviewed articles examined the effect of eWriters in children’s self-efficacy and motivation towards literacy (Ferdig et al., 2017). Participants were encouraged to use eWriters in both formal (for 6 weeks) and in-formal settings (for 3 weeks), resulting in a significant increase in children’s motivation and self-efficacy in writing. Children's executive functioning was also examined in one of the reviewed studies. Huber et al. (2018) compared the effect of using different modes of iPads (i.e., playing vs. watching) in the executive functioning skills of 96 2- to 3-year-old young children. Participants showed higher executive functioning skills when playing and interacting with iPad apps compared to watching a video.

Zimmermann et al. (2017) investigated the efficacy of touchscreens in improving imitation skills of very young children aged 2.5-3 years. Their results revealed no effect of touchscreen in young children's performance; however, being tested on touchscreens through a social demonstration resulted in better performance. The use of touchscreens was also reported to create opportunities for eliciting more prosocial behaviors (Ralph, 2018). Digital devices in the children's learning context encouraged their sharing behaviors, which in turn created a safer learning environment for young children.

Discussion
The investigation of the study characteristics was indicative of a growing interest in examining the effect of digital devices on young children's learning in the recent years since 85% of the reviewed studies have been carried out in the last 5 years (2015-2020). This can be due to the increasing use of these devices by young children in instructional and non-instructional settings. The analysis of the geographical distribution of the reviewed studies revealed an uneven pattern. For example, while 57% of the studies had been performed in North America, we could not find any study conducted in Africa. This uneven geographical distribution of the studies across the world highlights the need for the implementation of more studies in most of the regions throughout the world, especially remote/isolated areas with lower income levels, to benefit from the potentials of technologies for closing the educational attainment gaps. Further, the analysis of the interventions implemented in the reviewed studies revealed a dearth of longitudinal investigations examining both the short-term and long-term effects of touchscreen devices on young children's learning. A great number of the studies (N =19) were limited to only one or two interventional sessions, focusing on the immediate rather than the lasting effects of touchscreen technologies.

The learning domains addressed in the reviewed studies included literacy, mathematics, science, arts, and other learning outcomes/skills, such as engagement, attention, motivation, self-efficacy, imitation skills, prosocial behaviors, and executive functioning. The research trend analysis revealed that most of the research attention was given to literacy (N =24) and mathematics (N =24) learning, while other subject domains such as science (N =5) and arts (N =2) were not sufficiently investigated in relation to touchscreen technologies. Accordingly, these areas require further research.

Therefore, it is recommended to perform more studies addressing the effect of touchscreen devices on different subject domains and learning skills/outcomes, especially science and art among children of different age groups. Moreover, it is required to carry out more longitudinal studies to examine the persistence of the educational effects of these tools on the learning outcomes of children living across different geographical regions. Such studies would facilitate the identification of the different developmental, environmental, and cultural factors accounting for the success or failure of integrating digital technologies into early childhood educational settings.

With respect to the overall findings, most of the studies (N =34) confirmed the positive effects of touchscreen devices on young children's learning, with only two studies reporting purely negative effects. There were also several studies reporting a mixed set of findings (a combination of neutral, negative, and positive effects), and the majority studies reported a combination of neutral and positive findings. While some studies indicated the high effectiveness of touchscreen-based interventions compared to traditional instructions, other studies indicated their equal effectiveness. These findings reveal the potential of touchscreen devices for improving early childhood learning outcomes if employed appropriately.

The reviewed studies involved the comparison of the effects of touchscreens versus traditional teaching approaches or other digital technologies. There were also some investigations comparing the different modes with touchscreens (e.g., playing vs. watching) or a specific touchscreen app with other apps. As the reviewed studies demonstrated, some touchscreen-based apps/interventions were more beneficial for a certain age group or under certain learning conditions/approaches (e.g., played-based learning and interactive learning).

This underscores the significance of considering the conditions and factors contributing to the achievement of the maximal positive effects using touchscreen devices in early childhood educational settings. The factors/conditions affected children's learning with technology can be classified into these five categories: (1) app features (e.g., multimedia, interactivity) and contents (e.g., developmental appropriateness, difficulty level), (2) applied pedagogical approach (e.g., play-based learning, interactive learning, inquiry-based learning), (3) adult mediation (i.e., working with minimal or maximal adult feedback), (4) instructional grouping (i.e., working in pairs, in small groups, or individually), and (5) child age and previous experience/familiarity with touchscreen devices. The app features were frequently discussed in the reviewed studies. These factors can determine the students' learning experiences and outcomes since they engage/disengage or motivate/demotivate the young app users depending on their quality.

For example, hotspots are among the frequent interactive features and core elements of eBooks, designed to elicit verbal or haptic responses from children. However, as the literature indicated, this feature can act like a double-edged sword since it can improve children's comprehension but distract them from their learning process depending on their age and conditions. Regarding this, several factors need to be considered when choosing an eBook equipped with this feature. To name some of these factors, the applied hotpots should be relevant to the content and story flow so that they support the children's understanding of the story rather than distracting them from the content. Moreover, hotspots should be congruent with the child's developmental stage in order not to result in cognitive overload. Last but not the least, the employed hotspots should be visually attractive to encourage the child to keep up with the story and learning activity. The detailed description of each of the factors accounting for the maximal positive effect of touchscreens on childhood learning goes beyond the scope of this study. However, given the significance of this topic, further systematic reviews are needed to gain a deeper insight into the current evidence in this regard.

Limitations
We acknowledge that this study has several limitations. This study reviewed the research published from 2010 to 2020 and written in English. Thus, our findings may not include all research published on the effect of touchscreens on early childhood learning although we conducted a robust search of the studies.

Conclusion
Our systematic review provided an up-to-date systematic review of the research endeavors addressing the effect of touchscreen devices on early childhood learning and identified the factors/conditions affecting young children's learning with these technologies. The findings of the current review can inform the teachers, educators, and parents about the potential benefits of touchscreen technologies. The ever-increasing relevance and use of technologies, especially touchscreen technologies, in early childhood learning both in formal and informal learning settings call for the implementation of more research in the field. For example, the observation of age-dependent effects also calls for the investigation of the impact of touchscreens on children of exactly similar age. This is especially important for studies addressing early learning since children are at a fast-paced cognitive development stage in their early years (Fischer & Bullock, 1984). Accordingly, an age difference of only one year may create a difference in responding to touchscreen-based learning conditions. Therefore, the further investigation of children based on their specific age group would facilitate the identification of the factors and conditions accounting for the optimal learning outcomes during young children's learning with touchscreens.