The purpose of this study was to investigate the trends of GeoGebra related studies. We focused on the articles published between 2009 and 2021 and existed in Web of Science database. The bibliometric analysis of the GeoGebra related articles exposed four-clustered structure according to the degree of relationships among terms that reflect the articles. The clusters were identified as learner anatomy (the use of GeoGebra to improve students’ mathematics learning), teaching analytics (the role of GeoGebra in mathematics teaching), technological focus (the technological and procedural issues), and conceptual extension (the attempts considering the features of GeoGebra, mathematics topics and skills). This study offers evidence to show trends and practices in GeoGebra related studies, as well as to clarify their relationships with other concepts. The investigation into GeoGebra’s dynamics would help researchers, teachers, students, and policymakers gain insight into areas that need further research, as well as plan for future studies.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Computer technology increasingly being used as teaching and learning resource, and the importance of computer tools has long been recognized by educational systems in many countries such as USA (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics [NCTM], 2000), Croatia (Tomic, 2013), Turkey (Ministry of National Education [MoNE], 2018). The most recent meta-analysis studies related to the use of technology in education have reported that students who use technology in their learning have better learning outcomes than students who do not (Waxman et al., 2002). Technology has influenced mathematics education in the same way as it has influenced other fields. Computer technology provides dynamic experiences for students in mathematics education (Lew et al., 2010). As a result of these encounters, mathematics classes that have turned into virtual environments enable students to learn math by conducting experiments (Arcavi & Hadas, 2000) and provide opportunities to discover, imagine, associate, and generalize mathematical knowledge (Barcelos et al., 2011; Lyublinskaya & Funsch, 2012).

The acquisition of twenty-first century skills including higher order thinking skills, technological skills, problem-solving skills, innovative skills, and decision-making skills necessitates the environments that provide opportunities and experiences for developing these skills (Saavedra & Opfer, 2012). The integration of technology into teaching and learning enables to improve 21st skills such as problem-solving skills, critical, creative, innovative thinking etc. with the opportunity of reconstructing the concepts and reasoning on problems (Saavedra & Opfer, 2012; Way & Beardon, 2003). One of the most common of these sources for technology integration in instruction is GeoGebra dynamic geometry software. Recently, it has become a tool that has gained popularity around the world. It is open-source software that can be downloaded for free and run directly from a web browser (Sangwin, 2007). Moreover, Geogebra’s spread is thought to be aided by the fact that it has been translated into several languages. According to Suljic (2005), the increasing popularity of GeoGebra is based on its extensive mathematical structure for primary and secondary schools, interface bringing geometry and algebra together, and dynamic drawings.

GeoGebra helps students to understand processes of mathematics procedures and facts by pictorial representation in two and three dimensions and fosters the learning of mathematics concepts to develop problem-solving skills (Hohenwarter & Lavicza, 2007; Jarvis et al., 2011). It also presents an interactive setting for geometrical constructions such as line, angle, graph, polygon and solid (Jarvis et al., 2011). Students can concurrently work on two-dimensional and three-dimensional shapes or they can make connections between algebraic and numeric representations in this platform. Integration of GeogGebra into teaching and learning mathematics foster the development of creativity, mathematical knowledge, and skills (Hohenwarter et al., 2009). Thus, teaching with GeoGebra could be an alternative approach to overcome the expectations and challenges in twenty-first century education.

Computer Technology in Mathematics Education
Technology principle in Principles and Standards for School Mathematics stated that “technology is essential in teaching and learning mathematics; it influences the mathematics that is taught and enhances students’ learning” (NCTM, 2000, p. 24). Van de Walle et al. (2016) highlight, in teaching, the importance of using different representations of concepts to introduce the relational structure among them and the transition from one representation to the others to enhance conceptual understanding. Since computer technology enables to use multiple representations together, it facilitates the teaching process (Hutkemri & Zakaria, 2014). NCTM (2000) also suggest the integration of computer technology into the conceptual teaching of a wide range of mathematics topics, including linear equations, functions and graphics, slope, derivative, integral, and geometry. Lately, the growing interest in use of computer technology and educational software in mathematics education has drawn attention. The related research studies has reported that dynamic geometry software (DGS) allows students to make relations between mathematical objects and graphical representations (Shadaan & Leong, 2013), promotes active construction of mathematics knowledge in a dynamic learning context (Hohenwarter & Fuchs, 2004; Hutkemri & Zakaria, 2014), facilitates conceptual learning through the use of animation and visual materials (Dikovic, 2009; Tatar & Zengin, 2016), positively affects students’ mathematics achievement (Chan & Leung, 2014; Köklü & Topçu, 2012; Pilli & Aksu, 2013; Turk & Akyuz, 2016) and their attitudes towards mathematics (Barkatsas et al., 2009; Pilli & Aksu, 2013). It points out the importance of teaching with technology. The studies also revealed that the use of dynamic geometry software support learning of both students (Agyei & Benning, 2015) and preservice teachers (Bhagat et al., 2017; McGee & Deborah, 2015). One of the reasons for the increase may be that this kind of software allow students to adjust the parameters while simultaneously observing the changes in the corresponding representations (McGee & Deborah, 2015). Dynamic nature of these software enables users to comprehend the concepts better than static representations (Hohenwarter et al., 2009). According to Hohenwarter et al. (2009), using software that allows students and educators to explore mathematical concepts through multiple representations is necessary for effective teaching and learning. Moreover, dynamic geometry software provides motivational contexts since it allows to work on concepts with new perspectives (Çağlayan, 2016). Furthermore, effective mathematics learning requires active involvement, discussion, and reflection on one’s own and others’ work (Gravemeijer, 1994). Computer tools that refer to software such as GeoGebra, Geometer’s Sketchpad, Cabri etc. aim to link visual images with abstract symbols, assisting students in developing an approach for understanding abstract mathematical concepts (Tomic, 2013). Thus, these tools contribute to the effectiveness of the teaching and learning process (Lou et al., 2001) and students’ self-motivation and self-confidence (Sivin-Kachala & Bialo, 2000).

GeoGebra and mathematics education
Computer technology in mathematics education is classified as Computer Algebra Systems (CAS) and Dynamic Geometry Software (DGS) (Hohenwarter & Fuchs, 2004). GeoGebra has drawn a lot of attention because of its robust structure combining DGS and CAS functionality (Hohenwarter et al., 2009). Many forms of educational software have been recently used as learning tools in mathematics teaching (Autograph, Cabri II, Cabri 3D, Coypu, Cinderella, Derive, GeoGebra, Geometer’s Sketchpad, Graphmatica, etc.). These mathematics software were found to be inadequate in connecting graphics, algebra, and table representations, as well as providing a dynamic learning environment and ease of use, when compared to GeoGebra software (Birgin & Uzun Yazıcı, 2021). GeoGebra introduces a single and completely free structure that can be used to explore geometry and algebra effectively (Hohenwarter & Jones, 2007). Dynamism in GeoGebra help students to investigate mathematical concepts (Hohenwarter et al., 2009), observe the changes in different representations simultaneously and construct mathematics knowledge based on these dynamic relationships (Dikovic, 2009).

GeoGebra is one of the most widely used for better teaching mathematics subjects from primary school to university level (Birgin & Uzun Yazıcı, 2021). Points, vectors, line segments, polygons, straight lines, conic sections, and functions are some of the artifacts in GeoGebra. It allows to change constructions dynamically by dragging free objects, and coordinates of points or vectors, equations of lines, functions, and numbers or angles can be entered directly (Hohenwarter & Fuchs, 2004). GeoGebra visualizes mathematical concepts, making it easy to build connections between geometry, calculus, and algebra (Dikovic, 2009). It also enables students to work on math tasks, offer multiple presentations, and learn through experimentation and guided exploration (Dikovic, 2009). Moreover, GeoGebra can be used in a variety of ways to teach mathematics: (1) a tool for demonstration and visualization (2) a tool for construction (3) a tool for discovering mathematics and (4) a tool for preparing teaching materials (Hohenwarter & Fuchs, 2004). There are no limitations in terms of learning how to use it because it is easy to do so. Thus, GeoGebra is a common tool among students and teachers due to its ease of use (Sangwin, 2007).

GeoGebra is an effective software in teaching and learning arithmetic, geometry, algebra, and calculus (Antohe, 2009; Hohenwarter et al., 2009) with its structure providing meaningful learning opportunities for both students and teachers (Zulnaidi et al., 2020). It promotes creative practices not only from a geometrical but also from an algebraic standpoint. For example, students can draw circle and adjust it to explore changes in the circle’s equation while also changing the circle equation to track alterations on the circle in the geometry window. This situation refers the exploratory aspect of learning since GeoGebra enables students to redo constructions, introduce new components, and rearrange them, enhancing their understanding of functional dependencies (Tomic, 2013). At this point, it should be remembered that simply drawing mathematical objects and figures is not only enough to gain a thorough understanding of fundamental mathematical concepts, but also creative dynamic practices are essential (Velichová, 2011). It dynamically necessitates the navigation through multiple mathematical representations that GeoGebra allows this activity (Velichová, 2011).

The effective features of GeoGebra alone are not enough for successful teaching. Teachers who know how to use GeoGebra and construct relevant activities with it also play a critical role in teaching process (Laborde et al., 2006). Heid (2005) emphasized that “Dynamic tools are likely to be essential components of the technology toolkit in the school mathematics instruction of the future” (p. 349). Today, teachers should assist students in comprehending the future world, which will inevitably depend on mathematics, science, and technology (Furner & Marinas, 2007). However, the studies generally point out the lack of mathematics teachers in designing lessons including technology and using technology tools (Agyei & Voogt, 2011; Gueudet & Trouche, 2011). Because of the contributions of the software to instruction and lack of teachers, GeoGebra has begun to be included in teacher training programs in recent (Hohenwarter & Lavicza, 2007). On the other hand, a variety of research works at different grade levels reported that GeoGebra had a significant effect on students’ mathematics achievement, attitude towards mathematics and long-term retention (e.g., Dikovic, 2009; Lopez, 2011; Pilli & Aksu, 2013; Zengin, 2017). Although GeoGebra has recently and rapidly been gaining popularity among teachers and researchers around the world, there is little research on its effect on mathematics teaching and learning (Dikovic, 2009). Furthermore, it is noteworthy that there is a lack of research revealing what kind of studies have been conducted on GeoGebra over the years. From this point of view, it was aimed to investigate the trends in the use of GeoGebra over the last 12 years through bibliometric analysis in this study.

Methodology
In recent years, powerful methods for finding and analyzing research in the literature, as well as establishing a framework for literature analysis, have been formed (Drijvers et al., 2020). Bibliometric analysis is an important approach for systematically examining studies in the literature using techniques such as co-occurrence analysis, keyword analysis, cluster analysis, and bibliometric maps (Song & Wang, 2020). With a retrospective review, it allows to gain insight into the trends of research studies over time. The bibliometric analysis was used for the statistical evaluation of publications, finding out the trends in the overall picture of GeoGebra related studies from 2009 to 2021.

Research phases and data collection
The phases of exploration, visualization, identification, and verification, as shown in Fig. 1, were used to structure this research.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Research phases

Full size image
The published articles in the Web of Science (WoS) database that includes “GeoGebra” in their title, keywords or abstract between 2009 and 2021 were focused. The language of the publications were set as English. A total of 286 publications were met these constraints. Table 1 summarizes the investigation of the articles.

Table 1 Summary of the investigation
Full size table
Data analysis
VOSviewer software was used to provide statistical information about the most frequently occurring items, connections between items, and clusters of items during the bibliometric analysis (Van Eck & Waltman, 2010). This software enables to create bibliometric maps such as network map demonstrating the relation between items and grouping them into clusters based on the strength of the connections; overlay map displaying a color bar depending on the changes over years and density map presenting occurrence frequency of items (Van Eck & Waltman, 2020). It also provides to determine highly occurring keywords in publications and items in clusters. To discover the structure of GeoGebra studies by identifying the general trend and providing evidence, bibliometric maps were created, and the analyses based on occurrences, keywords, and clusters were conducted through VOSviewer.

Results
This section details the bibliometric analysis results, including keyword analysis, occurrence analysis, cluster analysis and bibliometric maps.

Exploration
In the first group of analysis in exploration phase, the trends in the number of publications about GeoGebra were the focus. Figure 2 illustrates the change in the number of articles published between 2009 and 2020. Since the year 2021 has not yet been completed, it has been excluded from the graph to avoid misinterpretation of the trend.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Trends in the number of articles

Full size image
The above figure shows that the first group of GeoGebra related studies were published by 2009 in WoS. Although the number of publications has tendency to increase towards the recent years, this increase is not sharp and there are decreases in shifting from some years to others, for example, from 2013 to 2014 or from 2019 to 2020. Figure 2 reveals that increasing trends have not always been observed in the number of articles related to GeoGebra.

In the second group of analysis in exploration phase, the keyword analysis was carried out to find the most frequently used keywords and the most concentrated terms in the articles. The results are shown in Table 2.

Table 2 Highly occurring keywords
Full size table
The first four highly occurring keywords were dynamic geometry, mathematics, technology, and dynamic mathematics software. These keywords reflect the consistency between the content of the research studies and the purpose of this study, which investigates trends in GeoGebra. Moreover, the keywords such as geometry, calculus, Euclidean geometry, automated theorem proving, elementary geometry, linear functions, mathematical modeling, and problem-solving give information about in which mathematical subjects teaching or with which teaching activities GeoGebra was used. The terms locus and visualization show that the most focal point properties of software in GeoGebra related studies were these two terms. The keywords such as teaching, education and e-learning refer to the studies that investigate the use of GeoGebra in teaching and learning process. Furthermore, it is seen that the researchers especially focused on GeoGebra in teacher education and the effects of it on mathematics achievement.

A timeline analysis as well as keyword analysis were performed to provide more specific details about the changes in trends over time. The most frequently occurring keywords were put on the timeline in a way that reflected each triannual period during the timeline review. The result of timeline analysis is given in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Timeline analysis of highly occurring keywords

Full size image
Figure 3 illustrates the evolution of GeoGebra between 2009 and 2021. It is apparent that early research focused on the integration of GeoGebra into mathematics and learning design. The terms such as computer-based mathematical tasks and interactive whiteboard also give information about the way of this integration. In other words, GeoGebra is trying to be included in the learning environment mostly through mathematical tasks or interactive whiteboards. Moreover, the terms cognitive demands and computer affordances point out that the researchers organized and examined learning designs in their studies considering both cognitive and technical issues. Between 2012 and 2015, the terms such as dynamic geometry, dynamic mathematics software and dynamic software reveal that dynamic software has begun to be included more in research works. It is also understood that the studies were conducted with GeoGebra in different mathematical topics such as algebra, Euclidean geometry, mathematical modeling, ovals, and polycentric curves in this time-period. Furthermore, the term teacher training refers to the research on the use and the effects of GeoGebra in teacher education. The term middle school appear in timeline between 2015 and 2018. While teacher training has attracted attention in the previous time-period, middle school has become prominent in this time-period. This shows that there has been a transition from studying GeoGebra at the upper-class levels to the lower class-levels. The terms collaboration and problem-solving points out the investigations related to GeoGebra within different contexts. It is also seen that function is one of the popular mathematics topics in GeoGebra related studies between 2015 and 2018. In the last time-period, visualization has come into prominence as a property of software. It is seen that mostly calculus, linear functions and automated theorem proving are engaged in GeoGebra between 2018 and 2021. In sum, it is seen that the concepts of dynamic geometry, dynamic mathematics software, technology, mathematics, and geometry exist in almost all time periods. On the other hand, it is noticed that the mathematics subjects or teaching activities studied on GeoGebra have changed over time. For example, as mentioned before, while algebra and mathematical modeling were more prominent between 2012 and 2015, calculus and proving were more prominent in the last time-period.

Visualization
In visualization, bibliometric maps that display the terms in GeoGebra related studies, as well as the relationships between them, were generated through VOSviewer software. The overlay map of the articles between 2009 and 2021 was shown in Fig. 4. The color bar in the bottom right corner of this map shows how the color varies from blue to green and green to yellow depending on the year of publication. The blue color represents early research, while the yellow color represents recent publications.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Overlay map of research on GeoGebra between 2009 and 2021

Full size image
In Fig. 4, the terms such as computer, software, dynamic mathematics software, problem, solution, example, tool, paper, opportunity, difficulty, mathematics, mathematical concept have a color between blue and green indicating these terms highly occur in the articles between 2010 and 2015. These terms refer to the use of GeoGebra as a dynamic software, the usage for illustrating a problem, solution or an example and the comparison of its opportunity and difficulty to paper in this time-period. Also, there are other terms that have a color between blue and green in this time-period. Of these, the terms like instruction, student, teacher, experience, experiment, preservice teacher, and prospective teacher point out the investigations on the role of GeoGebra in teaching process and teacher training whereas the terms representation and connection indicate the prominent features of GeoGebra, which were focused by researchers between 2010 and 2015. The terms such as case study, qualitative data, interview, effect, group, control group, experimental group, test, questionnaire, application, process, model, significant difference post-test, ability, class, school, learner, learning skill, classroom, strategy, practice, approach have a color between green and yellow indicating these terms highly occur in the articles between 2015 and 2020. The terms in this time-period refer to both intervention studies investigating effectiveness of GeoGebra and qualitative studies providing more details about the process. The fact that the colors are similar to each other indicates that the studies have not changed dramatically over the last ten years.

The density map of the terms in the studies was given in Fig. 5. In this map, the bright yellow color emphasizes the abundance of work and shows the density of the terms.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Density map of research on GeoGebra between 2009 and 2021

Full size image
The terms in the overlay map are in the same place as the terms in the density map in Fig. 5, but this map reflects the density of the terms. When the number of terms that exist in the surrounding of a point increases and the weights of the neighboring terms increase, the color of the point takes on a yellowish color. The middle of the map shows the terms commonly used in GeoGebra related studies which are approach, tool, paper, problem, process, use, software, mathematics, technology, student, teacher, study, learning course, effect. This map reveals that the studies primarily centered on mathematics teaching and learning through GeoGebra, the examination of effectiveness of it, and the details of its different aspects.

Figure 6 illustrates a network map of the terms used in the studies. The colored clusters on this map provide details about the frequently occurring terms and their relationships.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Network map of research on GeoGebra between 2009 and 2021

Full size image
In Fig. 6, each circle represents a term, and the larger the circle, the more articles that include that term. Furthermore, the closer the circles are together, the stronger the relation between the terms. According to the frequency and relation of the terms, VOSviewer software creates clusters of different colors. Figure 6 displays four clusters of different colors related to GeoGebra studies– red, green, blue, green, and yellow. These clusters were named as (1) learner anatomy (blue), (2) teaching analytics (green), (3) technological focus (red), and (4) conceptual extension (yellow). The identification and verification of these clusters is presented in detail in the following phases.

Identification
The clusters were identified based on the most frequently occurring words. Table 3 summarizes the details for each cluster.

Table 3 Identification of clusters
Full size table
In Table 3, The highly occurring terms in blue cluster were student, learning, research, analysis, group, effect, understanding, function, course, test. Based on these terms, the cluster with blue circles was named as learner anatomy. It refers to the studies focus on how GeoGebra can be used to improve students’ mathematics learning and its effects on learning. The cluster with green circles was identified as teaching analytics depending on the highly occurring terms such as study, mathematics, teacher, teaching, technology, data, knowledge, school, skill, dynamic geometry software. This cluster points out the role of GeoGebra in mathematics teaching and its effects on the development of knowledge and skills. The cluster with red circles was named as technological focus because it included the terms such as use, paper, tool, problem, software, approach, process, environment, activity and way. These terms mostly indicate the technological and procedural issues in design of research works. The highly occurring terms in yellow cluster were concept, task, computer, representation, topic, reasoning, framework, time, form, strategy. The cluster with yellow circles was given the name conceptual extension based on these terms. It refers to the studies considering the features of GeoGebra, mathematics topics and skills. Thus, conceptually extension in different aspects in these studies draw attention.

Verification
During the verification process, the focus was on examining and illustrating articles related to each cluster to provide evidence for the four-clustered structure of GeoGebra related studies displayed on the network map. It was aimed to elaborate the cluster-specific structure of the articles, explain the trend in each cluster, and uncover research gaps.

Cluster 1: Learner anatomy
When the blue circles were examined in the network map (Fig. 6), the following terms stand out: student, learning, learner, ability, difficulty, class, course, instruction, questionnaire, test, experiment, experimental group, control group, effect, significance difference. Explanatory research terms such as effect, experiment, experimental group, control group, and significance difference signal the measurements to compare groups for assessing the effects of interventions based on GeoGebra. In other words, the studies in this cluster refer to an instruction or a course related to GeoGebra, the evaluation of its effectiveness on students’ learning, ability or other aspects and the examination of difficulty of students. It is seen that this cluster mainly engages in GeoGebra in terms of learner and learning perspectives. For example, Mthethwa et al. (2020) investigated the effects of the use of GeoGebra on learners’ learning and the results revealed that learners who used GeoGebra were more successful at solving problems and justifying their claims, while those who did not used GeoGebra had only a limited rationale for their responses. Similarly, Kusumah et al. (2020) revealed that there was a significant difference between the mathematical communication skills of the students who received Geogebra-based geometry learning and those who do not. Albaladejo et al. (2015) found that GeoGebra helped students in developing mathematical competencies managing representations, problem-solving, reasoning and communication after introducing GeoGebra in the classroom. There are also studies investigating the effect of using dynamic geometry software (GeoGebra) on students’ conceptual understanding (Dikovic, 2009) and the retention of learning (Birgin & Uzun Yazıcı, 2021), mathematics achievement (Alabdulaziz et al., 2020; Birgin & Acar, 2020; Bozic et al., 2019; Zulnaidi et al., 2020), conceptual knowledge (Dikovic, 2009; Zulnaidi & Zamri, 2017), visualization and interpretation of a mathematics subject (Ngwabe & Felix, 2020). These research works indicate the positive effects of GeoGebra on these constructs.

Cluster 2: Teaching analytics
As seen in Fig. 6, the prominent terms in green cluster are mathematics, technology, study, teacher, school, classroom, practice, experience, opportunity, preservice teacher, prospective teacher, case study, interview, qualitative data. These terms mostly point out the research works that reflect the opinions, experiences and emotions of teacher or preservice teachers who used GeoGebra in classroom and practice. On the other hand, qualitative research terms such as case study, interview, qualitative data reveal the attempts to gain detailed information about the use and opportunity of GeoGebra from the perspective of teacher and preservice teacher in the studies of this cluster. The terms also signal the existence of investigations on GeoGebra in teacher training. Bozkurt and Ruthven (2017), in a case study with one mathematics teacher, illustrated how the teacher integrated GeoGebra into his teaching practices and developed his craft knowledge in teaching and learning mathematics. Açıkgül (2021) examined mathematics teachers’ opinions about a GeoGebra-supported learning and indicated the cognitive and affective development of the students and the quality of teaching as advantage, and the difficulties in using the software as disadvantage. Mthethwa et al. (2020) found the positive effects of the use of GeoGebra on a teacher’s beliefs regarding teaching and learning. Martinovic and Manizade (2020) investigated how teachers use GeoGebra to visualize and verify conjectures and the results showed the existence of teachers’ misconceptions and incorrect usages while visualizing conjectures. The results of other research also reveal that mathematics teachers are not prepared or trained to plan and execute technology-assisted lessons (Agyei & Voogt, 2011; Gueudet & Trouche, 2011). In terms of GeoGebra studies with preservice teachers, Hall and Chamblee (2013) emphasized the use of GeoGebra to enhance pre-service and in-service mathematics teachers’ mathematical thinking. Hernandez et al. (2020) conducted a case study in teacher education to elaborate mathematical understanding of students in problem solving with GeoGebra. The results highlighted the key role of GeoGebra to foster mathematical understanding for teaching. Saralar et al. (2018) evaluated a preservice mathematics teacher’s TPCAK during her experience performing GeoGebra and found that the preservice teacher’s TPACK and her skills in teaching with GeoGebra improved over time. McGee and Deborah (2015) discovered that using GeoGebra in technology-based classrooms provided preservice teachers with simultaneous knowledge of multiple representations and multiple-representational fluency. Other studies also emphasized the effectiveness of using GeoGebra in technology-based classrooms for preservice teachers to develop their knowledge (Bhagat et al., 2017; McGee & Deborah, 2015).

Cluster 3: Technological focus
The terms such as tool, use, software, paper, problem, solution, example, model, process, application, property, activity, context, way, are given in red cluster (Fig. 6). These mainly refer to the studies that include illustrating a problem, solution, or example through GeoGebra, using this software in an activity or model, comparing the advantages and disadvantages of GeoGebra and paper. It is seen that technological issues and concerns are more dominant in this cluster. In these research works, the focus is mainly on using of GeoGebra as a technological tool and the details of its properties. For example, Podaeva et al. (2021) defined a didactic system model for mastering geometric concepts in figurative structures in the process of teaching geometry to 10–11 graders using the GeoGebra dynamic method. On the other hand, da Silva et al. (2021) focused on the use of digital technology (GeoGebra and Microsoft Excel) to estimate a value of pi based on the problem of squaring the circle. They found that the use of GeoGebra and Microsoft Excel was effective in visually, numerically, and experimentally exploring the mathematical problem and the exploration of problems using digital technology contributed to the process of solution. da Silva et al. (2021) also indicated that these pieces of software allowed for the generation of solutions that would not have been possible with paper and pencil. Similarly, Koyuncu et al. (2015), investigating plane geometry problem-solving strategies of prospective mathematics teachers in GeoGebra and paper-and-pencil environments, reported that the participants developed different solution strategies in each environment. Based on the results, they suggested that using both environments may encourage students to find additional solutions. Moreover, Turgut (2019) explored students’ sense-making regarding matrix representation of geometric transformations in GeoGebra and he emphasized that the dragging tool strengths the sense of understanding of the variables, geometric transformations, and their notion of matrix representations. These research works mainly points out the comparison of GeoGebra with other environments and representation of problems through GeoGebra.

Cluster 4: Conceptual extension
When the yellow circles are examined in the network map (Fig. 6), it is seen that the remarkable terms are concept, task, reasoning, representation, framework, subject, topic, strategy, connection. These terms signal the studies go beyond from evaluating the use of GeoGebra, examining its properties, the attempts turn into linking GeoGebra and other concepts. For example, they include assessing GeoGebra in teaching different mathematical subjects, examining the features of GeoGebra and its contributions on learning topics, forming a framework, determining the relationship between the use of GeoGebra and mathematical skills. If we give an example to these studies from literature, it is seen that Jacinto and Carreira (2017) created and used a framework for analyzing the processes of mathematical problem solving with technology (GeoGebra). The study of Zengin (2018) that he incorporated GeoGebra into a history mathematics course refers to the use of the software in teaching and learning of different mathematics subjects. On the other hand, Kovacs et al. (2020) explored a way to accommodate GeoGebra Automated Reasoning Tools (GGb-ART) in a computer-supported geometric reasoning ecosystem. They found that these tools are very useful to explore geometric statements and conjectures but the use of them in classroom may be challenging and discouraging for students. In the research examining the effects of instruction-based dynamic versus static visualization on the self-efficacy and problem-solving skills in mathematics, Kohen et al. (2019) found that instruction based on GeoGebra through its dynamic visualization had a positive effect as opposed to instruction on static visualization. These studies also point out that GeoGebra can be useful for not only teaching and learning mathematics but also various mathematics related topics such as history of mathematics, reasoning, self-efficacy, and the problem-solving skills.

Discussion and conclusion
The findings of bibliometric analyses provide useful details about the number of studies as well as important insights about the nature of the studies. This study aimed to investigate the trends of studies focusing on GeoGebra from 2009 to 2021 with the bibliometric analysis. The results showed that the GeoGebra related studies were published by 2009 in WoS. Although the number of publications has mostly tendency to increase over years, it was also observed that the number of studies decreased in a few time-periods compared to the previous year. It can be said that the trend is not always in the upward direction and the rate of growth is not sharp in the research on GeoGebra. This points out the need for more studies related to GeoGebra.

In the keyword analysis, the terms such as dynamic geometry, mathematics, technology, and dynamic mathematics software reflect the consistency between the content of the research studies and the purpose of this study, which investigates trends in GeoGebra. Moreover, while the keywords such as geometry (e.g., Bhagat & Chang, 2015; Martinovic & Manizade, 2020; Podaeva et al., 2021), calculus (e.g., Caglayan, 2016; Ovodenko & Kouropatov, 2019), Euclidean geometry (e.g., Bayaga et al., 2019), linear functions (e.g., Granberg & Olsson, 2015; Mushipe & Ogbonnaya, 2019) give information about in which mathematical subjects and grade levels Geogebra is used for teaching, the terms like automated theorem proving (e.g., Blazek & Pech, 2017; Botana et al., 2015), mathematical modeling (e.g., Arzarello et al., 2012; Budinski & Takaci, 2013; Sekulic et al., 2020), and problem-solving (e.g., da Silva et al., 2021; Hernandez et al., 2020; Koyuncu et al., 2015) mainly show in which mathematics teaching activities GeoGebra is used. In the studies, it has been also observed that the features that stand out more about GeoGebra are locus (e.g., Blazek & Pech, 2017, 2019; Kovacs, 2019) and visualization (e.g., Gómez-Chacón, 2013; Kohen et al., 2019; Orozco & Morales-Morgado, 2017). This points out the lack of research studies on the effects of other properties such as dragging, rotating etc. The keywords such as teaching, education and e-learning indicates that the studies have mostly investigated the use of GeoGebra in teaching and learning process (e.g., Açıkgül, 2021; Birgin & Uzun Yazıcı, 2021; Mthethwa et al., 2020; Verhoef et al., 2015). Furthermore, it is understood that the researchers especially focused on GeoGebra in teacher education (e.g., Andresen & Misfeldt, 2010; Hall & Chamblee, 2013; Hernandez et al., 2020) and the effects of it on mathematics achievement (e.g., Alabdulaziz et al., 2020; Birgin & Acar, 2020; Bozic et al., 2019; Zulnaidi et al., 2020). The results of keyword analysis not only indicates that its effect on variables other than mathematics achievement and at earlier grade levels should be investigated, but also points to the lack of studies on GeoGebra in cognitive, affective, and metacognitive dimensions.

The timeline analysis shows that early research centered on integrating GeoGebra into mathematics and learning design through computer-based mathematical tasks and interactive whiteboards (e.g., Berger, 2011; Lavicza & Papp-Varga, 2010). Furthermore, the terms cognitive demands and computer affordances (e.g., Berger, 2011) indicate that the researchers arranged and analyzed learning designs in their studies by taking both cognitive and technological considerations into account. The terms, such as dynamic geometry, dynamic mathematics software, and dynamic software, indicate that the concept of dynamic software was becoming more widely and clearly used in research studies as of 2012. According to timeline analysis, while the studies on GeoGebra seemed to be related to teacher education in the beginning, the studies at the middle school level came to the fore towards the last periods. This shows that an attempt has been started for a transition from studying GeoGebra at the upper-class levels to the lower class-levels. The terms collaboration (e.g., Birgin & Acar, 2020; Takaci et al., 2015) and problem-solving points out the investigations related to GeoGebra within different contexts. In the last time-period, visualization has come into prominence as a property of software. It is also understood that the studies were conducted with GeoGebra in different mathematical topics such as algebra, Euclidean geometry, mathematical modeling, function, ovals, polycentric curves, calculus, linear functions, and automated theorem proving. It can be said that the mathematics subjects or teaching activities studied in GeoGebra have changed over time. For example, while algebra and mathematical modeling were more prominent between 2012 and 2015, calculus and proving (Hasek, 2019; Kovacs et al., 2018; Zengin, 2017) were more prominent in the last time-period. To summarize, the concepts of dynamic geometry, dynamic mathematics software, technology, mathematics, and geometry can be found in almost every time-period.

The overlay map including the terms such as computer, software, dynamic mathematics software, problem, solution, example, tool, paper, opportunity, difficulty, mathematics, mathematical concept indicates that these terms highly occur in the articles between 2010 and 2015. These terms refer to the use of GeoGebra as a dynamic software, as well as the use of GeoGebra to illustrate a problem, solution, or example, and the comparison of its opportunity and difficulty to paper during this time-period. Other terms used during this time-period include instruction, student, teacher, experience, experiment, preservice teacher, and prospective teacher, which all refer to investigations into the function of GeoGebra in the teaching process and teacher training, while the terms representation and connection correspond to the prominent features of GeoGebra that researchers focused on between 2010 and 2015. On the other hand, the terms, such as case study, qualitative data, interview, effect, group, control group, experimental group, test, questionnaire, application, process, model, significant difference post-test, ability, class, school, learner, learning skill, classroom, strategy, practice, approach, are highly occurring terms in the articles between 2015 and 2020. These terms used in this time-period point out both intervention research examining GeoGebra’s effectiveness and qualitative studies that provide further information about the process. When the overlay map is examined, the closeness of the colors to each other indicates that the studies have not changed dramatically over the last ten years in terms of the concepts that were focused. Moreover, the density map shows that the terms commonly used in GeoGebra related studies were approach, tool, paper, problem, process, use, software, mathematics, technology, student, teacher, study, learning course, and effect. This map shows that majority of the research focused on using GeoGebra to teach and learn mathematics, as well as the usefulness of the program and the specifics of its various aspects.

The network map indicates that the terms of GeoGebra related studies were clustered in four groups depending on the degree of the relationships among them. The first cluster was named as learner anatomy since its highly occurring terms were student, learning, research, analysis, group, effect, understanding, function, course, test. This cluster refers to the studies focus on how GeoGebra can be used to enhance students’ mathematics learning and the impact it has on learning. The second cluster was identified as teaching analytics depending on the highly occurring terms such as study, mathematics, teacher, teaching, technology, data, knowledge, school, skill, dynamic geometry software. This cluster points out the role of GeoGebra in mathematics teaching and its effects on the development of knowledge and skills. The third cluster was called as technological focus because it included the terms such as use, paper, tool, problem, software, approach, process, environment, activity and way. In the design of research works, these terms often refer to technical and procedural issues. The fourth cluster was given the name conceptual extension based on the highly occurring terms, such as concept, task, computer, representation, topic, reasoning, framework, time, form, strategy. It refers to studies considering GeoGebra characteristics, as well as mathematical topics and skills. As a result, conceptual expansion in various aspects of these studies attracts attention.

In summary, the earlier GeoGebra studies were mostly related to the active use of computers in mathematics education, but the research works focused on the dynamic feature of GeoGebra in the following periods. Initially, the studies gave the weight to teacher training for the use of this software and then included the integration of GeoGebra in mathematics instruction. In recent years, the effectiveness of GeoGebra on different mathematical contexts and different subjects has been investigated.

Limitations and recommendations
This research only focused on GeoGebra as a dynamic software used for educational purposes. However, there are many other programs such as Geometer’s Sketchpad, Cabri II, Cabri 3D, Autograph, Coypu, Cinderella, Derive and Graphmatica. More holistic research studies on the use of all these programs in mathematics teaching and learning can be done to reveal the place, effects, advantages, and disadvantages of technological software in mathematics education. The effects of these programs can also be compared with each other and the results may help reveal in which programs more studies are needed. Moreover, investigating the use of GeoGebra in different fields or disciplines can assist to compare the similarities and differences and link different fields or disciplines together. In other words, it can be investigated how Geogebra can be used for STEM. The findings indicate that GeoGebra has been in widespread use for around the past ten years, with less research on the subject than other mathematics education topics. There is need more research on GeoGebra reflecting its effects in cognitive, affective, and metacognitive dimensions. Furthermore, experimental and qualitative, especially case study, studies appear in the research works related to GeoGebra predominantly. Other type of research designs such as longitudinal, relational, cross-sectional can be conducted by the researchers to complete the gaps in this research area. Moreover, although studies with pre-service teachers attract more attention, it is thought that there is a need for research on GeoGebra at all grade levels, including teacher training. This study examined English articles in the WoS database, and further analysis could be done by incorporating various databases, languages, and research topics.