The present study investigates a comparison of the recursive and non-recursive models of attitude towards problem-based learning, disposition to critical thinking, and creative thinking as outcomes of an ill-structured problem-based technology integration course for pre-service teachers. There are 394 participants compromised via online surveys. Initially, we have examined each outcome for their possible influential factors. We have included the factors revealed associated with the outcome variables in the development of the recursive and non-recursive measurement models. The recursive model suggests cooperative learning process is associated with all the outcomes. Personality traits have a great potential as complementary factors. Spare time activities played a prominent role in the disposition to critical thinking. Reflective thinking on problem-solving improved disposition to critical thinking and attitude towards problem-based learning. Interestingly, the regulation of cognition, a type of metacognition, influenced in disposition to critical thinking, and the knowledge of cognition impacted creative thinking. In the nonrecursive model, we have dropped creative thinking to obtain the best fit model. Attitudes towards Problem-Based Learning and Disposition to Critical Thinking have a feedback loop association. Several factor variables are excluded, as well. Then, the findings are discussed.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Higher order thinking skills are in action when an individual has acquired new information and related and/or reorganized this information to reach a goal and/or reveal possible responses in confusing or confounding situations (Lewis & Smith, 1993). They may shape diversity of purposes, such as creating a new idea, information, or object, establishing a belief system and values, making decisions, an artistic expression, forecasting events, solving unusual and unique problems, etc. Therefore, critical thinking, creative thinking and problem-solving are the superior higher order thinking skills that students are expected to acquire.

Problem-based learning (PBL) improves students’ a wide range of capabilities due to its complex, active, and challenging nature (Newman, 2005). Educational tasks such as open-ended and ill-structures problems requiring sophisticated efforts have a possibility to improve critical thinking (Lai, 2011). Supporting this notion, PBL encourages critical and creative thinking, and utilize professional skills along with complex problems, identifies and justifies problem space, generate solutions to the problems (Ian, 2009; Awang & Ramly, 2008; Newman, 2005). Moreover, PBL improved not only critical but also creative thinking skills; however, critical thinking was more prominent than creative thinking in the process (Chan, 2013). However, not surprisingly, there is no conclusive evidence related to improvements of critical thinking through PBL (Choi, 2004; Yuan, Kunaviktikul, et al., 2008; Yuan, Williams, et al., 2008). The relationship between problem solving, critical thinking, and creative thinking usually was investigated one impacting another in one direction. However, it may be bi-directional and in feedback loop nature. For instance, problem solving can impact creative thinking while creative thinking impacts problem solving. The same situation may be possible with three of these skills. Berry (1984) discussed that in social sciences, sometimes it is unrealistic to assume that two or more variables are not reciprocally related. In these cases, researchers need non-recursive models rather than conventional recursive models.

The current model that represents associations among PBL, Critical Thinking and Creative Thinking. Figure 1 represents the current recursive model, and Fig. 2 illustrates the non-recursive current model.

Fig. 1
figure 1
The Current Recursive Model. Note: Each figure is provided in a single page

Full size image
Fig. 2
figure 2
The Current Non-Recursive Model

Full size image
Based on the literature review the current recursive model was generated from stand-alone problem expertise and finding approaches, and it covers one-directional effect from PBL to Creative Thinking and Critical Thinking. The current model of the non-recursive model contains reciprocal effects among Problem-Based Learning and Attitude, Creative Thinking, and Critical Thinking. The proposed models further examine any plausible association among the variables and demographics.

This study compares recursive and non-recursive measurement models of attitude towards problem-based learning (AtPBL), disposition to critical thinking, and creative thinking as outcomes of an ill-structured problem-based technology integration course for pre-service teachers. In recursive model assumes that all impacts among variables are one-directional whereas a non-recursive model assumes all impacts among variables are bi-directional. This comparison is made in terms of problem-solving theories problem-solving and expertise (Ericsson, 1999; Weisberg, 1999), and problem finding (Runco, 1994). To develop non-recursive models, there must be several instrument variables called predictors in recursive models. Hereby, the current study seeks the answers to the following research questions:

1.
What instrumental variables predict AtPBL, Disposition to Critical Thinking (DCT), and Creative Thinking (CRET) of college students in ill-structured problem-based computer literacy courses?

2.
Can instrumental variables that have been revealed in the first question generate a comprehensive measurement model?

3.
Can AtPBL, DCT and CRET non-recursively impact each other with the presence of instrumental variables?

4.
What are the similarities and differences between recursive and non-recursive models generated?

Theoretical Framework
Problem-solving process, expertise, and problem finding are the major theoretical explanations of creativity. Problem-solving and expertise group stated that expertise or extensive and well-organized knowledge in a specific domain led to creative achievements (Ericsson, 1999; Weisberg, 1999). Heuristics of problem-space to produce solutions to a problem explain how people generate creative solutions. An opposing idea, Problem Finding (Runco, 1994), suggested that creators are usually not aware of the existence of the problem. The traditional view of problem-solving was not sufficient to address the realization of the existence of the problem and the effect of subjective experiences for an understanding of the problem. Moreover, the ill-structured problem-solving process even departed as small well-structured processes enhance critical thinking.

Problem-solving, creative thinking, and critical thinking are overlapping concepts; however, problem-solving, and creative thinking are not sufficient to explain some components of critical thinking (Garrison, 1991). According to Johnson & Johnson (1993), problem-solving and critical thinking have a common aspect of controversies where students’ ideas, understandings, interpretations, or conclusions are incomputable with those of another. Moreover, they argued that controversies may produce creative insights and high quality of problem-solving. They made a functional connection between problem-solving and critical thinking as means and the conceptual association between problem-solving and creative thinking as ends.

Critical thinking and problem-solving are not isolated activities; problem-based learning has a likely impact on critical thinking (Pithers & Soden, 2000). Lai (2011) suggested that critical thinking can be improved in educational tasks like open-ended and ill-structures problems requiring sophisticated efforts. For instance, Şendağ and Odabaşı (2009) found that problem-based learning in an online education setting significantly improved critical thinking skills of students. However, Choi (2004) indicated that problem-based learning did not foster critical thinking in nurse education settings.

Traditionally, critical thinking and creative thinking are grasped as separate and different skills; nevertheless, they have strong connections (Glassnes & Schwarz, 2007; Baker et al., 2001). Hence, creative thinking requires many evaluations while critical thinking needs a good imagination for new perspectives. Critical thinking and creative thinking cannot be thought separately since critical thinking without creativity produces little skepticism and pessimism; creativity without critical thinking produces little originality lacking added value (Paul & Elder, 2006).

Identification of Instrumental Variables
The factors investigated in the present study for their potential association with AtPBL, DCT, and CRET are provided next.

Personality
Personality traits may have different impacts on creativity, critical thinking, and problem solving. For instance, Batey and Furham (2006) found that personality traits had different impacts on artistic, scientific, and everyday creativity. In such, neuroticism impacted positively artistic creativity but negatively scientific and everyday creativity whereas, conscientiousness was positively related to scientific and everyday activity but negatively with artistic creativity. Besides, openness to experience and concern for truth enhance critical thinking (Bauer & Liang, 2003; Clifford et al., 2004; Ku & Ho, 2010b) while conscientiousness has a hindering effect on it (Bauer & Liang, 2003). Additionally, problem-solvers perceive themselves as open-minded, socially initiating, and flexible (Houtz et al., 2010). Moreover, personality variables were significantly and negatively linked to ineffective problem-solving ability; however, neuroticism demonstrated a positive relationship (Elliott et al., 1994).

Demographics
Critical thinking ability was only explained by parents’ education level among other precollege characteristics such as total family income, race, sex, highest degree planned, and initial critical thinking (Terenzini et al., 1995). Moreover, grade level could foresee critical thinking whereas the followings did not have any significant impact on critical thinking: mother and father educational attainment, subscription to periodicals, watching TV, income level, and the place their families live (Akkuş et al., 2010; Bulut et al., 2009). College students from upper-class families or fathers demonstrated better critical thinking skills than lower-class students (Cheung et al. 2001). This can be explained with students’ insufficient access to resources and commitment to work part-time. Thus, they must spend less time for studying result in lower critical thinking and learning effort. On the other hand, students’ employment may appear to be a disadvantage at the first glance, but there is an evidence indicating an increased critical thinking due to work experience (Gellin, 2003). Finally, previous experience in the clinical environment caused better hypothesis generation, classification, plan selection and error recovery; besides, it triggered alteration and adjustment of problem-solving (Kolodner & Kolodner, 1987). Depending on few studies, critical thinking has been majorly examined for a potential relationship. For that reason, demographics factors would be better to be used as instrumental variables for critical thinking.

Use of Technology
Critical thinking is a required ability because individuals must access and evaluate validity or non-validity of accurate information effectively (Brouwer, 1996; Browne et al., 2000; Weiler, 2004). Moreover, what technology offers today may also foster critical thinking. Computer-based video conferencing has potential impact on creating an educational community of inquiry via utilization of critical reflection and discourse (Garrison et al. 2001). Particularly, hypermedia is identified as one of the several mind tools helping individuals to involve in critical thinking overtly (Jonassen et al., 1998). Moreover, Tsai (2001) suggested the potential contribution of the Internet is leading students to think more critically via searching, debating, and evaluating arguments. Using the internet for searching and scanning information contributed to information problem-solving skills (Brand-Gruwel et al., 2009) as well. The internet may be utilized as an effective and efficient tool to gather information to identify problem spaces and propose solutions. Internet use supports students’ motivation, verbal communication skills, thought stimulation, and creative thinking as a part of general learning (Cheung & Huang, 2005).

Due to the importance of critical information search and evaluation, the relationship between technology use and critical thinking is dominantly investigated. Technology use is seen from functional perspective for critical thinking and problem-solving. It is expected to support the required tasks during the execution of these two higher orders thinking skills. However, the association of creative thinking and technology use is unrevealed. Since there are numerous issues remaining covert, it is worth to examine the association of technology use with higher order thinking skills as instrumental variables.

Spare Time Activities
There is a negative association between personal and social activities and critical thinking (Bauer & Liang, 2003). Terenzini et al. (1995) found that relationship with other students negatively impacted critical thinking abilities when it is considered as out-of-class experiences. On the other hand, students involved in the activities of Greek Life, clubs and organization, interaction with both faculty and peer, and living on campus, participation in social and scientific activities influenced in critical thinking compared to students who were not involved (Akkuş et al., 2010). Students with a higher level of creative self-efficacy tended to engage in after-school academics and after-school group activities more (Beghetto, 2006). Hong and Milgram (2010) indicated that an examination of out-of-school activities might reveal the hidden abilities of children and reduce talent-loss. Moreover, creative thinking and leisure activities may foresee noteworthy life accomplishments. Under this category, critical and creative thinking appears to be more influenced. For that reason, spare time activities were used as instrumental variables for these two skills.

Reflective Thinking on Problem Solving
Due to the common belief that critical thinking and reflective thinking mutually impacts each other; they are sometimes used interchangeably (Griffin, 2003). Hence, critical thinking requires a reasonable amount of reflective thinking to make proper decisions (Ennis, 1987). For this reason, reflective thinking is usually explained as a strategy to teach or a support for critical thinking skills (Forneris & Peden-McAlpine 2007). On the other hand, critical thinking is explained as one of the main elements of reflective thinking in teacher education (Sparks-Langer & Colton, 1991). Moreover, reflective thinking is usually employed during the ill-structured problem-solving process (Lee, 2000). The reflective thinking was an outcome of the problem-solving process (Dieker & Monda-Amaya, 1997). Reflective practice is also developed via critical partnership along an ill-structured problem-solving process (Parsons & Stephenson, 2005).

Cooperation
It is commonly stated that cooperative learning has a great potential to enhance critical thinking. The relationship between these two is mutually beneficial (Abrami et al., 2008; Waite & Davis, 2006). Students with more experiences about diversity and positive interactions with diverse peers were more inclined to have high scores on critical thinking disposition (Laird, 2005). Taylor et al. (1958) found that group participation while using brainstorming constrains creativity. Supporting this point from individual member levels in collaboration groups, group-independent students showed the higher need for achievement, autonomy, aggression, and creativity (Perkins, 1993).

During problem-solving in the learning of mathematics and spatial concepts; Phelps and Damon (1989) specified that peer collaboration is an effective learning atmosphere for reasoning. Titzer et al. (2012) demonstrated that collaboration and problem solving progressed reciprocally. Students working in pairs or groups outperformed the peers working individually on problem-solving tasks applied in different settings; moreover, they maintained their superior successful performance in another task (Fawcett & Garton, 2005; Uribe et al., 2003).

Metacognition
Metacognition would establish a bridge between the modern research of cognition, learning and critical thinking (Dean & Khun 2003; Khun & Dean Jr., 2004). Moreover, metacognition is one of the necessary fostering components of critical thinking skills, and it makes critical thinking promising (Ku & Ho, 2010a; Mango, 2010). Wilen and Phillips (1995) proposes metacognition as a teaching approach for critical thinking. Creativity is particularly defined as a self-regulatory metacognitive process (Pesut, 1990). Compared to critical and creative thinking, there are more efforts to identify the relationship between metacognition and problem-solving. Cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational skills are necessary for effective problem-solving in diverse academic settings (Antonietti et al., 2000; Mayer, 1998).

Metacognitive statements can be used as an evidence for students’ reflections on problem-solving (Pugalee, 2001); since students were aware of cognitive processes affecting their problem-solving approaches (Hanley, 1995). Unsuccessful problem solving was characterized by students’ poor metacognitive decisions exacerbated by the lack of critical engagement with each other’s thinking, while successful outcomes were favored if students challenged and discarded unhelpful ideas and actively endorsed useful strategies (Goos et al., 2002). Moreover, students who got metacognition training had a broad range of strategies for solving problems, in turn, increased performance (Mevarech, 1999; Teong, 2003).

Attitude towards Scientific Research
It seems that problem-solving is investigated for its relationship to attitude towards scientific research compared to other higher order thinking skills. Adesoji (2008) found that problem-solving process supported the improvement of a positive attitude towards science. Students in medical school demonstrated a better attitude towards science in problem-based learning lessons compared to lecture-based lessons (Khan et al., 2007).

Places Currently Living
Places, where students are currently living, were used by Akkuş et al. (2010) to analyze its potential impact on the disposition to critical thinking; they found that it did not explain DCT significantly. We have not come across any studies explaining the potential influence of places currently living on both problem-solving and creative thinking.

Method
The Participants
This study uses convenience sampling due to resource limit. Researchers are unable to use random sampling due to money, time, and resource limitations (Wallen & Fraenkel, 2001). 394 teacher candidates voluntarily participated to the study. The power analysis conducted before data collection for SEM, suggested by MacCallum et al. (1996), yielded minimum 164 participants for 0.80 power, df = 24, RMSEA-H0 = 0.10 (high misfit) and RMSEA-H1 = 0.02 (good-fit), p = 0.05. Incomplete surveys were omitted from the data. To increase the response rate, we sent several reminders to the potential participants. The sample comprised 280 (71.1%) females and 114 (28.9%) males. The sample was recruited from following departments: Primary Teaching (%32.5), Social Science Teaching (%15.0), English Language Teaching (%9.9), Psychological Counseling and Guidance (%7.9), Early Childhood Education (%24.6), Arts Teaching (%3.8), and Turkish Language Teaching (%6.3). The detailed descriptive information related to demographics, internet use purposes, and the leisure time activities are illustrated in Table 1, 2, and 3 respectively.

Table 1 Demographic Characteristics of the Participants
Full size table
Table 2 The Internet Use Purposes of the Participants
Full size table
Table 3 Leisure Time Activities of the Participants
Full size table
Procedures
The study took place in an introductory computer literacy course along the semester. In the course, there were several different instructors; however, they applied the same course syllabus. The instructors designed the course together at the beginning of the semester, and they implemented the course in Moodle learning environment. The computer literacy course content contained Microsoft Office and Internet tools for educational use.

To investigate the relationship among AtPBL, DCT, and CRET participants must demonstrate critical and creative thinking. Thus, a computer literacy course designed for preservice teachers based on ill-structured problem-solving process and Moodle learning management system enabled researchers to test recursive and non-recursive models among the variables. Problem-based learning used as core instructional strategy during the course. The instructors applied ill-structured problem-solving process in the course as explained in Barrows and Myers (1993).

The reason for exposing participants to ICT related course (i.e., computer literacy) relies on scientific evidence that creative and critical thinking skills are improved via use of ICT integrated curricular activities. Some research findings suggested that practical application and use of ICT enhance creative thinking ability (i.e., Allegra et al., 2001; Wheeler et al., 2002). There are also quite a few research reports providing evidence that ICT improves students’ critical thinking abilities (i.e., McMahon, 2009; Rumpagaporn, 2007; Shkvyr et al. 2020). Nirbita et al. (2018) further argued that integrating ICT into problem-based learning activities support creative thinking because it enables students to conduct questions, give argumentations, collect and compose information, analyze problems, and make decisions.

Students were introduced with the problem via scenario to motivate students and let them internalize the problem. According to scenario, students were supposed to be a school principal in their career. The instructors utilized this step since they expect students to internalize the problem. The problems set during the PBL activities are included but not limited to followings: (1) finding out the most appropriate computer configuration for the given purposes without going over the budget. (2) identifying the most useful features of MS word to create school magazine that include multimedia contents, (3) identifying the features of MS Excel to handle (i.e., sorting, filtering, classifying, summing etc. data) recorded voting data and to make inference based on the result. (4) selecting and recommending the most useful features of MS PowerPoint to create tell-tale show, in each PBL activity, scenario was similar, they were school principals and solving some authentic problems. In each activity, once the problem introduced, students are worked in groups are gathered to explore the problem, to share knowledge regarding the problem and possible solutions, and to define the problem in detail. To do that, they use synchronous and asynchronous communication tools provided by Moodle. Then, they all searched for information from resources provided or guided by the instructors. The instructors prepared and provided students with a resource package in Moodle including textbooks, manuals, offline or online videos, step-by-step instructions, so on and so forth for learning about information technologies. Then students listed all required actions and discussed possible solutions. Next, each group presented their solution to the problem and supported it. Last, revision to each group’s proposed solution took place.

However, learning how to use these technologies was not sufficient because they had to apply them in a particular task purpose. Therefore, some tasks provided in Table 4 and summarized above require creating a product such as building school magazine or creating tell-tale show. In those tasks, after they found out what software features are required to do so during PBL activities, they go further and create those products. During the product creation phases of the instruction, one of the scaffolding strategies, material scaffolding, were applied. Material scaffolding requires instructors to use of written prompts and offering cues to help the students achieve a task (IRIS Center, 2021). The instructors provided manuals to use MS Word, Excel, and PowerPoint programs, step-by-step instructions for building asked products, and guided example for similar ones.

Table 4 The tasks and relevant recursive and non-recursive sub-tasks of ill-structured problem in computer literacy course
Full size table
At the end of the semester, the instructors awarded the students by their performances. Students worked in collaborative groups both in PBL and scaffolding activities. Each instructor assisted them during course hours (four hours every week). They got 64 h of assistance in total. Table 4 illustrates each assigned task.

While students are engaged with the ill-structured problem-solving tasks, we assumed that their problem-solving actions were progressed in both expertise and finding angles discussed in the literature. The stand-alone propositions about expertise accepted as fostering creativity while the finding angle majorly are triggering critical thinking. Both of these stand-alone angles supported the recursive model of the present study. Moreover, a hybrid angle suggested that problem-solving enabled the development of three skills interconnectedly. This hybrid understanding is of ill-structured problem-solving tasks provided a foundation for a non-recursive model. The technology integration course was designed based on these two different views of problem-solving processes and corresponding models. The course included several main tasks, and the main tasks required both recursive and non-recursive understanding for generating solutions. To what extent recursive and non-recursive models reflected as sub-tasks during the technology integration course are presented in Table 4 by mapping them with each task. Recursive components focused on the development of either critical thinking or creative thinking during problem-solving processes while non-recursive components concentrated on the development of problem-solving, critical thinking, and creative thinking reciprocally due to their simultaneous need for the application. The Moodle system supported these two models by providing necessary learning materials and clues separately. These learning materials and clues are developed based on the rapid-prototyping model suggested by Tripp and Bichelmeyer (1990). Mainly, two activities were completed during this process: selection or preparation of materials. Initially, the available and ready-to-use materials were searched on the Internet, and a collection of them were prepared. Then, students took the same class one year ago before were introduced with this collection to get their feedback. Depending on positive and negative feedback, a final list of materials was identified. In the second leg of this process, if there were any task was unable to be supported by ready materials, new materials were developed. First, a prototype of the materials was developed, and then the same students used for materials selection was asked to give feedback about new materials. These iterative cycles were performed couple of times. Finally, we had diversity of materials to support both recursive and non-recursive sub-tasks. During implementation, students enrolled the course along with the present study had studied them when they need to use either recursive or non-recursive sub-tasks depending on their need.

Students had to analyze those tasks based on four components: (1) ideas or hypothesis – students’ inference about the task and its contribution to the problem, (2) facts – an increasing synthesis and re-synthesis of information collected through inquiry essential to the hypotheses formulated, (3) learning issues – students list what they need to know or comprehend to complete the problem task and (4) action plan – things that had to be performed to finish the tasks in a formulated plan form. Along the semester, students proposed the feasible solutions to the tasks as well as the problem. They revisited and updated their assignments when learning issues, which had led them into new directions. They also focused on the identification of resources. The instructors scheduled follow-ups, and then students critiqued the resources they used as well as how they had progressed. When necessary, they revisited their four components. With their final products, they presented their solutions. After the presentations, the instructors abstracted the knowledge and skills, and summarized all courses as the definitions, diagrams, lists, concepts, principles, so on and so forth. As a final step, students gave themselves a self-evaluation regarding the reasoning for the problem, the sufficiency of information and their resource quality, contribution to the group work to complete the tasks, knowledge, attitude, and skills acquirement.

Studies showed that the more opportunities teacher candidates get to use technology during training programs, the more likely they integrate technology in their own classrooms in future (McCoy, 2008). One way to prepare teacher candidates for technology integration in their either online or face-to-face instructions is stand-alone technology courses such as computer literacy. The stand-alone technology courses are commonly used because they allow wide range of technology skills to be taught (Kay, 2006) and improve teacher candidates’ self-efficacy in the use of technology as well as attitudes toward it (Bielefeldt, 2001; Gunter, 2001).

During the PBL activities students must search information to propose a solution to given problem through scenario. The Internet plays a big role in such searches (Benoit 1998). Through integration of technology into PBL, instructors can create active, authentic learning environment which develops certain skills (i.e., collaboration, communication etc.) that enhance learning (Green, 2018). Therefore, technology integration and PBL are complementary to each other and together they support learning (Green, 2018).

Measures
Demographic Questionnaire
Demographic questionnaire covered following information: gender, department, mother and father education level, family income, previous work experiences and the place currently living (i.e., parents house, student apartment/house, state residential house, dormitory etc.).

Use of Technology Questionnaire
The questionnaire included hours of internet use and the use purposes of the internet. Hours of the internet use was measured in five categories: (0) Never, (1) Less than one hour, (2) One to three hours, (3) Three to five hours and (4) More than five hours. The Internet use purposes of were measured as frequencies in five category frequency scale: (0) Never, (1) Rarely, (2) Sometimes, (3) Often and (4) Always. The purposes were categorized as commenting, studying, research, downloading, reading news, playing games, listening to music, watching movies, meeting new people, communicating and chatting, and friendship.

Attitude towards Problem-Based Learning Scale
Turan & Demirel (2010) developed this scale to measure college students’ attitude towards to problem-based learning in Turkish. They applied item analysis and explanatory factor analysis with principal component analysis method and varimax rotation. The Cronbach’s α was found 0.95. They concluded that the scale was valid and reliable to measure the intended construct.

Disposition to Critical Thinking
The Disposition toward Critical Thinking Scale was developed by the American Philosophy Association in 1990 via a Delphi study (Facione et al., 1994). It contained 75 items (Cronbach’s α is 0.90) and seven subfactors: (1) Truth-seeking, (2) Open-mindedness, (3) Analyticity, (4) Systematicity, (5) Self-confidence, (6) Inquisitiveness, and (7) Maturity (Cronbach’s αs ranging from 0.72 to 0.82). Kökdemir (2003) adapted the scale to Turkish (α = 0.88) and decreased the number of items to 51, and six subfactors: (1) Truth-seeking, (2) Open-mindedness, (3) Analyticity, (4) Systematicity, (5) Self-confidence and (6) Inquisitiveness (α ranging from 0.39 to 85).

Creative Thinking Scale
The scale was originally developed by Raudsepp (1979)  entitled as “How creative are you?”. It is a Likert-type scale with 50 items. Çoban (1999) adapted the scale to Turkish; they also examined and confirmed the validity and reliability of the Turkish scale.

Cooperative Learning Process Scale
Bay & Çetin (2012) developed this scale to measure whether cooperative learning happens along the implementation of the process. It includes 40 items. The scale initially was validated by experts for the appropriateness of its content. Then, explanatory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) were performed. After EFA, there were five sub-factors. The authors stated that it could be used as either one overall total factor or five factors separately. CFA results revealed a good fit model for both one and five-factor forms. The reliability of the scales was 0.94.

Reflective Thinking Skill Scale towards Problem Solving
Kızılkaya & Aşkar (2010) developed this scale. They applied CFA for construct validity, and they found an acceptable model fit with three factors: questioning, reasoning, and evaluation. Cronbach’s α values for questioning, reasoning and evaluation, and a total of the scale were 0.73, 0.71, 0.69, and 0.83, respectively.

Metacognitive Awareness Inventory:
Schraw and Dennison (1994) originally developed this Likert scale, and Abacı et al. (2006) adapted it into Turkish. Abacı, et.al., (2006) approved construct, content, translation, and appropriateness validity of the scale. They also found that Cronbach’s α was 0.95 for an overall of the scale. There are eight factors under overarching two factors: knowledge of cognition (sub-factors: declarative, procedural, and conditional knowledge) and regulation of cognition (sub-factors: planning, organizing and information management, monitoring, debugging and evaluation). The present study used overarching factors for analyses.

Adjective-Based Personality Test
Bacanlı et al. (2009) developed this test to measure personality based on a Five Factor Theory. They provided construct validity via Direct Oblimin rotations and principal component analysis; they also demonstrated concurrent validity with the Sociotprohy scale, Reactions to Conflicts Scale, Negative–Positive Emotion Scale and Trait Anxiety Inventory. For reliability, they used both test–retest and internal consistency (Cronbach’s α). They indicated that all psychometric properties of the test were satisfactory and that it could be utilized to assess and evaluate undergraduate and graduate students’ personality.

Attitude towards Scientific Research Scale
The scale is developed by Korkmaz et al. (2011). It included 30 items. There were four factors extracted after explanatory factor analysis. They were (1) Unwillingness to help researchers, (2) Negative attitude towards to scientific research, (3) Positive attitude towards scientific research, and (4) Willingness to help researchers. Since first and fourth, and second and third factors are opposite to each other, each of them must be used separately in research studies. The total score of the scale is meaningless. The scale was also approved by confirmatory factor analysis with an acceptable fit at both first and second order analysis. Several reliability analyses were performed. Cronbach’s α for each factor ranged from 0.76 to 0.85. The test–retest coefficient yielded results more than 0.90 for all factors.

Data Collection
Data is gathered at the end of the semester. Once students delivered their final task, they are guided to complete the questionnaires on the course page in Moodle. They have spent 45 min to one hour to complete the survey pack. The questionnaires were online and recorded the responses to the database for questionnaire plug-in on Moodle. They had to complete all questions; otherwise, the questionnaire did not let them leave the page.

Data Analysis
To answer the first research question, three independent multiple linear regression analyses were conducted using demographics, use of technology, leisure time activities, personality, awareness of metacognition, attitudes towards reflection of problem solving and collaboration as independent variables and AtPBL, DCT, and CRET as the dependent variables. The assumptions of the multiple linear regression analysis were checked, and no issues were observed. Structural equation modeling (SEM) analysis was performed using each of the three dependent variables, and their predictors revealed in previous three research questions, and the appropriate model fit values were analyzed to examine the second research question. To examine the non-recursive impact of each outcome variables, we performed non-recursive structural equation modeling in which variables are analyzed with double-sided arrows. Berry (1984) discussed that in social sciences, sometimes it is unrealistic to assume that two or more variables are not reciprocally related. In these cases, researchers need non-recursive models rather than conventional recursive models. Finally, the results of both SEM analyses in terms of remained or extracted variables are compared.

Results
Predictors of AtPBL
Multiple linear regression analysis revealed eight variables capable of significantly explaining 33.6% of total variance [F(7, 386) = 27.906, p < 0.01]. Coefficients of the variables included in the model are presented in Table 5.

Table 5 Coefficients Predicted AtPBL
Full size table
Cooperative learning process, Reflection Thinking Skill on towards Problem Solving, and Conscientiousness increased AtPBL whereas neuroticism, previous work experience, internet use hours, and place where participants are currently living decreased it.

Predictors of DCT
Multiple linear regression analysis revealed eight variables capable of significantly explaining 36.5% of total variance [F(8, 385) = 27.683, p < 0.01]. Coefficients of the variables included in the model are presented in Table 6.

Table 6 Coefficients Predicted DCT
Full size table
All the predictors had almost the same amount impact on DCT. The cooperative learning process, reflective thinking skill on problem-solving, Participating in Social Activities, and Openness to Experience positively increases DCT. In contrast, watching TV, use of the internet for meeting new people, negative attitude towards Scientific Research decreased it.

Predictors of CRET
Multiple linear regression analysis revealed eight variables capable of significantly explaining 39.3% of total variance [F(7, 386) = 35.707, p < 0.01]. Coefficients of the variables included in the model are presented in Table 7.

Table 7 Coefficients Predicted CRET
Full size table
Cooperative Learning Process, Knowledge of Cognition, Participating in Social Activities, Family Income, Use of Internet for Downloading and Positive Attitude towards Scientific Research positively increases CRET. In contrast, Use of Internet for Watching Movies decreased it.

Comprehensive Model of Factors Affecting AtPBL, DCT, and CRET.
We combined all predictors found in the first research question and their corresponding dependent variables in a comprehensive measurement model. The hypothesized model is illustrated in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3
figure 3
The Comprehensive Hypothesized Model for Three Variables with their Predictors

Full size image
Before preceding to estimate the hypothesized model, univariate and multivariate normality is checked, which is a critical assumption of SEM (Arbuckle, 2007). For variance and covariance-based analysis, kurtosis values are essential to examine than skewness values (DeCarlo, 1997); hence, while skewness affects tests based on means, kurtosis seriously impacts variance and covariance-based tests. The univariate and multivariate normality assessments (both) are presented in Table 8.

Table 8 Assessment of Normality
Full size table
The analysis revealed that there was an issue regarding normality. For univariate normal distribution, Family Income (independent variable) and CRET (dependent variable) were seen the main reasons for this since West et al. (1995) indicated that critical ratio values of kurtosis higher than seven are a sign of non-normal univariate data. Moreover, according to Byrne (2010), a critical ratio value for multivariate distribution greater than five is an indication of non-normal distribution. we reran the analysis after removing Family Income; however, multivariate kurtosis values did not even change a point. Since CRET was one of the dependent variables, we did not try to remove it; otherwise, the whole model would be modified. Due to the violation of normality assumption, the model results including estimates and the model fit values were checked via bootstrapping technique to ensure the confidence intervals of estimates since all variables were not continuous measures. Byrne (2010) contends that bootstrapping help researchers to ensure the stability of estimates and present more accurate results in the case of non-normal distribution of data issues. For noncontinuous variables bootstrapping is suggested as one of the corrective procedures (Byrne, 1998; Coenders et al., 1997; West et al., 1995).

The estimated model of four hypotheses is illustrated in Fig. 4 below. Internet Use Hours and The Place Currently Living variables were removed from the model since they did not yield a significant path on AtPBL.

Fig. 4
figure 4
The Estimated Model for Three Variables and Their Predictors

Full size image
The model fit values revealed that we had a good fit for the model under investigation as illustrated in Table 9.

Table 10 illustrates unstandardized estimates for regular and bootstrapped results. There were not any drastic differences between both results of estimates and standard errors. Only differences were observed in significance value of three paths: Reflecting Thinking on Problem Solving on AtPBL, Openness to Experience on DCT and Family Income on CRET. However, all paths remained significant after bootstrapping.

Non-recursive analysis of the comprehensive model of AtPBL, DCT, and CRET.
According to Kline (2016), non-recursive models have causal feedback loops or may have correlated disturbances which are not presented in conventional recursive models. For the identification of a nonrecursive model, there must be instrument variables which are unique variables for each endogenous variable in a nonrecursive relationship. In the present study, the variables found for the first research question are utilized as instrument variables. The hypothesized model is illustrated in Fig. 5. The non-recursive relationships are emphasized with solid arrows and square area.

Fig. 5
figure 5
The Hypothesized Model for Non-recursive Relationships of Three Variables

Full size image
We checked univariate and multivariate normality for this analysis, as well. Since the remained variables had the same value for assessment of normality (Please see Table 11), we only provided two additional variables and multivariate values in Table 8.

The multivariate values are lower than the recursive model; however, the normality issue remained. The same procedures implemented in the recursive model was applied for remediation. To estimate the hypothesized model, Generalized Least Squared as suggested by Kline (2016) and Berry (1984) was used. At the first run of the analysis, the model was not identified. After several modifications by adding covariance relationships and deleting some variables, it was identified. The identified model is illustrated in Fig. 6. Stability index, a quality indicator, for a nonrecursive relationship is 0.191 which should not be higher than one or lower than minus one (Arbuckle, 2013).

Fig. 6
figure 6
The Estimated and Updated Model for Non-recursive Relationships of Three Variables

Full size image
The model fit values revealed that we had a good fit for the model under investigation as illustrated in Table 12.

Table 9 Evaluation of the Model Fit Indices
Full size table
Table 13 illustrates unstandardized estimates for regular and bootstrapped results. There were not any significant differences between both results of estimates and standard except for the significance value of one path: Openness to Experience on DCT. It was not remained significant after bootstrapping, so it was interpreted cautiously (Table 11, 12 and 13).

Table 10 Estimates of the paths in the model
Full size table
Table 11 Assessment of Normality
Full size table
Table 12 Evaluation of the Model Fit Indices
Full size table
Table 13 Estimates of the paths in the non-recursive model
Full size table
Differences and similarities between recursive and non-recursive models
Different from the recursive model, CRET and its instrument variables were not able to remain in the non-recursive model. Moreover, the cooperative learning process was only associated with AtPBL; in contrast, Reflective Thinking on Problem-Solving did not remain. Internet Use Hours and The Place Currently Living were not eliminated in the non-recursive model. Like the recursive model, all other instrument variables for Attitude towards Problem-based Learning and DCT remained.

Discussion
The present study demonstrated that ICT related or integrated courses may contribute to the improvement of higher-order thinking skills, such as critical thinking and creative thinking especially in problem-solving settings (Allegra et al., 2001; Wheeler et al., 2002; McMahon, 2009; Rumpagaporn, 2007; Shkvyr et al. 2020; Joyoatmojo & Sudiyanto, 2018). The role of ICT in education moves beyond its initial purpose which teaching technology literacy and integration of ICT into teaching and learning processes. It enabled to imrpove preservice teachers’ higher-order thinking skills which will high probably help them to teacher better.

The cooperative learning process is the only factor affecting all the higher order thinking skills in the recursive model. This study demonstrated the necessity of cooperative learning activities to foster higher order thinking skills. More specifically, its impact was very high on AtPBL and CRET compared to DCT. For DCT, the present study provided evidence for the notion that cooperative learning has a promising potential to enhance critical thinking. Moreover, the association between these two is mutually beneficial (Abrami et al., 2008; Gokhale, 1995; Waite & Davis, 2006). However, the magnitude of the relationship needs improvement. CRET and AtPBL exploited cooperative learning better than critical thinking, and this should be further investigated. The positive and reciprocal relationship between problem-solving and collaboration has been well documented (Dossick & Neff, 2011; Fawcett & Garton, 2005; Goos et al., 2002; Rummel & Spada, 2005; Swenty & Hoehn, 2012). The relationship between creativity and collaboration are controversial. The current study indicated the positive association (Barrett, 2006; Eteläpelto & Lahti, 2008; Vass et al., 2008). Even though this study contradicted with the studies that found adverse impact (Laudel, 2001; Perkins, 1993; Skilton & Dooley, 2010), cooperation and creativity need more effort to illuminate the dynamics unambiguously.

Personality factor seemed critical for AtPBL and DCT. In this study, three personality factors (Openness to Experience, Conscientiousness, and Neuroticism) showed a significant impact. While Conscientiousness had an increasing impact on AtPBL, Neuroticism had a decreasing impact. It seems that group work might influence in this result. Hence, Conscientiousness of group members assisted problem-solving process effectively and efficiently. Neuroticism could raise endless and unproductive discussions and issues along with the process. For this reason, this two personality demonstrated reverse side impacts. As previously indicated (Bauer & Liang, 2003; Clifford et al., 2004; Halpem, 1998), we contributed that Openness to Experience was the only personality trait impacted DCT. Interestingly, there were not any impacts of any of personality traits on CRET, yet there were some evidences (Furnham et al., 2009; Batey & Furham, 2006). The studies between personality and three higher order skills are still required more investigation to reach a clear and enlightening conclusion as also suggested by Zhang (2002). Personality did not seem high priority factor, so they may be good complementary factors for higher order thinking skills.

Using the internet for some purposes impacted DCT and CRET. If the internet is used for downloading purposes, it triggers creativity. This may happen due to the content of the downloaded materials. The Internet can provide a wide range of opportunities to its users. Therefore, users can reach diverse materials that they can use for their creative works. That also increased students’ knowledge base about the domain in which they need to produce creative ideas or products (Feldhusen, 1995). In contrast, when the internet is used for watching movies, it hinders CRET. Since watching movies is a time-consuming activity, students may not have sufficient time for CRET. Moreover, the content of movies may constrain students’ imagination. For DCT, using the internet for meeting new people decreases it. Use of technology may be utilized as a controlling variable like personality; however, the major issue for employing has a broad range of options and rapid advancement for releasing new products.

Like the use of the internet, participation in social activities also had an impact on DCT and CRET. In contrast to Bauer & Liang, 2003 and Terenzini et al. (1995), the current study indicated the positive impact of social activities on critical thinking as suggested by Akkuş et al. (2010), and Gellin (2003). Social activities may provide more complex real-life challenges in which students had an opportunity to employ critical thinking skills. If the activity is merely focusing on killing time rather than having a value or cause, the previous findings may be accurate. For creative thinking, the present study confirmed the results indicated by Beghetto, 2006 and Hong & Milgram, 2010. Social activities may improve students’ self-efficacy to become creative and reveal students’ hidden talents and abilities.

Reflective thinking played a prominent role in affecting both AtPBL and DCT. It seems that reflective thinking and critical thinking cannot be thought separately like mentioned by Griffin (2003). They have a mutual relationship with each other. The present study provided evidence for the necessity of reflective thinking for critical thinking and the reflective thinking as a component of critical thinking (Forneris & Peden-McAlpine 2007; Ennis, 1987). We observed that reflective thinking may be utilized as a strategy for critical thinking as suggested by Baker (1996).

The subcomponents of metacognition were associated with different higher order thinking skills. Regulation of Cognition was related to disposition to critical thinking while Knowledge of Cognition influenced in creative thinking. We were unable to find a link between metacognition and attitude towards problem-solving, surprisingly. Particularly, Regulation of Cognition triggered disposition to critical thinking; since, it is expected that metacognition is one of the fostering components and makes critical thinking promising (Ku & Ho, 2010a; Mango, 2010; Jenkins & Turick-Gibson, 1999; Kuhn, 1999). The nature of critical thinking is procedural; therefore, Regulation of Cognition seems a good match. It was not surprising that metacognition is thought as one of the approaches to teach critical thinking (Wilen & Phillips, 1995). The present study is contradicting with previous studies; hence, it found the only relationship between Regulation of Cognition and Disposition to critical thinking. Yet, previous studies also mentioned the association with Knowledge of Cognition. There may be further research to examine this result in depth. Interestingly, AtPBL was not impacted by any of metacognitive processing. Most previous studies have been reviewed the relationship between metacognition and problem-solving skills (Antonietti et al., 2000; Goos & Galbraith, 1996; Goos et al., 2002; Kapa, 2001; Long, 2003; Mayer, 1998; Mevarech, 1999; Pugalee, 2001). The present study may reveal a need for investigating AtPBL and metacognition. Finally, the creative thinking was associated with Knowledge of Cognition, which was more related to knowing about cognition. Pesut (1990) questioned to what extent individuals use self-regulatory metacognitive processes consciously, and the present study may illuminate that point. In the present study, the preparation stage of creative thinking may be fostered by knowledge of cognition. Hence, an individual should have adequate knowledge-base in a domain and metacognitive skills set to show a higher level of creativity (Feldhusen, 1995). Creative thinking is explained as a component of critical thinking when it is necessary (Paul & Elder, 2004).

For the demographics, previous work experience had a negative impact on attitude towards problem-solving. Another significant finding, not surprisingly, was the negative impact of watching TV on DCT. Most of the TV programs currently being watched by college students are reality shows, series, song contests, prize-winning, etc. Since these programs are not concerned to improve the higher order thinking skills of people, they do not have an impact, yet they hinder their developments. Therefore, when young people watch these kinds of programs often, they are specifically inclined to lower their critical thinking skills. This result was essential to see how the use of media impacts critical thinking. Since people become the only receptor of information on TVs, they eventually forget questioning skills. This causes low critical thinking disposition. Finally, family income had an increasing impact on creative thinking. Cheung et al. (2001) found a similar relationship between income and critical thinking. For high-income households, their parents can provide more opportunities for their children to try out different activities to locate their children to the most appropriate one. Moreover, they may be more illuminated to support their children’s creativity. For instance, Hong and Milgram (2010) indicated that an examination of out-of-school activities might reveal the hidden abilities of children and reduce talent-loss. As noted by Beghetto (2006), high level of creative self-efficacy was more tended to engage in after-school academics and after-school group activities, and we found that social activities impacted the creative thinking of students in the current study.

Attitude towards scientific research generated interesting results. Previous studies demonstrated the relationship between problem-solving and scientific research. However, in the present study, negative attitude toward scientific research hindered critical thinking; in contrast, a positive attitude fostered creative thinking. Students indicated that when they concerned of the quality and necessity of scientific studies, their critical thinking was negatively impacted. It was somehow expected since the nature of critical thinking requires questioning, analysis, and evaluation. When one does not have a positive attitude towards scientific research, it also ends up with a negative attitude towards scientific research processes and their consequences including many questioning, analysis, and interpretation of analysis skills. On the other hand, this study suggested that positive attitude towards scientific research merely impacted creative thinking. A positive attitude may trigger access to knowledge and information that improve one’s knowledge level of a domain (Feldhusen, 1995). This result served the argument by Paul and Elder (2004) that critical thinking and creative thinking cannot be separable.

This study also opens a new discussion about recursive vs. non-recursive nature of the outcome variables. Two models produced different results. The most critical one was the removal of creative thinking from the estimated non-recursive model. Problem-solving process, expertise and problem finding are the major theoretical explanations of creativity. Problem-solving and expertise group stated that expertise or extensive and well-organized knowledge in a specific domain led to creative achievements (Ericsson, 1999; Weisberg, 1999). Heuristics of problem-space to produce solutions to a problem explain how people generate creative solutions. An opposing idea, Problem Finding (Runco, 1994), suggested that creators are usually not aware of the existence of the problem. The traditional view of problem-solving was not sufficient to address the realization of the existence of the problem and the effect of subjective experiences for an understanding of the problem. Moreover, the theory contends that heuristics of problem space cannot be an appropriate situation where there is not a pre-identified set of alternative solutions. The non-recursive results of this study suggested that ill-structured problems may be divided into well-defined problems, and students follow the standard guidelines of problem-solving. There may be no room left for subjective experiences used to understand the problem. Therefore, creativity is not triggered most of the time. For this reason, the non-recursive analysis of this study might not produce any association with the attitude towards problem-solving and critical thinking. In contrast, the ill-structured problem-solving process even departed as small well-structured processes enhance critical thinking. Salvi et al. (2016) and Hedne et al. (2016) indicated that insight problem-solving produced more accurate solutions than analytical problem-solving. Insight problem-solving is an all-or-none approach. In the present study, as students needed to complete a set of assignments, they high probably did not want to take the risk of insight approach, and they preferred to utilize analytic approach. For this reason, the association between attitude towards problem-based learning and creativity became meaningless after non-recursive examination. The non-recursive analysis may confirm that problem-solving and critical thinking are not isolated activities (Pithers & Soden, 2000). As found by Lai (2011) and Şendağ & Odabaşı (2009), problem-based learning triggered critical thinking. Moreover, this study demonstrated that critical thinking had an increasing impact on attitude towards problem-based learning. However, this impact was almost half of the impact of the attitude towards problem-based learning. Critical thinking was improved by attitude towards problem-based learning. This improvement returned to trigger attitude towards problem-based learning via the improved critical thinking. The current study supported the connection between problem-solving and critical thinking as means perspective argued by Johnson and Johnson (1993). They also discussed the association between problem-solving and creativity as ends which are not confirmed in the present study. These results may be because preservice teachers experienced the process of problem-solving, not because of the primary outcomes which they would be aware of when they start using these technologies.

In the non-recursive model, the place currently living, and internet use frequencies remained in decreasing association with AtPBL compared to the recursive model. These results contradicted with the results suggested by Akkuş et al. (2010). The options of the place currently students living are sequenced from less to more responsibility required environments. When students live with their parents, they develop a more negative attitude towards problem-based learning. Many Turkish families usually do not give additional responsibilities to their children except for academic ones if they go to college. For this reason, they do not have to deal with problems and attempt to resolve them. As a result, the problem-solving process may be appealing for these students. On the other hand, students living at their own house must take care all responsibilities. Therefore, they may develop problem-solving skills and positive attitude. Internet use frequency hinders positive attitude since students suppose the internet as an easy resource locator for their assignments. They do not approach searching as a critical approach. They are verbatim the information on the internet without filtering and evaluating. Thus, all these shortcut habits are not associated with the nature of the problem-solving process.

Conclusion
The study can be replicated with the use of skill measuring tests such as Critical Thinking Test or Problem-Solving Inventory, Torrance Creative thinking test. We majorly focused on attitude, perception and disposition level of higher order thinking skills due to the feasibility and resources of the study. Further research should utilize skill measurement test for better comprehension of the results of this study. Moreover, we used attitude towards problem-based learning. Problem-solving inventory may also be used.

The present study reveals numerous factors and may be antecedents of educational and instructional settings. They may illuminate teachers or educators to consider the entry conditions of their students. Moreover, the present study may illuminate framework models to enable higher order thinking skills. Since they are difficult skills to acquire, there are numerous models to make the process of development simpler. Moreover, educational institutions may have the secondary groups that benefit from these results. As seen, most of the impacting factors for attitude towards higher order thinking skills are demographics or extracurricular activities. The institutions are responsible for creating environments fostering these higher order skills.

Teacher training programs, especially, are the specific institutions can take advantage of the current study. The findings of the present study suggest that stand-alone course for technology integration of teacher training programs can be enriched with more engaging teaching and learning activities. Thus, that may result in the future use of technology into preservice teachers (Kay, 2006; McCoy, 2008). Moreover, in addition to technology integration, since preservice teachers experienced higher-order thinking skills, they would be more inclined to utilize these skills as well (Bielefeldt, 2001; Gunter, 2001).

The sampling strategy was one of the limitations of this study, especially, for generalizability. Convenience sampling is not representing the population since random sampling techniques are not employed. The utilization of an online survey is the second limitation generating self-selection stemming from the voluntary participation (Thomson, Surface, Martin & Sanders, 2003) and sampling issues (Wright, 2005). The characteristics and rate of respondents and non-respondents of the survey cannot be clearly differentiated because most of the crucial information about non-respondents is unknown (Guerra, 2003). The study sample was inherently biased due to these limitations. In future studies, these issues can be resolved by using random sampling techniques. However, the current study presented a valued model which illuminates the further efforts and can be implemented in future researches.