Digital games have become increasingly popular. However, many teachers may not have relevant knowledge and experience of designing and implementing digital game-based teaching in formal classrooms. This study proposed a collaborative design approach to facilitate pre-service teachers’ abilities of designing for learning with a digital game. To evaluate the effects of the proposed approach, a quasi-experiment was carried out at a teachers’ university in Eastern China. This study was implemented in a Fall 2019 educational development course, a total of 100 pre-service teachers from two intact classes participated in it. It is found that the approach is effective in helping the students design digital games-based learning activities. Additionally, the experimental group students developed more constructivist views of game-based teaching practices. It is concluded that engaging pre-service teachers in design, implementation and reflection of innovative technologies-enhanced learning practices is imaginable for our mission of bring children to a cheerful and harvesting journey in classroom.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
With the rapid development of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and its wide use in education, the development of teachers' ability to integrate ICT into their teaching has gathered importance (Chien et al., 2012; Michos & Hernandez-Leo, 2020; Tondeur et al., 2018). One of the core tasks of teachers is to plan classroom activities, which involves a careful consideration of all influential factors (e.g., lesson objectives, characteristics of learners, and available tools). However, when technology is integrated into these factors, the task becomes more difficult (Michos & Hernandez-Leo, 2020; Persico et al., 2018) as teachers have to infuse many aspects of knowledge (e.g., technology, content, and pedagogy). The Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge framework (TPACK), proposed by Mishra and Koehler (2006), has frequently been used to define this kind of knowledge and assess one's ICT competency; however, most of these efforts have focused on developing and evaluating the TPACK framework (Saubern et al., 2020), while how to develop teachers' ability to integrate technology into teaching remains under-investigated (Saubern et al., 2020).

As one of the ways to foster teachers’ ability to use ICT in the classroom, teachers as designers (TaD) has been increasingly favored (Kali et al., 2015; Mor & Mogilevsky, 2013; Nguyen & Bower, 2018; Papanikolaou et al., 2017). When teachers design their own ICT-enhanced learning activities, they are more likely to be reflective and critical of what they have created (Michos & Hernandez-Leo, 2020), which enhances their ability to integrate technology into their teaching (Cober et al., 2015; Koehler et al., 2007; Li, 2018) while fostering their ownership and commitment to it.

Recently, teacher involvement in the collaborative design of curricular materials and/or activities has received increasing attention in teacher professional development (Michos & Hernandez-Leo, 2020; Voogt et al., 2015). Its benefits include: learning to appreciate others' perspectives (Chien et al., 2012; Nguyen & Bower, 2018), encouraging reflection and refinement of their practices based on peers' comments (Chien et al., 2012; Voogt et al., 2015), and engaging in the co-construction of knowledge (Laurillard et al., 2018). Teachers benefit most from learning in a meaningful and collaborative design context as they can share ideas and tap into each other's expertise (Voogt et al., 2015). However, teacher collaborative-design practice remains under-investigated (Michos & Hernandez-Leo, 2020; Voogt et al., 2015), especially for pre-service teachers (Papanikolaou et al., 2017).

Concurrently, digital games have been increasingly used to facilitate teaching and learning (Hsu et al., 2015; Hsu et al., 2020; Sanchez-Mena et al., 2019; Talamo et al., 2016). However, implementing digital game-based learning (DGBL) practices remains challenging for teachers (Hsu et al., 2020; Li, 2018) because there are few professional development opportunities for them to learn how to integrate it into their teaching (Akcaoglu & Kale, 2016; Chien et al., 2012; Denham, 2019). Additionally, most teachers have little digital game knowledge (Akcaoglu & Kale, 2016). Lacking tailored games for specific subject-matter knowledge is another reason (Denham, 2019).

Pre-service teachers, because of their youth, are considered to be keen and capable of using ICT to enhance teaching and learning in their future careers (Gill & Dalgarno, 2017). For example, Uluay and Dogan (2016) reported that engaging pre-service teachers in designing games to teach specific subject content could help them consider how games can be used to facilitate learning. However, studies of this kind are few (Akcaoglu & Kale, 2016; Li, 2018).

Designing teaching practices collaboratively, as opposed to individually (Li, 2018), has been strongly advocated in teacher professional development (Voogt et al., 2015). Therefore, investigating pre-service teachers’ collaborative design of game-based teaching and learning practices can advance knowledge in this area of education. Accordingly, the present study aims to develop a collaborative-design approach to foster pre-service teachers' ability to design for learning with a digital game. Following this objective, two research questions are proposed:

(1)
Do pre-service teachers who learned with the collaborative design approach have better design performance in designing a digital game-based lesson plan than those who learned with a conventional design approach?

(2)
What views do the two groups of pre-service teachers hold about DGBL?

Literature review
Incorporation of digital games into teaching
Game-based learning (GBL), which refers to using digital games to enhance learning in formal education (Talamo et al., 2016), has been advocated in the past decade. There are two orientations in GBL practices: one uses commercial videogames for learning, and the other uses custom-designed games to help students learn. However, in general, commercial video games are designed for entertainment while educational games are designed for learning in a specific knowledge area and normally used in the classroom (de Sousa et al., 2018). In the present study, the ability to learn with digital games is linked to the development of pre-service teachers' ability to integrate their newly created games into teaching.

According to situated learning theory (Lave & Wenger, 1991), knowledge is constructed through interactions with authentic contexts. Digital games create a virtual environment simulating real-life contexts that engage students in building and applying knowledge in such contexts (Fu, 2019). They usually offer a bundle of elements to assist learning, such as immersing students in an authentic context, encouraging exploration and competition, providing instant feedback, learning through failure, developing a sense of control, and customizing the level of challenge (Denham, 2019).

However, even when a digital game is intentionally designed for learning with these affordances, it still cannot assure learning will occur (de Sousa et al., 2018) because the content embedded in games is not always explicit to students (de Sousa et al., 2018). Thus, teachers need to help students link gameplay experience and curricular content (de Sousa et al., 2018; Silseth, 2012). For example, de Sousa et al. (2018) found that whole-class and small-group discussions led by the teacher can help students bridge their real-life and gameplay experience to understand ethical theories. Wouters et al. (2013) meta-analysis also reported that when digital games are incorporated with other teaching approaches, DGBL is more effective. Therefore, teachers need to infuse DGBL activities with their teaching goals to achieve students' productive learning.

Incorporating digital games for learning remains challenging because most teachers have little knowledge of them and they often cannot grasp the connections between the games and learning and have difficulty identifying their effectiveness (Denham, 2019; Li, 2018). Additionally, there are few educational games for teaching, and commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) games are usually expensive and not intentionally designed for learning (Li, 2018). Thus, involving teachers in designing learning with digital games offers potential to address these challenges (Li, 2018).

To guide teacher-designed learning with digital games, Hsu et al. (2013) proposed the Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge—Games (TPACK-G) framework, which consists of game knowledge (GK), game pedagogical knowledge (GPK), game content knowledge (GCK) and game pedagogical content knowledge (GPCK). They stated that GK should be taught first and followed by GPK. Hsu et al. (2015) further claimed that students who learned GK first followed by GPK had better GPCK than those who learned GPK first and then GK. Learning-by-game-design can offer teachers opportunities to develop knowledge of subject-matter, pedagogy, and technology, and enhance their TPACK (Li, 2012). Additionally, it can help preservice teachers better understand and implement DGBL practices in the classroom (Li, 2018) and develop their game knowledge, critical thinking and problem-solving skills (Akcaoglu & Kale, 2016). Furthermore, it can help teachers develop tailored games for their teaching (Boschman et al., 2014). For example, in Kafai et al. (1998) study, pre-service teachers designed digital games for mathematics learning which helped them blend game ideas with mathematics knowledge and reflect on their teaching practices. Li (2012) reported that game-design experience helped pre-service teachers deliberate on creatively integrating subject knowledge into games. Li (2018) also found that game-designing experience offered practicing teachers a valuable opportunity to develop useful and meaningful games tailored to their local context (i.e., specific target groups of students, subjects, strategies, and learning outcomes).

A bundle of strategies is considered beneficial for helping pre-service teachers design learning with technology, including but not limited to collaborative design, expert modeling and templates, scaffolding, feedback, and reflection (Nguyen & Bower, 2018). Among them, collaborative design is considered a critical factor positively impacting teachers' ICT design process (Nguyen & Bower, 2018; Talamo et al., 2016). Tondeur et al. (2018) also reported the following effective strategies for developing pre-service teachers' ability to use technology in the classroom: 1) teacher educators acting as role models; 2) learning to use technology via design; 3) collaboration with peers; 4) continuous feedback; 5) offering students authentic technology experiences; and 6) helping students reflecting on the role of technology.

Accordingly, we contend that to foster pre-service teachers' ability to design for learning with a digital games, teacher educators should first teach them how to develop their games and then engage them in creating learning activities with their collectively designed games. In this way, collaborative design can help pre-service teachers build shared motivation and responsibility and provide an opportunity for them to exchange ideas and learn about subject content, pedagogy, and game design.

Collaborative design of learning with technologies
From the socio-constructivist perspective, learning is a participative and shared process (Talamo et al., 2016). Knowledge is distributed among individuals and the context they are involved in (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Collaborative design is increasingly viewed as an essential form of teacher professional development (Voogt et al., 2015). It can be defined as developing new or revised curriculum materials in collaboration with peers, often with the help of educational experts (Voogt et al., 2011). The present study is based on Voogt et al.'s definition, where a collaborative-design approach shares responsibility among pre-service teachers. Individual design refers to pre-service teachers creating curriculum materials by themselves; in this sense, they might (or be asked to) discuss with their classmates, which is also a familiar context in teacher education programs, but they do not have a shared responsibility. In collaborative design, teachers construct their understanding through reflection on peers' beliefs and knowledge, their developed artifacts (i.e., curricular materials, lesson plans) or activities, and the realities of their context while developing a collective conceptual and practical understanding (Parke & Coble, 1997; Voogt et al., 2015).

Collaborative design as a teacher professional development strategy has been advocated in the past decades. Teacher participation in professional communities aiming to design and implement ICT-enhanced teaching practice has also become common. For example, Michos and Hernandez-Leo (2020) proposed a data analytics framework to support teacher-designed practice. This framework consists of three components: a) an inquiry process where teachers inquire and reflect on their practice; b) a collective process, which refers to the social environment (i.e., other teachers from the community, students, the rules or constraints of their institutions) informing, shaping and guiding teacher practices; and c) technological support, including the use of technology (i.e., Wikis, Blogs) to support collective teacher inquiry, and the use of learning analytic tools to help teachers discuss, interpret and improve their practices based on a bundle of data (i.e., student data, learning log, teaching journals). Michos and Hernandez-Leo’ findings recognized the positive effects of the proposed framework for helping teachers to study and support participatory teacher-designed practice.

Another form of collaborative design is based on Community of Inquiry (CoI) (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007), which has often been used in online and blended environments to facilitate collaborative and constructivist learning by building and strengthening socio-cognitive, and teaching presence. In Papanikolaou et al.'s (2017) study, a synthetic framework composed of TPACK and CoI elements was proposed where TPACK was used to guide the collaborative design tasks, while CoI functioned to facilitate peers' interaction around design tasks to develop their cognitive presence and collective meaning. Findings revealed pre-service teachers' TPACK was enhanced, and a significant relationship between TPACK and elements of CoI (cognitive presence) was also demonstrated.

Researchers have used the collaborative design process to develop pre-service teachers' abilities to integrate technology into their teaching. For example, Chien et al. (2012) developed a four-phase cyclic MAGDAIRE framework (including modeled analysis, guided development, articulated implementation, and reflected evaluation) to help pre-service science teachers collaboratively use Adobe Flash to design Online Science Coursewares (OSCs). The findings indicated that the pre-service teachers' technology competency levels were significantly enhanced. Mor and Mogilevsky (2013) proposed a Learning Design Studio (LDS) course format to implement a Design inquiry of Learning (DIL) approach. In this approach, students worked collaboratively to identify an educational challenge by reviewing previous examples of innovation, and then devised a techno-pedagogical innovation based on the LDS format to address the chosen challenge. The students reported that their theoretical knowledge and professional practice were improved.

These lines of research help construct a knowledgeable picture of teacher professional development for designing learning activities using technology. However, these initiatives are still few (Michos & Hernandez-Leo, 2020; Voogt et al., 2015). More fresh ideas or experience on developing pre-service teachers' abilities to design learning activities using new technology (especially innovative ones such as digital games) are needed(Papanikolaou et al., 2017).

Methodology
Participants and context
A total of 100 pre-service teachers with an average age of 20.1 years old in their sophomore year from three intact classes at a teachers' university in Eastern China participated in the study. The pre-service teachers had a tight schedule and two of three intact classes could not be taught separately; therefore, the two intact classes were combined into one large class by the university’s office of educational administration with 71 pre-service teachers (67 females and four males). The large class was assigned to the experimental group following Bielak and Pawlak's (2013) suggestion that novel kinds of instruction should be tested on the group with the largest possible membership. Another class with 29 pre-service teachers (24 females and five males) was assigned to the control group, who learned with a conventional approach. The two groups of pre-service teachers did not have any experience in game design or designing for learning with a game, nor had they attended any courses related to teaching lesson design. The two groups had a similar academic background (e.g., they all followed the similar teacher education programme in the past year), and they had equal prior knowledge associated with this course before the experiment. The result of a Chi-Square Test (x2 = 2.118, p = 0.146 > 0.05) indicated that there was no significant statistical difference in the gender balance of the two groups. They all agreed to participate in the study, and ethical requirements for research in the university were followed.

The study was implemented in a course offered in the autumn of 2019. The course had 19 sessions of 100 min each week. The experimental group learned with a proposed collaborative design approach, while the control group learned with a conventional approach (the details can be found in the "3.2 procedures" sub-section). The same teacher taught the two groups.

Procedures
The experimental procedure is illustrated in Fig. 1. A collaborative design approach was proposed and used in the experimental group, which was informed by the MAGDAIRE framework developed by Chien et al. (2012) and Hsu et al.'s (2013) TPACK-G framework, is illustrated in Fig. 2. It consisted of four phases: model learning, co-design of game, articulation, co-design and reflection of learning. The experiment began with model learning, followed by co-design of game (or design a game individually in the control group), articulation, and co-design and reflection of learning (or design a lesson plan individually in the control group).

Fig. 1
figure 1
Experimental procedure

Full size image
Fig. 2
figure 2
A collaborative design approach

Full size image
At the model learning stage, multiple learning materials were proxies for the "experts" who guided the two groups to design for learning with games. Specifically, from sessions 1 to 4, the teacher lectured on a series of topics, including learning theories, DGBL theories, game design principles, and the TIM (abbreviated from Technology Integration Matrix) model (Florida Center for Instructional Technology, 2021) with classroom examples. Then a whole class discussion and question and answer session (Q&A) followed. A tutorial video about making a 2D platformer game by Construct 2 (Construct is an HTML5-based 2D video game engine developed by Scirra Ltd; Construct 2 is the second major release of the Construct engine and the latest one is Construct 3) was delivered to each pre-service teacher, and they were required to watch the tutorial video and develop a 2D platformer game out of class similar to the one in the video. Meanwhile, how to design learning activities using games was demonstrated. Pre-service teachers had to learn the basics of designing for learning with a game four weeks.

In session 5, all pre-service teachers in the two groups designed an educational game and wrote a lesson plan. Because developing a game and writing a lesson plan was a time-consuming task, they were allowed to submit their games and lesson plans in session 7.

From sessions 6 to 11, the teacher explained how to design a digital game step by step, and the pre-service teachers followed these steps using their computers. To demonstrate the whole process of developing a digital educational game tailored for learning specific subject matter, the teacher chose the topic, "On the Stork Tower," which is classical Chinese poem familiar to all the participants. The whole process of designing the game was recorded and the tutorial videos and all the other learning materials were uploaded to a learning management system used for assisting the pre-service teachers outside of class.

Co-designing of a game (for the experimental group) or designing a game individually (for the control group) occurred from sessions 12 to 14. In the experimental group, pre-service teachers were divided into 23 groups with three or four members. First, each group identified a topic. Then, they brainstormed what technological elements, subject matter, and specific pedagogies would be included in the game and how they should be blended. After that, each group collaboratively developed a game (Fig. 3 shows a game designed by one group). On the contrary, the control group members developed a game by themselves.

Fig. 3
figure 3
A game developed by a group of pre-service teachers

Full size image
When the two groups of pre-service teachers designed their games, the teacher helped them resolve problems they encountered, answered their questions, and gave suggestions for their work. The unfinished parts of their work were left as homework.

Additionally, in session 12, several published papers were distributed to the pre-service teachers in the two groups serving as "experts" to inform them how to design learning activities using games. They were required to read all the papers as homework and select one to write a presentation. A lesson plan assessment rubric (see the "Measurements" sub-section) was also provided and explained to help the two groups of pre-service teachers learn what makes digital game-based learning exemplary.

The stage of articulation occurred from sessions 15 to 16. In session 15, all pre-service teachers in the two groups submitted their written presentations based on the selected paper to the teacher. Three pre-service teachers in each group were randomly chosen to deliver their oral presentations. Then, the teacher led a whole-class discussion intending to introduce diverse ideas to help them produce a more comprehensive view of DGBL. In session 16, all pre-service teachers were required to draft a lesson plan to elicit ideas.

In sessions 17 and 18, for the experimental group, each pre-service teacher had to evaluate their group members' lesson plans and give feedback based on the lesson plan assessment rubric. After they received the feedback from their partners, they had to respond to it and revise based on the comments. This cycle of giving feedback, responding, and adjusting the lesson plan comprised at least one round (as illustrated in Fig. 4). In contrast, in the control group, the teacher randomly chose several lesson plans, gave feedback, and led a whole-class discussion about the merits and shortcomings of the selected lesson plans. The control group members revised their lesson plans by themselves according to their reflections on the teacher's comments.

Fig. 4
figure 4
The peer feedback part of a lesson plan from a pre-service teacher in the experimental group

Full size image
In the two sessions, when needed, the two groups of pre-service teachers could move to the model learning stage to review the learning materials (i.e., tutorial video, lecture) again, and move to the co-design (or design individually) the game and articulation stage to refine their work.

In session 19, all pre-service teachers from the two groups submitted their games, lesson plans and answered an open-ended questionnaire.

Measurements
We developed a rubric to assess the participants' lesson plans in which the pre-service teachers were required to integrate their designed digital education games into a specific lesson. A rubric was first drafted informed by the ICT integrated lesson framework from Chai et al. (2012). The draft was then revised based on three rounds of discussion between the researchers and an experienced teacher who had taught design courses for more than 10 years. Table 1 shows the final version, which consisted of five constructs: lesson analysis, teaching beliefs, integration, fantasy and engagement, and reflection. Lesson analysis relates to considering all potential influencing factors before implementing the learning activities, for example, what pre-service teachers need to learn, what essential questions should be focused on, what characteristics of learners should be considered, and what materials are required. Teaching beliefs refers to pre-service teachers' beliefs about teaching and learning, which was embedded in the learning activities. Integration indicates to what extent the developed game is incorporated into the learning activities to enhance its effects. Fantasy and engagement means creating an engaging learning atmosphere in the learning activities. Reflection refers to the pre-service teachers' reflections on their designed lesson plan. The total score is 100 points with 20 points for each construct which is divided into four rankings, namely, beginning (13–14 points), approaching (15–16 points), accomplished (17–18 points), and exemplary (19–20 points).

Table 1 Lesson plan assessment rubric
Full size table
An open-ended questionnaire was administered as homework to elicit the participants' views about DGBL and what they had obtained from this course. It included four questions to prompt the participants to express their thoughts: 1) what do you think of DGBL in terms of its advantages and disadvantages? 2) what challenges do you think teachers face when they design and/or implement DGBL? 3) what have you learned from this course? and 4) is there anything else you want to say about the course or DGBL? Pre-service teachers can answer the questionnaire with a pen and paper or in Microsoft Word.

Data collection and analysis
After obtaining a consistent agreement on the rubric for the lesson plan, two authors, both of whom had more than eight years experience in teaching multimedia design and learning, independently rated the midterm homework and final homework of the two groups. The intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) was adopted to measure the inter-rater reliability between the two instructors. The ICC value in the pretest (the scores of the lesson plan assignments submitted in session 7) was 0.866, and the one in the posttest (the scores of the lesson plan assignments submitted in session 19) was 0.931, indicating good and excellent reliability, respectively.

The narrative responses from the two groups to the open-ended questions were put into two categories (Eklund-Myrskog, 1998) representing their unique understanding of DGBL and their opinions about the course. Two authors independently classified the narrative data, then resolved the discrepancies via discussion.

Results
The performance on designing for learning with a game
A one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was employed with the learning approach as the independent variable, the pretest of the lesson plan as the covariate, and the posttest of the lesson plan as the dependent variable, to examine the effect of the proposed learning approach on pre-service teachers' performance on designing for learning with a game. The assumption of homogeneity of regression slopes was not violated with F(1, 96) = 2.689, p > 0.05. The covariate was continuous and not different across the two groups (t = -1.288, p = 0.201). The linearity assumption (the covariate being linearly related to the dependent variable across each level of the independent variable) was checked. The covariate was significantly related to the dependent variable (for the experimental group, r = 0.434, p < 0.01; r = 0.619, p < 0.01 in the control group). A further analysis with ANCOVA was thus conducted (Table 2) showing that the adjusted mean (92.84) of the experimental group was significantly greater than that of the control group (91.05) with F(1, 97) = 5.632 and p = 0.02, meaning that the proposed learning approach improved the pre-service teachers' abilities to design for learning with a game.

Table 2 The ANCOVA results of lesson plan performance
Full size table
Perceptions of game-based learning
After a careful analysis of the open-ended questionnaire, five themes emerged from the two groups.

Theme 1: Bringing change to traditional classroom teaching

Most participants in the two groups considered DGBL to be an innovative way to teach bringing a refreshing atmosphere to the classroom. In such an environment, students will feel motivated, more focused and active in their learning. They also claimed students’ relationship with the teacher will be less hierarchical and more relaxed, which can encourage students to express their ideas and take risks. For example, one pre-service teacher from the experimental group mentioned that “teaching is treated as one kind of game [in DGBL]. An equal, democratic and relaxing atmosphere can be created, leading to students being motivated to freely express themselves, actively engage themselves in the classroom, and reflect on their learning.” DGBL also can encourage a stronger connection between teachers and students, as one pre-service teacher from the experimental group indicated: “all students especially younger ones desire to be connected with teachers like friends; game-based learning can build a bridge to create such a connection.”

Theme 2: Providing a contextualized and interactive learning experience

A pre-service teacher from the control group indicated: "game-based learning in nature is contextualized; students can feel and experience what they meet in such a virtual context. This kind of context can help a student learn and better remember knowledge". The pre-service teachers widely recognized the relationship between context and knowledge and emphasized the importance of context on learning. Interactivity was regarded as another critical affordance of GBL to facilitate learning. For example, a pre-service teacher from the experimental group stated: "game-based learning enhances the interaction among teachers, students and non-player characters (NPCs) in games. Students will be thus more engaged in the classroom and focus on learning activities."

Theme 3: Facilitating students' development

It is generally perceived that student engagement in digital game-facilitated teaching activities improves their learning and fosters diverse cognitive skills such as observation, recall, critical thinking, communication, collaboration, and creativity. For instance, one pre-service teacher from the control group claimed: “with the help of the game, students can be absorbed into the learning activities to develop their abilities of observation, recall, thinking and imagination.” Another pre-service teacher indicated: “when learning with a game, students can learn to observe the surrounding and have the opportunity to critically judge what they are experiencing in the game.”

Theme 4: A large, new challenge for teachers

Almost all the pre-service teachers in both groups mentioned that designing and implementing DGBL is a significant and new challenge for teachers. They claimed that teachers have to change their beliefs and mindset to adapt to this innovative way of learning. A scarcity of sound DGBL pedagogical models for teachers to follow and teachers' lack of experience may impede the implementation of DGBL in the classroom. As stated by a pre-service teacher, "currently, GBL is an emerging field with a scarcity of pedagogically sound teaching modes for teachers to refer to." Another pre-service teacher claimed: "generally, all the professional development practices that pre-service teachers have undergone did not include learning to integrate digital games into teaching; thus, it is difficult for them to design a digital game-based lesson plan." Thus, mastering the knowledge and skills required for designing a digital game is also difficult. Additionally, teachers must spend time and energy preparing game-based teaching activities, such as "deciding how to integrate knowledge into a game." Balancing fun and learning is also important because, as one preservice teacher said: "too much fun will impede learning; while too much learning decreases the benefits of GBL."

Theme 5: External constraints can impede the promotion of GBL

Most pre-service teachers from the two groups mentioned several external constraints that can impede the promotion of GBL. The most pervasive one was the examination-oriented educational system, which focuses on a summative score rather than promoting students' individual development. Thus, some parents and teachers may object to a learning mode using games because they are accustomed to the traditional teaching methods and are concerned that children will indulge in games at the expense of more “serious” learning. Additionally, in areas of low economic status, promoting GBL is challenging due to a lack of sufficient equipment in schools.

Apart from these themes emerging from the comments of the two groups, some constructivist-oriented views were found in the responses from the experimental group. For example, one pre-service teacher stated that the DGBL activities should shift: "teachers should shift the DGBL activities from teaching-centered to learning-centered, even further shifting to learning-by-play. [Meanwhile], by applying constructivist learning theory, a teacher should appropriately integrate knowledge into games, and then let students learn by themselves and construct knowledge." Another pre-service teacher in the experimental group realized students should play a central and active role in constructing knowledge: "The interactivity of gameplay can motivate students to learn actively, which makes me realize that students, rather than teachers, should be put at the center of a classroom. The teacher acting as a guide, leaving a certain free space for students to experience and construct knowledge actively, is important."

Additionally, the experimental group also held a deeper understanding of the game-based teaching practice regarding how games can be integrated into teaching. For example, they claimed games played diverse roles in teaching activities. One pre-service teacher said: "I think that games can play three kinds of roles in primary mathematics class." One is as a guide, "games as a guide, just as its name implies introduces the essential knowledge points via students' game playing experience as the guiding part of the teaching activities." Another is as a facilitator, "in a traditional classroom, teachers often adopt direct instruction regardless of whether students can understand the knowledge; whereas, games can facilitate student understanding of knowledge by engaging them and learning it meaningfully." The third is as a connector, that is, to design games based on the mathematical problems coming from daily life.

The experimental group were more likely to consider designing a lesson plan from diverse perspectives, such as learning theory, prior knowledge, student characteristics, individual differences, teaching objectives, learning outcomes, teacher roles, teaching strategies, monitoring and adjusting instructions. For example, when designing game content, one pre-service teacher stated: "based on Piaget's cognitive development theory, primary school students remain in the concrete operational stage, they perceive the outer world mainly through direct observation and experience. Additionally, they are active but with a short attention span. Thus, the game content should be intuitive and interesting." Another pre-service teacher claimed: "I will design a gradual game-based learning activity which will be divided into several stages, and set up a teaching objective in each stage; these teaching objectives are not too difficult for students."

These constructivist-oriented views and deep understandings of GBL practices were mainly triggered by their discussions in the co-design stage and from peer feedback in the reflection stage. For example, in the feedback to Anni’s lesson plan, Alisa claimed the activities focused less on student learning: "this lesson plan paid more attention to the teaching than students' learning; adding a group discussion component might be beneficial to enhance students' initiative in learning." Anni accepted the suggestion and replied: I will provide students more opportunities to collaboratively learn." In this dialogue, Alisa suggested enhancing student-centered learning, which is advocated by constructivist learning theory, which may have helped Anni foster her constructivist-oriented views and provide a deeper understanding of GBL practices.

Perceptions of the course
The two groups of pre-service teachers reported that they had benefited from the course. One pre-service teacher's comment reflected many of their opinions: "at the beginning, learning Construct 2 was indeed a difficult thing, especially when we began to design an educational game by ourselves; it was super nerve-wracking; whereas, the finished work did give us a sense of fulfillment. We have truly learned a lot in this course." Another pre-service teacher claimed: "before doing the homework (design an educational game), I was perturbed because I thought I could not make it. In the beginning, I even did not know what I could do and what the direction was; I was totally not confident about myself. After that, I began to find the right way; the game topic and architecture were confirmed. With help from the teacher and classmates [in the control groups, we were allowed and encouraged to help each other], my game improved increasingly. When this game was eventually finished, I was overjoyed, and my confidence was tremendously enhanced. I am delighted that I can stick to it and finally complete the development of this game."

Many pre-service teachers in both groups reported that the course broadened their horizons on teaching, and they had a solid intention to adopt GBL in their future careers. For example, one pre-service teacher indicated, "I knew nothing about GBL before; this course let me realize that digital games can be incorporated into classroom teaching and opens a new horizon for me. I am willing to use this kind of innovative teaching technique in the future to improve and enrich my teaching skills."

However, some different perceptions were found between the two groups. Pre-service teachers from the experimental group claimed the learning approach used in this course had merit: "I like this kind of learning mode, which is useful. I was enjoying the whole design process." The benefits of the proposed collaborative design approach can be judged from another pre-service teacher's response: "in our group, at first, we figured out a design solution, and began to design the game collaboratively. We also revised the game based on the new ideas generated in writing the lesson plan and increased our understanding of the links between the game and teaching activities. When writing the lesson plan and the game was taken into consideration, the transition between some parts of the teaching activities were natural and fluent." However, the comments from pre-service teachers in the control group indicated they needed more help. For example, one pre-service teacher claimed: "when I was writing my lesson plan, I found many defects in it, i.e., how to stop the game and incorporate the teachable moments into teaching which I did not expect. I will consider it more thoroughly next time."

In conclusion, the pre-service teachers acquired various kinds of knowledge; as one pre-service teacher said, "in this course, I learned a new tool (Construct 2), mastered how to use it, designed a game, and acquainted myself with a GBL teaching model and several teaching principles." Although many of them reported the course was a bit overloaded with homework, they all expressed their satisfaction towards it. Another pre-service teacher stated: "the homework was an overwhelming challenge for most of us; we all like you [the instructor] very much." The most inspiring comment from a pre-service teacher: "I hope that you [the instructor] will also be good to students who enroll in this course in the following semesters just like you treated us." This praise tends to indicate that the pre-service teachers viewed their teacher as a friend.

Discussion
In this study, a collaborative design approach was proposed to enhance pre-service teachers' abilities to design for learning with a game, that resulted in a lesson plan based on their developed game. Their perceptions towards GBL and the course were then analyzed.

Findings revealed that the proposed approach can improve pre-service teachers' abilities to design for learning with a game when compared to the conventional design approach. According to Johnson and Johnson (2009), effective collaboration includes five essential elements: a) positive interdependence; b) individual accountability; c) promotive interaction; d) the appropriate use of social skills; and e) group processing. Among these, positive interdependence refers to individuals reaching goals only when they perceive their partners can also reach their goals (Johnson & Johnson, 2016). In the proposed approach, each group of pre-service teachers collaboratively designed an educational game based on their selected topic, which means they shared a common goal. Namely, they had to work together to develop a game to facilitate learning related to the topic. Via their common goals, they were motivated to share and discuss their ideas.

However, the control group members designed their game alone, and although they were allowed and encouraged to discuss with and help their classmates, they did not share responsibilities; thus, there was no collaboration. After learning in the co-design of the game stage, the experimental group members developed a deeper understanding of how to use their collaboratively developed games to teach the related topic. Furthermore, they had a unique understanding of it. In the stage of articulation, based on this more profound and unique understanding, the experimental group was more likely to draft a thoughtful lesson plan. The peer evaluation strategy in the co-design and reflection of learning stage was introduced to promote interactions within each group. As indicated by the conversation between Anni and her group member Alisa, peer feedback triggered the assessee's reflection and revision of her lesson plan.

We conclude that the superiority of the proposed collaborative design approach over the conventional design one can mostly be attributed to the collaboration. Co-designing a game to teach a specific topic engaged members of the experimental group in a shared meaningful context. Each group was supposed to develop a shared understanding or knowledge about using the game to teach the selected topic in the co-design context. Furthermore, each of the group members was supposed to develop a unique understanding or insight about it. These common and unique understandings or senses built a solid base for their peer evaluation in the process of co-designing a lesson plan. Their abilities to design for learning with a game were eventually improved.

Meanwhile, a constructivist-oriented view and a deeper understanding of the game-based teaching practice emerged in the experimental group. This finding aligns with the effects of the proposed collaborative design approach. Teacher knowledge is considered context-based, situated in teacher practices (Porras-Hernández & Salinas-Amescua, 2013). As the experimental group were designing collaboratively, their diverse sources of knowledge such as TK, PK, TPACK, perception towards teaching contexts (i.e., student characteristics, prior knowledge, available resources), teaching beliefs, and philosophical views were evolving due to the social interaction among group members. This means that each student's knowledge was shaped by their group members' opinions, eventually leading to a deeper understanding of GBL practices. The situated nature of learning is also one factor that influences learning (Angeli & Valanides, 2009; Porras-Hernández & Salinas-Amescua, 2013). Collaborative learning is regarded as a constructivist-oriented pedagogy (Schellens & Valcke, 2005). Therefore, students' collective design experience can foster their constructivist-oriented views toward teaching and learning, and these views can also guide their design practices. Furthermore, the peer evaluation strategy has students comparing their design ideas with those of their group members, while reflecting and refining their lesson plans, which is also beneficial for understanding how games can be integrated into teaching.

Our findings reveal that the two groups held a comprehensive understanding of the advantages (i.e., theme 1, 2, and 3) and disadvantages (i.e., theme 4 and 5) of GBL. The fresh learning experience brought by the course allowed them to acquaint themselves with GBL, criticize mainstream teaching modes, and reflect on them. Their commitment to implementing GBL practices in their future classrooms was identified, similar to the findings of previous studies (i.e., Uluay & Dogan, 2016), namely, that engaging pre-service teachers in technology-integration practices can foster positive attitudes toward using technology in classroom.

In conclusion, the two groups of pre-service teachers clearly benefitted from the course. Almost all of them reported that their horizons on teaching and learning were broadened and enriched. They claimed they wound integrate innovative technologies (i.e., digital games) into their future teaching. They also obtained a comprehensive understanding of GBL. Thus, the proposed approach appears effective for fostering pre-service teachers’ constructivist-oriented views towards learning and providing a deeper understanding of GBL practices.

This study is not without its limitations. The effect size (Cohen, 1988) was small (η2 = 0.055); one reason may be that some free riders in the collaborative groups did not effectively participate in the collaborative design activities and therefore had unsatisfactory achievement reducing the average score in the posttest of the experimental group. Additionally, to encourage the pre-service teachers to freely practice and exhibit their abilities, previously developed games were used rather than the same game for all of them, which may have impacted the validity. Finally, future researchers can consider refining the proposed approach by implementating GBL practice in a real teaching context, rather than only designing a lesson plan, which would further authenticate the task.

Conclusion
Today, more and more young people enjoy using digital devices to create or produce something rather than simply consuming it. They distribute and share their productions via social media platforms to build and sustain their ideas, opinions and identities with others from diverse backgrounds. Pre-service teachers, as one group of digital natives, are more likely to be motivated to express themselves (e.g., their teaching beliefs and ideas about planning a lesson) with technology when equipped with knowledge and suitable pedagogies.

This study was conducted in a collective-oriented culture that values mutual responsibility and cooperation (Huang et al., 2019), which may have facilitated the co-design involved in the experimental group. However, people in such a culture tend to avoid criticizing others (Zhu et al., 2010), which may have impeded constructive peer evaluation. On the contrary, in individualist cultures (e.g., western culture), people are prone to be more comfortable with criticism (Zhu et al., 2010). Thus, we consider the proposed approach can extend to other cultures beyond China.

This study advances our knowledge with a proven collaborative design approach, which should encourage more efforts to explore how to help pre-service teachers design and implement innovative technologies-enhanced learning practices in the classroom. As a vigorous and promising one among teacher groups, pre-service teachers are eager to open their minds and heart to all new things related to classroom. Technologies, especially the emerging ones, are regarded as one of the drivers of educational reform. Engaging pre-service teachers in the design, implementation, and reflection of innovative technologies-enhanced learning practices thus has clear benefits for learning.