Harnessing the potential of wikis in teacher education is a significantly challenging task. Researchers suggest that incorporating wikis in the educational process requires a proper design rationale. This paper extends the previous research scope by proposing a wiki-based framework for organising collaborative Learning Design (LD) activities in teacher education. Aiming to exploit wiki’s functionalities to foster collaborative LD tasks, cultivate LD knowledge and promote collaborative learning behaviour, the innovation of the particular framework stands in two elements. The first one is setting a blended learning context organised around five stages by adapting Salmon’s model to gradually familiarise student teachers with wiki functionality, collaboration, and the LD process. The second one involves balancing individual and collaborative tasks through the five stages to cultivate trust and promote work-sharing among groups of student teachers. The proposed framework’s effectiveness has been explored in an empirical study conducted in a professional graduate diploma in education offered by a Greek Higher Education Institution. Following a convergent mixed-method research design, we collected quantitative and qualitative data such as the preservice teachers’ perceptions gathered through a survey questionnaire, the wiki logs and the wiki pages developed. Initial evidence is promising for the proposed framework’s potential to effectively utilise a wiki for collaborative LD and LD knowledge development. Also, a quite welcome finding regarding the potential of the proposed framework is the well-accepted collaborative writing among preservice teachers showing their commitment to author their learning designs and revise the content created by their peers.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Wikis are among the most popular implementations of the Web 2.0 paradigm, offering social constructivist learning environments to their users (Özdener, 2018). Wikis establish an effective knowledge-creating platform that facilitates brainstorming activities, enhances project outcomes, promotes collaborative problem solving, and stimulates critical inquiry, which are the hallmarks of constructivist learning (Chu et al., 2013). Research has determined wikis’ perspective pedagogical value to include promoting collaboration in group assignments, encouraging negotiation, and cultivating technological fluency (Hazari et al., 2009). Beyond individual knowledge construction, wikis facilitate collaborative knowledge building (Chen et al., 2015), with researchers describing wikis’ potential for promoting collaborative learning quite favourably in various contexts (Astall & Cowan, 2016). Wikis are presented as an open and flexible collaborative learning environment where learning happens through the collaborative construction and sharing of knowledge, as well as active participation (Barajas & Frossard, 2018; Ng, 2016; Su & Beaumont, 2010). They are considered to enable learners to collaboratively generate, mix, edit and synthesise subject-specific knowledge within a shared and openly accessible digital space at the time and place of their choosing (O’Bannon et al., 2013; Wheeler et al., 2008). Wikis also trigger collaborative learning by tracking different versions of their content, thus promoting learning through the observation of revisions (Trentin, 2009). Wikis seem to resolve practical issues that allow learners to focus on collaboration and exchange information. They enable working on joint artefacts without time and place constraints (Chen et al., 2015). Users with minimal technical skills and cognitive load can read, create, reorganise, and update a wiki’s content using a web browser (K. M. Li, 2015; O’Bannon et al., 2013). Past studies have shown that wikis can facilitate a wide variety of authentic, collaborative and reflective learning activities contributing to learners’ motivation and achievement and cultivating a sense of community in an educational context (Çelik & Aydın, 2021; Chen et al., 2015). To this end, research literature calls attention to wiki-based learning regarding the collaborative learning opportunities that wikis may provide.

Contemporary research looking at teachers as innovation agents in education highlights the need to transform teachers’ mindset towards the schooling system. This transformation’s central aspect moves from individual learning and conformity within a brick-and-mortar classroom to collaborative learning in a blended context (Monteiro & Morrison, 2014). Consequently, new views on teacher education and professional development emphasise the social dimension of reflection through collaboration and collegial dialogue (Ostovar-Nameghi & Sheikhahmadi, 2016). Indeed, student teachers practising collaborative learning during their studies, apart from the benefits derived from constructing their own knowledge as a joint intellectual effort, potentially affects their future practice. On that account, wiki-based learning has been explored in teacher education to support such socio-constructivist approaches, with corresponding studies identifying various degrees of success (Astall & Cowan, 2016). Researchers report that harnessing wikis’ potential turns out to be very challenging, indicating a theory-practice gap regarding how to best use wikis in teacher education (Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis, 2013). Even though wikis may provide learning opportunities, collaboration is not automatically a direct influence of wiki technology unless supported by sound pedagogy (Chu et al., 2017; Hadjerrouit, 2014). Judd et al. (2010) also mention that while wikis include features designed to facilitate collaboration, it does not necessarily follow that their use will ensure or even encourage collaborative learning behaviour among student teachers. In this line of research, suggestions for actualising the potential of wikis for collaborative learning in teacher education focus on the proper design and implementation of the activities organised (Hadjerrouit, 2012, 2014, 2016; Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis, 2013; Moundridou et al., 2020; Ng, 2016; O’Bannon et al., 2013; Witney & Smallbone, 2011; Zheng et al., 2015).

This paper aims to extend previous research scope on wikis in teacher education by proposing a wiki-based framework for organising collaborative Learning Design (LD) activities. In what follows, we first present a literature review regarding approaches to designing and implementing wiki-based learning in teacher education along with corresponding evaluation methods. We present the wiki-based framework articulating its structure and its rationale. Then, we describe the methodology of an empirical study conducted to explore the effectiveness of the proposed framework. This study involved preservice teachers (PSTs) in a wiki-based collaborative LD activity developed on the proposed framework. This study’s results allow us to gain insights into the proposed framework’s implementation. The results and discussion sections address how participants assessed the proposed framework for promoting collaborative LD and LD knowledge development. Also, utilising analytics deriving from the wiki, we investigate how the proposed framework promoted peer collaboration. In particular, data analytics provided insights into how participants collaborate during the activity in terms of (a) the individual contribution to groupwork, (b) the collaboration timeline, and (c) the participant’s collaborative learning behaviour in terms of quantitative and qualitative data about various types of editorial actions performed in wiki pages. In the end, we discuss the potential of the proposed framework considering initial evidence of the empirical study and elaborate on the implications of employing this wiki-based framework in teacher education.

Literature Review
Utilising wikis and assessing their effectiveness in teacher education is characterised by diversity. This literature review section focuses on student teachers either in initial or preservice teacher education programmes. We first conduct a non-exhaustive literature review of studies proposing strategies that apply wiki-based learning in teacher education. We interpret these strategies, reflect on good practices and implications that drive our research to a wiki-based framework for organising collaborative LD activities in teacher education. Considering the assessment method of any research as critical, we then review evaluation methods of wiki-based learning to develop an appropriate method for evaluating wiki-based collaborative LD activities.

Design and implementation of wiki-based learning in teacher education
Several approaches have been adopted to organise student teachers’ interaction through wikis mainly for collaborative authoring of lessons or educational content for their students, each focusing on a different perspective. The main targets of these researches are (a) promoting collaborative behaviour, (b) harnessing the affordances of wikis for content development, (c) increasing feedback and interaction, and (d) promoting knowledge and skill development. Despite researchers reporting on positive experiences of integrating wikis in the teaching/learning process, there are still barriers to investigate. Issues reported are the limited student contribution, the problem of ownership, and the lack of an appropriate pedagogy making optimum use of the wiki potential (Hadjerrouit, 2016; Karasavvidis, 2010; O’Bannon et al., 2013). The automatic transition from a traditional, delivery-based, and assessment–oriented learning culture to a new collaboration-based, shared-thinking-oriented one is doubtful without further task tweaking, scaffolding, and support (Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis, 2013).

Trentin (2009) suggests a methodological approach to content co-authoring to monitor and evaluate collaborative learning. He highlights the need to motivate co-authors to participate in each development stage of the shared content. His approach includes five stages: (1) individual study of recommended materials, (2) co-planning of the content’s structure (defining the wiki layout) and division of work among the group members, (3) group members working individually to develop the wiki content, (4) create links to content created by others and (5) intragroup peer review to suggest changes to their peers. Trentin (2009) argues that the last two stages get co-authors to examine the conceptual links throughout the work and foster a complete overall vision of the content. Reading and reviewing the content created by co-authors spark new ideas towards improving the final product. This research’s positive results can be valuable for any teacher education context concerning co-authoring in a wiki.

Lai & Ng (2011), aiming to explore wikis’ potential for developing student teachers’ learning, teaching, and assessment capabilities, organise a wiki task in 5 stages focusing on individual and peer assessment processes. At the 1st stage, participants are given guidelines about collaboratively constructing a wiki site for teaching a topic. Also, participants form groups, and they assign roles to group members. At the 2nd stage, participants provide constructive comments on their peers’ work. The tutor is also giving supplementary guidelines and feedback. At the 3rd stage, each group designs an assessment rubric to assess its wiki. At the 4th stage, each group assesses their wiki using their rubric and other groups’ wikis using those groups’ rubrics. At the 5th stage, each group reflects on using wikis considering: (a) creating the wiki pages, (b) using assessment rubrics for wiki-based projects, and (c) using self-assessment and peer assessment for wiki projects. When researchers examine the footprints on the wikis developed, they report how the student teachers developed collaboration skills with their peers. Focusing on the potential of peer feedback and its facilitation through wikis, they conclude that educators must develop new strategies to facilitate interaction among student teachers.

Hadjerrouit (2012) deems that collaborative content authoring in wiki requires collaborative work such as arguing, discussing, and reflecting on the content by editing each other’s contributions, adapting the language to the target’s needs audience, designing an overall structure of the wiki, and making cross-linking. To cultivate collaborative authoring skills, he assigns student teachers a wiki-based project that had to meet a set of three learning goals: (a) the wiki pages developed should follow general usability criteria such as technical layout, formatting, and style, (b) the wiki pages must contain information of good quality, without linguistic, grammar, and spelling errors, and (c) the wiki content should be self-explaining and offer information that is relevant to the target audience. However, empirical data showed low collaboration among student teachers who focused on formatting and adding content to wiki pages.

Biasutti & EL-Deghaidy (2012) focus on promoting participants’ knowledge development while creating wiki content without catering to their collaboration. They note that considering authentic problems positively affects the outcomes of collaborative online learning activities. Therefore, they assign student teachers to design an interdisciplinary project for their students collaboratively. To scaffold student teachers in developing the wiki pages’ content, they give them study material and guidelines about structuring the project (title, abstract, disciplines involved, e.t.c). The researchers cater to familiarising the participants with the wiki. Also, they assign the tutor to act as a facilitator throughout the implementation.

Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis (2013) identify three primary sources of problems that undermine the harnessing of wikis in education: (a) minimal participation, (b) limited interaction, and (c) no consistently positive perceptions of a wiki. They argue that new learner-centred pedagogical approaches should be developed. After conducting five design cycles of a wiki-task with pre-school student teachers, they provide two pedagogical approaches to address aspects of these types of problems. A shared repository may promote communal sharing, and assigned commenting may trigger interaction.

O’Bannon et al. (2013) propose a three-step structure of a wiki-based activity to stimulate student teachers gradually into generating information collaboratively. At first, student teachers familiarise themselves with wiki, e.g., they use it as a source of educational material. At the second step, student teachers get familiar with collaborative authoring by developing a study guide for a Web 2.0 tool on a wiki page. In the third step, student teachers collaboratively create repositories by contributing web resources in a structured format. The findings of this intervention reveal that although the participants’ comfort level with the wiki was influenced, they were not adequately prepared for enacting the roles of reader, writer, and editor within the wiki.

Goldstein & Peled (2016) explore the emerging wiki-based pedagogy in teacher education based on interviews from eleven teacher educators and interaction data from their wiki-based courses. Findings regarding the typical structure of wiki-based activities include: preparing the student teachers to work in a wiki and to collaborate effectively, choosing a topic and forming working groups, searching for meaningful resources, writing content, giving feedback to peers’ content, and rewriting their content based on the feedback received. In most cases, the type of content that was collaboratively developed depended on the subject taught, aiming at cultivating specific subject-related skills.

In the same line of research, the promotion of wiki-based content co-authoring is addressed by Jimoyiannis & Roussinos (2017) with a framework structured in four phases: (1) introduction, where participants specify goals and duties and familiarise themselves with the wiki environment, (2) exploration, for seeking information, exchanging ideas and structuring the content of the wiki, (3) implementation, for editing wiki pages and enriching the content with multimedia, and (4) integration, where the participants exchange ideas for content development, make final adjustments and corrections. Based on this framework, they analyse an intervention in a higher education context, reporting encouraging findings regarding (a) participants’ interaction and reflection using the community of inquiry model and (b) content contribution.

Applying wiki-based collaborative learning activities in the domain of teaching English as a foreign language has been widely explored towards advancing innovative and active learning (Y. Li et al., 2020). Following this line of research, Çelik & Aydin (2021) focus on the effects of wikis on writing motivation for foreign language learning and propose wiki utilisation based on a process-based writing approach. Wiki is employed in English language teacher education to actualise sequential writing phases of brainstorming, planning, drafting, writing, peer review, editing, and rewriting. However, the researchers do not address collaboration; instead, they report how the wiki-oriented writing environment strengthens learners’ motivation.

Reviewing all the studies mentioned above allows reflecting on the proposed strategies to design and implement wiki-based learning in teacher education. Our interpretation pinpoints that a common strategy is applying an introductory/preparation phase with guidelines to familiarise student teachers with wiki technology (e.g., Biasutti & EL-Deghaidy, 2012; Lai & Ng, 2011; O’Bannon et al., 2013). However, we detect that the following phases vary greatly. The vast majority go straight to a collaborative assignment (e.g., Hadjerrouit, 2012; Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis, 2013). Most of the approaches do not cater to promoting interaction and collaboration among student teachers (e.g., Biasutti & EL-Deghaidy, 2012). Those who do cater primarily rely on providing content specifications that have the potential to promote coediting (e.g., Hadjerrouit, 2012; Trentin, 2009). A few strategies apply a peer-assessment phase as a means of reflection and knowledge development (e.g., Goldstein & Peled, 2016; Lai & Ng, 2011).

Evaluation of wiki-based learning in teacher education
Research studies on wiki implementations are mostly perception-based (Judd et al., 2010). However, perceptions are not a straightforward method to assess a wiki implementation’s effectiveness, i.e., who contributed to the wiki, how student teachers collaborated, the extent to which they collaborated, and what types of activities were performed (Hadjerrouit, 2014). Instead, an interesting proposal in this line suggests that researchers adopt a qualitative analysis of the student teachers’ collaborative learning behaviour based on a taxonomy of editorial actions carried out on wikis by tracing and categorising editorial actions in the wiki pages’ history logs (Hadjerrouit, 2014).

The first attempt to introduce such a taxonomy aimed to categorise 13 different actions while editing an article in Wikipedia (Pfeil et al., 2006). Trying to typify the significance of these actions in wikis, Meishar-Tal & Gorsky (2010) classified them into two main categories by separating the actions made “in the content” such as adding and deleting, from actions that are made “within the content” such as formatting and correcting grammar.

Hadjerrouit (2012) opted to classify actions according to the wiki-based task. He initially adopted the Meishar-Tal & Gorsky (2010) classification, pointing out that the two categories are not equivalent in the context of a wiki-based collaborative task. Then, Hadjerrouit (2014) classified 10 out of 13 actions of Pfeil et al. (2006) by omitting “Vandalism”, “Mark-up Language”, and “Reversion”. Furthermore, he organised the ten actions into three categories that reflect the collaborative learning behaviour by determining the level of collaboration through a wiki-based task as follows:

1.
actions of “content format” and “changing style/typography” focus on technical issues and therefore indicate low collaboration,

2.
actions of “add information”, “add a link”, “delete information,” and “delete link” show cooperation among the participants, i.e., they divide the task assigned to them into individual sections, and each one undertakes a sub-section, thus resulting in middle collaboration,

3.
actions of “clarify information”, “fix link”, “correct grammar”, and “correct spelling” show that participants reviewed and coedited the wiki content, having achieved a high level of collaboration.

Recently, Jimoyiannis & Roussinos (2017) analysed content contributions to wiki pages in 5 categories: (1) creating a new page, (2) content expansion, (3) content reorganisation, (4) content enrichment (with video, images, or hyperlinks), and (5) editing and grammatical corrections. Chu et al. (2017) modified the classification scheme of Meishar-Tal & Gorsky (2010) to analyse modification actions in wiki pages. They classified “modifications made on sentences” comprised of actions related to adding, deleting, and moving sentences. Also, “modifications made within sentences”, including actions of editing format, editing content (e.g. words, images, or links), and editing grammar. However, research approaches neither classify nor link actions to the participants’ collaborative learning behaviour.

Organising and evaluating collaborative LD activities in teacher education
A wiki-based framework for collaborative LD
This section proposes a wiki-based framework for collaborative LD, which builds on and expands further the strategies of organising and introducing wiki-based learning in teacher education presented in the literature review Section 2.1. This framework introduces co-authoring learning designs in a blended learning context to increase interaction and support the cultivation of LD skills. As collaborative LD requires supporting the collaborative learning paradigm of education (Makri et al., 2014; Martinez-Maldonado et al., 2017), we centre our attention on promoting interaction and collaboration among student teachers. In this line, we adopt best practices from relevant research, such as familiarising participants with wiki technology, providing content specifications that promote coediting, and peer-reviewing. However, considering that research accounts for these well-tried practices not having delivered the expected outcomes, our proposal caters to the student teachers’ progressive engagement concurrently with wikis’ functionalities and collaborative writing. To achieve this concurrent progression, we organise student teachers’ involvement in stages caring to balance individual and joint contributions.

Along with the rationale of utilising a wiki as an e-learning tool promoting collaborative skills, we deem that e-learning models may provide the appropriate basis for wiki integration in a teacher education context. Looking attentively at e-learning models, we noted Salmon’s five-stage e-learning model (2013). This model’s stages fits well with the gradual familiarisation of technical functionalities and collaborative online behaviour that we aim to promote. Specifically, Salmon’s five-stage model (2013) provides a valuable curriculum building tool for designing and implementing e-tivities that integrate e-learning tools. The model aligns with social constructivism, focusing on students’ progressive engagement throughout its five stages identified as access and motivation (stage 1), online socialisation (stage 2), information exchange (stage 3), knowledge construction (stage 4) and knowledge development (stage 5). Although its structure does not reflect the potential to use e-learning as part of an integrated approach that includes face-to-face interaction (Moule, 2007), the model has also been studied in blended learning contexts (Jaques & Salmon, 2007). Therefore, we utilise this model and adapt its five stages to apply to a collaborative LD project. Furthermore, we reconstruct and set Salmon’s model in a blended learning context through the wiki technology. We opted to adopt a blended learning context as it has been endorsed for promoting collaborative learning through linking the effectiveness and flexibility of working in online learning environments with the dynamics of the social presence (Monteiro & Morrison, 2014). To this end, we incorporate face-to-face instances in the 1st, 3rd and 5th stages as anchoring points for group members and the tutor.

Considering that this framework focuses on collaborative LD towards producing a group product, it attempts through the five stages’ realisation to enhance trust and sharing among co-designers. To do so, it (a) deploys wiki features for supporting collaboration and caters to cultivate social skills through assigned commenting on exemplar learning designs, (b) triggers the information exchange among student teachers by using the wiki forum to negotiate elements of the designs and distribute tasks, and (c) promotes collaborative content creation by catering for individual and cross contributions to the designs.

Moreover, it aims at building LD knowledge by (a) stimulating student teachers to analyse exemplar designs, (b) scaffolding the utilisation of wiki for designing by providing a synthesis of pedagogical and technological specifications that the learning designs have to meet, (c) scaffolding individual development in a collaborative context, (d) catering for the interaction among student teachers as a mean to build their LD knowledge, and (e) increasing the feedback through peer-assessment towards improving the designs and developing student teachers’ LD knowledge.

Below we introduce the five stages of the proposed wiki-based framework and link them, when applicable, with strategies suggested in relevant research presented in the literature review Section 2.1.

The 1st stage of access and motivation is organised according to the typical practice of all wiki-based learning implementations catering for PSTs getting access to the wiki environment and familiarising with it (Biasutti & El-Deghaidy, 2012; Goldstein & Peled, 2016; O’Bannon et al., 2013). If possible, implementing this phase in a face-to-face context allows the instructor to stimulate social presence by organising, for instance, ice-breaking activities and motivating students to start interacting with each other. S/he also individually helps participants resolve possible technical issues and/or constraints. Lastly, the tutor is advised to organise a user-friendly wiki interface and set up a forum to enable interaction beyond the classroom and provide online support.

The 2nd stage of online socialisation focuses on triggering participants’ involvement in elaborating sample material, for example, sample learning designs. Individual study tasks are suitable at this stage (Biasutti & El-Deghaidy, 2012; Trentin, 2009). However, discussion tasks on the sample material should accompany them to promote engagement, analyse critical aspects, warm-up ideas sharing among participants, and cultivate a sense of community (Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis, 2013).

The 3rd stage of information exchange addresses student teachers’ collaborative engagement with the main concepts of LD and the wiki functionality. Participants are organised into groups to develop a learning design collaboratively. Each group needs to co-plan the learning design’s structure and divide responsibilities (Trentin, 2009), considering the instructor’s specific guidelines. These guidelines concern (a) a set of pedagogical and technological specifications (Hadjerrouit, 2012; Lai & Ng, 2011) and (b) the development/representation of the design as a set of interconnected wiki pages (Biasutti & El-Deghaidy, 2012; O’Bannon et al., 2013). Starting this stage with a face-to-face meeting, if possible, can boost interaction among group members and help them manage any difficulties. As far as the wiki environment is concerned, it has to be structured in a way that facilitates: (a) individual and cross contributions while developing each group learning design, (b) sharing content and exchanging ideas at a group level (communication), and (c) access to the specifications that the activity has to meet.

At the 4th stage of knowledge construction, the PSTs working in groups develop their learning designs in the wiki. Organising a wiki forum for each group where the tutor may also participate is ideal for facilitating intragroup communication.

At the 5th stage of knowledge development, a peer assessment activity is strongly suggested to enact participants’ reflection on the learning designs and promote intergroup interaction. Proposing evaluation criteria aligned with the design specifications could guide the review process. This activity aims to extend collaboration opportunities and provide timely feedback to peer learning designs by enhancing the authors’ and the reviewers’ reflections on the group designs (Goldstein & Peled, 2016; Lai & Ng, 2011). At the end of this stage, a face-to-face meeting is recommended for a final discussion to conclude with specific guidelines for learning designing.

Throughout the five stages, the tutor should be available at a wiki forum to support and respond to queries (Biasutti & El-Deghaidy, 2012). Participants should be encouraged to use their group wiki forum to exchange ideas and support each other through the activity.

Evaluation of wiki-based collaborative LD
Considering how previous research studies assess a wiki implementation’s effectiveness as presented in the literature research Section 2.2, we adapt Hadjerrouit’s (2014) classification of editorial actions considering teachers’ actions in a wiki while collaboratively creating learning designs.

Figure 1 depicts the classification of 9 editorial actions in wiki pages for collaborative LD and their categorisation in three collaboration levels. These actions are: content format, change style/typography, add information, add link, delete information, delete link, clarify information, fix link and correct grammar / spelling. In this classification, we consider 9 instead of 10 editorial actions in wiki pages proposed in Hadjerrouit’s (2014) classification of editorial actions. In particular, we merge the two editorial actions of “correct grammar” and “correct spelling” into “correct grammar/spelling”, considering their distinction insignificant for the specific activity of co-authoring a learning design.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Level of collaboration and classification of editorial actions carried out in wiki for LD

Full size image
Similar to Hadjerrouit (2014), we categorise these 9 editorial action types into three collaboration levels (low, middle, and high) and classify them based on their significance for an LD activity. Regarding categorising the low collaboration level, the classification of editorial actions follows Hadjerrouit (2014). We consider “content format” and “change style/typography” to indicate low collaboration concerning only the learning design format, not its content. Regarding categorising the middle and high collaboration level, we differentiate from the classification of editorial actions by Hadjerrouit (2014). We classify the actions of “add information” and “add link” as middle collaboration, indicating the participants working individually. We rank as high collaboration the actions of “clarify information”, “fix link,” and “correct grammar/spelling”, indicating that participants co-revise the wiki pages towards the improvement of a learning design’s content. The proposed categorisation differs from Hadjerrouit (2014) in ranking “delete information” and “delete links” as highly instead of middle collaborative actions since they reflect significant revisions on the content of a learning design requiring collaborators’ consent.

Methodology
Aim and Research Questions
Aiming to assess the proposed wiki-based framework for organising collaborative LD activities in teacher education, we get insights into its implementation. Considering that exploiting wikis’ affordances to promote peer collaboration is the core issue of wiki-based learning, our assessment is twofold. We focus on how the proposed framework exploits wiki and fosters peer collaboration. In particular, we address the following research questions:

RQ1: How do PSTs assess wiki exploitation according to the wiki-based framework for collaborative LD?

RQ2: How does the wiki-based framework promote collaboration among PSTs while developing learning designs?

Context and Participants
The study took place in the context of a technology-enhanced learning course offered at a professional graduate diploma in education offered by a Greek Higher Education Institution. Participants were 49 PSTs, 21 male and 28 female. They all had a technical background, with the majority (35) being Computer Science graduates, while the rest (14) were Engineers of various disciplines. They all had prior experience in using Web 2.0 technologies, and in the context of this programme, they had been involved in designing for learning in a narrative form. Nevertheless, neither of them had previously used wiki nor developed a learning design in an online environment.

Procedure
The particular course included one hour lecture and two hours of lab per week. The course was organised around an LD activity as the main project. Specifically, PSTs were assigned to collaboratively develop a technology-enhanced learning design according to a set of technological and pedagogical specifications. The instructor developed a wiki environment to facilitate group collaboration, classroom interaction and accommodate the group designs. This main project was organised over seven weeks, structured upon the proposed wiki-based framework as follows:

1st stage - 1st week: During a face-to-face course lab, participants introduced themselves to their peers and discussed the framework of the project in groups of three. The discussion was organised based on the guided reciprocal questioning technique. Then, they created accounts and were assigned to carry out several tasks individually (e.g., creating and editing wiki pages, adding web 2.0 objects in a wiki page, working with the history function) to familiarise themselves with the wiki environment.

2nd stage - 2nd week: Participants were assigned to work online and study exemplar learning designs available in the wiki individually. They were also asked to use the wiki forum to comment and exchange views on these designs’ efficacy based on technology integration and pedagogical background criteria.

3rd stage - 3rd week: During a face-to-face course lab, participants were asked to develop a learning design collaboratively in the wiki. They were provided with specifications that the design had to meet. Specification included pedagogical issues such as describing learning outcomes and technological issues such as integrating various Web 2.0 tools and applications in the design. The PSTs were organised in 16 groups: 3 of them with two members, 9 with three members, and 4 with four members. The instructor did not interfere in group formation; participants were self-organised in groups. They negotiated the learning design’s topic and outcomes, the work schedule, and the group members’ task distribution. Each group was urged to use its wiki discussion forum as a meeting place out of the face-to-face course labs throughout the project.

4th stage - 4th to 6th weeks: Working online, participants collaboratively developed their learning designs in the wiki. Aiming to promote collaboration among the group members and ensure their contributions, the LD activity required that the learning designs had a specific structure. The structure included one main wiki page that all group members shared responsibility for, and a separate wiki page for each group member to develop a design task. The main wiki page included general information about the design, an outline of short descriptions of the tasks (for students) comprising the design, and links to the discrete wiki pages of each task developed by each particular group member.

5th stage – 7th week: Working online, PSTs participated in a peer review activity. Each participant had to comment on the appropriateness and effectiveness of technology integration into three group learning designs of peer groups. In the end, during a face-to-face course lab, we conducted a final discussion focusing on PSTs’ reflection on their experience and concluded on general guidelines and good practices for LD. Ιt is worth noting that apart from the 3 stages (1st, 3rd and 5th) that included a face-to-face session during the course lab, the instructor was also available to support the participants in the main wiki forum organised as a help desk for this purpose.

Data collection
In this study, we combine participants’ perceptions with data analytics aiming to increase the credibility of the findings and, therefore, the conclusions’ reliability regarding the proposed framework.

To assess the exploitation of wiki as an e-learning tool for collaborative LD according to the wiki-based framework (RQ1), we followed a convergent mixed-method research design (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2017). We collected quantitative and qualitative data through a survey questionnaire assessing PSTs’ perceptions about their LD experience. After piloting the questionnaire with a convenient sample, we concluded in 28 questions. Quantitative data included 25 Likert scaled questions, with statements ranging from 1: Highly Disagree to 5: Highly Agree. Qualitative data included three open-ended ones.

Likewise, to assess the promotion of collaboration in an LD activity organised according to the wiki-based framework (RQ2), we collected quantitative data from the wiki’s analytics focusing on the statistics of wiki pages and qualitative data deriving from the data logs generated by the wiki pages developed.

Data analysis
To address the 1st research question, we organised the survey questionnaire in two sections to explore participants’ LD experience with the wiki about:

a)
The support offered for collaborative LD in terms of how the implementation of the proposed framework exploited wiki’s functionalities for fostering PSTs to perform collaborative LD tasks, including 15 Likert-scaled questions and two open-ended questions. In particular, questions 1 to 15 explore the various wiki functionalities that PSTs used through the various stages of the framework in individual and collaborative tasks (see Table 1), whilst Q16 and 17 stimulate them to summarise and reflect on the pros and cons of the various functionalities offered for collaborative LD (see Table 2).

b)
The cultivation of LD knowledge in terms of how the activity’s organisation based on the framework promotes developing LD knowledge and applying it in other educational contexts. It includes 10 Likert-scaled questions and one open-ended question. In particular, questions 18 to 27 explore various LD tasks that PSTs performed as authors or reviewers, individually or collaboratively through the various stages of the framework (see Table 3), whilst question 28 explore the sustainability and impact of this wiki experience on their future professional life (see Table 4).

Table 1 Distribution of participants’ responses in statements (n=49)
Full size table
Table 2 Participants’ responses to open-ended questions (n=49)
Full size table
Table 3 Distribution of participants’ responses in statements (n=49)
Full size table
Table 4 Participants’ responses to an open-ended question (n=49)
Full size table
We performed quantitative data analysis in SPSS v26 of the participants’ responses to the 28 statements of the questionnaire. We determined the Cronbach’s alpha to be 0.79 for the statements related to the utilisation of the wiki and 0.73 for the cultivation of LD knowledge, indicating acceptable internal consistency. In the results section, we present the descriptive statistics in Tables 1 and 3.

In the open-ended questions, we analysed the participants’ responses applying frequency analysis to categories derived from the content analysis results (Neuendorf, 2020). The inductive coding process was performed in NVivo by one of the researchers, who consulted the other researcher systematically. In the results section, we depict this content analysis in Tables 2 and 4.

To address the 2nd research question, we analyse participants collaboration along three dimensions:

a)
The individual contribution to group work, referring to the number of the contributions of each group member in the group wiki pages,

b)
The collaboration timeline, referring to revisions performed by each group member available in the wiki pages’ history logs,

c)
The collaborative learning behaviour, referring to evaluating the various types of editorial actions performed by the group members on the group wiki pages (Hadjerrouit, 2014).

We performed quantitative data analysis for the first two dimensions as presented in Figs. 2 and 3 in the results section. For the 3rd dimension, we analysed the data logs generated by the wiki pages developed, applying frequency analysis to categories derived from the content analysis results (Neuendorf, 2020). The deductive content analysis and the subsequent categorisation of the collaboration level followed the rationale presented in Section 3.2 and specifically the classification of 9 editorial actions into three collaboration levels depicted in Fig. 1. In the results section, we represent this content analysis in Tables 2 and 4.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Individual contribution to groupwork

Full size image
Fig. 3
figure 3
The collaboration timeline

Full size image
Results
(RQ1) How do PSTs assess wiki exploitation according to the wiki-based framework for collaborative LD?
Wiki exploitation addresses how implementing the proposed framework (a) exploited wiki’s functionalities to support collaborative LD and (b) cultivated the PSTs’ LD knowledge.

The support offered for collaborative LD
Table 1 presents the participants’ responses in statements Q1 through Q15 that address PSTs’ perceptions regarding the support offered for collaborative LD. Table 2 includes the frequency analysis of the categories of responses in the open-ended questions Q16 and Q17 about the features that facilitated or interfered with practising collaborative LD.

The Cultivation of LD knowledge
Table 3 presents the participants’ responses in statements Q18 through Q27 that address PSTs’ perceptions regarding the development of LD knowledge during the collaborative LD activity. Table 4 includes the frequency analysis of the categories of responses in the open-ended question Q28 about a potential application of wikis in their future practice.

(RQ2) How does the wiki-based framework promote collaboration among PSTs while developing learning designs?
The PSTs’ actual participation explores collaboration during the collaborative LD activity. We focus on the period of the 4th till the 6th week of the activity’s actualisation, i.e., at their collaborative behaviour implementing the framework’s 4th stage. The specific period is chosen since this is the framework stage that the participants have to balance individual and group contributions. This collaborative behaviour is analysed in three dimensions: (1) the individual contribution to group work, (2) the collaboration timeline, and (3) the quality of PSTs’ contributions during the LD activity.

Individual contribution to groupwork
Figure 2 shows the distribution of editorial actions per group member at each group learning design’s main page. The group wiki pages’ history log analysis focuses on each group’s main page due to the assignment’s specification demanding that the group members share the responsibility of developing their design’s main page (see Section 4.3 Procedure, 4th stage). The findings reveal that only 18,7% of the groups had equal contributions. The group members contributed equally among the 16 groups, only in 3 groups (G2, G3, G16). In 7 groups, one member had much more contributions than the others (G1, G4, G7, G8, G9, G13, G14), in 5 groups there was an equal contribution by some members, but only minimal by the others (G5, G6, G10, G11, G15) and there was also an extreme case of a group in which only one member did all the work (G12).

The collaboration timeline
The wiki logs reveal that the groups worked only for a few days on revising their wiki pages compared to the three weeks available for collaboration (see Section 4.2 Procedure, 4th stage). Specifically, six groups worked up to 5 days, four groups worked for more than 9 days, and the rest varied in-between. Also, as shown in Fig. 3 depicting the number of participants’ actions per day, the groups worked mainly in the last days.

The collaborative learning behaviour
The analysis of the data logs generated by the wiki pages’ history function developed during the LD activity focused on 730 editorial actions performed on the main page of each group learning design since the assignment’s specifications required that group members co-author this page and link it to their individual pages. Findings reflect (i) the type of editorial actions performed as illustrated in Fig. 4, (ii) the level of collaboration attained per group as shown in Fig. 5, and (iii) the level of collaboration attained in total as illustrated in Fig. 6.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Distributions of editorial actions per type carried out during the collaborative LD activity

Full size image
Fig. 5
figure 5
Distribution of editorial actions per group according to the level of collaboration

Full size image
Fig 6
figure 6
Classified distribution of editorial actions reflecting the collaboration level

Full size image
In particular, Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the editorial actions investigated based on the taxonomy presented in Fig. 1, revealing that the most common editorial action carried out in the wiki pages was “add information”.

Figure 5 shows the distribution of editorial actions per group of PSTs according to the attained level of collaboration. Findings reveal that among the 16 groups, only the members of 2 groups performed more actions classified as of high level of collaboration (G2 and G16). Also, two groups (G6 and G12) performed the least actions classified as high collaboration level.

A comprehensive finding is shown in Fig. 6, depicting the classified distribution of the editorial actions according to the collaboration level. This distribution proclaims that the PSTs’ collaboration level during the LD activity was mainly middle.

Discussion
Results presented in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4, addressing the 1st research question, reveal the proposed framework’s potential for exploiting wiki as an e-learning tool providing an online, authoring, and collaborative environment in a blended learning context. Specifically, like DeWitt et al. (2014), the wiki as an online environment is found easy to access and use (Q1, 77,5%), and the vast majority of the PSTs did not need any assistance using it (Q2, 55,1%). Responses are similar to Moundridou et al. (2020), reporting a wikis’ usefulness for working online during an LD activity (Q3, 73,5%). Although most PSTs felt protected when authoring wiki pages (Q5, 75,5%), this was not directly linked to evoking their engagement (Q6, 46,9%). Regarding authoring, the PSTs valued the feature of integrating Web 2.0 objects in wiki pages (Q7, 79,6% and Q16, 46,9%). They also mentioned the feature of adding hyperlinks and the overall simple process of content development (Q16, 26,4%). Furthermore, perceptions collected (Q17) provide evidence that the vast majority of PSTs have well-accepted wikis since they do not report on specific features that neglect the collaborative LD process.

Focusing on collaboration, we observe two contrasting trends towards online versus face-to-face collaboration that reinforces adopting blended learning contexts like the one proposed in this framework. On the one hand, the PSTs seem to highly appreciate wiki for providing a shared online space for their group (Q8, 73,5%), working at their convenience (Q9, 79,6%), and saving them time while collaborating (Q10, 69,4%). This is in accordance with O’Bannon et al., (2013) reporting the preference to collaborate in an online environment rather than meeting face-to-face. On the other hand, PSTs seem to slightly favour the traditional approach to collaboration and consider face-to-face collaboration more effective than wiki-based collaboration (Q14, 42,8% vs 30,6%), aligning with previous research in Witney & Smallbone (2011) and Donelly & Hume (2014). This could be attributed either to a lack of online collaborative skills that need to be cultivated or to K. M. Li’s (2015) arguments. These arguments refer to PSTs (i) treasuring face-to-face interaction as they consider it an essential element in teaching and learning, and (ii) claiming that technology will not replace traditional classroom interaction involving the use of gestures, eye contact, and physical interactions. Likewise, the PSTs do not seem to value the forum available in the wiki as a means of communication among group members (Q11, 38,8%). This may be attributed to (a) considering most helpful a direct conversation (Donelly & Hume, 2014) when they have the chance to meet each other during lessons, and (b) utilising other contemporary communication tools. Nevertheless, it is quite promising that the PSTs feel that wiki-based collaboration has enhanced the sense of community in their class (Q15, 61,2%). Similar to the PSTs in Moundridou et al. (2019) study, they also seem to enjoy collaborating within their group in shared wiki pages (Q13, 85,8%) as they consider that this allows group members to equally contribute to co-authoring a learning design (Q12, 81,6%). Regarding collaborative content authoring, the PSTs appreciate sharing wiki pages (Q16, 48,9%), but they also mention some implications. Some claim that the inability of a wiki to support synchronous edit interferes with their work (Q17, 12,2%), which aligns with K. M. Li (2015) reporting that not editing a page simultaneously is a limitation of wikis. They also mention that sharing may lead to changes without group consent (Q17, 20,4%). The ownership aspect appears to be a twofold issue in wiki implementations (Wheeler et al., 2008). The first aspect refers to participants’ resistance to having their content changed by others (Hadjerrouit, 2012) and fearing that others might accidentally or deliberately delete their work (Karasavvidis & Karagiannidis, 2013). The second aspect refers to participants’ hesitancy and/or feeling a psychological barrier to intervene in content authored by peers (Donnelly & Hume, 2015; Goldstein & Peled, 2016; Zheng et al., 2015). In this study, we witness only the first aspect since PSTs report implications caused by group members deleting or modifying content without prior consent from the rest group members.

The PSTs perceptions provide evidence regarding the activity’s blended learning context and gradual involvement in LD tasks to cultivate LD knowledge. It seems that the LD experience organised in the collaborative LD activity has offered them opportunities to construct and develop their LD knowledge. For starters, the majority (Q18, 79,6%) appreciate wiki as an online space and overall endorse it for serving as an environment for the collaborative development of a learning design (Q20, 65,3%). PSTs appreciate the exemplar learning designs available in the wiki (Q19, 75,5%). Indeed, previous studies reported providing study material as an adequate method for scaffolding PSTs while collaborating in a wiki (Biasutti & El-Deghaidy, 2012; K. M. Li, 2015; Moundridou et al., 2020). A significant finding concerns 85,7% (Q25) of the PSTs, similar to Ng (2016), valuing the peer assessment activity that provided timely feedback and helpful reviews towards improving their group learning design. It confirms peer assessment’s potential for learning instead of grading (Lai & Ng, 2011). However, only 38,8% of the PSTs in this study felt comfortable reviewing their peers’ learning design. This reservation is cited consistently in the research literature. It is attributed to participants (a) feeling exposed to express their opinion publicly and (b) not wanting to potentially upset other participants (Donnelly & Hume, 2015; Wheeler et al., 2008). Three more findings highlight that the activity gradually developed PSTs’ LD knowledge. The first is their testimony that collaborating with their groupmates and co-authoring a learning design has enhanced their LD knowledge (Q21, 69,4%). The second refers to almost half of the PSTs being motivated to improve their learning designs as they were publicly available (Q22), which aligns with Wheeler et al. (2008) reporting that being aware of an unseen audience enforces them to write accurate and relevant content to the wiki. The third one is that the PSTs were creatively stimulated by inspecting peer-group designs while developing their own (Q23, 65,3%). This aligns with Lai & Ng (2011) and Moundridou et al. (2020) reporting that finding new features in their peers’ wikis often motivated the PSTs to adopt them and improve their wikis.

The PSTs’ intentions are moderate towards wiki utilisation during their studies (Q26, 49%) and positive towards utilising the learning designs developed during the activity in the future (Q27, 65,3%). Furthermore, the findings in this study confirm the positive intentions of PSTs for integrating wikis in their practice (Q28, 67,3%) as reported in several other studies (Biasutti & El-Deghaidy, 2012; Chu et al., 2013; DeWitt et al., 2014; Judd et al., 2010; K. M. Li, 2015; Moundridou et al., 2019). Assuming their future role as teachers, participants’ intentions include using a wiki at their lessons as a repository of learning material or organising their students’ collaboration in projects. They also propose alternative uses, such as utilising the learning designs developed during this course project. A very encouraging finding is that 10% of the PSTs, although they were not asked to, declared that they would collaborate with fellow teachers in the future to develop learning designs for their classes.

Results presented in Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, addressing the 2nd research question, reveal the proposed framework’s potential for promoting collaboration when organising a collaborative LD activity around the specific stages. The findings of the individual contribution to group work (Fig. 2) align with Hadjerrouit’s (2016) and Moundridou et al. (2019) analysis of PSTs’ contribution to group work, reporting an unequal distribution of workload among group members. Additionally, the phenomenon of one member dominating the groupwork. (Hadjerrouit, 2014; Meishar-Tal & Gorsky, 2010; Moundridou et al., 2019) is noted. These findings can be attributed to the limited collaborative experience of the PSTs as they mostly undertook individual assignments in their studies. Literature research accounts for possible reasons the lack of e-collaborative skills and expertise in collaborative learning (Hadjerrouit, 2014) and/or the phenomenon of social loafing (Keppell et al., 2006) and/or the predominant behavioural learning paradigm (Hadjerrouit, 2014; Karasavvidis, 2010). The findings of the collaboration timeline reveal groups’ involvement occurring mainly in the last days of their assignment (Fig. 3), confirming learners’ tendency to postpone their work just before the deadline (Hadjerrouit, 2014; Judd et al., 2010; Meishar-Tal & Gorsky, 2010). This discrepancy may be attributed in some cases to the tendency of being more concerned about passing the course, doing as little work as possible than learning collaboratively (Hadjerrouit, 2014).

Regarding PSTs’ online collaborative learning behaviour, a pretty favourable finding of this research involves the most common editorial action carried out in the wiki pages. In this study “add information” (Fig. 4) emerged, while previous studies using a similar analysis method found “formatting” as the most frequently performed editorial action (Hadjerrouit, 2012, 2014, 2016)). The distribution of editorial actions per group of PSTs according to the attained level of collaboration (Fig. 5), apart from showing each group’s collaboration level, is interesting to correlate with the members’ contribution to group work (Fig. 2). This correlation indicates that the two groups who attained a high collaboration level were among the three groups that their members contributed equally. Likewise, the two groups that performed the least actions classified as of high level of collaboration were among the groups that one of the members did not contribute at all. To our knowledge, such evidence correlating the equal distribution of the workload among group members with a high collaboration level has never been noted by previous studies about wiki-based learning. We consider this finding as a compelling issue for further investigation. Considering that the literature review of wiki implementations reports a low level of collaborative writing (Hadjerrouit, 2014) despite adopting various aids to support it (Judd et al., 2010; Hadjerrouit, 2012; Karasavvidis, 2010), a quite welcome finding of this study is PSTs’ showing mainly middle collaboration level during the LD activity (Fig. 6). Moreover, the fact that 36% of the actions performed are classified as showing a high collaboration level reveals that the PSTs in this study did not hesitate to edit or revise the content created by their peers, unlike studies reporting such a burden (Donnelly & Hume, 2015; Goldstein & Peled, 2016; Hadjerrouit, 2012; Karasavvidis, 2010).

Conclusions and Implications for Future Research
This paper proposes a framework for organising wiki-based collaborative LD activities. The innovation of the particular framework stands in two elements. The first one is setting a blended learning context organised around five stages by adapting Salmon’s model to gradually familiarise students with wiki functionality, collaboration, and the LD process. The second one involves balancing individual and collaborative tasks through the five stages to cultivate trust and promote work-sharing among groups of student teachers.

A study conducted in a PST education context provides initial evidence about the effectiveness of the proposed framework in terms of the wiki exploitation as a means for collaborative LD (RQ1) and in promoting collaboration among co-designers (RQ2). Following a convergent mixed-method research design, data were collected through a survey questionnaire, the wiki analytics and the wiki pages developed. This study’s findings validate that teacher education may harness wikis’ affordances for content development and actualise wiki-based learning through the wiki-based framework proposed for organising teachers’ active involvement in LD tasks.

The participants’ perceptions of their experience with the wiki during the collaborative LD activity (RQ1) reveal that the proposed framework’s implementation exploited the wiki’s functionalities adequately for fostering PSTs to perform collaborative LD tasks. Specifically, PSTs favoured wiki as an e-learning tool providing an online environment for co-developing learning designs along with support offered by the instructor and peers due to its accessibility anytime, anywhere, the authoring features and communication/collaboration opportunities provided. The activities organised through the five stages of the framework successfully introduced wiki’s affordances for collaboration. Participants report enjoying peer collaboration, saving time, and having the opportunity to contribute to their assignment equally. The perceived cultivation of LD knowledge suggests that the proposed framework stimulates, scaffolds, builds and develops PSTs’ LD knowledge. Elements of the proposed framework that contributed to this direction were providing exemplar learning designs in the wiki, balancing individual and group deliverables following specific technological/pedagogical guidelines, and organising a peer-assessment task. Furthermore, wiki’s publicly available pages allowed them to get ideas from their peer’s work and motivated them to improve their learning design.

Quantitative and qualitative analysis of wiki analytics provides promising findings for the potential of the proposed framework in promoting collaboration (RQ2). The editorial action primarily performed by PSTs in the wiki was “add information” instead of “content format” reported by other studies, showing their commitment to authoring their learning design. The distribution of editorial actions classified as “highly collaborative” is also quite favourable, showing that participants edited or revised the content created by their peers, unlike previous studies reporting such a burden. Nevertheless, burdens reported by previous studies, such as the unequal distribution of workload among group members and the tendency to postpone working just before the deadline, are also recorded and need to be addressed to improve the proposed framework.

The implications derived from the current study validate that deploying a wiki does not automatically ensure collaboration; instead, the organisation of wiki-based learning in teacher education should inherently support the collaborative learning paradigm of education. The wiki-based framework proposed in this paper further contributes design principles for deploying collaborative LD activities by adapting Salmon’s five-stage model in a blended learning context. Key elements towards promoting collaborative LD seem to be: (a) cultivating social skills through commenting on exemplar learning designs, (b) triggering the information exchange among group members by using a wiki forum to negotiate elements of the learning design and distribute tasks, and (c) promoting collaborative content creation by catering for individual, group and cross contributions to the learning designs developed as interlinked wiki pages. Concerning the cultivation of PSTs’ LD knowledge, the study yielded positive findings providing evidence that key elements toward this direction are: (a) stimulating PSTs to analyse exemplar learning designs, (b) scaffolding the utilisation of wiki by providing adequate technological/pedagogical specifications that the learning designs have to meet, (c) catering for the interaction among PSTs to build LD knowledge collaboratively and (d) increasing timely feedback provision on learning design issues through peer-assessment aiming at improving the learning designs and developing PSTs’ LD knowledge.

Future research involving the proposed framework’s improvement will be directed by two intriguing pieces of evidence of the current study. Firstly, evidence about the PSTs’ collaborative learning behaviour showing the unequal contribution to groupwork suggests focusing on initially cultivating e-collaborative skills. In this line, the proposed framework could be improved by integrating a preparatory warm-up asynchronous discussion in groups (instead of individual contributions to a forum on a specific topic) at the 2nd stage or a primitive collaborative LD assignment at the 3rd stage. The latter could concern developing technology-enhanced learning objects to be used in the group learning designs. Secondly, the perceived usefulness of the peer assessment organised at the 5th stage of the proposed framework could be further exploited by using predefined assessment criteria as a common ground for reflection. These criteria may refer to pedagogical and technological aspects of the learning designs aiming to support the peer assessment process, and at the same time, advance participants’ efficiency as designers. For example, criteria based on the TPACK model (Koehler et al., 2014) could properly develop PSTs’ knowledge towards integrating technology with pedagogy and content in the learning designs. Finally, peer reviews could be used as boundary objects for cultivating collaboration among authors and reviewers.