Mobile instant messengers such as WhatsApp have become an essential part of everyday life and can be a transformative tool for teacher professional development. Several studies have addressed the use of WhatsApp in a community of practices. However, there is a lack of study on examining teachers’ interaction in WhatsApp community of practices, particularly using social network analysis (SNA). This study aimed to investigate teachers’ interactions with emphasis on frequency and pattern of interactions in eight groups of WhatsApp community of practices, which were voluntarily formed. The participants of this study were 76 secondary school mathematics teachers in Banda Aceh, Indonesia. Data were collected during the two months of the program and were analyzed using descriptive quantitative analysis and SNA. This study reveals that there were great differences in teachers’ interaction across the groups. Participants were predominantly involved in discussions during evenings, either weekdays or weekends. In addition, this study indicates that the most active participants in each group, who played a critical role, sent the highest number of messages and interacted with most of the other members of their groups. The participants also started a new session of discussion after a short or long activity. The findings of this study could be the basis for sustainable professional development using mobile instant messenger technology in the context of the community of practices.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Teacher professional development is an essential mechanism for enhancing teachers' knowledge and instructional practices (Borko, 2004) and student achievement (Ball & Cohen, 1999). The core of teacher professional development is related to teacher learning, learning how to learn, and transforming their knowledge into practice to benefit students' growth (Avalos, 2011). According to Darling-Hammond et al. (2017), an effective professional development (PD) should meet the criteria as content-focused, incorporate active learning utilizing adult learning theory, support collaboration typically in job-embedded context, offer opportunities for feedback and reflection, and last for a sustained duration.

According to Mak and Pun (2015), a community of practice (CoP) is a means for sustainable professional development. A CoP is a group of professionals who learn together to support one another in developing their practice (Wenger, 1999). Furthermore, they shared knowledge, concerns, and value within a supportive culture (Hur & Brush, 2009). Teacher participation in a CoP can lead to transformative learning outcomes (Herbers et al., 2011). A similar argument is also proposed by Servage (2008), arguing that community of practices can facilitate change in teachers' beliefs and practices. In addition, Carpenter (2016) highlights that professional development activities involving collaboration, such as CoPs, have transformative potential.

Johnson (2001) states that online CoPs extend traditional nations of CoPs into virtual mode. According to Trust and Horrocks (2017), commonly used tools for online CoPs are discussion forums, listservs, blogs, wikis and social networking sites. In recent years, the use of instant messaging applications such as WhatsApp has emerged as a new way to support professional activities (Pacholek et al., 2021). Previous studies have investigated various aspects of the use of WhatsApp in the context of a community of practices. For instance, Tyrer (2019) examined the norms, behaviours, and attitudes of users of WhatsApp during a two-year university teacher training program. This study revealed that a WhatsApp group significantly shaped the experience of the participants in their training program. Furthermore, another study conducted by Abiodun et al. (2020), aimed to examine the use of WhatsApp community of practices to support nurses in their first year of practice. This study showed the important role of WhatsApp community of practice for isolated graduated nurses in a critical phase of the transition of their professional development. Della Líbera and Jurberg (2020) conducted a study aiming to use WhatsApp for students with blindness and low vision. This study showed that these students were heavy users of WhatsApp, and WhatsApp groups, helped them develop their social skills and health issues. Cansoy (2017) examined kinds of information shared by teachers in WhatsApp group as an online community of practice. This study revealed that WhatsApp could be an important tool in teacher professional development.

Brooks (2010) describes CoPs as 'dynamic social structures' activated through interaction. In a CoP, learning is a socially constructed process of participation, interaction, and developing shared knowledge (Wenger, 1999). Those arguments indicate that interaction is one of the essential aspects of CoPs. Online CoPs using an instant messenger app, such as WhatsApp, can be a transformative learning tool for teacher professional development, and interaction is one of the critical elements of an online CoP. However, there is a lack of study investigating interactions in a WhatsApp community of practices. Therefore, in this study, we sought to examine the frequency and pattern of teachers’ interactions in WhatsApp community of practices. The following research questions guided our study: (1) What are the frequencies of teachers' interaction in WhatsApp groups during a CoP? (2) What are the patterns of teachers' interaction in WhatsApp groups during a CoP? This study adds to the literature in two ways: first, it provides new insight on teachers’ interactions in WhatsApp community of practices, which helps us to better understand this issue for future online professional development. Second, this study applies Social Network Analysis to understand teachers' interaction in community of practices.

Related literature
Social network analysis (SNA)
According to (Tran et al., 2016), social network analysis (SNA) is a great tool to analyze the relationship in a graphical form. SNA looks at a social relationship based on network theory, which consists of nodes, representing network actors, and edges representing a relationship between the actors (Bokhove, 2018). Furthermore, he states that social network analysis creates visualization and measures relationships between people, groups and other entities, allowing for visual analysis of human interaction.

SNA has been employed in a sizable amount of educational research. For instance, Penuel et al. (2009) has employed a network approach to study managing teacher professional communities. In the context of secondary school, Sentse et al. (2014) used SNA to investigate peer influences and bullying. Furthermore, De Laat et al. (2007) used SNA to study patterns of interactions within a networked learning community and how their members construct knowledge. However, studies using SNA to investigate participation in online discussion are limited (Saqr et al., 2018).

SNA is effective in studying the relational dimension of blended project-based learning by the ways of visual and mathematical analysis (Cela et al., 2015; Hernández-García et al., 2015). Furthermore, SNA network analysis can be used to estimate the power of each member, the strength of the relationship, and group properties (Romero et al., 2013). Therefore, SNA network analysis is significant in studying interaction in an online CoP. We argue that using SNA to study interaction in an online CoP can offer insights that help us to understand CoP and uncover the significance of members' interaction in a CoP.

Realistic mathematics educations (RME)
Realistic Mathematics Education (RME) was initiated by Hans Freudenthal, who viewed mathematics as a human activity. He believed that, in learning mathematics, students are not passive receivers of read-made mathematics. According to Treffers (1987), there are six principles of RME: activity, reality, intertwinement, interaction, and guidance.

Teaching mathematics based on the RME approach indicates using the contextual problem as a starting point of a lesson to empower students toward the mathematization process. Fauzan and Diana (2020) argued that RME-based learning would benefit students for several reasons. First, students can learn mathematics by exploring problems related to their daily lives. Second, students will investigate mathematics contents using informal knowledge that orients them to reinvent formal knowledge. Third, students will experience the heuristics of RME.

Teacher professional development (TPD) in RME is necessary to ensure teachers integrate the RME approach in their classrooms. Furthermore, continuing professional development should be conducted to assist teachers in developing RME-based lessons based on students’ characteristics and thinking levels. In the context of TPD on RME in Indonesia, Hadi et al. (2010) suggested five standards: (1) TPD activities emphasize not only the process supporting teachers to understand RME but also on developing learning teaching resources that can be used at schools; (2) TPD should assists teachers to develop knowledge and skills by experiencing the nature of RME; (3) TPD should align with the curriculum (4) During TPD, teachers should connect the activities, mathematical concepts, and RME theories; and (5) TPD empowers teachers to implement RME in their lesson sustainably.

WhatsApp community of practices
According to Macià and García (2016), an online community of practices becomes necessary since teachers can voluntarily participate in professional development and reflect on their own practices. In recent years, there have been several studies addressing the use of mobile learning devices in support of learning and the opportunities offered by the devices (e.g., Cochrane & Antonczak, 2013; Macià & García, 2016; Rambe & Bere, 2013; Wang & Ma, 2017). One of the mobile apps which are potentially used for professional development is WhatsApp.

The WhatsApp app is a multitasking internet messenger introduced in 2009. The growing use of smartphones has increased the membership of WhatsApp daily (Agrawal & Mittal, 2019). Currently, WhatsApp supports real-time sending and receiving text messages, emoticons, videos, documents, locations, weblinks, statuses, voices, and video calls (Agrawal, 2020). Furthermore, WhatsApp users can easily view whether their shared content has been viewed or not (Agrawal, 2020). Furthermore, WhatsApp allows users to stay connected with all members of a group and share content with all members at one time (Agrawal, 2020). Importantly, the basic purpose of WhatsApp is the facilitation of communication, which can improve teamwork and online communication among users (Barhoumi, 2015). The incorporation of WhatsApp in online teacher professional development can be useful to improve interaction and communication. Specifically, WhatsApp can play an important role in strengthening collaboration among teachers in a professional development course since it provides a platform for an entire team to stay connected with each other. In addition, WhatsApp can be used to discuss, share a document, provide feedback, and do other things.

As previously mentioned, the use of WhatsApp groups as an online community of practices has been addressed in several studies. Abiodun et al. (2020) conducted a study on using WhatsApp to support nurse students in their community service placement. WhatsApp groups were created based on the participants’ location. The groups consisted of moderators, facilitators, students, and alumni. This study revealed that the WhatsApp community of practices has a strong impact on professional development during the transition period for the students. The study also suggests that the WhatsApp group increased the interaction between the students and the alumni. This is in line with Chan (2015) suggesting that WhatsApp, which has a capacity for immediate feedback, could enable social interactions and establish social connections.

Cansoy (2017) employed an ethnographic research method to investigate kinds of shares made by teachers in a WhatsApp community of practice. The study analyzed WhatsApp messages sent by 12 teachers over 12 months. By employing content analysis to analyze the data, the finding revealed that the teachers shared four main themes, namely content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, teaching practices, and emotional support among teachers. The study suggested that WhatsApp groups can be an important digital tool in enhancing teacher professional development.

Furthermore, another study was conducted by Tyrer (2019) examining the emerging practices of WhatsApp on a teacher professional development program. The participants voluntarily set up a WhatsApp group as a collaborative space, where they can share information related to the program. The study addressed three important issues: the ways of WhatsApp are used by the participants, how socio-technical relations are maintained in the WhatsApp community of practices, and the relationship between WhatsApp and other communities of practices. This study suggested that WhatsApp community of practices significantly shaped the experience of participants on their professional development program. In addition, this study revealed that WhatsApp complements other types of social interactions rather than replacing them.

Method
Research design
This study was conducted with the purpose of examining teacher’s interaction in an online CoP. At the beginning of this study, all the participants attended a webinar. The webinar aimed to introduce realistic mathematics education (RME) and design a lesson plan based on the RME theory. After participating in the webinar, participants were free to join a community of practices regarding their interests in designing lesson plans based on the RME theory. Eight groups of participants were formed voluntarily according to their topical interests.

Participants
The participants of this study were secondary school mathematics teachers in Banda Aceh, Indonesia. We selected mathematics teachers in this study because of the following reason. First, Realistic Mathematics Education is a relatively new concept to the teachers; therefore, the need for teacher professional development in this area is still highly demanded by the teachers. Second, according to Borba et al. (2016), using an online system for improving mathematics teachers is a relatively new field of research.

We conduct this study in Banda Aceh, Indonesia, since most teachers have access to WhatsApp and have a relatively good internet connection. To recruit the participants, we used the convenience sampling technique. As already mentioned, we sent an invitation to the schools regarding the Webinar of RME introduction. Furthermore, we offered teachers to participate in communities of practices based on their interests. According to their topic of interest, teachers who were conveniently available to participate in communities of practices were enrolled in WhatsApp groups.

A total of 76 teachers participated in the study. The majority (90%) of participants had a bachelor’s degree in mathematics education, while the remaining (10%) had a master’s degree. To easily identify teachers in the data analysis process, the data analysis software automatically specifies participants’ numbers in each group.

Data collection
After receiving approval from the participants, we collected data from eight WhatsApp groups of teachers. Each group consisted of six to eleven members. The majority of the groups consisted of ten members. As previously mentioned, participants of this study participated in a webinar, which then was then followed by an online community of practice. To collect the data, we exported chat data in.txt format from the eight groups. Data was collected after two months the groups were formed. Within the two months period, all the groups have completed at least one task of designing of a lesson plan and learning trajectory.

Data preparation
The data was processed using the chat analysis method developed in Python. First, the plain text data file downloaded from the WhatsApp application needed to be parsed and tokenized in a meaningful manner, so that the file can be used in a Pandas data frame. Table 1 shows the data frame structure with an example from group 4.

Table 1 Data frame with example
Full size table
Furthermore, we broke down our chat data into four steps. The first is detecting Date and Time tokens. This step is significant to distinguish whether a line of text is a new message or belongs to a multi-line message. If the line begins with a Date and Time, it means the line is a new message. Otherwise, it is a part of multi-line message. A regular expression (Regex) library has been employed to facilitate this work. The second is detecting the Author token. Once we have identified lines containing new messages with Date and Time components, we can now detect the Author token. The result of this step depends on how we saved our friends’ names in the phone contacts app. If we do not save someone’s name in our contact list, we need to check the author’s phone number. Regex is used to check both names and mobile phones (Indonesia). After identifying the Date, Time, and Author tokens, the main information (Message token) remains in the remaining message string. As a result, the Message token can be identified easily. The third is extracting and combining tokens. After identifying Date, Time, Author and Message tokens in a single message, we split each line based on the separator tokens like commas (,), hyphens (-), colons (:) and spaces () so that the required tokens can be extracted. Fourth is parsing the entire files and handling Multi-Line Messages. This is the step of data parsing for which we will read the entire WhatsApp text files, identify and extract tokens from each line, and capture all data in tabular Pandas data frame format.

After the parsing and tokenizing processes are completely performed, and before the data can be used for analysis, the data must be filtered to eliminate unused information, such as discarded media, someone added by someone else, or someone changing the topic of conversation. We filtered out all this unnecessary data from the tabular information.

Validity and reliability
Social network analysis (SNA) is useful for studying online communities. It allows analysis of the connections between individuals that results from the interaction (Howison, et al., 2011). Using SNA in research is a data reduction method that parallels other quantitative methods (Howison et al., 2011). The relationship is presented as a mathematical structure consisting of nodes and links for analysis.

Regarding the nature of online communities data, this study collects complete data. It means that online communities are purely virtual groups that interact via WhatsApp. For a purely virtual community of practice, the data from the groups provide a complete of the groups’ interaction (Howison et al., 2011). With online community data, data are completely given by what the system store. Using the system-generated data from purely virtual groups, we confirm that this study's validity is not an issue.

In terms of reliability, according to Howison et al. (2011), by using system-generated data, we can ensure reliability when the data are retrieved from the online system for research. In this study, since participants are from the same areas and use the same platform, time zone management and server outages, which can threaten reliability, are not an issue. Furthermore, to increase the reliability of network data, we increase the number of observations by having eight groups of communities of practices and collect the data during two months.

Data analysis
In this process, we investigated the relation between users by finding the interaction between them. The users’ interaction can be obtained by observing the response of someone-to-someone else’s messages. However, it is difficult to know exactly who replied or responded to whom because WhatsApp does not provide this feature. Therefore, we assumed that if different authors appear consecutively in the author column’s name, this indicates that they are responding to each other. In this case, the first author should be the one who started sending the message and the second author should reply or respond to this message. We also took into account long intervals between messages. If a new conversation occurs after a long break, it is considered a new conversation topic, and the one who sends the message is considered the one who started a new conversation.

Results
Frequency of teachers' interaction in WhatsApp group during the CoP
Regarding the frequency of teachers' interaction, we assessed it based on the number of text messages and the number of media messages sent. We also looked at who sent the most messages and predominantly started a discussion session after a short and long period of inactivity. Also, we explored the most popular day and time for texting in the groups.

Table 2 presents the number of text messages sent during the first two months of the CoP. The highest number of messages was sent in group 3. This group consisted of 11 members and was interested in designing lesson plans for teaching integer numbers. There were 654 messages sent within two months, consisting of 578 text messages and 76 media messages. Group 6 is the second most active group. In this group, 555 messages were sent in the group, consisting of 491 text messages and 64 media messages. On the other hand, the least number of messages were sent in group 8, consisting of 59 text messages and 20 media messages. Table 2 shows that the number of messages sent in each group was varied. It also indicates that a large number of participants does not play an essential role in a group activity. Overall, the results reveal that the number of messages sent varies in each group, and the participants sent a large number of media messages.

Table 2 Numbers of messages sent in each group
Full size table
To describe the frequency of interaction in each group, we looked at the most active participant in each group based on who sent the most messages and who mostly started a new discussion session. Overall, Table 3 shows that most of the most active participant in each group were those who sent the most messages and mostly started a new session of discussion either after a short or long inactive periodity. For instance, in group 1, participant 6 was the most active because he sent 37.8% of messages in the group. In addition, 76.2% of media messages in the group were sent by the participant. Furthermore, participant 6 was also the most active participant to start a new session of discussion after a short and long period of inactivity, in which he started 38.9% of a new session after a short period of inactivity and 66.7% of a new session after a long period of inactivity. A similar situation also occurred in other groups, except group 3 that was slightly different. Therefore, it is concluded that the most active participant in each group dominated the number of messages they sent and played a significant role in starting a new session of discussion after a short and long period of inactivity.

Table 3 The most active participant in each group
Full size table
As previously mentioned, regarding the frequency of interaction, we also looked at the most popular days of the week and the most popular time of the day for texting. Table 4 shows that Wednesday and Sunday were the two most popular days for texting. Furthermore, the data shows that the most popular time for texting was after 2 PM, except for group 1, with the most popular time for texting was at 9 AM. The results indicated that teachers were involved in group activities during weekdays and weekends. In addition, it reveals that the participants actively discussed in the groups during working hours and off-hours.

Table 4 The most popular days and times for texting
Full size table
Pattern of interaction
The second important aspect investigated in this study was to examine patterns of teachers' interaction in the groups. The actor and the isolated position can be determined by analyzing the degree of centrality. The degree centrality is the number of links incident upon a node. It indicates the strength of the interaction among the participants. In this study, we focus on edge density, the number of active nodes, and the direction of the edges. Edge density represents the intensity of interaction, while the direction of the edges shows the direction of replaying messages.

Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 reveals patterns of interaction in each group. Overall, the figures displaying patterns of interaction were varied across the group. Figure 3 shows more intense interaction in group 3 than the other groups, demonstrated by edges density and the number of active nodes. The patterns of interaction of this group suggest that interaction pattern in this group is more complex than in other groups. In this group, participant 5 has the greatest strength of network, indicating that the teacher has the upper hand in the discussion and a leadership role in the group. The network shows that participant 5 responded to 7 members of the groups. The edges indicate that participant 5 has a stronger relationship with participant 9 and participant 1, indicating intense discussion between those participants.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Visualisation for Group 1

Full size image
Fig. 2
figure 2
Visualisation for Group 2

Full size image
Fig. 3
figure 3
Visualisation for Group 3

Full size image
Fig. 4
figure 4
Visualisation for Group 4

Full size image
Fig. 5
figure 5
Visualisation for Group 5

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure 6
Visualisation for Group 6

Full size image
Fig. 7
figure 7
Visualisation for Group 7

Full size image
Fig. 8
figure 8
Visualisation for Group 8

Full size image
The second most active group was group 6. Figure 6 shows that participant 1 played a central role in this group. The participant responded to all other members. Furthermore, the graph shows that participant 1 had very intense interaction with participant 7, who was the second most active participant in the group. In addition, edges show that participant 1 had quite intense interaction with participant 4 and participant 10. The results indicate that the most active participant sent the most messages and interacted with all other members.

The third most active group was group 7. Figure 7 shows that participant 7 was the most active in the group. Participant 7 interacted with all members of the group. Furthermore, the other members who actively involved in the discussion were participant 4 and participant 0. The edges show that both participants had a very intense discussion. The interaction pattern indicates that among group members, participant 7 played a central role as the one sending the highest number of the message and interacting with all members.

The fourth most active group was group 5. Figure 5 shows that the most active participant in the group was user 4. This participant interacted with almost all group members, except participant 1. Another participant who actively involved in the discussion was user 3. This participant had a very intense discussion with participant 4. Patterns of interaction in this group were similar to group 3, group 6, and group 7. In those groups, there were actors who played a significant role not only in sending more messages than other participants, but also interacting with almost all other members of their group.

On the other hand, the least interaction occurred in group 8. Figure 8 shows that there was no participant who played a central role in the group. Participant 6 sent the highest number of messages in the group. However, the participant only responded to two members of the group. Furthermore, in this group, five participants responded once to other members. This indicates that having an actor who interacted with all member in the group was necessary to develop a more dynamic and active discussions in a WhatsApp group during a CoP.

Overall, the dynamic models for each group confirm that the interactions during the discussion were varied in each group. In the more active groups, there were always key participants who played a central role, in sending more message and interacting with most group members. On the other hand, in the least active groups, due to the absence of a key participant, the group discussions were unattractive and inactive.

Discussion
This study aimed to examine the interactions of mathematics teachers during the WhatsApp community of practices. To investigate this issue, we designed a community of practices consisting of 8 groups of mathematic teachers. A total of 76 teachers were involved in this study, and we collected data from eight WhatsApp groups after two months the groups were created. The findings of this study showed that there was a great difference in interactions across the groups during the two months of the community of practices. Participants sent a large number of media messages, and they were mostly involved in discussions in the evening, either on weekdays or weekends. In addition, the most active participants in each group send the highest number of the messages and actively started a new session of discussion after short and long periods of inactivity. Moreover, the participants interacted with almost all participants in their group. Based on the findings, several important points of the discussions are drawn.

First, in the groups with intense interaction, there was always a core actor found who played a critical role in maintaining the group discussions. This finding indicates that similar to other types of community of practices, in the WhatsApp group, it is important to have a participant leader who can lead the interaction with the other participants (Lin et al., 2016). Such interactions make it possible to build trust among community members. Furthermore, Baker-Eveleth et al. (2011) found that in a community practice leader interaction has a positive effect on members’ involvement and sense of belonging. Therefore, leader support plays an important role in the development of engagements with the community, and interaction with a leader significantly affects actions taken by members of the community (Baker-Eveleth et al., 2011). In the context of the present study, the members formally selected someone to be a leader, but there is always one in the group who plays a leadership role in strengthening the relationships between members. The trust relationship between members is an important foundation of deep interactions (Lin et al., 2016). However, there was no acceptable level of interaction. The more teachers interact in the group, the better a community of practice goes. Therefore, it is necessary to have someone as a leader in an online community of practice.

Second, the results showed that teachers were involved in discussions during weekdays, weekends, and after work hours. It indicated that WhatsApp community of practices potentially supports sustainable teacher professional development. Webb et al. (2005) suggest that professional development is effective if it continues on a daily basis and does not take place as a series of events. Teacher interaction in the groups indicates that they were involved in the discussion on a daily basis. Furthermore, online communities provide sources for sustainable professional development for teachers (Duncan-Howell, 2010). A similar argument was also proposed by Widodo and Allamnakhrah (2020), claiming that a blended professional learning community could help educators engage in sustainable professional learning.

Third, this study indicates that WhatsApp is the potential to be employed for an online community of practices as it keeps users connected anytime. Therefore, the participants are still possible to get involved in a discussion at any time, including after working hours and on the weekends. WhatsApp also supported various media message formats, such as images, documents, audios, and videos. In the context of mathematics learning, media messages are found suitable since they accommodate various media such as image, audio, and video. Equations of mathematics can be easily sent through media messages such as an image. It encourages participants to share various resources for their learning. This study showed that in each group participants sent a large number of media messages. Agrawal (2020) revealed that users consider WhatsApp as an information platform for effective communication; even passive users can access information on the WhatsApp group without making any extra effort. The idea is also in line with Tyrer (2019), revealing that WhatsApp positively shaped the experience of teachers in their community of practices. Cansoy (2017) also revealed that WhatsApp groups could be an important tool for teacher professional development. Thus, we suggest that it is a good potential to use WhatsApp as a tool for teacher professional development in the context of the community of practices.

Fourth, it is concluded that social network analysis is a valuable tool to provide a richer understanding of the interaction occurring during WhatsApp community of practices. As suggested by De Laat et al. (2007), Social Network Analysis can provide insight for teachers to see interaction as a group. This information is important for the teachers to reflect on their performance in the groups and to make a decision for the future of their community of practices. In addition, SNA offers a quick way to capture group activities and their cohesion.

Conclusion and future work
This study investigated teachers' interaction in the WhatsApp community of practices. It focused on the frequency and pattern of interaction. This study used quantitative descriptive and social network analysis to analyze teacher’s interaction in eight WhatsApp groups within two months of their collaboration in the groups. Currently, WhatsApp is one of the most popular social media platforms, which can be adopted for strengthening a community of practices. Therefore, the current study unfolds a range of theoretical and practical knowledge for educators, researchers, and policymakers involved in teacher professional development. The findings of this study could be a basis for future online professional development in terms of the community of practices. Strong interactions in many groups are a promising indicator of teachers' positive and collaborative community of practices (Admiraal et al., 2012).

It is worth noting the limitations of this study. First, this study only used quantitative data in understanding teachers' interactions in the WhatsApp community of practices. Without knowing the content of specific interactions, it is difficult to understand whether the interactions are related to topics discussed in the community of practices. Furthermore, this study did not explore the reasons why one group appears to be inactive in their discussion. Future research should be conducted using qualitative data to understand teacher interactions in the groups, for instance, to understand the problems in the groups with the least interaction. Also, it is necessary to look deeper into the content of information shared in the groups, such as mathematical content and terminology.