Information governance (IG) embraces underlying necessities to organize information using consistent method for meeting organizational needs. This demand has proliferated over the past few years to any organization, including universities. However, due to the poor nature of information management systems in Nigerian universities, there is a significant need to explore the possibilities of IG implementation. Even though various factors affect IG success, these have not been investigated yet, particularly in the context of the Nigerian university system. The objective of this study is to identify key factors necessary for IG implementation in universities. A qualitative research using a case study approach was used with a semi-structured interview technique to elicit findings from the domain of information and record management in case universities. Findings were qualitatively analyzed using ATLAS-ti 7.0 software for developing meaningful interpretations. Research findings embraced key factors including user expertise, funding, technology; org. facilities, and security, which are the necessities of leading to successful IG implementation.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Information is an essential resource, and most of the case it is indicated as “the heart and soul of business” (McKeen & Smith, 2007, p. 34). Organizations worldwide consider this critical reason to increasingly investigate new approaches to effectively manage information to support their activities, in line with stakeholders’ information needs. Information governance consists of policies, processes, and technologies through which information or records can be controlled and secured.

Organizations should consider information as an asset; therefore, they should measure both the value and costs of the data they hold. In general, organizations aim to enhance the significance of information management for all stakeholders for ensuring the security of information throughout its lifecycle. As with any other important organizational treasures such as human and infrastructure, information needs to be controlled effectively to realize success and be sustainable in the modern era.

Defining IG in an organizational context, Lomas (2010, p.182) described IG as “the specification of decision rights and an accountability framework to encourage desirable behavior in the valuation, creation, storage, use, archival, and deletion of information. It includes the processes, roles, standards, and metrics that ensure the effective and efficient use of information in enabling an organization to achieve its goals”. This definition is rooted in records management that is aimed at handling all records from creation stage as a result of organizational activities, and to organize, evaluate and enable access to these records when needed (Ordemici, 2008). In fact, there are views that include IG underpinning and adding significance to records management. At the same time, some studies consider it only a question of re-describing records management as IG is constructed on the fundamental principles of records management (Brooks, 2019).

In the light of this definition, our research goes with the status of records and information management in Nigerian universities intending to explore key factors for implementing a road map in the form of IG framework—for managing records and information in the universities. This includes investigating the behaviors of records and information management (RIM), stakeholders towards RIM processes, how records are created, stored, and records disposition in order to ensure effective and efficient use of information in the organizational boundaries.

The twenty-first century is a digital age and requires all organisations to have efficient information systems to maintain modern-day industry standards. Phiri (2016) argued that, like any other organization, universities also function in an impulsive and uneven environment that requires managing risk factors, not only to alleviate hazards but also to improve service delivery. For universities to maintain standard practices through the advantage of electronic exchanges, information must be managed systematically and planned. The way to do this, McLeod and Hare (2012) includes enacting a roadmap of procedures, policies and practical guidelines for stakeholders in an organization to recognize their roles and responsibilities towards adequate records or information management. Similarly, Smallwood (2013) states that records and information management must be rooted in the organizational settings for managing risk and potentials for future impacts.

Universities in Nigeria generate large quantities and quality records in their daily business transactions. However, the system has suffered from poor information governance for decades resulting into data redundancy and wasteful spending (Asogwa & Brenden, 2015). Momoh and Abdulsalam (2014) claim that effective information management in a university context should have a framework for maintaining, keeping, and disseminating information for managerial decisions. The support assists in easing continuity in the administrative function in the event of scarce resources. Therefore, it has become essential for organizations such as universities to identify some factors that ensure implementation of appropriate measures such as IG to reduce the risk of information leakages or loss and guarantee efficient decision-making within the ambit of the universities.

A properly organized and well managed IG program can go along in protecting an organization for making it work towards achieving its aims and objectives. This makes it necessary for public sector organizations such as universities to utilise IG process in order to maximize information value and minimize risk (Yudatama et al., 2017). Previous publication from this project has focused on the analysis of six critical factors from a case university X (ref removed for review purpose), while another associated article included insights of investigating potential content that formed an IG framework for improving practices in Nigerian universities (ref removed for blind review purposes). This paper differs from previous articles because its key focuses are on new insights development from a new case organization [we termed as university Y] to investigate the significance and key factors for IG implementation. Thus, this study was triggered to investigate the factors needed to implement the IG framework in Nigerian universities.

Study background
The fast expansion of very complex and interwoven information systems is accredited to the emergence of policies and legal rules that necessitated organizations to organize records better. IG is considered to be a field of knowledge management that sprang due to recent tightened policies regarding business and external threats which include unauthorized access and mismanagement of information and realization that, the different fields of knowledge can be included to solve information management problems (Smallwood, 2013).

In a tighter view, the emergence of IG followed the increased demand for a specific platform that operated within organizations. Perhaps, Gartner (2018) described the IG as a concept that comprises the process, policies, roles, metrics and standards that guarantee an organization to achieve its goals through the effective use of information. The term involves enacting information management programs to allow for the availability of appropriate information, ensuring that its integrity and standard remain intact.

It is evident from the above views that the primary concern of IG is the underlying necessity to organize information in ways that are consistent with the needs of the organizations. Mullon and Ngoepe (2019) found that new global legislation for information management, use of information in organisations as well as changes in corporate governance gave rise to the need to clearly define a IG framework, with a consistent definition, proper enclosure of affected disciplines and an implementation approach. However, as stated earlier, universities in Nigeria lack of standard modus operandi in their RIM system (Asogwa & Brenden, 2015). Therefore, adopting the IG process in universities to ensure effective control and safeguarding of voluminous information against alteration, loss or damage should not be underscored (Rantala et al., 2020). This study aims to fill this literature gap.

Existing studies suggest that managing information in Nigerian universities has not attained proficiency in the face of global reality (Abdurrahman 2015; Asogwa & Brenden, 2015). Abdulrahman (2015) argued that, RIM in Nigerian universities are characterized by unprofessional destruction, in-proper arrangement and description, lack of proper disaster prevention plan, and general lack of guidelines for managing records in their lifecycle. This situation has resulted in various certificate scandals among some prominent citizens (Ogbonna, 2017).

In management information systems, the concept of critical success factors (CSFs) became trendy in the 1970s when researchers at MIT studied the essence of identifying CSFs to the plan of information systems, and named this method the CSF approach. Researchers have identified different CSFs in an attempt to implement various information systems in organizations. For instance, Rockart (1979), Bullen and Rockart (1981), Sumner (1999), Hafner (2001) and Smith (2015) studied CSFs in implementing different information systems in business enterprises. Maroop et al. (2016) extracted ten factors that can be deemed key for IS implementation. Mainly, top management support, staff awareness and training are found to be the most vital factors in determining the success of IS implementation. Equally, Zhiling et al. (2018) identifies three major key factors: top management support, business alignment, and organizational awareness of security risks and controls, which can result in successful information security management in an organization.

The potential application and importance of key success factors (KSFs) are now being utilized in many organizations. IG is a broad topic and an encompassing word for many information management components; therefore, many studies have been carried out to address IG in general and these components in particular (Alreemy et al., 2016). Based on this, previous researchers have concentrated their attention on tracing key success factors for information management to assist in realizing successful information governance implementation projects. Thus, selected CSFs acknowledged by earlier researchers in different organizations and relevant to this study are presented in Table 1 below.

Table 1 Some example studies on key success factors
Full size table
Implementing IG ensures new ways for organizations to manage regulatory information, to enhance public access and to enhance organizational transference. However, factors to be considered before implementing an information governance system has not yet receive adequate attention (Al-Ruithe & Benkhelifa, 2017). Moreover, Eastman et al. (2011) argued that in the absent of holistic view of the possible success factors, organizations may find issues to implement IS. Hence, keeping in view of the general deteriorating position of RIM in Nigerian universities; and by considering the scarcity of literature towards IG implementation in Nigeria particularly in the university system, this study aims to address the gap in the relevant body of the literature.

Research methodology
The study is to identify key factors for implementing IG. This study seeks to reveal ‘meanings’ derived from records and information managers’ ‘constructs’ as individuals based on their social interactions within records and information management initiatives that are qualitative. Hence, the study adopts qualitative research technique.

The qualitative tradition is assistive to conduct a literature review, purposive sampling, theoretical framework formulation, data collection and analysis of results. This technique helps to create a new phenomenon about which not much is known and will allow understanding of the meaning of what is going on (Pickard, 2013). The findings of this research are transferable rather than generalizable, just like other qualitative research studies.

We adopt a single case study approach following the idea of Yin (2018), which suggests that case study research deals with an empirical way for investigating the current phenomenon, explored by a researcher within its practical life context. Rich context and lack of control over events are part of the characteristics of this research, which are the significant characteristics of a case study. Hence the decision to use the method seems appropriate.

The purposive sampling technique was used to select respondents of the study based on their knowledge of records and information management. Similarly, this also goes with the idea of Yin (2018), who posits the flexibility in choosing the research respondents based on the researcher’s desired characteristics. The study engages 12 stakeholders in RIM departments in universities as the research respondents. 12 interviews were conducted and analyzed for the purpose of this study. These include Registrar, Records manager, Faculty administrators, Professors or senior lecturers, Clerical officers, Departmental secretary, and senior students.

The case study was conducted using open-ended interviews as the primary data collection technique. Full consent of the respondents was sought together with the approval of the university to carry out the interviews. The research respondents comprised the Registrar, three senior lecturers, the university’s records officer, two faculty officers, and two clerical officers. These officers and their schedule of duties were adopted from Phiri (2016), who conducted a study on “Managing university records and documents in the world of governance, audit, and risk” through a case study in South Africa and Malawi.

The semi-structured interview method was used due to its advantage of enabling a researcher to use proposed themes just like in a structured interview and concurrently ensuring flexibility for the respondent to express himself freely on any issue raised during the interview (Wahyuni, 2012).

The scope of the semi-structured interview questions is based on the RIM practice in the university. The study seeks to reveal ‘meanings’ that are derived from records and information managers’ experience as individuals based on their social interactions with records and information management. The questions were centred towards analysing the challenges encountered in RIM with a view of proposing a solution in form of IG implementation in the university. Some of the questions in the interview guide schedule are common in all the interviews, while some questions are specific to particular respondents base on his/her role in RIM in the university. The interview guides was generally divided into four sections: brief introduction of the interview; personal information of the interviewee; records and information management; and; managing records and information to foster RIM practice.

Qualitative analysis software called ATLAS.ti 7.0 was used to facilitate the interview analysis. ATLAS.ti stands for Archive for technology, everyday languages, and text Interpretation. The interview data collected was subsequently transcribed into Microsoft word before coding. The purpose of data transcription is to assign meaning to the raw texts based on category and context. The transcription stage involved clustering data into two main categories namely, the verbatim transcription and followed by the assignment of themes and contexts to the text (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). A brief introduction of the case study university is necessary in order to contextualize its selection for the research. Instead of using the university’s name, the researcher decided to use ‘University Y’ to protect the identity of the university and the interviewees.

Justification for choosing University Y
The case university is one of the enlisted in the Nigeria Public Higher Education. The case university is named as “University Y” which has a strong vision to deliver high education in the country and also offering proactive and creative teaching & learning environment, especially for teachers and students (University Y academic brief, 2004). The case university offers effective degree programs, such as diploma, and foundational degree, bachelor degree, master degree, doctorate degree in several areas of study. It is important to gather collective experiences that would be captured from the case university in terms of consequence of success and failure in the way records and information management are being administered. In this case, perspectives of uncovering factors are to be of paramount knowledge to implement IG framework; hence this informed the choice of this university for the study.

Data presentation and analysis
Analysis of the interview findings offers a number of important themes that are based on multiple responses regarding interview questions. The five themes are: information security, funding, technology, facilities, and expertise. Figure 1 illustrates the themes. Interviewees are assigned acronyms to represent individual’s analysis (RP-n) i.e. Research Participant n; where “n” stands for a serial number of the respondent presented in the sub-section below.

Fig. 1
figure 1
The identified factors and the central research question

Full size image
Fig. 2
figure 2
Key factors if the IG implementation

Full size image
Coding for conceptualizing
We utilized ATLAS.ti software for the data analysis. Open coding for the analysis was used to recognize concepts, where more than 150 codes were identified. Concepts together with their properties and dimensions were developed subsequently, which provided meaning into categories represented through axial coding. The categories finally were linked to the central research question. This approach was helpful to arrange the concepts by categorizing them, which is based on a logical classification scheme. These concepts, along with their properties and dimensions, were gradually developed into categories and subsequently into themes, as represented below:

The study is to identify key factors for implementing IG. This study seeks to reveal ‘meanings’ that are derived from records and information managers’ ‘constructs’ as individuals based on their social interactions within records and information management initiatives that are qualitative in nature. Hence, the study adopts qualitative research technique.

The qualitative tradition is assistive to conduct literature review, purposive sampling, theoretical framework formulation, data collection and analysis of results. This technique helps to expose and create knowledge of a phenomenon about which not much is known and will allow understanding of the meaning of what is going on (Pickard, 2013). The findings of this research are transferable rather than generalizable just like other qualitative research studies Figure 2.

We adopt single case study approach following the idea of Yin (2018) which suggests that case study research deals with an empirical way for investigating current phenomenon, explored by a researcher within its practical life context. Rich context and lack of control over events are part of the characteristics of this research, which are the major characteristics of a case study, hence the decision to use the method seems appropriate.

Purposive sampling technique was used to select respondents of the study based on their knowledge of records and information management. Similarly, this also goes with the idea of Yin (2018) who posits the flexibility in choosing the research respondents based on the researcher’s desired characteristics. The study engages 12 stakeholders in RIM departments in universities, as the research respondents. 12 interviews were conducted and analysed for the purpose of this study. These include Registrar, Records manager, Faculty administrators, Professors or senior lecturers, Clerical officers, Departmental secretary and senior students.

The case study was conducted using open-ended interviews as primary data collection technique. Full consent of the respondents was sought together with the approval of the university to carry out the interviews. The research respondents comprised the Registrar, three senior lecturers, university’s records officer, two faculty officers, two clerical officers, and two senior students. The research participants and their corresponding matching code names are presented in the Table 2 below.

Table 2 Research participant’s names with their matching code
Full size table
These officers and their schedule of duties were adopted from Phiri (2016) who conducted a study on “Managing university records and documents in the world of governance, audit and risk” through a case study in South Africa and Malawi.

Semi-structured interview method was used due to its advantage of enabling a researcher to use proposed themes just like in a structured interview and concurrently ensuring flexibility for the respondent to express himself freely on any issue raised during the interview (Wahyuni, 2012). Qualitative analysis software called ATLAS.ti 7.0 was used to facilitate the interview analysis. ATLAS.ti stands for Archive for Technology, the Life world and everyday languages, Text Interpretation. The interview data collected was subsequently transcribed in to Microsoft word before coding. The purpose of data transcription is to assign meaning to the raw texts based on category and context. The transcription stage involved clustering data into two main categories namely; the verbatim transcription and followed by the assignment of themes and contexts to the text (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).

In order to prevent some elements of bias that is capable of misrepresenting the research findings and to ensure validity and reliability of this study, the following strategies were put in place:

i.
Data triangulation

In this study, data triangulation which is considered as the most common form of triangulation (Creswell, 2009, p.211) was used in which various sources of data were utilized through engaging different stakeholders in RIM as informants as well as utilizing documentary and observation evidences. As the study advances and particular pieces of information come to light, steps were taken to validate it against at least one other source.

ii.
Member check

Member checking was employed to determine the accuracy of this research. The procedure of member checks according to Lincoln and Guba (1985) helps to check for data accuracy during the interview and the final research findings. It helped the researcher to elucidate any uncertainty in the initial interview scripts and the findings, by giving the respondents an opportunity to confirm that their opinions are captured correctly in the whole research process. This is done by making available a copy of the findings regarding each theme to the participants for scrutiny after which all necessary amendment, corrections were made in order to establish the credibility of the research.

Theme one: Funding
This study reveals that records and information management has not receive proper attention in terms of funding. This emerged as a result of responses obtained regarding the interview question on, “What are the Challenges facing RIM Practices in the University?” “What is the way forward to improve the process RIM in the University? What suggestion do you have to speed up this change?”.

Considering the fact that for any project to be successful, it requires substantial financial commitment from its benefiting organization. This study suggests that in order to ensure successful IG implementation in the university, funding is the most important factor because of its role in general RIM in the university. Poor funding has led to non-recruitment of appropriate and competent staff; low provision of enough space and lack of contemporary computational and storage aids like computers. This has led to poor preservation of its records and information resources. (RP8) explain that “we are facing the scarcity of the working materials in the department, inadequate and scarcity of working materials such as computers; fans; and the good cabinets for storing the records”. Also responding to the issue of funding, (RP1) confirmed that, even though the university is in dare need of additional manpower, it is constrained in terms of recruiting adequate manpower due to inadequate funding, adding that “I will tell you that, for the past five years the university has not been given the right to employ due to issues that has to do with funding; even though there is the need for the staff. Also there is an issue of short falls in salaries”.

This need for funding as discovered by this study is in conformity with the findings of Mehta (2010) who discovered that, cost of implementation is one of the necessary factors for successful enterprise resource planning and implementation at Indian Small and Medium-size Enterprises (SMEs). Moreover, most of the responses regarding the participants’ view on the way forward regarding problems of records and information management in the university are centred toward demand for more resources for the job. This automatically indicates the need for additional financial commitment from the university. In order to achieve the objective of implementing information governance in the university, there is a need for the university to channel its resources in the area of RIM as emphasised by the respondents.

Theme two: Expertise
In order to understand the level of staff availability and competency towards RIM in the university, the following questions were raised in the research interview guide:

Does the University have training programme for RIM staff?

Do the RIM staffs have enough training to perform their duties effectively?

Does the university assign high-level responsibility to records management professionals in the University?

Responses obtained suggest that, there is acute shortage of records managers in the university; and that the available staffs lack the basic competency in records and information management because they are employed without prejudice to the ideologies of records management. The clerical and administrative staffs have shown limited understanding on the need to knowingly create and manage records and information with extreme care. The university is using its registry staff to manage any records and information related issues. Respondent RP1 confirmed this through his words, “The University has no professionals whose major specialization is in the area of Records and Information Management. All the staffs that are responsible for handling Records do not have any professional training. Of course, if such professionals exist, they could be assigned High-level Responsibility by the University like other staff”.

The study also suggests that there is inadequate short and long-term training on records and information management to boost staff capabilities to manage the records. Narrating the effect of this manpower shortage, RP2 explained that, apart from the seven faculties and the school for postgraduate studies, the university also have seven affiliated institutions that equally admits and graduate students accordingly; but no single officer is specifically assign to take responsibility and control of records generated and received from these affiliated institutions. His words: “We have that shortage of man power in the unit to actually cover other areas; and like the way you said you discover that, the transcripts and other in- and- out- going mails to the academic office are being manned by just single individual, and besides he is also the desk officer for faculty of environmental”.

The study also revealed that the available RIM personnel don’t undergo refresher courses on records and information management. Most of them acknowledged that they never had any formal training on records and information management. This resulted in to inconsistency in the way records and information is managed. As it is now, each unit and department applied various modalities to manage the information resources based on the discretion of the custodian of the information in that unit. A clerical officer (RP9) revealed that, “For workshops, the university is not supporting us for training the clerical staff. For instance now if you apply for a workshop, the university may complain to you that, they don’t have enough funds to sponsor you, unless if you will sponsor yourself then later you wait for reimbursement. If you cannot sponsor yourself then you will not developed, no way to develop yourself. So university is not supporting us”.

For any IG related project, information management staff plays a significant role in the accomplishment of the projects. This theme is considered to be the second most important factor in the IG implementation project because most of the implementation efforts will be performed by the information management team. This supports the studies of Peterson (2004) and Tan et al. (2009), which discover that the governance awareness and competencies are key for effective IG performance.

Hence, information management staffing and competency is a vital aspect that should be considered in the IG implementation plan. Consequently, the respondents suggested the need to recruit adequate manpower and equally train the existing staff for successful IG framework implementation in the university.

Theme three: Facilities and Maintenance
This theme represents respondents’ view on the need to provide and adequately maintained facilities for records and information management activities. These include records storage facilities and office accommodation as well as internet connectivity to ease information communication within the university. This theme emerged as a result of the interview question on, “What are the challenges facing RIM practices in the University?” “What is the way forward to improve the process RIM in the University? It was proven by this research that RIM personnel cannot function effectively in the absent of adequate tools to perform their duties. Consequently, this factor is considered to be the next most important factor after funding and expertise in the implementation process.

This study has revealed the inadequacy of working facilities in most of the offices visited during the interviews”. These include inadequate power supply to use the available electronic gadgets which affect the speed at which information is disseminated and used in the university. RP8 explained that “We are facing the scarcity of the working materials in the department, inadequate and scarcity of working materials such as computers; fans; and the good cabinets for storing the records”. There is need for commitment and exercising several attempts that can take care of information and system resources as well as human resources. RP3 commented that “The fundamental element to be considered is that of infrastructure; the infrastructure for proper information management should be put in place; the necessary communication bandwidth should be acquired; the backup and computing system should be put in place and adequately maintained, we know the extent to which we blame ourselves for poor maintenance culture, therefore maintenance is very necessary”.

As a result of poor storage conditions and facilities to manage the records, important information could be risked and as a result vital information could be lost. Consequently, responses show that achieving the objectives and intention of establishing IG framework cannot be achieved unless facilities are put in place and properly maintained in order to optimise cost and information flow within the university. This agrees with COBIT 5 IG framework implementation requirements. Control objectives for information related technology (COBIT 5) is a popular information governance framework in the area of information technology governance. In its implementation guidelines, COBIT 5 provided that, once commitment has been obtained for the implementation project, adequate resources and facilities should be provided and sustained to support the project (ISACA, 2012).

Theme four: Technology
Some questions in the interview guide were posed specifically to ascertain the level of technology application in the recordkeeping system of the university, “Name any technological factor and explain how it has affected records keeping in the University”. “How do you store students’ records? You may wish to separate your treatment of paper and electronic records”.

Even though, the university is predominantly using paper-based records and information management system, as noticed from the way hard copy information such as correspondences are physically communicated across the university via staff-messenger; responses indicated that technology can play a vital role towards IG implementation. Interviewees acknowledged the positive impact of technology in the areas where recent technological advancements were used to enhance information exchange in the university. These include the recent introduction of software for students’ registration. RP3 explain that “A student who registered courses online, his online registration can be received by his individual head of department who will okay his registration and then such a student will be directed to print out the registration form and proceed to the next step”.

Interviewees agreed that using technology can improve or make their work easier. In his words, RP3 explained how students records are manage with less difficulty using the soft copy than the hard copy system. “We are using both methods, manual and also soft copy records, but the soft copy is much easier because we introduced all our results into the compiler which is making it easier to get records because once you know the year of graduation of the students you can access all his data, which year he came in to the university so you can expect which year he is supposed to finish. So we have all the records session by session and are in the compiler, which is better”.

Some technological capabilities associated with IG implementation success have to do with human capital which was shown to be effective in technology adoption (Oliveira & Martins, 2011). In this regards, the records officer (RP2) suggested that, computer literacy should be made compulsory and part of the RIM policy for the staff to efficiently handle e-records. In adapting to the use of new technology, an organization is automatically altering the way and the process in which staff both hold and work with information and records. This necessitates people to also change their perception to how they work in the organization. With the progression and modernization in technology, it becomes imperative to use information and communication technologies in the university sector- as they prove excellence in the corporate and private sector. Hence, interviewees consider technology application in the recordkeeping system as the next most important factor in the IG implementation process.

Indicating the benefits of electronic records management system to an organization, Sprehe (2005) found that many organizations have realised that electronic management system (ERMS) provides them with prompt access to latest and influential organizational memory. This was realised to be an important business asset that can be influenced to support and improve a lot of activities within the organization. In this concern, organizations that utilize ICTs are now being considered as potent to achieve good governance in the public sector (Ali & Mujahid, 2015).

However, attention is now on delivering information services online using information and communication methods such as internet usage, which raises the need for using ICT in managing and storing records for the purpose of efficient access and retrieval of information demanded by the clientele in order to convey the required services. This tally with the finding of Upadhyay et al., 2011 who argues that, the level of IT capabilities in organization plays an important role in IG implementation; it enhances the development of innovation, specifically through IG implementation. Similarly, Smith (2015) asserts that technology is one of the key factors in implementing IG when he conducted a study of exploring critical success factors on fortune 500 companies within United States from their Enterprise Information Management (EIM) program.

Theme five: Security
Security of information is considered paramount and regarded as a key factor for IG implementation. Interview question that led to the emergence of this theme is, “Do you think the records are safe from stealing, damaging or alteration”?

It is found from this study that human element is responsible for most of the information security related issues as clearly indicated by RP1, “with the issue of social media, almost all information is no longer secured. What was before known as secret registry, some records that are not supposed to be taken out, but now you realized that a lot of information is being taken out, so, university should focus on the issue of information just going round without the authority of it”.

Even though, there are numerous advantages attached to use of social media to facilitate communication within and outside an organization such as facilitating corporate dialog which enhances information provision to workers in public sector organizations (Faber et al., 2020); the use of social media can as well be risky to an organization, as argued by Bekkers et al. (2013, p.2) who noticed that “statements or messages on social media sent by public organizations can be wrong, misperceived, or unwelcomed by citizens, and thereby harming the public organization’s reputation”. Respondents suggested for general sensitization and awareness regarding information security in the university.

The predominantly paper based records system has forced the university to store its records in files arranged on cabinets and drawers. Storing records using these facilities could be risky of being destroyed by some records destructing agents such as insects, humidity and temperature. This was the view of some of the interviewees on the safety of the records storage area. RP7 stated that “Storing the physical records using the above mentioned medium could be risky as the records were exposed to some factors insects, humidity and temperature, capable of destroying them. Actually I cannot guarantee 100% that the records are safe. Nowadays if you are dealing with hard records, you can’t say they are safe. But we use to lock them in the cabinet that is the metal cabinets, but I cannot assure you that they are safe 100%”.

This study argues that records security entails more than storage concerns. In other words, security should concern to the whole scope of a record’s existence from the time of creation of the records through to the use and preservation of records at archival stage. This was an indication of negligent concern about an aspect of records security that is often overlooked. Security issues were recognised as a current problem for both paper and electronic records. The security of electronic records certainly remains of extreme importance, and respondents were passionate about having information security measures as an obligatory requirement by the university. To achieve an effective information security strategy, awareness on information security is very crucial for employees of the universities.

This awareness can go along in minimising information risk; and when the university’s information is safe, then a successful IG implementation could be realised as emphasised by the respondents. RP2 suggest that “The University should be sensitized on the importance of Records and Information Management”. Applying approaches of critical success factors in their study of strategic value alignment for information security management, Zhiling et al. (2018) discovers that through organizational awareness of security risks and controls, efficient information security control can be developed that can result into successful information security management. The needed factors are indicated in a figure below:

As the information management in Nigerian universities lacks efficiency as suggested by this study, a top-down approach to IG implementation is recommended. Implementation should start at the faculty level with statutory instruments, support infrastructure and authorization with the dean of the faculty as ultimately accountable. Then it can be flowed down to the departmental level with head of department (HOD) as the accounting officer. Once spilt down to the level of other units of the university, an IG business unit can be established to be responsible for university-wide implementation.

The successful achievement of IG implementation required trained and skilful personnel. In this context, it is essential to provide adequate funding in order to allow for technological utilization and supply of modern RIM facilities in the recordkeeping system of the university which in turn can aid IG implementation and ensure safety and efficient information utilization in the university. Table 3 demonstrates the summary of five emergent themes of IG.

Table 3 Note: This data is mandatory. Please provide
Full size table
The findings indicate that all the factors were valued as either significant or most significant based on the results from the total number of respondents. Despite the difference in the importance of each of the 5 factors, the differences in importance of the critical aspects between the respondents reflect the different possible roles to be played by each factor when implementing IG.

Similar to the existing CSFs in information-related studies identified by previous studies like Maroop et al. (2016) and Zhiling et al. (2018) that are pointed out in this study, these CSFs were similar to the factors identified by this study. The newly re-established factors included Funding, Facilities, Expertise, Technology and Information security. For instance, funding has played an immeasurable role towards realising the success of information system in so many organizations Mehta (2010), this study equally established that, adequate funding is required to ensure IG implementation project in the university.

The role of expertise is not only limited to the implementation phase of IG, but also required throughout the process of RIM in the university. It is established by this study that, the successful completion of IG implementation requires qualified, skilled and experienced professionals to handle RIM, hence, considered expertise as a critical factor for IG implementation. Studies conducted by Tan et al. (2009) and Nfuka and Rusu (2013) discovered related factor to expertise where staff awareness and competencies are considered vital for higher IT governance performance.

To provide and maintain adequate facilities for records and information management activities including storage facilities, such as drawers, cabinets, office accommodation as well as internet connectivity to ease information management within and outside the university is a critical factor for implementing IG as revealed by this study. Previous researchers have identified provision of facilities and required infrastructure as a critical factor towards achieving goal of an information management system (Al-Ruithe & Benkhalifa, 2017; Musangi et al. (2019) who emphasised that, provision of the required resources such as facilities, building, infrastructure and budget among others to facilitate the success of information system implementation.

The ability to use technology to automate processes was viewed as a critical success factor for IG implementation within an enterprise information management programme by Smith (2015). The present study found that, complicated rules on retention, archiving, and disposition of information signified challenges to employees when conducted manually across the university. The university under investigation is predominantly using paper-based to manage records and information. Hence, respondents suggested the use of technology as a critical factor to be address before IG implementation in the university.

Through sensitization and training sessions on information security, employees are made to be convinced that they really face information security threats, and these threats can result in to negative consequences to their organization. Employees can also understand the user effectiveness of information security policies so they can believe that conforming with these policies will help prevent security breaches (Siponen & Willison, 2009; Zhiling et al. 2018), hence, emphasised on information security as a CSF for information security management. Similarly, respondents of this study suggested for general sensitization and awareness regarding information security threats and control in the university as a critical factor before IG implementation.

Conclusion and recommendation
The IG is viewed as an important method to managing organizational records and information; hence, we focused on investigating key factors for successful IG implementation. An in-depth interview was conducted with stakeholders of the case organizations to achieve the research objective. The study established that, Expertise; Funding; Technology; Facilities; and Security, are the key factors for successful IG implementation in the university. Thus, it is recommended that the university should give due consideration on these five identified factors to serve as guidelines for implementing the framework. The IG implementation framework recognizes existing studies such as Nfuka and Rusu (2010) in which the role played by CSFs was examined in Tanzania public sector IG. The Tanzania CSF framework consists of factors and dimensions. Dimensions are the initial stage of the framework based on a set of interrelated factors, while factors are the second stage of the framework and they identify subjects that an organization should address to ensure the IG success. Identified factors in Tanzania framework include, retaining and developing manpower; awareness and training for maximum IT utilization; managing infrastructure to optimise cost and information flow; policies and guidelines enforcement; consolidating IT structures for accountability; stakeholder involvement; and finally, management support. Conversely, most of these factors can be accommodated under the five factors identified by our study. Each factor identified is important in its justification during the implementation process. Integrating these, they supplement each other to guide the implementation to success.