In this study, considering the effect of interactive learning environments on human cognition, we have examined extraneous processing effects of multimedia materials on cognitive load, metacognitive judgments and learning outcomes. This study examines Augmented Reality Learning Environments (ARLE) and Virtual Reality Learning Environments (VRLE) as interactive learning environments. Learners, assigned randomly to one of seven experimental conditions, participated in computer-assisted instructional presentations for Augmented Reality Learning Environments and mobile-assisted instructional presentations for Virtual Reality Learning Environments. Participants’ working memory capacity and prior knowledge levels were scrutinized as control variables. Findings revealed no significant differences in the learning outcomes and metacognitive judgments, although significant differences were reported in the objective cognitive load. Therefore, we faced some results that contradict our hypotheses. In addition, we found a significant difference in terms of interactive learning environments’ effect on metacognitive judgments. Conversely, we found that metacognitive judgments are affected directly by learning environments. Finally, we discussed theoretical and practical implications for further research, based on experimental studies and approaches in Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning and Cognitive Load Theory, in terms of interactive learning environments.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Researchers and instructional designers seek to develop cognitive skills by implementing innovative approaches and design techniques to support learner performance, engagement, and degree of satisfaction (Prit Kaur et al., 2019; Schroeder & Cenkci, 2018; Song et al., 2014; van Merriënboer, 2002). They should also attract and maintain the attention of learners through interactive learning environments that encourage participation and engagement (Larmuseau et al., 2018), differentiating from traditional methods (Bjork & Bjork, 2011; Raupers, 2000; Tsou et al., 2006). To achieve these goals, the metacognitive and cognitive skills of the learners are essential and crucial (Martens et al., 2007). The learners easily adjust to internal and external conditions by changing rapidly (Lau et al., 2017) when interacting with learning tasks and systems in parallel with the accurate use of metacognitive and cognitive processes in interactive learning environments. In other respects, Alter (2013) stated that learners will face problems with cognitive skills, such as thinking, retention, or comprehension, in the future due to the excessive use of technology to which they are constantly exposed. Therefore, even if the integration of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) into learning environments are believed to contribute considerably to learning procedures (Dede, 2000; Fonseca et al., 2014; Zareie & Navimipour, 2016) potential adverse impacts should not be overlooked. Transformations in technology and information types have obligated multiple channel learning environments to be re-designed (Mutlu-Bayraktar et al., 2019).

The current trend is that multimedia learning to explore Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) and objective measurements in such empirical studies are rarely used (Mutlu-Bayraktar et al., 2019; Sanchez & Jaeger, 2015). As well as suggestions to monitor the working memory and prior knowledge levels of learners in multimedia learning, subjective measurement approaches for cognitive load concentrate on material characteristics (Eitel & Kühl, 2016; Mutlu-Bayraktar et al., 2019; Sidi et al., 2016; Song & Schwarz, 2008; Thompson & Ince, 2013) and perceived difficulties (Eitel & Kühl, 2016; Eitel et al., 2014; Rosner et al., 2015). In the literature, there is no promotive empirical research on perceived difficulty and its relationship with real-life and learning outcomes, and it is noteworthy that objective criteria are emphasized generally in cognitive load measurement (Dunlosky & Mueller, 2016; Lehmann et al., 2015; Mutlu-Bayraktar et al., 2019; Strukelj et al., 2016). Considering the effect of metacognitive judgments on human cognition and the multimedia studies in which the JoL is examined (reviewed in, Besken & Mulligan, 2014; Magreehan et al., 2015; Mudrick et al., 2019; Rhodes & Castel, 2008; Susser et al., 2013; Yue et al., 2013), similar studies on the EoL are also appreciable (Mudrick et al., 2019; Pieger et al., 2016).

In the literature, the studies on metacognitive decisions in multimedia research and human cognition, the JoL, and EoL are examined as variables within the scope of this research. In Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML) studies, numerous variables are listed that are directly related to learners’ characteristics, and many empirical studies suggest they should be evaluated as control variables (e.g., Chandler & Sweller, 1991; Dindar & Akbulut, 2016; French et al., 2013; İlic & Akbulut, 2019; Lehmann et al., 2015; Mayer, 2001; Mayer & Moreno, 2002; Moreno & Mayer, 2002a, 2002b; Örün & Akbulut, 2019; Stull & Mayer, 2007; Thompson & Ince, 2013). Therefore, working memory capacity and prior knowledge levels were utilized as control variables in this study. There is a gap to examine the different multimedia learning principles as independent variables while using measures in cognitive load studies (Mutlu-Bayraktar et al., 2019). Despite the multiplexed advantages of AR and VR-based instruction, especially VRLE has not been commonly used for educational purposes because of its immature methodology, lack of design principles, and high expense (Callaghan et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019). Interactive learning environments should not only be exclusively aimed at acquiring knowledge; thus, to obtaining a constructivist consensus for design principles of these environments from the multimedia learning perspective is important, to achieve learning benefits (Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2019). Mitigating the mentioned confounds is important for VRLE and ARLE.

In consequence, the characteristics of multimedia learning and instructional design should be re-interrogated by technological transformations that are effective in traditional learning environments incapable of meeting today’s current needs. In this regard, empirical studies on how to design interactive learning environments are quite limited. Therefore, it is crucial to investigate and address the gap about how interactive learning environments should be designed and to effective use of these emerging facilities (Huang et al., 2010; Makransky et al., 2017). The current study examines Augmented Reality Learning Environments (ARLE) and Virtual Reality Learning Environments (VRLE) as interactive learning environments. In this paper, we focused on cognitive load, metacognitive judgments, and learning outcomes, considering human cognition in different interactive learning environments that were manipulated for principles for reducing extraneous processing effects of multimedia learning materials. In the next section, the effect of the cognitive load on human cognition is addressed through the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML).

Theoretical Framework & Concepts
Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML) and Cognitive Load Theory (CLT)
The Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML; Mayer, 2005, 2014) provides a significant theoretical framework based on the research on the principles and effects of learning materials. Human memory can be divided into working, long-term and sensory systems, according to CTML (Mousavi et al., 1995; Sweller, 2008; Sweller & Sweller, 2006; Sweller et al., 1998; Wang & Antonenko, 2017). Long-term memory retains an information management system and cognitive constructs. The selection and storage of visual and verbal information from the visual and auditory contents are carried out by the sensory system. The working memory system acts as a complex central processing unit, which processes and combines incoming data with what exists in the long-term system. Working memory capacity has limited (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) and allows for the processing of only about four items simultaneously (Cowan, 2001).

How the working memory operates and interacts with the long-term memory is indicated by the Cognitive Load Theory (CLT; Kalyuga et al., 1999; Paas et al. 2003a,b; Sweller et al., 1998). The amount of information stored and processed in the working memory system is defined as Cognitive Load (Paas et al., 2004; Sweller et al., 1998) and it is a critical factor in learning (Lee, 2014). If learners’ working memory capacities are surpassed, then learning is hindered due to excessive demand for cognitive processing (Wang & Antonenko, 2017). There are three different types (i.e., intrinsic, extraneous, and germane) of cognitive load (Paas et al., 2003a,b; Sweller et al., 2019). The intrinsic cognitive load is determined by the learning materials’ complexity and is governed by the learners’ prior knowledge. The extraneous cognitive load is mainly related to the presentation of insufficient information and the design of learning materials (Paas & Sweller, 2014). The germane load occurs when the assimilation and reconciliation of the presented information are encouraged during the learning, and but not overwhelming. Therefore, while intrinsic and extraneous cognitive load types tend to hinder learning, on the contrary, the germane load has a facilitating effect on learning (Plass et al., 2010). The ideal design framework for multimedia materials is to reduce the extraneous cognitive load level, balance the intrinsic load level, and increase the germane load level. The optimal managing of the cognitive load can be seen as a problem faced by interactive learning environments. In this experimental study, the extraneous cognitive load was examined to investigate the cognitive load due to the potential effects caused by the design philosophy of the new instructional materials for interactive learning environments were developed. In line with this objective, the principles for reducing extraneous processing in multimedia material have been taken into account. Besides, the management of the cognitive load could be a potential problem faced by interactive learning environments. In the next section, the theoretical framework, variables of interest, and learning environments are reviewed.

Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality
Augmented Reality (AR) is an emerging technology that combines real-world environments and virtual elements, enabling both to interact simultaneously (Azuma, 1997; Chang et al., 2010; Makhataeva & Varol, 2020; Matcha & Rambli, 2013; Soltani & Morice, 2020), and enriches the real-world environments with three-dimensional objects. In addition, AR allows for the development of an interactive learning experience by visualizing real-world environments (Dehghani et al., 2020; Garzón et al., 2020). Moreover, ARLE allows learners to practice critical comprehension of these differences by conducting more detailed cognitive activities as the contents are interactive (Schank & Kozma, 2002). AR applications are more interesting in instructional settings (Bujak et al., 2013; Caudell & Mizell, 1992; Garzón, 2021), which is probably a result of the novelty effect (Bursali & Yilmaz, 2019; Yen et al., 2013).

AR which has begun to be investigated in educational settings with its potential opportunities has been the subject of numerous studies in recent years (Quintero et al., 2019). ARLE succeeded in creating different aspects in the concretization of learning and its contributions to social relations between learners (Billinghurst et al., 2001; Katell et al., 2019; Oleksy & Wnuk, 2017; Squire & Jan, 2007), in creating a positive effect on motivation and achievement in instructional settings (Bacca et al., 2018; Bursali & Yilmaz, 2019; Chang & Hwang, 2018; Chin et al., 2019; Di Serio et al., 2013; Garzón et al., 2019; Küçük et al., 2014; Lai et al., 2019; Sotiriou & Bogner, 2008; Zagoranski & Divjak, 2003), in encouraging students to participate (Klopfer, 2008; Tomi & Rambli, 2013; vanMeerten & Varma, 2017; Zhang et al., 2021), and in creating simulations that are difficult or impossible to create in the real-world (Izard et al., 2019; Kaplan et al., 2021; Klopfer & Squire, 2008). The concepts of AR and Virtual Reality (VR) are described as different technologies, but rather a misunderstanding exists related to the definitions of AR and VR (Wu et al., 2013). AR integrates virtual elements into real-world environments and allows individuals to interact. On the other hand, VR is a digital and computer-based environment in which the individuals have experienced simulated sensations and immersed, and this provides them with a sense of presence in virtual-world settings (Aitamurto et al., 2020; Ostler, 1994; Salar et al., 2020; Smink et al., 2020).

In the most general sense, VR is described as a multimedia-based virtual environment designed to enhance communication among humans and computers through human-computer interaction (Lv, 2020; Stone, 1991; Zhang, 2021). Another definition by Oppenheim (1993) states that it is also a technology that seeks to enhance the sense of feeling and presence. Based on the general specifications, it is possible to state that there is human-computer interaction in VR environments. In a similar way as AR, VR may be utilized in educational settings, and AR is the core of VR technology (Chittaro & Ranon, 2007; Kipper & Rampolla, 2013; Krajčovič et al., 2021; Monahan et al., 2008; Pan et al., 2006; Rauch, 2007). In addition, VRLE provides a visualization of three-dimensional data and interactive learning environments that reinforces the feeling of users’ immersion in the virtual world (Huang et al., 2010; Park & Lee, 2020; Servotte et al., 2020).

ARLE could be readily integrated into traditional learning environments, due to its technological and wieldy structure. Therefore, instructional design elements for ARLE can be considered as being established following traditional design principles. However, the problematical issues faced by literature is about the reality that the instructional design principles and qualifications’ for VRLE are insufficient and quite limited (Albus et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2005; de Vasconcelos et al., 2020; Dunleavy et al., 2009; Riva, 2003; Wong et al., 2000). Researchers should contribute to the formation of a theoretical framework on how learning principles should be applied in VRLE (Huang et al., 2010; Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2017), and the current study aims to contribute to the relevant literature by addressing this gap.

Interactive Learning Environments and Learning Outcomes
In the current study, ARLE and VRLE were examined as interactive learning environments. The emergence of mobile digital technology creates a new area for learners and instructors to collaborate in traditional and virtual environments in educational settings (Lu, 2012; Parsons, 2012). Furthermore, BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) has grown into a viable and emerging teaching strategy to promote active engagement by students in the learning process (Chou et al., 2017). Numerous scholars researched different interactive learning environments and factors that have an impact on learning outcomes and revealed controversial findings in recent years. According to Dede (2009), VRLE offers promising training potential in education. Scholars who study the relationship between VRLE and learning outcomes (Bailenson et al., 2008; Dede, 2009; Lee & Wong, 2008; Roussou et al., 2006; Trindade et al., 2002) argue that rigorous scientific research is necessary to be examined to better appreciate the connection between learning environments and learning outcomes. Webster (2016) stated that more experimental work on traditional learning environments and VRLE comparisons are needed. Wang (2012) also noted that no researcher in the past had examined the potential between VRLE and traditional instructional settings.

Thanks to the rapid development of technologies and related peripherals, not only has living been more comfortable but there have also been numerous advancements in instructional settings, in terms of interactive learning environments (Chang et al., 2020; Fonseca et al., 2014). According to Pribeanu et al. (2017), interactive learning environments can support new learning paradigms in many ways. The general characteristics of ARLE and VRLE provide immersion, navigation, and interaction potentials for users (Dunleavy et al., 2009). Similar to ARLE, VRLE could provide a self-paced learning experience for learners to fulfill their individualized learning criteria. On the other hand, numerous scholars studied ARLE’s relationship with learning outcomes (Holden & Sykes, 2011; Kye & Kim, 2008; Pérez-López & Contero, 2013) and found that it leads to motivation due to its recreational characteristics (Chen & Wang, 2008; DiSerio et al., 2013; Fonseca et al., 2014; Küçük et al., 2014; Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2010; Pan et al., 2006; Sotiriou & Bogner, 2008; Wu et al., 2013). Still, limited empirical research exists in the literature in which ARLE and VRLE design principles are directly scrutinized in terms of learning outcomes or instruction. How the multimedia principles for ARLE and VRLE should be implemented is still debated (Dunleavy et al., 2009; Mutlu-Bayraktar et al., 2019). This is because there is still no clear consensus about how to implement the innovations stably into instructional settings (Wu et al., 2019). Thus, the instructional potentials in interactive learning environments (i.e., ARLE and VRLE) must be scrutinized.

Metacognitive Judgments and Learning
The Metamemory Model by Nelson and Narens (1990) states that memory-related processes require three stages and metacognition occurs on a meta-level. Therefore, participating in meta-level metacognitive processes has the potential to directly affect task performances at the object level (Lau et al., 2017). Metacognitive monitoring judgments of various types are available (reviewed in, Dunlosky and Metcalfe, 2008; Schraw, 2009). Ease of Learning (EoL) and Judgments of Learning (JoL) are considered metacognitive monitoring. The EoL judgments are associated with self-regulated learning phases and could be used before the instructional phase as a measure of predicted task challenges (Pintrich, 2000).

The JoL is the level at which learners assess their level of comprehension of materials. JoL is one of the most commonly preferred concurrent self-report measures and as utilized as a strategy for learners’ active engagement, requires learners to evaluate their judgments about the material (Azevedo et al., 2010; Dunlosky & Lipko, 2007; Greene & Azevedo, 2009; Serra & Dunlosky, 2010). Learners choose appropriate cognitive learning strategies (Lau et al., 2017) and can change their behaviors depending on their JoL judgments (Double et al., 2018). JoL reflects a subjective judgment of learners’ confidences on if a studied item in a material will be remembered later (Arbuckle & Cuddy, 1969; Nelson & Narens, 1990). JoL has been shown to reliably predict performance, as well as decisions and learning behaviors (Double et al., 2018). In particular, JoL may be a useful strategy in improving learning for low-performing students who avoid active engagement during performance monitoring (Dunning et al., 2003). On the other hand, JoL is often used to evaluate how various empirical manipulations could affect learners’ subjective confidences in learning processes (Dunlosky et al., 2005; Susser et al., 2016). Although the literature on the EoL is minimal, JoL has been studied more broadly (Dunlosky et al., 2005).

Although the effect of multimedia materials on learning and comprehension have received attention in the field (e.g., Mayer, 2001, 2009), the notion of metacomprehension has not been largely explored (Serra & Dunlosky, 2010). Metacomprehension engages the monitoring and regulation of learners’ comprehension and may have significant effects on problem-solving, reasoning, and achievement when learning through multimedia materials about complex topics (Azevedo, 2014; Mayer, 2014). Learners must be able to accurately evaluate how well they understand the material they read to monitor their learning level effectively (Metcalfe & Finn, 2008). Therefore, it is imperative to reveal the processes in which learners judge their understanding because these processes are critical components to successful learning (Mudrick et al., 2019). Consequently, considering the metacognitive judgments for learning environments, the current study could contribute to the relevant literature.

Cognitive Load and Environments
Cognitive load capacity, as defined in the literature, is affected by learner characteristics, the characteristics of the information items related to the learning tasks, and the interaction of these characteristics (Paas & van Merriënboer, 1994). Thus, in addition to the casual factors of cognitive load, it is also crucial to dwell on situations where performance, cognitive tasks, and load are affected by these factors. A learner’s characteristics affected by the cognitive load are suggested to be separated from the casual factors related to the learning task effectively in the measurement of cognitive load. Choi et al. (2014) stated that physical environments should be considered as causal factors to rearrange this proposed structure and that the physical environment interacts with learners and learning tasks. The physical environment is suggested to have cognitive, physiological, and emotional effects, and how these effects are reflected in the learning environments is difficult to determine (Higgins et al., 2005). In addition, an approach exists such that the cognitive, physiological, and emotional effects of the physical environments on learning may be intertwined. Choi et al. (2014) emphasize the physical environment variable in detail, based on various empirical studies, while revealing the effects of the environments, and clearly states the effects of the physical environments’ variable on learning outcomes and cognitive load.

Numerous studies have been conducted on the physiological, cognitive, and emotional effects of physical environments (for a review please see, Godden & Baddeley, 1980; Jia et al., 2009; Knez & Hygge, 2002; Lan et al., 2011; Örün & Akbulut, 2019). The relationship between the physical environment and cognitive load revealed that physical environments should have similar qualities to the test environments to reach the highest level of retention performance (Smith & Vela, 2001). The mentioned findings hold crucial implications for design and development clues in interactive learning environments. In this context, Cheng and Tsai (2013) stated that ARLE could cause cognitive load in a complex system. Nedim (2013) found that cognitive load can be effectively managed by the characteristics of ARLE. On the other hand, VR is still reported as one of the least published research topics in the field of interactive learning (Lin & Lan, 2015). Therefore, the empirical VR studies are quite limited for educational and instructional settings (Merchant et al., 2014).

In brief, the environment is a factor that affects the cognitive, physiological, and emotional characteristics of learners and can directly impact the cognitive load. In this respect, the relationship of the psychological characteristics, mood, or motivation of the learners with the environments can have a predictive effect on their learning performance (Erez & Isen, 2002; Uline & Tschannen-Moran, 2008). Overall, considering the variedness in approaches on cognitive load and different learning environments, the current study aims to examine whether interactive learning environments affect cognitive load.

Hypotheses
In the present study, cognitive load, metacognitive judgments and learning outcomes of learners who interacted with proper (PRP) or inappropriate (INP) prepared materials presented in interactive learning environments were examined.

Our hypotheses (H) can be tidily listed as:

H1. Applied traditional multimedia design principles for VR reduces learning outcomes.

H2. Provision of visually assisted presentations leads to higher cognitive load in interactive learning environments (i.e., ARLE & VRLE).

H3. The intervention of EoL has an impact on JoL in interactive learning environments (i.e., ARLE & VRLE).

H4. There is a statistically significant correlation between variables representing learning outcomes and subjective cognitive load.

Method
Participants
Participants for this study included 370 undergraduate students who constituted a convenience sample. The context was an Eastern European State University where the authors worked. Of the participants, 21 had to be excluded from data analyses due to outlier factors, and the number of valid cases was about 95% of the total (n=349; 203 females [58.2%]; Age range = 18 – 30; Meanage = 20.83; SD = 1.89). The current study aims to examine the effects of CTML principles for reducing extraneous processing, in interactive learning environments. Mentioned principles are "Coherence," "Redundancy," "Signaling," "Temporal Contiguity," and "Spatial Contiguity" (Mayer & Fiorella, 2014). In brief, according to the Coherence Principle, people learn deeply an explanation better from a multimedia lesson having essential content (i.e., concise lesson) than from a multimedia lesson combining essential material plus supplementary materials (i.e., expanded lesson). On the other hand, according to the Signaling Principle, when cues that highlight the organization of the essential material are provided, people learn better. Finally, according to the Spatial Contiguity Principle, when corresponding words and pictures on the page or screen are presented close together rather than far apart, students learn better. Due to the nature of the research method applied, the "Temporal Contiguity" principle was not addressed because potentially affects time-dependent objective cognitive load measurements; similarly, "Redundancy" is also not addressed due to any sound element was not used in the experiments. In addition, "Signaling" includes visual and verbal sub-dimensions. Therefore, experimental conditions were determined for 7-groups, instead of 6-groups. In each condition, participants were assigned randomly to treatment levels (i.e., SIGNON, SIGVIS, SIGVER, COHPRP, COHINP, SPAPRP, SPAINP) to maintain homogeneity of the subjects, and distributed analogically for demographics, as summarized in Table 1.

Table 1 Assignment of participants to treatment levels and demographics
Full size table
Materials
Mobile-based learning materials for VRLE and computer-assisted learning materials for ARLE were prepared for the experiment in the target language (shown in Fig. 1). The developed materials for ARLE allowed users to follow and interact with the "Lightning" process with 2D and 3D floating objects on the monitor screen. Similarly, a virtual environment that allows 2D and 3D floating objects on the mobile screen was prepared for the “Lightning” topic in VR application and presented to the participants. The learning materials were related to the subject of “Lightning.” The chosen topic offered some familiarity with the participants’ low-level prior knowledge. Each action of the participants (e.g., keystrokes, mouse actions) was recorded into a log file by a computer-assisted data collection tool. Participants could only navigate to the next page and could not return to alter responses on a previous page. The participants were also provided with instructions covering what to do during each stage of the material.

Fig. 1.
figure 1
The sample screenshots from ARLE and VRLE.

Full size image
The learner’s control has positive effects on learning (Mayer, 2009), so the experiment was developed in a way that allows the opportunity to handle the material incrementally (i.e., self-paced). Experts determined the headings of the subtopics, and expert opinions were scrutinized. The “Definition of Lightning,” “Stages of Lightning,” “Theories of Lightning,” “Destructive Effects of Lightning,” and “Lightning Protection” were the developed subtopics. The content of the topic was presented in 16-sequences both equally in ARLE and VRLE, with a maximum of three sentences in each sequence. Sample photos from the instructional phase for ARLE and VRLE are presented in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2.
figure 2
Photos from instructional phase for ARLE and VRLE.

Full size image
Measurements
The measurements included learning outcomes, cognitive load, metacognitive judgments, a Demographics Questionnaire, a Prior-Knowledge Test, a Visual Working Memory Capacity Test, and evaluations of the text and visual manipulations in ARLE and VRLE. To control the confounding factors caused by individual differences, prior-knowledge levels and working memory capacities were measured before the experiment. All measurements were performed using computer-assisted learning material and the results were captured real-time into a log file.

Demographic data was collected through the Demographic Questionnaire consisting of two sections. The first section covered the participants’ gender, departments, and ages. All variables required responses.

In the Prior-Knowledge Test, participants were asked to score subjective prior-knowledge levels about the “Lightning” topic. This evaluation was from the response to the following question: “How much do you know sufficient about the Lightning?”, similar to those used by Strukelj et al. (2016). The question has to be replied to on a scale in a range of “1=very little” and “5=too much”.

The computer-based Working Memory Capacity Test developed by Oberauer et al. (2000, 2003) was used, localized in the target language, to measure the Visual Working Memory Capacity (VWMC). Over recent years, numerous scholars have used this/adapted types of VWMC test to measure working memory capacity (see, Chavan et al., 2015; Horvath, 2014; Koller et al. 2015; Langer et al., 2013; Lehmann et al., 2015; Stone & Towse, 2015; von Bastian & Eschen, 2016; von Bastian & Oberauer, 2013; von Bastian et al., 2013; von Bastian et al., 2016). In this test, participants were asked to identify the text or color they encountered randomly with the “A” or “L” keys on a computer keyboard. According to the given responses, the test proceeded in complicating structure. In the test, each task was presented for 5 s on the screen. There was no time limitation for the task to be answered, and no feedback was given for the response regardless of whether it was false or true. To complete the test, it was sufficient for the participants to respond to 15 randomized tasks. When a total of 15 responses were received, the test was terminated and skipped to the next stage. Each correct response was evaluated as being worth 1-point (Oberauer et al., 2000, von Bastian et al., 2013).

The EoL was performed before the instructional presentation, and JoL was performed after. EoL was evaluated using a continuous scale where values ranging from “0 = hard” – “100 =easy” were entered by the user. Before the instructional presentation, participants answered the EoL question, “How difficult or easy do you think to learn the subject?” (İlic & Akbulut, 2019; Pieger et al., 2016). The 10-second video clip of the subject to be simulated in ARLE and VRLE was presented to the participants, and this limited short video clip could only be played once. The EoL was measured after viewing the video clip and a judgment was required from the participants. This test was mandatory, and the next phase could not be skipped without a response. The JoL was evaluated with the answer to the following question, “What percentage of questions about the topic will you answer correctly?” (İlic & Akbulut, 2019) by selection from a continuous scale of 0 (none) to 100 (all), similar to those used by İlic and Akbulut (2019).

In order to evaluate the subjective cognitive load, the Subjective Rating Scale (SRS) in 1-item 9-point Likert type was assessed. The scale was developed by Paas and van Merriënboer (1993) and was adapted to the target language by Kılıç and Karadeniz (2004) (Cronbach’s Alpha (α) = 0.78). Cronbach’s α reliability coefficient for the original SRS was .90, and Cronbach’s α was found to be .91 for the adapted scale in this study. The highest score on the scale is “9 = too much,” and the lowest score is “1 = very little,” where scores 5 and above represent a high-level cognitive load. The subjective cognitive load was then evaluated from the response to the question, “How much mental effort did you invest?” The process was performed in line with a previous study that also made use of the subjective cognitive load (Paas, 1992). On the other hand, the extraneous cognitive load was evaluated from responses to the question, “How difficult was it for you to study with the material?” (Cierniak et al., 2009; Kalyuga et al., 1998), which was scored on a 7-point Likert scale, similar to those used by İlic and Akbulut (2019), and Cronbach’s α reliability coefficient was found to be .78.

To measure objective cognitive load, the concurrent secondary task technique (for a review please see, Anmarkrud et al., 2019), which has a multitasking structure and is based on the limited capacity assumption of CLT, was used. This technique is presented in the research as performing a secondary task in addition to the primary content (see, Brünken et al., 2002), in the form of the "Click Here" button, that appears in one of the narration sections, similar to those used by İlic and Akbulut (2019). In ARLE, this button is displayed after 17-seconds with a red background and white font color. In VRLE, the secondary task button is displayed in the third sequence, also with a red background and white font color. Nevertheless, within VRLE, before the instruction material was applied, a demo-training environment was presented where students could try interacting with the buttons. The learners must perform secondary tasks while studying the primary content. The time between the secondary tasks on the screen and clicking actions of the participants were evaluated as the reaction time.

The retention, achievement, and comprehension performances were measured as learning outcomes. Each question in the tests was expected to be responded without any time limitation. The maximum score that could be obtained from the Retention Test, which consisted of ten open-ended questions (e.g., “Please, write as much as you can about the destructive effects of lightning.”) corresponding to one point for each correct answer, was 47. In the Comprehension Test, five open-ended questions were asked (e.g., “Which criteria are determined for lightning types?”), similar to those used by İlic and Akbulut (2019) were applied with one point for each correct up to a maximum score of 14. Two independent scholars graded the responses from the open-ended questions, reported the (K=0.87) level interrater reliability coefficients for the retention test, and (K=0.78) for the comprehension test.

Finally, an Achievement Test consisting of 15 multiple-choice questions (e.g., “Which one is not one of the devastating effects of lightning?”), 1-point for each correct, was developed and conducted to measure the learning outcomes of the participants. The test items consisted of five distractors. Items addressed the content of instructional materials, which are further described in section 3.3. The test items were evaluated thrice by field experts and the ultimate revised 15-item version of the test was piloted on 92 undergraduate students. Revisions were conducted for appropriate item discrimination, distractor indices, and item facility. No item was found to be with a very small corrected-item total correlation value (i.e., <.30). This test was also used before the instructional stage as a pre-test to measure participants' prior-knowledge levels. In each implementation, the test demonstrated acceptable internal consistency coefficients, ranging between (0.72) and (0.78), which were acceptable for intergroup comparison as referred by Schmidt (1996), (i.e., +0.70). The item discrimination indices ranged between (0.38) through (0.89), with an average of (0.52). Although the item difficulty varied between (0.27) and (0.81), the average was found to be (0.56).

Procedure
Considering the availability of computer labs and participants, 17 sessions were first conducted in ARLE, followed by 13 sessions in VRLE. Figure 3 illustrates the procedure of the data collection performed over 30 sessions. The participants spent approximately 36 minutes during a single session. In the lab, participants were free to sit wherever they wanted, and seven conditions were randomly assigned to each of the 30 computers. Log files were used to track the conditions of the participants involved in the experiment. Before the experiment, the procedure was briefly explained, the students were also informed that they participated in a session that they could leave whenever they wanted, and a written instruction was given in the teaching material for each stage. The process was conducted in three computer labs, each of which had the exact same hardware and software components. The procedure was completed without any unforeseen problems.

Fig. 3.
figure 3
The procedure of data collection

Full size image
The experiment began with a welcome animation that included ethical issues link and the researchers’ contact information, followed by the application of the Prior-Knowledge Test. Next, the VWMC test was completed by all the groups. In the next step, the Achievements Test was performed as a pre-test followed by participants being randomly allocated to the experimental conditions by the computer-assisted system. EoL judgments were made after watching the short video clip that summarized the main subject, and then the instructional phase was initiated. The narration was self-paced under the learner’s control and the computer-assisted system recorded all reactions. During the learning phase, no time limit was applied, but participants could not revert to pages they had studied previously, nor could they proceed to the next stage without completing the current page. After completing the learning phase, participants were asked to enter a six-digit code generated by the computer-assisted learning material in ARLE or mobile-based learning material in VRLE. If the code was successful, then they would continue the next step for measuring the objective cognitive load and processing the learning judgments through the JoL Test. Next, tests for learning outcomes (i.e., achievement, retention, and comprehension) were administered, followed by the cognitive load (i.e., subjective, and extraneous). Finally, participants were asked to complete the demographic questionnaire, and the session was terminated.

Experiment conditions’ power limitation
Just one approach for sample size planning is to use a priori power analysis to assess a minimum sample size dependent on statistical significance (Chen & Liu, 2019). This study is one of the prominent studies to provide learners with ARLE and VRLE in terms of CTML principles for reducing extraneous processing, and so we had no chance to directly compare the current findings. Nevertheless, it is appreciable to mention the effect-size values for similar experiments. In interactive learning environments, the average d value = .68 was found by Garzón and Acevedo (2019). A priori power analysis was performed using G*Power Software to acquire the estimated sample size to obtain statistical power of (.80). It was stated that there should be at least 21 participants for each experimental group to achieve a partial eta-squared of 0.06 or above (i.e., medium effect size; Huck, 2012). In consequence, this research has been moderately powered in comparison to interactive learning environments' priori power analysis results.

Results
In Table 2, the descriptive statistics for variables of interest are presented. In the following, when an ANOVA, ANCOVA, or MANCOVA is required, the adjusted means values are provided. In order to meet the normality assumption, the kurtosis and skewness values were scrutinized for all continuous variables before the parametric tests (Huck, 2008, 2012), and the parametric test assumptions were met when the descriptive statistics of the variables were evaluated (i.e., with the most skewness and kurtosis values in the range of ±1.0). The design procedure involved assigning participants randomly to one of the seven treatment levels. As a result of the participants' random assignment to treatment levels, the distribution of department, χ2 (30) = 25.901, p = .680, and gender, χ2 (6) = 1.591, p = .953, across each treatment level was homogeneous. In conclusion, the homogeneity of variance was checked, and the results revealed no violation (i.e., p>.05), indicating that the variance is equal across each treatment level.

Table 2 Descriptive statistics
Full size table
Learning Outcomes for Multimedia Principle Manipulations in Different Learning Environments
In order to analyze the effect of multimedia manipulations on learning outcomes in interactive learning environments, prior knowledge and VWMC, which are significantly correlated with the dependent variables in the between-groups MANCOVA, were examined as covariance variables. In other words, there is a significant correlation between prior knowledge and VWMC (r=.483, p<.001), achievement (r=.763, p<.001), retention (r=.273, p<.001), and comprehension (r=.178, p<.001). Similarly, the relationship between the VWMC and the retention (r=.872, p<.001), comprehension (r=.757, p<.001), and are statistically significant. The MANCOVA assumption test indicated that all dependent and independent variables for learning outcomes were normally distributed. In addition, before conducting the MANCOVA, the homogeneity of regression coefficients was analyzed, and was supported for participants’ prior knowledge (F=.684, p=.779>.05), achievement test (F=.663, p=.799>.05), retention test (F=.861, p=.595>.05), and comprehension test (F=.603, p=.852>.05) scores, respectively. The results revealed that MANCOVA could be used to analyze the learning outcomes.

In Table 3, adjusted means are presented. In ARLE, the highest achievement performance belonged to SPAINP group (MEstimate=7.636, SE=.305), and the worst performance was demonstrated by SIGVER (MEstimate =6.963, SE=.302) and COHPRP (MEstimate = 6.966, SE=.298). In VRLE, the highest achievement performance belonged to the COHPRP group (MEstimate =8.092, SE=.337), while the SIGVER group (MEstimate =6.563, SE=.338) demonstrated the worst performance. In ARLE, learners in SIGVER group (MEstimate = 7.544, SE=.363) demonstrated highest retention performance, and SPAINP group (MEstimate = 6.466, SE=.365) condition resulted in the lowest scores. The highest retention performance was demonstrated by the SIGVER group (MEstimate =8.207, SE=.405), and SIGVIS group (MEstimate = 6.603, SE=.400) condition resulted in the lowest performance in VRLE. When examining the comprehension performances, the highest performance was demonstrated by the COHPRP group (MEstimate =4.426, SE=.211), and the lowest performance was demonstrated by the SIGVER group (MEstimate =3.833, SE=.214) conditions in ARLE. In VRLE, learners in the SPAPRP group (MEstimate =4.356, SE=.232) demonstrated the highest performance, while the COHINP group (MEstimate=3.627, SE=.238) condition resulted in the lowest performance. The descriptive statistics demonstrate that studying with materials presented in interactive learning environments following different multimedia principles may impact learning outcomes. Nonetheless, MANCOVA results reveal no significant effect of the interaction with interactive learning environments and multimedia principles for either retention (F(6,333)=0.499; p=0.809; ηp2=0.009; Power=.202), comprehension (F(6,333)=1.667; p=0.128; ηp2=0.029; Power=.634), and achievement (F(6,333)=2.043; p=0.060; ηp2=0.035; Power=.739) performances, which is a result that contradict to our hypotheses.

Table 3 Adjusted means of learning outcomes for different conditions in interactive learning environments
Full size table
Cognitive Load in Interactive Learning Environments
ANOVA was conducted to analyze the differences between groups in regard to cognitive load measurements for each learning environment. The cognitive load was evaluated by subjective and objective criteria. Objective measurements were calculated with secondary task-reaction time and application usage time. Subjective cognitive load involved cognitive load and extraneous cognitive load variables. In Table 4, the descriptive statistics for all mentioned cognitive load variables are presented.

Table 4 The descriptive statistics for cognitive load
Full size table
The four ANOVAs were evaluated by dividing the significance value of Alpha by four (i.e., Bonferroni Adjustment; p=0.05/4 = 0.0125) to avoid a significant difference by coincidence. In ARLE, ANOVA results showed no statistically significant difference was found between the groups in terms of cognitive load (F(6,188)=.716; p=.638; ηp2=0.022; Power=.280) and extraneous cognitive load (F(6,188)=.666; p=.933; ηp2=0.010; Power=.134). However, a significant difference was found in the exposure (F(6,188)=6.201; p<.001; ηp2=0.165; Power=.999) and reaction time (F(6,188)=10.966; p<.001; ηp2=0.259; Power=1.000). Moreover, Levene’s Test achieved significance (F=7.232; p<0.001) for only reaction time for the secondary task. Hence, Tamhane post-hoc test was preferred for a secondary task reaction time and the Scheffe was preferred for exposure time, which suggested that differences across the groups were statistically significant. According to these results, the SPAPRP group is the most disadvantageous in terms of exposure time, while COHINP group conditions are the most disadvantageous in terms of the secondary task reaction time. These findings reveal that visual presentations for learners in ARLE are consistent with text-based content that causes long-continued reactions. On the other hand, verbal signaling in ARLE shortened the reaction time to perform the secondary task.

In VRLE, ANOVA results revealed that no significant differences existed between the groups in regard to cognitive load (F(6,147)=.881; p=.511; ηp2=0.035; Power=.340), extraneous cognitive load (F(6,147)=.404; p=.875; ηp2=0.016; Power=.165), and reaction time (F(6,147)=1.507; p=.180; ηp2=0.058; Power=.570). Nevertheless, a statistically significant difference was seen in exposure time (F(6,147)=5.604; p<.001; ηp2=0.186; Power=.996). Thus, Levene’s Test achieved significance (F=3.339; p<0.01) for only reaction time for the secondary task. Therefore, Tamhane post-hoc test was preferred for reaction time, and Scheffe was preferred for exposure time, which suggested that the differences between the groups were statistically significant. According to these results, the difference was to the disadvantage of SIGVIS group conditions. Therefore, participants in SIGVIS group conditions were exposed to higher levels of objective cognitive load in VRLE. These findings suggest that visual signaling may cause the higher objective cognitive load in VRLE.

Metacognitive Judgments in Interactive Learning Environments
ANCOVA was conducted to analyze the effect of manipulations on multimedia principles on metacognitive judgments in interactive learning environments. Metacognitive judgments were evaluated by considering the variables EoL and JoL. Since EoL was measured before the instruction, it was considered as a covariance variable, and JoL was evaluated after the instructional phase. The relationship of these variables was examined, as stated in the literature because metacognitive judgments were related to working memory capacity and prior knowledge. Therefore, a positively significant relationship was found among JoL and EoL (r=0.450; p<.001), working memory capacity and JoL (r=0.188, p<.001), and prior knowledge and JoL (r=0.138; p=.010). The adjusted JoL means are summarized for all conditions in Table 5.

Table 5 Adjusted means of JOL for each condition
Full size table
However, ANCOVA revealed no significant effect of manipulations on multimedia principles in interactive learning environments on metacognitive judgments (F(6,334)=1.717; p=0.116; ηp2=.030; Power=0.650). The result is, therefore, that metacognitive judgments (i.e., JoL) were not influenced by the interaction of interactive learning environments and multimedia conditions. The participants who studied with coherent visuals and text-based content (i.e., COHPRP group) had the highest scores (MEstimate =57.698, SE=2.565). On the other hand, participants who studied with non-coherent visuals and text-based content (i.e., COHINP group) had the lowest scores (MEstimate=50.849, SE=2.586). The effects of ARLE (App=1) and VRLE (App=2) on metacognitive judgments are presented in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4.
figure 4
Effect of ARLE and VRLE on metacognitive judgments.

Full size image
Although we suggest a result that contradicts our hypotheses, we also observed a statistically significant difference in favor of VRLE in terms of the learning environments on metacognitive judgments regardless of CTML manipulations (F(1,346)=6.559; p=0.011; ηp2=.019; Power=0.724). Participants' metacognitive judgments were higher in VRLE (i.e., JoL), so it could be considered that participants working in VRLE are more confident learners.

The relationship between learning outcomes and cognitive load
The correlations between mentioned variables of interest are presented in Table 6.

Table 6 Relationships between cognitive load and learning outcomes
Full size table
The findings showed that significant and positive relationships between all variables mentioned in Table 6. The extraneous cognitive load was positively related with achievement (r=.216, p=.001), retention (r=.214, p=.002) and comprehension (r=.194, p=001). Moreover, the extraneous cognitive load correlated positively with secondary task reaction time (r=.145, p=.007) and exposure time (r=.222, p=.001). It was revealed that there is a positive significant relationship between exposure time and learning outcomes.

Discussion
In the current study, the effects of different multimedia manipulations in interactive learning environments were assessed. Undergraduate students participated in computer-assisted instructional presentations for ARLE and mobile-assisted instructional presentations for VRLE. Computer-based data collection procedures were conducted, control variables (i.e., working memory capacity and prior knowledge) were handled in the study. The originality of the study was the incorporation of comparisons and singly investigating multimedia manipulations in interactive learning environments. Although there was a significant difference in respect to the objective cognitive load, groups demonstrated no significant difference in terms of metacognitive judgments and learning outcomes. These results cause us to reject the H1, H2, and H3 hypotheses. Nevertheless, the findings related to the learning environments suggested that VRLE causes a higher subjective cognitive load in comparison to ARLE, although there was no statistically significant difference.

We found that multimedia manipulations in interactive learning environments do not reveal statistically significant in terms of metacognitive judgments (i.e., H3 rejected). On the other hand, we investigated how JoL was only affected by the learning environments. The findings related to the metacognitive judgments demonstrated that there was a significant difference in terms of learning environments. The participants' judgments of learning were higher in VRLE compared with ARLE. The related finding also supports the hypothesis that VRLE continues to offer a promising educational training environment (Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011) and the importance of metacognition should be become prominent (Matvey et al., 2006; Terras & Ramsay, 2014). These findings were remarkable as VRLE suggested that learners could have a higher judgment of learning.

Our hypotheses on learning outcomes in interactive learning environments have been disproved by the findings (i.e., H1 rejected). On the other hand, the empirical studies in the literature to which we directly compared the findings were quite limited. Although there were no statistically significant differences in terms of variables of interest in this study, some striking results were observed. It was an unanticipated case that the SPAINP group outperformed the SPAPRP group in the ARLE. The highest retention performance in the ARLE was with the SIGVER group, which had a higher performance than the SIGNON and SIGVIS groups. This finding may support the assumptions of the CTML (e.g., Harp & Mayer, 1998; Mautone & Mayer, 2001; Stull & Mayer, 2007). The findings related to the comprehension in the ARLE showed that the COHPRP and SPAPRP groups had higher performances. These findings support the assumptions that if the content presented is suitable for spatial contiguity and is coherent, then it offers an advantage for the learners in organizing their cognitive abilities that require higher cognitive skills (Harp & Mayer, 1997, 1998; Moreno & Mayer, 2000). In addition, if the control variables are not considered, then the lowest performance in ARLE belonged to the SIGNON group, and the highest performance belonged to the SPAPRP group, which is consistent with numerous studies (e.g., Bodemer et al., 2004; Chandler & Sweller, 1992; Kester et al., 2005; Mayer et al., 1995; Moreno & Mayer, 1999).

The highest performances in VRLE in terms of the achievement, retention, and comprehension scores belong to the COHPRP, SIGVER, and SPAPRP groups, respectively. These results are parallel with those of ARLE. However, the highest performance in ARLE in terms of achievement belonged to the SPAINP group. Nevertheless, when the control variables were not considered in the VR learning environment, the highest performances for achievement and comprehension were with the SIGVIS group and the SIGVER group for retention. In other words, visual elements may potentially affect achievement and comprehension performances in VRLE, but verbal signaling is also important for comprehension abilities that require higher cognitive skills. This case emphasizes the effect of visual signaling that cannot be proved in the literature (Mayer, 2009). Nevertheless, further empirical studies are required to evaluate these manipulations for interactive learning environments in more detail.

Cognitive load capacity is thought to be affected by the learner’s characteristics and the tasks that are presented during the learning phase (Paas & van Merriënboer, 1994). In the current study, ARLE and VRLE were investigated with the idea that learning environments should be evaluated as a remarkable factor in learning (Choi et al., 2014). We hypothesized that VRLE would cause a higher cognitive load. In addition, we consulted the criteria of objectivity and subjectivity that Brünken et al. (2003) emphasized in the measurement of cognitive load. According to Anmarkrud et al. (2019), objective cognitive load measurement techniques include various methods such as physiological and dual-task methodology. Therefore, the current study is supported by subjective and objective cognitive load measurements. The findings related to the subjective cognitive load revealed that no statistically significant difference in ARLE. However, there was a significant difference between the groups in terms of objective cognitive load. The instructional material was also determined to cause extraneous cognitive load for all study groups in ARLE. Therefore, manipulations on instructional material are a striking factor in the management of extraneous cognitive load. In ARLE, the SPAPRP group demonstrated the maximum exposure time to the instructional material, in line with our hypothesis, in terms of objective cognitive load.

On the other hand, as an expected result, we determined that there is a significant relationship between subjective cognitive load and learning outcomes (i.e., achievement (r=.249, p<.01), retention (r=.211, p<.01), and comprehension (r=.219, p<.01)). This finding led us to retain the H4 hypothesis. An interesting finding was that the extraneous cognitive load was low-level positively correlated with levels of learning outcomes (i.e., achievement (r=.216, p<.01), retention (r=.214, p<.01), and comprehension (r=.194, p<.01)). This finding was inconsistent with former scholarly studies. However, the implications of such differences may also depend on the characteristics of the materials (Francis et al., 2020), in that dealing with manipulations in learning environments may not be beneficial for learning outcomes (Rivers et al., 2021; Seufert et al., 2017), and the provision of manipulated materials for inexperienced participants may overshadow the potential of learning outcomes and extraneous cognitive load.

In VRLE, we found similar results to ARLE in terms of objective and subjective cognitive load. A significant difference between groups was determined in terms of objective cognitive load in VRLE with the highest exposure time belonging to the SIGVIS group. Based on this finding, understanding the instructional content manipulated by the visual signaling was challenging. In addition, this finding supports the idea that visual elements may offer a negative effect on learning procedures (Renkl & Scheiter, 2017). On the other hand, the visual effects applied to text-based content could make the instructional material difficult to understand (Lindner et al., 2018; Saß et al., 2012). In contradiction to these results, the literature suggests that supporting text-based content with visual elements offers a positive effect (Ainsworth, 2006; Butcher, 2014; Ozcelik et al., 2010; Schnotz & Bannert, 2003). We also found that each participant studying in VRLE was exposed to a higher level of cognitive load compared to ARLE. Although no statistically significant difference existed, the training tasks to be completed in VRLE could lead to higher cognitive loads than in ARLE. Therefore, as we hypothesized, we found tenable results. Nevertheless, as we were the first to examine ARLE and VRLE comparatively in terms of these variables of interest, similar investigations and empirical studies are required to further support the current findings.

While metacognitive judgments do not have a significant effect on learning outcomes (i.e., H3 rejected), metacognitive judgments have been a factor explored in multimedia learning in recent years (İlic & Akbulut, 2019; Lindner et al., 2018a, b). On the other hand, Metcalfe (2009) emphasized that we have only just begun to understand the relationships between metacognitive judgments and learning. Similarly, metacognitive judgments had been examined in terms of learning (Clore & Parrott, 1994; Koriat & Goldsmith, 1996), in the past, and in the current study, positive and significant relationships were observed between EoL and JoL. However, no statistically significant difference in terms of metacognitive judgments was seen in ARLE and VRLE, similar to these learning outcomes. The presence of a higher degree of JoL among learners, who practice with coherent visuals, could provide guidance to instructional designers.

In addition, we revealed a finding that by considering only the learning environments, JoL was statistically significant. This case is crucial as it indicates that JoL could be directly affected by learning environments. Although the participants’ metacognitive judgments are biased, individuals demonstrate clear metacognitive judgments under different circumstances (Dunlosky & Nelson, 1992, 1997; Dunlosky & Lipko, 2007; Kelemen and Weaver III, 1997; Matvey et al., 2001). We suggest that this finding revealing how participants' judgments of learning may be affected by learning environments contributes to the literature. While metacognitive judgments support respondents to make correct judgments about their insights (Clore & Parrott, 1994), misapplying metacognitive judgments may have a compelling effect. Therefore, we may propound that the application framework of metacognitive judgments should be considered by researchers. On the other hand, because instructional settings described in the literature are difficult to replicate successfully (Ilic and Akbulut, 2019), therefore, direct comparison of findings with previous may not be practicable. According to Barrett et al. (2020), since VRLE combines both physical and digital elements in a particular manner, the use of this emerging technology is not entirely intuitive and should be specifically pre-experienced. One of the confounding factors or difficulty of exploring the capabilities of any VRLE or any emerging technology in this respect is that certain participants may not be virtual literate level. It is highly recommended that these factors should be taken into consideration in further research. In conclusion, the lack of significant differences in experiments compared to the current variables of interest promote findings that relatively support the CTML and CLT. The current study contributes to the literature by questioning the learning activities manipulated in interactive learning environments by considering multimedia principles. Still, various empirical research needs to be done to address about interactive learning environments' design gap. Nevertheless, as we are the first to examine interactive learning environments comparatively in terms of variables of interest, further empirical studies are needed to discuss the findings in more detail in terms of CTML and CLT.

Limitations and Future Research Directions
In this study, we investigated the effect of instructional materials manipulated with multimedia principles on cognitive load, metacognitive judgments, and learning outcomes in interactive learning environments. Nevertheless, we could not reveal statistically significant differences between groups in terms of variables of interest apart from objective cognitive load. We hypothesized a significant difference in learning outcomes but could not demonstrate in the learning outcomes. This result may be due to the characteristics of the target population, instructional material, or the complexity or quaintness of the topic for the current research context, so further validation through empirical studies is needed on standard topics and samples.

Another limitation is that participants worked in these experimental settings for the first time using ARLE or VRLE in the computer laboratories. These techniques may be difficult or confounding for inexperienced participants to adapt to the experiment settings, so attending to interactive learning environments may be a confounding factor. A comparison is needed between experienced and inexperienced learners through interactive learning environments. Standard VR equipment was used in this study due to economic inadequacies. This research was performed entirely through computer-assisted systems for ARLE and the learning content in VRLE was mobile-assisted. This potential limiting factor may also cause difficulties for the participants. In addition, the cognitive load measurement characteristics and cognitive load instruments may have potentially affected the results. To validate or prove the measurements in the further research, for example, the cognitive load may be tackled using neuroimaging tools (e.g., Electroencephalography (EEG), Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS), Transcranial Doppler Ultrasonography (TCD), Eye-Tracking, etc.).

Another factor may be the design characteristics of the ARLE and VRLE. In addition to presenting the topic material in both learning environments, the "Lightning" topic was simulated in tandem with the topic content in ARLE and VRLE. At the same time, the VRLE offered a 360-degree experience, so by limiting the angle of view in future research, participants may be prevented from having to act continuously to follow the learning content. This may have caused distracting effect and can be directly compared to a limited viewing angle in VRLE. Finally, metacognitive judgments were examined independently of learning environments. These measurements made directly in the ARLE or VRLE may lead to negotiable findings in future empirical studies.