This paper presents an analysis of cognitive skill levels expressed in high school students’ performance using laboratory simulations. We address lower-order cognitive skills (LOCS) and higher-order cognitive skills (HOCS) situations in a virtual simulation activity, in order to identify and underly further discussions about students’ reasoning when dealing with different levels of questions in such an environment. The research participants are 38 high school students, with an average age of 16 years, they performed an activity with two laboratory simulations in an instructional context in which students, working in small groups, could demonstrate their abilities to attain LOCS and HOCS levels. To analyze data, we established connections between students’ responses and cognitive skill levels, making sure that the established level contemplates the achieved performance. Results related to the attainment of LOCS level were found to be consistent with the literature as there was a prevailing adequacy, observed by the greater proportion of lower-order skills (LOCS-L3), related to concepts memorization However, when it comes to HOCS capacity, there is a different pattern of students’ performance, evidenced in students’ difficulties in expressing higher-level reasoning, suggesting efforts to the attainment of HOCS level through different approaches of interaction. The outcome of this study suggests that combining LOCS and HOCS in laboratory simulations may help teachers identify and progress on students’ reasoning between cognitive skill levels, and also contribute to the assessment and adaptation of simulations in order to facilitate learning.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The current effort to reform science education is the driving force for the development of students’ higher-order cognitive skills (HOCS) capacity (Zoller, 2001). Learning outcomes such as question-asking, decision making and critical thinking are the major acquisitions of HOCS capabilities, and the main instructional goal in contemporary education.

The need for a deep conceptual understanding of scientific topics, rather than simply applying algorithmic learning to a problem set, is the expected scenario to enhance students’ cognitive domain of scientific knowledge. It can also help students to improve academic performances and to become critical thinkers when learning outcomes are well-established in classroom settings.

However, the reality experienced in education systems denotes a different picture to the one desired by progressive reforms. Due to institutional constraints and, in some cases, resistance to change in the act of teaching, teachers tend to strictly choose easy grading methods. Which reinforces the difficulties to properly assess and support students’ learning, and therefore decide whether the instructional method employed has brought contributions for education or not.

The shift in instructional emphasis from lower-order cognitive skills (LOCS) to HOCS is a crucial issue. Remembering factual knowledge is a skill students are familiar with, the problem is when the tasks cannot give correct answers, demanding cognitive efforts to deal with open problems. Yet, it is not enough to just claim the paradigm shift if both teachers and students are not given the required assistance to make this change.

This study focuses on the analysis of cognitive skill levels expressed in high school students’ performance using laboratory simulations. These are alternative learning environments in which experimental activities can be done in a practical and optimized way. We address LOCS and HOCS situations in a virtual simulation activity, in order to identify and underly further discussions about students’ reasoning when dealing with different levels of questions in such an environment.

It is well-known the benefits of software simulations in science teaching (Khan, 2011; Plass et al., 2012; Lancaster et al., 2013) especially laboratory simulations (Tatli & Ayas, 2010; Chen et al., 2011; Ozdilek & Oncu, 2014; Winkelmann et al., 2017), regarding the effectiveness in instructional designs. Being considered important tools to enhance and support traditional instruction (Rutten et al., 2012).

Although there is a massive effort of studies on understanding the impacts on students’ achievement with such technologies, there is a clear aspect authors highlight when it comes to the integration and assessment of simulations in the classroom (Scalise et al., 2011; Rutten et al., 2012): the lack of studies that seek to base the use of virtual environments on theoretical foundations of teaching and learning.

It appears that a considerable amount of previous research has been mainly dominated by quantitative evidence, the use of multiple-choice pre-and post-testing, and descriptive and inferential statistical analysis within control and experimental groups, not really defining teachers’ role in mediating the use of simulations, or its adaptation in classroom. The current study, therefore, makes it possible to demonstrate a method of analyzing the use of simulations in a classroom context, in addition to better adapting it within teaching, based on discussions evidenced on cognitive skill levels identification.

Hence, this study aims to overcome obstacles to the use of simulations, providing the enhancement of simulations’ assessment in order to, gradually, introduce the necessary shift from LOCS to HOCS science education. Using a qualitative approach, based on students’ outcomes, we aligned the research design, analysis, and discussions through the question: “how high school students interact with simulations in terms of LOCS and HOCS questioning”.

Theoretical framework
Laboratory simulations in chemistry teaching
Thirty years ago, Richards et al., (1992, p. 69) stated: “we believe that learning science will be easier when students can use simulations as do scientists”, with the current technology development and implementation in education, is it possible to confirm their statement? We can be certain that simulations can make students better construct scientific knowledge, and there are many studies that corroborate with it.

Computer simulations can be defined as computer programs that simulate a model of a given system for analysis (Khan, 2011). It is linked to the creation of dynamic and simplified real-world models (Lancaster et al., 2013), using a mathematical or logical model to recreate phenomena or situations (Suits & Sanger, 2013), describing the system given particular conditions.

Simulations present different advantages and can be seen as support in teaching methodologies. Studies show that simulations can provide links between macroscopic and submicroscopic scale; increase students’ engagement; optimize reproduction of phenomenon; eliminate costs related to laboratory experiments, and can make students more comfortable about making mistakes (Russel et al., 1997; Gorghiu et al., 2009; Tatli & Ayas, 2010; Bonde et al., 2014).

While interacting with simulations, students can examine interrelationships between variables and observe different behavior of systems, receiving rapid feedback cycles (Chen et al., 2011; Khan, 2011; Plass et al., 2012; Moore et al., 2014). Besides that, simulations support the possibility to make the invisible visible, being a powerful tool for visualization of submicroscopic chemistry representations (Russel et al., 1997), engaging learners in scientific reasoning processes.

Taking into account experimental practices, simulations can play an important role as a computer-based model of laboratory experiments. As an alternative learning environment, virtual laboratories, or laboratory simulation, simulate a real laboratory and its processes, being defined as environments that students can conduct experiments, converting theoretical knowledge into practical knowledge, providing opportunities to foster their practical skills (Gorghiu et al., 2009; Tatli & Ayas, 2012, 2013).

Laboratories are places where students can learn and configure their scientific knowledge, master technical skills, and experience the scientific endeavor with concrete materials. When schools lack the resources to maintain laboratories, most of them restrict the type of experimental practices because of safety (Davenport et al., 2018). In many other contexts, teachers may avoid laboratories for different reasons, as expensive laboratory experiments (Bonde et al., 2014); safety doubts in risky experiments, time shortage, some teachers’ lack of self-confidence, and weakness of confirmation method (Tatli & Ayas, 2010, 2013).

Laboratory simulations can offer solutions for reasons why teachers do not include practical activities in their classes. According to different studies (Tatli & Ayas, 2010, 2013; Chen et al., 2011; Bonde et al., 2014; Ozdilek & Oncu, 2014; Winkelmann et al., 2017), laboratory simulations can overcome risky experiments when it can be safely performed; there is no need for laboratory experience while selecting equipment; the use of equipment and materials can be repeated without loss; in laboratory simulations time is reduced enabling students to perform different experiments in a short period; it can provide adaptive guidance; students can progress at their own pace; it can master the difficulties of having mistaken results, allowing the learning autonomy; and also in these environments teachers and students can design quickly.

In a literature review-type study, Tatli & Ayas (2010) investigated the main results teachers find with the implementation of laboratory-based simulation. It was observed that students could better express themselves and report experiments in virtual laboratories; students focus more on experiment and not on equipment and tools; virtual experiments can be conducted with equipment that could put students’ safety at risky; it is possible to repeat the operation, not harming the environment since there is no material waste. Data that corroborate with the above-mentioned studies about the alternative outcomes with the use of these resources.

Therefore, one must consider the way students behave and express themselves in different classroom contexts. Also, it is necessary to take into account the way simulations are assessed and adapted in the classroom, requiring the analysis of data produced by the user interactions. Based on Gibson (2013), Fig. 1 illustrates important stages necessary for assessing simulations, once the data is gathered and inferences are made.

Assessments based on students’ outcomes on tests do not really determine whether the instructional design with simulations contributed to education, or it just added some interaction among the students. This is an important aspect teachers should be aware of when intending to use technology in science teaching. The interaction, collection of data, data analysis and adaptation of the method for better results are crucial points for good performances with simulations.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Simulation-based personalization and assessment processes

Full size image
Simulations, such as laboratory-based, are open-ended, they encourage students to contemplate the implications of a scenario, they create new visual representations of phenomena. All the efforts should be made to make it difficult for students to become passive during the simulation, increasing interactivity. These implications suggest the benefits of instructional design with simulations, if aligned with a good assessment method of student needs.

Levels of cognitive skills
Due to the challenges and changes in the modern world, students are often required to develop skills that go beyond knowledge. They need to be provided with skills that involve decision-making, critical thinking and problem-solving (Zoller & Tsaparlis, 1997; Barak et al., 2007; Zoller & Pushkin, 2007; Zoller, 2011). Such a perspective of need is based on the acquisition of skills that relate to knowledge itself and its implications in social-cultural contexts.

According to Zoller (1993; 2001; 2012), cognitive skills fall under two main categories: LOCS (lower-order cognitive skills) and HOCS (higher-order cognitive skills). Zoller defines the LOCS level as basic or memorized information from known situations, involving formal definitions; also knowing, identifying and defining memorized algorithmic equations and concepts (Zoller & Pushkin, 2007), students memorize information rather than associate underlying concepts (Zoller et al., 2002).

By algorithmic, Zoller et al., (1995) established that it is convenient to relate it to the technical application of procedures for a solution; it constitutes a subset of LOCS level or even a separate category, since there is no use of understanding. In this study, algorithmic skills are portrayed in terms of LOCS.

The HOCS category requests approximations with critical thinking, decision-making and problem-solving (Lubezky et al., 2004; Zoller & Pushkin, 2007), it establishes connections between the application of known theory or knowledge in situations that may be unknown. HOCS level aims to explore interrelationships between variables, prediction moments, inferences, development of critical thinking, hypothesis and combination of theories in solving problems (Zoller et al., 2002). Chemistry assessments related to HOCS abilities would involve non-algorithmic and/or open-ended questions instead of the traditional multiple-choice model (Zoller & Tsaparlis, 1997).

In terms of practice, writing balanced chemical equations, stoichiometric analysis, and defining a concept can be qualified for LOCS capabilities, not for HOCS. Implications in chemistry teaching for HOCS abilities can be exemplified as asking students to make predictions, to consider the use of different limiting reagent and their implications, to consider solubility rules, to make connections between concepts, and critically interact with quantitative data (Zoller & Pushkin, 2007). Which corroborates the idea that higher-order items are certainly not independent of the content, requiring specific knowledge (Jensen et al., 2020).

The ideas of HOCS and LOCS capabilities are based on the foundations of Bloom’s taxonomy of cognitive domains (Bloom et al., 1956), in which explicit significant perspectives of assessing and creating good instructional teaching. Being created towards the need for changes in the way teachers think and act upon the quality of education.

Bloom’s taxonomy is well-known as a tool for facilitating teachers in terms of addressing better instructions and reflections on students’ outcomes (Anerson & Offerdahl, 2018). It categorizes types of thinking into six levels: knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation (Bloom et al., 1956). According to Crowe et al., (2008), the first two levels of Bloom’s (knowledge and comprehension) represent LOCS, the third (application) can be treated as both LOCS and HOCS, since it is considered as a transition, and the remaining categories (analysis, synthesis, and evaluation) are HOCS.

The utility of Bloom’s taxonomy, regarding analysis of LOCS and HOCS capacities, was demonstrated by Crowe et al., (2008) when not only the desired learning outcomes were assessed but also it generated feedback for both student and teacher, promoting support for adequacy of cognitive skill levels in the learning environment.

Given what has been evidenced, it concerns the chemistry teaching and assessment methods to enable students to apply the knowledge acquired in new contexts or, until then, unknown (Zoller, 2001), to properly assess and impact the quality of students’ learning. This is implied in educational reforms oriented to change teaching models that require only students’ LOCS capacity to models that value the development of cognitive reasoning based on the exploration of multiple capacities (Zoller & Pushkin, 2007).

However, LOCS-oriented examinations’ dominance persists due to both resistances to change on the part of teachers and issues associated with HOCS assessment in educational systems (Zoller et al., 2002). Also, the shift from LOCS to HOCS assessments can be inhibited due to institutional pressures regarding external tests and traditional grading systems (Lubezky et al., 2004). This demonstrates the need for more consistent relationships between teachers and pedagogical staff.

Different studies aimed to verify the performance of freshman science students on LOCS and HOCS chemistry exam questions (Zoller & Ben-Chaim, 1998; Zoller, 2001; Tsaparlis & Zoller, 2003; Lubezky et al., 2004). One of these studies was conducted with freshman biology students (Zoller, 2001), involving a free choice take-home examination, students were asked to choose a limited number of questions. The results indicated that students felt more comfortable answering and choosing LOCS questions, achieving the highest scores; most underestimated their solving abilities on HOCS questions, which denotes the realism within the educational systems’ constraints.

It is a fact that the vast majority of teachers recognize the role of experimental practices in the teaching and learning processes in chemistry, a strategy of multiple benefits in the face of cognitive development. It can contribute to the development of concepts, the correlation between theory and its application, the development of thinking skills, the acquisition of deductive methods and hypotheses, and the possibility of expressing arguments about the observed phenomenon (Souza et al., 2013). These are inherent characteristics of the use of experimental practices in teaching, and as mentioned before, it can be alternatively compared to computational environments, such as laboratory simulations.

Studies related to the association of technologies, such as simulations and animations, with LOCS and HOCS assessments demonstrate that the use of simulation with visual representations made some difference in students’ score tests when answering LOCS questions (Supasorn et al., 2008). And when working in small groups with the attendance of different teaching approaches and materials, such as computer-based technologies and physical analogies, students tend to better organize and demonstrate deeper learning, facilitating higher-order cognitive skills (Weerawardhana et al., 2006).

The analysis of students’ performance of LOCS and HOCS abilities while using simulations should be a major concern, in a sense to explore the potential of the resource, contributing to the introduction of new methods of interaction that promotes efficacy in students’ learning.

Method
Context and participants
This study consists of data analysis from the performance of students using two laboratory simulations addressing LOCS and HOCS items. The study aimed to investigate how the use of simulations is perceived by high school students when they face LOCS and HOCS questioning. This research demonstrates a qualitative approach (Bodgan & Biklen, 1982), assuming the adoption of methods that are treated more descriptive, which is based on the development of ideas according to interpretive understanding. The findings and results are drawn by inferences based on the theoretical framework adopted. Thus, the data showed here reinforce the interpretations expressed through the teaching context and the subject experience.

The research population consisted of 38 high school students, from a public school, in Brazil, with an average age of 16 years. The research authorization was granted by the school’s educational administration and the school’s chemistry teacher. Besides that, the participating students agreed with the research and they are all volunteers, they were assured that the data collected would remain anonymous.

The study was carried out in a students’ class by the authors with the authorization of the chemistry teacher of the school, the instructional method lasted for 3 classes (1 h each), for 2 days. The subject chosen was Chemistry Solutions, according to the teacher, the students haven’t had any formal class at the school about the topic until the start of the study, also the simulations used in the strategy treat with more emphasis the topic. In addition, according to authors (Echeverría, 1993; Valanides, 2000; Carmo & Marcondes, 2008), in general, the teaching practices address the theme with an emphasis on quantitative aspects, not addressing key concepts as concentration, ionic and molecular dissolution, substance and mixture at macroscopic and microscopic levels, and this was also one of the reasons to choose the topic Solutions. The research process is illustrated in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Research design

Full size image
The first two classes were carried out in the classroom using PowerPoint presentation, pictures, video experiments, and discussions. The third class occurred at the school’s computer lab.

First class: the students had to answer an Open-Ended Test (OET) with 5 questions (Fig. 3), to consider and verify their prior knowledge, right after that it was possible to discuss the subject Matter Structure (atom, molecule, pure and compound substances), and Homogeneous and Heterogenous Mixture.

Second class: discussion of video experiments about ionic (salt in water) and molecular (sugar in water) dissolution, and saturation levels in solutions, addressing the macroscopic and microscopic levels. A discussion of concentration and dilution was held using two magazine articles about the increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere and the concentration of salt in the Dead Sea.

Third class: the students went to the school’s computer lab and interacted, in small groups, with two laboratory simulations, each simulation had three items to investigate addressing LOCS and HOCS situations (Table 1). The students were instructed to work with their peers, and throughout the activity, the monitor of the research was available to help students with instructional assistance, also being possible to observe their interactions and clarify possible difficulties.

Data collection and analysis
The OET applied at the beginning of the study was developed by the researchers to assess learners’ prior knowledge about chemistry solutions. It includes 5 open-ended questions that were checked by an experienced college chemistry teacher. The suggestions were used to improve the questions. The reason to administrate the test was to obtain a clear picture of the students’ thinking about the corresponding concepts.

The questions were about: what they think they know about the theme solutions (1), how would they conceptualize a chemistry solution (2), examples of solutions (3), the comprehension of concentration in a juice (4), and the understanding of matter conservation and dissolution in a solution made of water and sugar (5). To analyze the OET we used a categorization method, the data and concepts that are similar to each other were gathered together, arranged and interpreted to construct a better view of students’ conceptions.

The laboratory simulations used in this study come from the PhET Interactive Simulations Project (https://phet.colorado.edu/), it presents in its interface a vast number of interactive simulations in the areas of Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics and Biology, being able to be used online or offline. The simulations used (Concentration and Molarity) are shown in Fig. 4. The items investigated in the simulations are shown in Table 1.

Fig. 3
figure 3
The Open-Ended Test items

Full size image
Fig. 4
figure 4
Simulations used in the research: (A) Concentration; (B) Molarity

Full size image
Within the simulations, the interaction of variables (mole, volume and concentration) and saturation levels of different solutions were explored in terms of LOCS and HOCS situations. To use the simulations the students were divided into 12 groups, each group received an activity sheet, containing three items to investigate for each simulation.

To create the items, we take into account the situations required for the respective cognitive skill based on Zoller & Ben-Chaim (1998), Tsaparlis & Zoller (2003), Lemon & Lemon (2013), and Zoller & Pushkin (2007). In this sense, we established that LOCS items related to laboratory simulations would require the recall of information mostly related to the identification of variables and their changes. HOCS items would require variable tests, expansion of hypothesis through observation of phenomena and generalization to different systems, it is also possible to apply conceptual knowledge to select appropriate procedures.

To verify these skills on students’ responses, the items present terms like identify, verify, what happens (LOCS), and explain, demonstrate, make connections, generalize (HOCS). Allowing students to explore and discuss their own knowledge while interacting with the simulations with their peers. To satisfy the validity of the activity sheet, the items were assessed by a college teacher of Chemistry Teaching. After the teacher’s review, the items were better adapted for the simulations.

Table 1 Items investigated in the simulations
Full size table
It is worth noting that, the levels required in questioning are generally predecessors to what students can demonstrate in learning (Lemon & Lemon, 2013; Suart 2008), so in order to verify HOCS and LOCS-students, examinations containing both LOCS and HOCS questions can be administered (Zoller & Tsaparlis, 1997; Zoller, 2001).

All items are open-ended questions, according to Zoller & Pushkin (2007), the presentation of open-ended questions allows and encourages students to take into account a wider spectrum of information, making links between information and knowledge more broadly. Besides that, the research participants had to work in groups and write their answers. According to Suart (2008), when writing, students need to synthesize their ideas so that others can understand them. Also, it can be considered that students feel more responsible for their attitudes. For data analysis, we used Suart’s analysis categories (Table 2), establishing connections between students’ performance and cognitive skill levels.

Table 2 Cognitive skill levels based on Suart (2008)
Full size table
This study aims to evaluate students’ performance in laboratory simulations taking these categories (Table 2) for analysis. The importance of using these categories is given by the better characterization of the students’ answers, making sure that the established level contemplates the achieved performance.

In data analysis, for the enunciation of representative responses from the groups, we used the letter G with numerical sequence, followed up by the level of cognitive skill represented. All the coding performances of the groups were made by the researchers, examples of how the coding was applied can be observed in Table 3.

Table 3 Example of coding performances
Full size table
Results and discussion
The analysis of the OET was conducted by the researchers and all categories were created based on students’ responses. The data shows that most of the students understand basic ideas of a chemistry solution, the dissolution/solubility process, and macroscopic observations of concentration. Although some misconceptions were also found, as relating solutions to substances, chemical reactions, and difficulties in understanding the conservation of matter in a solution.

The analysis of Question 1 revealed that most of the students associate the idea of solution as a mixture, which is correct, but they didn’t go beyond that. Only a few (4) of them complement their answers with terms like phase, homogeneous mixture, a mixture of substances. Just one student pointed out some more essential ideas, Student 38: “when something is mixture with another, and one of them is dissolved, because it is soluble, being possible to see only one phase”.

Data that comes to accordance with the analysis of Question 2, when the main category students associate with a chemical solution is a mixture, even though misconceptions in this category were perceptible as a mixture of elements. The main categories of Question 2 are shown in Fig. 5, and the main categories of Question 5 are shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Students’ conceptions about a chemistry solution

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure 6
Students’ ideas about the dissolution process

Full size image
As shown in Fig. 5, some students demonstrate misconceptions regarding concepts as substances and chemical reactions, these alternative ideas were also found and discussed in correlated works of students’ conceptions about solutions (Valanides, 2000; Carmo & Marcondes, 2008). Also, in Others (10), the students’ answers are completely dissociated from the subject, denoting alternative conceptions of the theme.

In Question 3, the students had to elucidate some examples of solutions, the results show that only 10 students establish wrong examples (as water, milk), the rest of them used solutions examples like water and salt, water and sugar, juice, medicine pills, coffee. Being, in most cases, examples of liquid solutions.

Question 4 associated the macroscopic view of a solution with concentration, 33 of the students chose the correct glass for the highest juice concentration, with justifications based upon the color, only 3 of them add ideas as the amount of substance. This shows that, for instance, the exploration of macroscopic level is the most frequently in students’ reasoning about certain topics.

Question 5 illustrates a process of dissolution and conservation matter; the main categories students associate with the water and sugar mixture are shown in Fig. 6. The most frequent category was Dissolution, being treated as synonymous for the Mixture and Solubility process. The term Melting was revealed, and suggests students’ misunderstanding of the process because there is no temperature or physical change, conceptions also found in Valanides (2000) with prospective teachers’ conceptions, when they say “the sugar melts”. The matter conservation was neglected by some students, even agreeing that the water level remains the same after the mixture, they do not add the mass of sugar at the end of the process. Also, some of them reduce the mass of sugar from the total mass, denoting that the sugar disappears.

After administrating the OET, the students were assigned into classes about the topic Solutions,

these classes provided students a qualitative treatment of the most common concepts students struggle in understanding, and suddenly develop misconceptions, associating macroscopic and microscopic scale.

In the third class occurred the virtual simulation activity. The students divided into 12 groups received an activity sheet (Table 1), to guide their interaction with the simulations. First, the items were read, and then the students started interacting with the simulations and with their peers. The students were arranged according to the number of computers available, as shown in Fig. 7.

According to the data obtained in the virtual simulation activity, in general, most of the groups managed to respond to what was requested in the activity. Some groups brought relevant contributions to the development of HOCS reasoning, detailing interrelationships between variables, creating hypotheses, or providing information dealing with autonomous analysis within the laboratory simulations. In some other cases, the groups most explored LOCS, even for HOCS items, indicating difficulties in expressing concepts and their relations. The analysis of this activity is treated with more emphasis within this section.

Fig. 7
figure 7
The students’ disposition while interacting with the simulations

Full size image
The first simulation used was Concentration, in the simulation it is possible to make changes in the solute nature, to observe the decrease and increase of concentration as solvent or solute are added, being possible to interact with different variables. Items 1 and 2 of the activity explore LOCS level situations, and item 3 explores a HOCS situation. Results indicated that the category LOCS-L3 was majored explored in students’ reasoning while answering this part of the activity (Fig. 8).

Fig. 8
figure 8
Levels of cognition related to groups’ performance on Concentration simulation

Full size image
Only for item 2, most groups demonstrate LOCS-L2, which may be due to evident conceptual misunderstanding between the concepts of concentration and mole, observed when some groups treated them as similar. For item 3, which requested a HOCS questioning, with the possibility of testing variables, and making connections between the different interactions within the environment by applying conceptual knowledge to appropriate procedures, it was observed that the groups demonstrated LOCS-L3, with the establishment of simple experiments within the simulation, without critical deepening of decision making.

Table 4 illustrates representative groups’ responses for each item, accompanied by the cognitive skill level detected in the groups’ reasoning.

Table 4 Representative groups’ responses using the Concentration simulation
Full size table
Some mistaken associations between the solution concentration and moles number were found in the groups’ data for item 2, which may be associated with difficulties that students may have had in the classes or within the simulation layout, since all variables were recognized in the simulation, except moles number, resulting in resolutions LOCS-L2. The data presented in Table 4 also demonstrate that the achievement of HOCS in students’ writing is not an easy aspect to be evoked, even when working in groups. This demands teachers to introduce methods that give opportunities for students to foster their abilities. Explanations and discussions about the proceedings would lead to better acquisition of HOCS thinking, since students would be put in a more active position, making possible reflections upon their actions during the use of simulations.

Another simulation used was Molarity, in the simulation it is possible to monitor the solute amount and solution volume, verifying changes in the solution concentration. Items 1 and 2 explore LOCS situations, the last part of item 2 brings a HOCS aspect, and item 3 requests a HOCS reasoning. Figure 9 illustrates the number of groups associated with the items and their respective level of cognitive skill.

Fig. 9
figure 9
Levels of cognition related to groups’ performance on Molarity simulation

Full size image
It is noticeable that the students demonstrate adequacy for the category LOCS-L2, which denotes difficulties in understanding the situations requested or preference on the establishment of LOCS capabilities. It is noteworthy that even for just a few groups, HOCS-level resolutions were observed, this expresses the difficulties of students to apply/express these abilities. Table 5 shows representative responses of the groups.

Table 5 Representative groups’ responses using the Molarity simulation
Full size table
Most groups faced some problems identifying variable dependencies (item 1), establishing mistaken conclusions, fitting the category LOCS-L2. Only four groups established the correct variables and their changes satisfactorily. In item 2, three levels of cognitive skills were noticeable. Some groups could not identify the variables and justify their answers according to the required concepts (LOCS-L2), whereas others reached LOCS-L3 identifying and establishing control processes for the selection of information.

Only three groups selected relevant information, analyzing or evaluating variables or causal relationships between the elements of the problem, proposing correct interactions between the variables and the solution concentration in the last part of item 2 (HOCS-L4). One of them also represented the situation with formulas, illustrating how the concentration changes when changing volume and solute. It is important to note that these groups are shown in Fig. 9 as groups that fully reached the HOCS category, even though the previous actions were LOCS.

With respect to item 3, the groups were asked to make relations between solubility levels. In general, the groups just described the solutions as saturated or unsaturated (LOCS-L2). Four groups established the correct relationships between solubility levels in different solutions, with no extension of concepts (LOCS-L3), suggesting they identify its differences but may not understand the meaning. Only one group performed the item with HOCS-L4 reasoning, displaying hypothesis-making ability, when extending the relations requested to an autonomous experiment with a chemical solution (see G9, Table 5).

Within the analysis performed, it was possible to elucidate a perspective of the use and assessment of simulations in the classroom, and also verify students’ reasoning while working in peers with simulations. Firstly, from the findings of the OET administrated at the beginning of the study, with the students’ prior-conceptualization about Solutions, it can be implied that the students tend to most explore the macroscopic level on their answers. None of the students’ responses explain the processes questioned using the microscopic level, this suggests different consequences as: the previous emphasis the students had in classes or assessment methods, students’ unfamiliarly with the use of the particular level in chemistry explanations, or even students’ underestimation of their cognitive domain.

Also, based on the OET analysis, the research participants demonstrate relevant basic ideas about the theme Solutions, even with some misconceptions, this denotes the importance of getting students’ first understanding of the concepts, in order to confront alternative conceptions and develop scientific ideas. The most frequent difficulties students faced on the OET were the difference of mixture and substance, substance and elements, matter conservation, and the concepts of concentration and dilution. These difficulties were also found in other studies (Echeverría, 1993; Carmo & Marcondes, 2008), and in the teaching context of this research were taken into consideration.

It is important to point out that, it is common to see some conceptual errors emerge at the beginning of the process, since it was their initial contact with the concepts and topics studied. Denoting the importance of teachers to verify and work with these issues during classes, making it possible to advance in students’ understanding.

The results of the virtual simulation activity indicate that different cognitive domains can be implied when students use software simulations in the learning process, it implicates in a range of cognitive skills going from low-level to high-level. In general, with the use of the simulations, the groups’ data reveal adequacy for LOCS resolutions, even when dealing with HOCS situations, correlate studies of cognitive skills evaluation show similar results (Zoller, 2001; Lubezky et al., 2004; Supasorn et al., 2008). According to the current research data, this evidence suggests different reasons:

The students may feel more comfortable using LOCS in activities, especially when they are introduced to questions that differ from algorithmic ones;

Because the fact it is an activity that is going to be evaluated by the researchers, the students can feel more favorable about using LOCS to not compromise any possible mistake they can take if they try to explore higher-level thinking on the subject in matter.

Also, the exposure of HOCS abilities through the writing can be difficult, if it is not employed any more interaction by/with the teacher. It means that articulations between the students’ outcomes and feedback can benefit the development of higher-order thinking.

It was also found that there is no connection between those groups that performed well HOCS items also to perform well LOCS items, or the other way round, this has already been discussed by Krathwohl (2002), Tsaparlis & Zoller (2003), and Jensen et al., (2020). In this sense, there is an expectation that students who perform well in HOCS may be able to successfully handle items that require LOCS, and that according to Bloom’s Taxonomy the possibility of LOCS resolution is given as a prerequisite for having the HOCS understanding, assuming that it is possible to have students that do just well in LOCS, but not just well in HOCS.

In the current study, some groups performed considerably lower on questions requiring HOCS than those requiring LOCS. This is due to factors like the lack of students’ construction of HOCS capabilities in contemporary education, besides the fact that different aspects contribute to learning, many of which cannot be controlled, such as the systematic study of the student beyond the classroom. In this sense, it can be stated that success in any type of question is not a predictor of success in any other.

The exploration of HOCS understanding in the teaching is still not an intrinsic aspect in most systems, requiring attention from the educational area. Therefore, HOCS assessment strategies should be gradually introduced into teaching practices, becoming more routine in students’ school lives, so there are changes in learning perspectives based on critical thinking development. These are perspectives and challenges that permeate the changing styles, from LOCS to HOCS learning, contributing to the development of skills that transcend the performance of memorization.

Based on the developed strategy and results, we support the idea that laboratory simulations can be a strong ally in the development of cognitive skills. In question, the use of these simulations contributed to the establishment of relationships between chemical processes and phenomena in a practical and optimized way, providing opportunities for students to redo and rethink the experimental situations.

Conclusions
This study demonstrates the assessment of a LOCS- and HOCS-oriented strategy using laboratory simulations on high school students. It presents development and implementation of the treatment, discussing participants’ conceptions and outcomes in a scenario using simulations.

The analysis of the responses given the OET items revealed that some participants have well-established conceptions about topics involving Solutions. Regardless of whether this was a particular observation of this study or not, there is a clear aspect teachers should be aware of, the prior-conceptions students bring when studying concepts in science. These conceptions, if not treated during class, can overcome scientific concepts, and if they are misconceptions or not, tend to persist during the school life.

Although the OET implementation evoked students’ prior conceptualization, it was not employed an assessment at the end of the study to verify students’ new or improved conceptions, we, therefore, suggest a post-assessment in order to validate the discussions performed during the classes.

When it comes to the results of the simulation activity, the findings indicate that there is a different pattern of students’ performance on questions requiring HOCS compared with that on questions requiring LOCS. This implicates that combining LOCS and HOCS situations can contribute to the identification of LOCS and HOCS students, and therefore promote significant changes in the way of fostering students to develop and demonstrate their HOCS capacity, as well as providing science teachers feedback on students’ progress, to validate the effectiveness of the instruction in inducing the LOCS to HOCS transition.

The analysis addressed in the current study demonstrate a new perspective of the use of simulations in the classroom, instead of just defining effectiveness based on students’ achievement on tests. It permits the introduction of new treatments with technology in favor of the development of science education. We hope, therefore, that the findings and ideas of the study will help prospective and science teachers in preparing and assessing their teaching activities with simulations.

Limitations
Some inherent limitations of this study should be considered. Our sample allows us to consider data from a small group of students, which means that potential analysis could be obtained in a large sample. It is worth noting that, the cognitive skill levels identified in this study for the use of laboratory simulations are not restricted to the data presented, since different teachers can develop different approaches and parameters for using the same tool. Also, different studies could be held with different software in order to develop new perspectives and have more discussions about the approach.