Geography education requires a combination of knowledge, skills, and geospatial relational thinking. To improve the learning efficiency and durability of knowledge, a new inquiry-based instruction system using tangible user interfaces has been developed. The tangible landscape modeling system (TLMS) comprises four components including a malleable physical model, 3D scanner, projector, and standard computer with software. In this paper, we introduce the TLMS for geography themes from a primary to a tertiary education level. We present a case study conducted for the secondary level of education in a local school with 8 children at the age of 11 years from a marginalized community. The TLMS is applied to typical geography themes with topographic maps, land surface and landscape processes such as water flow and flooding phenomena, often poorly understood by students. These examples are documented by the experiment setups and description of the workflow steps. Results of this study showed an improved understanding of the concept of contours and basic landforms. This indicates that the tangible landscape modeling system provides an easy-to-understand concept and teaching tool that improves the geospatial relational thinking of students.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Geography education is a challenging task. It requires a combination of diversified knowledge and skills to understand the components of the Earth and human society and the relationships between natural and human phenomena (Bednarz, 2004; Morgan, 2006; Van der Schee et al., 2006). The inherent part of this task is to equip students with skills to identify patterns, causes, and impacts of geospatial processes and landscape changes in the rapidly changing world (Xiang & Liu, 2017). The ability to relate any explored landscape phenomenon to a specific region or place and understand relationships with other landscape phenomena and processes is geospatial relational thinking (Huynh & Sharpe, 2013). To stimulate students’ ability in geospatial relational thinking, geography teachers must teach in fundamentally new ways, building student interest and skill through active engagement in critical thinking and project or inquiry-based learning (MaKinster et al., 2014). With the growing availability of geospatial technologies, teachers have plenty of options to teach geography themes in modern ways.

Over the last few decades, much attention has been paid to geospatial technologies and how to use them in geography education from a primary to a tertiary level of education. These include Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) for collecting field data (e.g., GPS, GLONASS, BeiDou, Galileo), web-based digital maps such Google Maps, Google Earth Engine, OpenStreetMaps, or even desktop Geographic Information Systems (GIS) such as ArcGIS or QGIS (Bednarz & Van der Schee, 2006; Favier & van der Schee, 2012; Goldstein & Alibrandi, 2013; Kim et al., 2013). Thanks to the massive use of smartphones for communication, most of these geospatial technologies are readily available for ordinary users, even elementary school children. Online tools generally offer far less functionality, however, they provide a more user-friendly and intuitive user interface than a traditional desktop GIS (Kim et al., 2013; Milson & Earle, 2007). Some WebGIS applications are specifically developed for use in secondary education, often as collections of digital maps (web-based atlases) (Favier & van der Schee, 2014). Historically, geography education has been closely related to cartography. Maps and atlases were always an integral part of geography teaching. With the advent of geospatial technology over the last couple of decades and frequent use in everyday life, it becomes clear that this technology should be integrated into the geography curriculum at least at the secondary level of education (Baker & White, 2003; Kerski, 2003). GIS allows spatial issues to be taught from a problem-based learning point of view, rather than a technical GIS point of view, which allows the consideration of the whole geographic inquiry process (Bearman et al., 2016).

However, the complexity of geospatial technologies often makes it quite difficult for geography teachers to use more sophisticated geospatial technologies such as a desktop GIS despite progress made in the curricula of many countries (National Research Council, 2006; Milson et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2013; Favier & van der Schee, 2014; Bednarz & Audet, 1999; Audet & Ludwig, 2000). These barriers include the lack of adequate hardware, linguistically and culturally adapted software, or even the absence of educational standards for geospatial technologies and instruction material. Still, a major barrier is teachers’ limited competencies in teaching with geospatial technologies (Walshe, 2018). The design of geography lessons with geospatial technologies is also often very different from the design of traditional geography lessons. One of the frequently cited challenges is that little is known about the effectiveness of lessons with geospatial technologies compared with lessons using traditional material such as paper maps and atlases. Some teachers argue that integrating geospatial technologies might not be worth the extra effort (Favier and van der Schee, 2014). Obviously, there are still some important challenges to the further diffusion of geospatial technologies in schools.

One of the challenges that geography teachers currently face is the development of the skills improving the ability of students to gain knowledge (Kent, 2006). Favier & van der Schee (2014) suggest that inquiry-based instruction helps to develop such knowledge and skills by engaging the students in exploring activities. This learning method builds on students’ previous knowledge and inquiry skills often further stimulated by a collaborative learning environment. Students are more active learners and teachers act as coaches to support this self-learning process. The main idea is that learning efficiency and durability of knowledge are increased when students are engaged in active learning (Favier & van der Schee, 2014). The review of Talbert & Mor-Avi (2019) on active learning classrooms suggests that the interest in this domain of education science has progressively grown in the last decade in this domain. However, most of the studies are conducted in universities and very few in primary and secondary schools. The authors call for research outside the higher education context and in a wider ethnic and cultural context. Our research aims to fill some of these gaps concerning active learning with tangible user interfaces (TUI) in geography at a lower secondary level of education.

Recently, TUIs have been recognized as a valuable tool for developing spatial thinking abilities and skills (Jafri et al., 2017; Palaigeorgiou et al., 2017; Baykal et al., 2018). TUIs offer a physical interaction with the digital model through graspable, embodied, or distributed mechanisms to support active students’ learning (Marshall, 2007) and cognitive development (Antle & Wise, 2013). Several researchers analyzed the applicability of TUIs in a great variety of learning domains such as biology, chemistry, physics, or programming (Marshall, 2007; Bara et al., 2015; Tonini et al., 2017). Ishii & Ullmer (1997) defined various TUIs such as interactive surfaces (an active interface between physical and virtual worlds), coupling of bits and atoms (seamless coupling of graspable everyday objects), or ambient media (use of sound, light, airflow, and water movement for background interfaces).

Recently, a new generation of TUIs for landscape modeling has been developed to enhance user interaction with geospatial models simulated in GRASS GIS (Petrasova et al., 2018; Millar et al., 2018). This TUI is more affordable than its predecessors (Mitasova et al., 2006) because it uses the Kinect sensor for three-dimensional (3D) scanning of physical models effectively making it available even for the general public and schools at all levels of education. A similar system based on the augmented reality sandbox was developed by Woods et al. (2016) to help geology students understand topographic maps and surficial processes. Results of educational experiments with the TUI published to date involved students of secondary schools and universities or land managers (Millar et al., 2018; Petrasova et al., 2018; Petrasova et al., 2020; Woods et al., 2016), but the TUI capabilities remain unexplored in teaching experiments with elementary school students.

The goal of this paper is to present a tangible landscape modeling system as a new educational tool for geography teachers that helps to develop a students’ geospatial relational thinking and skills from a primary to tertiary level education. We describe the low-cost system capable of presenting various landscape phenomena as well as various cartographic aspects of representing landscape in maps for a case study applied to a secondary level of geography education in Slovakia using selected geography curricula themes frequently present in many countries worldwide.

Geography in a general educational system
Geography is a traditional educational subject in most countries around the world. While there has been a huge scientific development in geography over the last few decades, only a few changes have been made to geography curricula at primary or secondary levels of education. Tani (2004) calls it a gulf between academic geography and school geography. Still, the International Charter of Geographical Education (revised in 2016) considers geography as a vital subject for the twenty-first century. As a study of the Earth and its natural, physical, and human environments, it should keep introducing distinctive investigative tools such as maps, fieldwork, and the use of powerful digital communication technologies such as GIS.

For example, in Slovakia, geography is a stand-alone school subject taught at lower (ISCED 2) and higher secondary (ISCED 3) degrees of education with educational standards in content and performance formulated by the Ministry of Education. The teaching units are mostly oriented towards regional geography, but there are also some units focused on general geography explaining the principles of landscape structure and processes. At 5th grade ISCED 2, general themes on planet Earth, cartographic principles of representing the Earth are introduced along with fieldwork and excursions. At 1st grade ISCED 3, thematic units such as Resources in Geography inquiry, Mapping the Earth, Planet Earth, Atmosphere, Hydrosphere, Lithosphere, Pedosphere and Biosphere, Fieldwork and Excursions are introduced. There has been some criticism among Slovak geography education experts such as Tolmáči & Karolčík (2017) towards weak innovations in the school geography concept and content, methodology, and teacher development over the last fifty years.

One of the key skills developed during geography lessons is reading, analysis, and interpretation of printed or digital maps. The concept of the map is usually introduced to students in their 5th grade of elementary school (age of 11 years). The student should be able to identify basic components of a map and use basic cartographic symbology for various landscape features such as mountains and lowlands, volcanos, valleys, rivers, lakes, etc. This also includes reading and interpreting map contours representing various landforms such as hills and valleys. Reading and interpreting maps requires a higher degree of abstraction because contours represent 3D landscape features. Quite often less capable students have a substantial problem interpreting contour lines and identifying hills or valleys on topographic maps. Even more complicated situation is with geospatial thinking which relates specific landform features to specific landscape processes. For example, valleys concentrate flowing water in the form of streams and rivers and therefore are more susceptible to floods than hills.

With the advent of TUI as a valuable teaching tool developing spatial thinking, it is desired to use an affordable, low-cost system for selected geography themes that are challenging to students, especially with decreased abstraction thinking capabilities. Therefore this paper seeks to bring innovations to teaching Geography via information technologies – tangible landscape to teach learners the basics of topography and terrain analysis to help develop their spatial thinking, cartographic and visual literacy. With tangible landscape, students can physically interact with digital models and simulations by “sculpting, placing objects or sketching and immediately see how they are changing terrain properties like contours, hillslopes steepness, or water flow” (Millar et al., 2018). As mentioned in Section 1, studies exploring the effect of such TUI exist but most of them focused on higher-level education and application professional tasks. Case studies from primary schools are still lacking with few exceptions, e.g. Xefteris et al. (2019). Their approach for teaching geography was shown to have a positive impact on the learning experience, making it more interactive, facilitating understanding of geospatial relations.

In Slovakia and other Central European states, the phenomenon of marginalized communities is frequent. Low social and economic life quality has a strong negative impact on the children from the communities (Lauritzen & Nodeland, 2018). We conclude, based on our job experience in teaching these children over 15 years in the secondary level, that they perceive geography as an abstract and not a favorite subject. The children have little experience with other landscapes than their immediate surroundings a few kilometers far from home. It is hard for them to understand and read maps and understand abstract and not touchable phenomena. Also imaging large-scale morphological types such as valleys, mountain ridges, lowland, or exotic landscapes which they had never experienced (e.g., glacial, eolian landscape). Further, the children have problems with concentrating on tasks or explanations of the teacher, thus keeping an organized and disciplined lesson of 45 min is very challenging. The education system in Slovakia aims to integrate the children from marginalized communities with children of standard living background or children with special needs are grouped in separate classes. The elementary school in Veľká Ida, Slovakia is an example of such a school where the children from marginalized groups dominate. They make about 75% of the total 650 students. In our opinion, the TUI has the potential to improve the perception of cartographic terms and landscape components by children from low-social backgrounds via the possibility of touching the subject being taught by the teacher and making the learning more interesting (Kyuchukov, 2010). Therefore, we focused on the demonstration of the designed tasks for geography teaching with the TUI on a small group of 11-year children from an integrated class of 5th grade in the elementary school living in one of these local marginalized communities.

Tangible landscape modeling system
Tangible landscape modeling system (TLMS) is a cheaper extension of the previous Tangible Geospatial Modeling System based on the use of a 3D laser scanner and an illuminated clay model (Mitasova et al., 2006). The TLMS used in this study is based on a much cheaper technology of Azure Kinect sensor manufactured by Microsoft. The sensor scans physical models built using a much wider and cheaper range of materials such as polymer-enriched sand, 3D prints, CNC-machined or architectural models. Conceptually, the TLMS couples a physical model with its digital model in GRASS GIS via 3D scanning, geospatial processing, and projection (Petrasova et al., 2018). The main advantage of this tangible system is that children can interact with the physical model by hand and see the effects of changes to properties of the model or simulated landscape processes without knowing the control operations done in GIS. They can concentrate on spatial aspects and effects of changing landscape components so important in geography. And since interaction with the physical model can be done simultaneously by many users at once, the TLMS also encourages collaborative forms of education. Thus the TLMS brings a teacher several important aspects of geography education supporting geospatial relation thinking. In the following sections, we describe the TLMS tested in this study.

The components of TLMS
The TLMS consists of four main components: (a) a physical model with malleable material that can be modified by hands or printed by a 3D printer, (b) a 3D scanner for capturing the surface of the physical model, (c) a projector that projects colors from a digital model computed in a GIS to the surface of the physical model, and (d) a standard desktop or laptop computer equipped with GRASS GIS software for geospatial modeling and additional software that connects all the components.

The physical model is placed on the table and the scanner and projector are mounted on one or two metallic stands (Fig. 1). The mutual position of the scanner and projector must not interfere and affect the visibility of the projected data or even cast a shadow over the model. The physical model contains a kinetic (polymer-enriched) or moon (cornstarch-enriched) sand, easily malleable material that keeps the shape within a wooden frame with the size 40 × 40 cm that can be easily enlarged to 70 × 70 cm or bigger sizes. The model is placed on the table with slightly larger dimensions than the frame to make the model easily accessible by persons and additional space for tools or application windows with additional information.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Main components of the TLMS

Full size image
The surface of the physical model is scanned by the Azure Kinect sensor mounted above resulting in 3D coordinates representing the surfaces as a 3D point cloud. The Azure Kinect is a non-gaming version of Kinect 2 for Windows (Kinect for Xbox One) with better sensor capabilities such as a 12-megapixel RGB camera, 1-megapixel depth camera, orientation sensor, and an array of 7 microphones. This device is primarily meant for artificial intelligence applications (Albert et al., 2020; McGlade et al., 2020) The scanned 3D point cloud is then imported into GRASS GIS, where a digital surface model is created and available for further geospatial analyses and modeling. GRASS GIS is a key software component responsible for processing the scans and performing geospatial computation. It is an Open Source GIS under the GNU GPL license with a wide range of functionality and geospatial applications (Neteler & Mitasova, 2008).

The resulting image or animation of this analysis/modeling is almost real-time projected by the short-throw BENQ MW820ST projector with 1280 × 800 resolution directly onto the modified physical model so the color appearance of the model representing the simulated land is put into the context of the modifications made to the model. The resolution and brightness of the projector are very important for the visibility of the projected data. Usually, a dim room with only a small amount of light increases the visual perception of the digital layer projected on the landscape model.

The hardware requirements for the computer are similar to gaming computers such as a multi-core central processor unit (CPU), sufficient system memory, and adequate graphics card to achieve real-time interaction with the model. Our computer system with the Linux Ubuntu operating system consists of AMD Ryzen 31,300 X Quad-Core CPU with 16 GB RAM, 230 GB SSD hard disk, and GeForce GTX 1050 Ti graphics card. The total cost of the TLMS is in the range of 2500–3500 EUR which is affordable by most elementary schools.

The TLMS contains several software components running under GRASS GIS. The TLMS is controlled by the Tangible Landscape console invoked by the g.gui.tangible module where the user can set the parameters of scanning, surface modeling, analyses, and drawing. This graphical user interface allows the adjustment of the different processing parameters that are necessary to properly georeference and extract the model. The module connects the scanning component with GRASS GIS and automates the loop of scanning, importing scans, and geoprocessing in the GRASS GIS environment. The r.in.kinect module operates the Azure Kinect (or Kinect for Xbox One) sensor and processes the scanned point clouds using the Point Cloud Library (PCL). The r.in.kinect scanning component is a C++ application that computes a mesh based on multiple scans using the KinectFusion algorithm (Petrasova et al., 2018; Newcombe et al. 2011). It allows to set the scanning properties such as the resolution of the reconstructed mesh and to limit the volume of the mesh. The particular applications (landscape phenomena) are simulated by the geoprocessing tools (commands) available in GRASS GIS and performed by Python scripts. The complete TLMS software is freely available in the GitHub repository (https://tangible-landscape.github.io/) under the GNU GPL license (Petrasova et al., 2018).

Interaction with the physical model
Human cognition operates at different levels. Higher-order cognition (memory, creativity) is based on low-order cognition including sensorimotor activities. The integration and coordination of perception, action, and thought replicate everyday human life and behavior. The traditional human-computer interaction using a graphical user interface, mouse, and keyboard is often inadequate to human perception and natural thought processes. In complex geospatial tasks using GIS, this can potentially lead to increased levels of cognitive load thus raising the likelihood of student frustration.

The TLMS currently provides 5 types of physical interaction: (a) sculpting the model by hand or printed by a 3D printer, (b) placing objects as markers, (c) drawing with laser pointer, (d) shaping and placing colored sand, and (e) cutting pieces of textile (Petrasova et al., 2018). 3D sculpting is often used to model topography which drives also many landscape processes such as water flow, soil moisture, solar radiation, or visibility. Small wooden/plastic blocks or pins can be used to represent single features such as buildings or trees or the position of an observer in the visibility analysis. These markers are detected during the scanning phase. These markers can be also directional, i.e. determining the direction of geospatial analysis or modeling such as viewshed analysis or wildfire spreading. Color plays an important role in representing specific landscape property or features such as soil type, land cover, land ownership, or area for future development. The scanner can detect the color and it is then interpreted according to classification rules. When coupled with the 3D object placed on top of the model it can be used to interactive changes in the landscape features such as the extent of protected or development areas.

TLMS workflow
The TLMS allows us to explore the land surface, objects placed on it, and associated dynamic phenomena. Many of these phenomena, such as the distribution of water flow or solar radiation over the land surface, are closely related to land surface geometry (geomorphometric properties). Thus the physical model usually represents a land surface as well as other natural or man-made landscape objects such as trees or buildings. These can be made using 3D printing from rigid materials. TLMS works with many types of physical 3D models. When we need to change the shapes of landscape features a malleable material such as sand, clay, or wax can be used so the users can easily deform the surface. When we need to manipulate the position of the stable objects, these can be made of a rigid material such as wood, plastic, or resin. All these materials can be combined within one physical model with malleable materials for the base and rigid materials for the objects. These models can be built by hand or digitally fabricated using 3D printing or computer numerically controlled (CNC) manufacturing.

Depending on the purpose of the model, we can choose the creation of the real landscape (a concrete small existing region) or the creation of a hypothetical landscape. The first option is appropriate when the effects of specific natural events are to show (e.g., heavy rainfall) and what kind of control measures should be taken to minimize the negative effects (e.g., flooding). The second option is appropriate when teaching children specific knowledge and skills about land surface and other phenomena (e.g., land surface geometry and forms, a concept of contours) or effects of slope steepness on water flow.

Once the physical model is made, the following steps using the TLMS software are performed (Petrasova et al., 2018):

1.
acquiring the scan as a point cloud,

2.
extracting only relevant points from the point cloud (filtering points outside the model area),

3.
georeferencing (horizontal rotation, horizontal and vertical scaling, translation) the scanned data to known geographic coordinates on the edges of the model,

4.
importing the point cloud into GRASS GIS and creating a digital surface model,

5.
running selected geospatial analyses, and

6.
re-rendering the resulting raster or vector data that are projected on top of the physical model.

These steps are fully automated using the r.in.kinect and g.gui.tangible modules in GRASS GIS. Step 5 is automated using the customized Python script under GRASS GIS for the particular landscape phenomenon (e.g., flooding, landforms, contours, etc.). The Tangible Landscape GitHub repository (https://tangible-landscape.github.io/) contains several examples of these scripts. The TLMS operator can make use of the loop of geospatial analyses available at (https://github.com/tangible-landscape/grass-tangible-landscape/blob/master/analyses.py). The preferred parts of the script can be uncommented to be functional while the rest remains commented (unfunctional) by typing # at the beginning of each line (https://github.com/tangible-landscape/grass-tangible-landscape/wiki/Running-analyses-and-developing-workflows). The code can be adjusted for custom settings of the parameters in a text editor. Another option is to invoke the GRASS GIS modules via the command line or the taskbar with icons using the DEM raster layer generated by the r.in.kinect (typically called scan) as the input for custom analyses. Alternatively, the operator of the TLMS can run predefined activities (https://github.com/tangible-landscape/grass-tangible-landscape/wiki/Working-with-Activities), which are the means for preparing a set of tasks for teaching or experiment and easily switch between them.

Teaching geography lessons using TLMS
We have selected 4 teaching themes to demonstrate the applicability of the TLMS to geography education at the elementary school level. We have selected the introductory teaching activity on topographic maps and contour lines quite common at the secondary level, then the next themes deal with different shapes of terrain, river water flow, and the last, the most advanced theme, is on the analysis and human-landscape interaction and evolution of the landscape. To perform the themes, we used selected analyses in the predefined Python script available at https://github.com/tangible-landscape/grass-tangible-landscape/blob/master/analyses.py. In particular, we activated the functions contours, flowacc, slope_aspect, and simwe.

Examples of geography themes
Theme 1 – Contour lines
The main learning objective of this introductory activity recommended for the 5th graders at the secondary level of education is to make students read and understand topographic maps with contours, grading and procedure of transformation of 2D map into a 3D model, identify the shapes of terrain in both 2D and 3D representations (steep or flat) and transform the shapes of the real object to contour lines.

Using traditional teaching methods, students are shown some paper topographic maps, and the teacher explains the meaning of contour lines drawn on the map in the sense that these lines connect the points of equal elevations. Looking at the maps, the teacher asks questions to deduce some of the basic contour rules such as contour lines never cross or intersect, the slope is steep when contour lines are close or the slope is flat when contour lines are further apart from each other. Students can draw the contour lines on a sheet of blank paper representing an imaginary island or isolated hill.

Using the TLMS, this task is performed as follows: the teacher introduces the TLMS and explains how it works. The students are shown that they can form various forms (hills, depressions), and the colors representing the elevation of the sand change accordingly. Then students are shown the contours on the model and explained that these are the lines connecting the same elevation on the model. Now the students are allowed to change the shape of the model by themselves to see how the colors and contours are changing. In the final part of the task, the teacher shows how specific landforms such as peak, ridge, saddle, valley, or depression are represented by contours (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
figure 2
Explaining contours using a physical 3D model and topographic map (A) and TLMS (B)

Full size image
Now, the students are given several land surface sketches and contour lines and their task is to match the landforms with the appropriate contour lines. Moreover, students are asked to make them up in the sandbox. The teacher then checks the answers and sand shapes.

Theme 2 – Different shapes of terrain – Valleys and hills
The main learning objective of this theme is to apply the student’s knowledge to create their custom 3D tangible model from visual images (photographs). The students will have to compare the peaks, and keep the order by their heights and shape them to replicate their characteristic silhouettes (Fig. 3). The teacher can ask the students to model some of the well-known world peaks (such as Matterhorn, Mount Fuji) with their hands using the TLMS and photographs of the peaks. During the modification of the model, the student can see changes in contours and colors showing the elevations.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Explaining basic terrain shape forms using TLMS

Full size image
Theme 3: Terrain analysis – Water flow and flooding
This activity is focused on more sophisticated terrain analysis and landscape process modeling. The objective of this activity is to explain the relationship between land surface morphology, optionally also land cover, and concentrated water flow, and subsequent floods. The teacher manually prepares a hilly terrain suitable for water flow analysis. The system creates a point cloud representing a DEM with color representing a water flow depth (Fig. 4). Now the students are requested to change the configuration of the terrain to observe the change in water flow. The water flow modeling is done using the r.sim.water module in GRASS GIS with default parameters and uniform land cover such as grass for an intense rainfall event (rain excess rate 50 mm/h, no soil infiltration, Manning surface roughness 0.1). Now the teacher explains that in some areas the original land cover was removed and only bare soil remains. Students can see the increased amount of flowing water. The teacher can explain the possible consequences of increased water flow such as soil erosion or contamination of rivers.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Exploring the phenomenon of water flow using TLMS

Full size image
Theme 4: Exploring the consequences of man-induced landform changes
This activity can be used for a higher level of education, for example, at the tertiary level, for students of geography, landscape architects, agriculture, or forestry engineers. This activity aims to demonstrate the impact of human activities that lead to changes in landscape processes. Based on available GIS data, we 3D printed a model of a real landscape using a white ABS (Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene) which well reflects the infrared light of the scanner. The physical model is at 1:450 scale and 4 times vertical exaggeration, to facilitate scanning and interaction (Fig. 2A). We used projected contours and the color-coded difference of the scanned and the real DEM, while building the model to ensure sufficient accuracy. Students can observe the effect of adding a new feature (Fig. 5) into the real landscape, which is different from Theme 3.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Exploring the effect of landform changes to water flow. (A) the concentration of water in a valley before the change, (B, C) adding a dam in the valley resulting in a change (C, D), i.e. formation of a lake

Full size image
Assessing the impact of TLMS
The practical execution of the designed tasks was performed in an educational experiment in June 2021 with four girls and four boys (11 years of age) from a marginalized community with low socioeconomic status who are part of an integrated standard class of 23 children (1st year of the secondary education level, 5th year of elementary school) at a local elementary school in Veľká Ida. The selected pupils represent a typical sample of children in the class. The number of pupils in the group was selected to ensure good visibility and direct access to the physical model by each child. This can pose a limitation in the class of 23 children with a limited class time if only 1 system operated by a teacher is available.

A week before the day of the experiment, the teacher (co-author of this paper) repeated with the group of pupils the knowledge on reading maps taught during geography lessons in autumn 2020. At that time the teaching was in presence at school before the COVID19 lock-down in Slovakia. The teacher in a traditional way of teaching explained how basic land surface shapes look like on the contour map and that the colors change with the increasing elevation from blue to brown. After the revision, the students were given a map comprising only contours colored by terrain elevation (Fig. 6), and they were asked to: “Locate valley (V), hill (H), saddle (S), ridge (R)”, i.e., basic landforms. On the day of the experiment with TLMS, after performing the four tasks with the TLMS (Section 4), the same students were given the same assignment to locate the basic landforms using the same copy of the map. Figure 6 presents the expected (correct) results (Fig. 6A), results of the test before (Fig. 6B) and immediately after the experiment with TLMS (Fig. 6C). The responses of pupils for all landforms annotated by numbers are summarized in Table 1. Before the experiment with TLMS, only 27.6% of answers were correct, after the experiment the majority of answers were correct (65.2%). Even more striking is the fact that after the experiment the failure to identify some landforms from contours dramatically decreased (especially for H2, V3, S3 and R2 landform). This indicates that almost all children understood correctly the concept of contours although they were not able to identify correctly all landforms. Before the experiment, they were rarely able to identify any landform and preferred not to provide an answer (only 29 answers vs. 46 answers after the experiment). Clearly, TLMS motivated and improved the self-confidence of pupils during the test. These findings show a clear improvement in understanding the concept of contours and basic landforms.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Results of the task “Locate valley (V), hill (H), saddle (S), ridge (R)”, (A) correct position, (B) assignment finished before the work with TLMS, (C) assignment finished after the work with TLMS. The elevation increases from blue to green, yellow, brown, light brown

Full size image
Table 1 Results of the tests in the group of 8 pupils
Full size table
Discussion
TLMS is a new educational tool that can improve the understanding of specific geography themes frequently taught at elementary and secondary schools around the world. The system is especially appropriate in themes requiring a higher level abstraction such as the concept of contours or the effects of landforms on various landscape phenomena. Moreover, the combination of modern tools such as computers, scanner, and projector with hands-on exercise leading to “magic” changes in the model surely attract the attention of students and keeps them focused on the theme. We demonstrated the system in a small group of students with disadvantaged social backgrounds. It was their very first experience with the TLMS. Observing the behavior and reaction of the students during the experiment showed a clear improvement of the students’ cognition of the themes often poorly understood for their abstract essence, such as contours and perceiving landscape shapes from a map. This is clearly documented in Table 1 with an almost doubled number of answers and 4-fold increase of correct answers. Some landforms were correctly identified by a majority of students indicating that almost all students correctly understood the concept of contours. The system helped the teacher in the explanation of the themes and activated the attention of students. Normally, these children remain focused on a teaching activity for less than 20 min but with the first contact with TLMS their focus persisted over 40 min. The tools can be used by an individual student or a small group of students thus giving a teacher flexibility of various teaching approaches or evaluation of student’s knowledge and skills. The system is based on GRASS GIS which is considered a world-leading open-source GIS software with a plethora of geospatial analysis tools available to address various themes in geography or even other subjects dealing with the landscape.

TLMS is seemingly best used for thematic areas of mainly 5th grade at elementary schools in Slovakia and other countries with similar geography curricula. We designed the teaching activities in a manner that students can effectively interact with the 3D system to acquaint themselves with terms of map, contour, grading, 3D landscape, the shape of the terrain, and terrain analysis. Around these key terms, the teaching contexts were created. The suggested themes 1 and 2 are best suited for primary and secondary levels of education, themes 2 and 3 for upper secondary or tertiary levels. From the perspective of the Slovak ISCED standards for the secondary level education, the TLMS can be potentially used in teaching the effect of glacial action on the landscape of Europe (7th grade, geography), perceiving the shape of mountains, lowlands, basins of Slovakia (8th grade, geography), perceive the shape of the landscape as a result of soil erosion, accumulation, river action (9th grade, biology).

However, the use of TLMS has also some limitations. The system can be too difficult to set up and operate for standard geography teachers with limited GIS experience. Although the installation of the system can be realized by an external supplier, the operation of the system requires at least basic knowledge and practical skills in GRASS GIS and running Python scripts in a Linux environment. Also, basic Python programming skills can be necessary to prepare new applications and themes. This indicates that the current curriculum for geography teachers at the tertiary level of education should better reflect these new challenges and technological progress. However, with rapidly expanding new geospatial tools available online such as Google Earth Engine also requiring basic programming skills for more advanced users it seems to be inevitable to include these new skills in the current curricula for future teachers of geography. Also, the system can be used only for small groups of students, so its application to a class of 23 students or more during the typical class hour (45 min) would require thorough preparation and planning by the teacher. Applicability TUIs in achieving teaching improvement was also observed in a similar study of Xefteris et al. (2019) who also worked with primary school students.

Previous studies of TLMS in education were focused on the application and performance of Landscape Architecture university students (Millar et al., 2018). The small group of students performed significantly better on themes related to earthmoving (cut and fill) tasks and marginally lower on landforms tasks. The authors conclude that the system enabled the participants to effectively interact with the system and each other, positively impacting ratings of usability and task-specific knowledge building. In our case, we compared the performance of 8 participating elementary school students in a task to identify basic landforms on the contour map using the traditional teaching approach and TLMS. Our results clearly showed the benefit of using TLMS and indicated a better understanding and performance of students. The difference with university students as opposed to the students of elementary school can be attributed to rather complex landform tasks performed by the university students with a much higher difficulty. Our observation confirmed that the TLMS greatly benefited the learning process of our students via keeping their attention high as well as via group teaching, so the students could re-affirm their knowledge following the performance of other students.

Conclusions
Geography education is still relevant in most educational systems around the world. However, the teaching content and form should better reflect recent developments and progress made in academic geography and associated geospatial technologies. This requires new teaching tools including tangible user interfaces to increase learning efficiency, the durability of knowledge, and practical skills.

In this study, we have presented a Tangible Landscape Modeling System for geography education from primary to tertiary levels of education. The system consists of four components including a malleable physical model, 3D scanner, projector, and standard computer with software. This low-cost system can be used effectively used in various teaching themes present in most geography curricula around the world.

In this paper, we have presented four examples using typical geography themes related to topographic maps, landforms, landscape processes such as water flow and flooding phenomena, and consequences of man-induced changes to the land surface. These examples documented the applicability of the system to themes with varying abstraction difficulties. The system was tested using a small group of students at the age of 11 years from marginalized communities. The real challenge in teaching these students is to keep them focused on presented themes. Our observation showed that the learning process of these students greatly benefited from TLMS via keeping their attention high for a much longer period as well as via group teaching. The results of this study indicate that a tangible landscape modeling system provides an easy-to-understand concept and teaching tool that improves the geospatial relational thinking of students.

Besides the perspective improvement of teaching geography, the perspective use of TLMS is also in teaching other subjects, such as foreign languages or physics using the Content and Language Integrated Learning. Students can better associate foreign vocabulary related to landscape features while touching or seeing the effect of change in the physical landscape model, thus strengthening their knowledge in language and geography.

Future improvements could focus on the TLMS ease of use. It takes a few minutes to calibrate the scanner and set up the system which takes the time from the lesson. Along with the technical improvements, to run the TLMS smoothly by the teachers themselves, their preparations at universities has to include gaining competencies in GIS and other geospatial technologies.