Previous screening studies conducted in leading educational technology journals have primarily been content analyses or systematic reviews; however, this article reports on a web scraping study through the keywords of the articles discussed in this study. An analysis was performed on the keywords of articles published between 2000 and 2018 in 14 educational technology journals screened within the scope of Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI). Using the web scraping method, 10,386 educational technology articles were screened to obtain 49,963 keywords and 27,045 unique keywords. These keywords were ranked according to their frequency of usage, and the top 100 keywords were reported. In addition, similar terms were combined into categories. The research findings aimed to reveal the current situation and shed light on the trends in educational technology research in recent years. Based on the findings, suggestions were developed for future research, and inferences were made.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The educational technology discipline has developed as a research area since the first decade of the twentieth century. In his book titled The Evolution of American Educational Technology, Saettler (1990) stated that educational media can be traced back to the first 10 years of the 1900s in the United States (Reiser, 2001). Today, more information is produced in this field each day with many journals publishing original research articles, reviews, and opinion papers. The evolution of educational technology in its natural development process undoubtedly affects learning and teaching processes. The need to discover how educational technology can effectively support learning and teaching has resulted in a significant increase in the number of research articles (Hsu et al., 2013). Looking at learning and teaching processes from the perspective of integrated technology reveals that the field of educational technology, also known as instructional technology, constantly changes, expands with new ideas and developing technologies and takes form according to the research purposes of the experts working in the field (Reiser, 2018). Bodily et al. (2019) have argued that the field of “instructional design and technology” is a very broad and meta field; therefore, it is difficult to understand its nature.

The Association for Educational Communications & Technology (AECT) is the leading voice in defining the field of educational technology as well as establishing its framework, scope, and boundaries. AECT is a professional organization that makes suggestions and provides consultancy to instructional designers, educators, and policymakers intending to enrich learning processes (AECT, 2019a). From this viewpoint, it is not surprising that AECT hosts the first journal published in the field. The journal Educational Technology Research and Development (ETR&D) has been published without interruption since 1953, though its name has evolved from Audiovisual Communication Review to AV Communication Review to Educational Communication and Technology Journal (ECTJ). This evolution reveals that the field has gradually changed and developed to cover research, theory, and development studies as well. From this point of view, even the name changes of the journal reflect the evolution of the field (Masood, 2004). AECT devotes considerable attention to defining the field and establishes a Definition and Terminology Committee to define the field of educational technology throughout the years. In 1977, when computers and computer-assisted instruction (CAI) systems began to develop, AECT provided the longest standing definition of the field:

“Educational technology is a complex, integrated process involving people, procedures, ideas, devices and organization for analyzing problems and devising, implementing, evaluating and managing solutions to those problems involved in all aspects of human learning (AECT, 1977; Seels, & Richey, 1994).”

From the 1970s to the 1990s, there were significant developments in the field of technology. One of the most important of these developments was the spread of computers and the use of the Internet. In addition, the rapid expansion and diffusion of Information and Communication Technologies has led to increased interest in popular new teaching strategies such as distance learning and cooperative learning (Ibrahim, 2015). Because of these and many other effects, the 1994 definition emerged. As a result of the studies conducted between 1990 and 1994, AECT offered a shorter definition of the field in 1994 compared to the previous definitions:

“Instructional technology is the theory and practice of design, development, utilization, management and evaluation of processes and resources for learning (Seels, & Richey, 1994).”

The 5 main components put forward in this definition interact with each other. The domains of instructional technology are summarized in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Instructional technology domains (AECT 1994 Definition)

Full size image
The 5 main domains seen in Fig. 1 include a wide variety of skills and knowledge guided by scientifically based theories and models that an instructional technologist should be able to use as various situations arise. The first, initiating domain is design. Seels and Richey (1994, p.30) define the design phase as “the process of specifying conditions for learning” and express its purpose as “to create strategies and products at the macro level, such as programs and curricula, and at the micro level, such as lessons and modules”. During the design phase, an instructional designer has a great role to play. At this stage, needs are determined with learner analysis and then goals and objectives are decided. Appropriate instructional strategies are determined, and then the teaching process and the evaluation process are planned.

The second domain following the design is the development. The field of development simply refers to the process of translating the design features determined during the design phase into physical form (Seels & Richey, 1994, p.35). This domain contains four subcategories: print, audiovisual, computer-based and integrated technologies. Instructional designers integrate these subcategories with theories, and research. At the same time, it can be said that these subcategories reveal the evolution and change of technology in time-dependent longitudinal processes.

Third domain is utilization. This domain refers to the usage of processes and resources for learning. In the utilization phase, the instructional designer prepares students to interact with learning materials and provide direction in the learning process. Students' first instructional experiences take place at this stage. In this respect utilization domain is a realization process. Instructional designers should manage the instructional environment and eliminate some situations that could hinder the implementation of instruction as designed.

Fourth domain is management. According to Seels and Richey (1994, p.49), management domain involves controlling instructional technology through planning, organizing, coordinating and supervising. This domain is very important for an instructional process to be carried out in line with its purpose. At this stage, the instructional designer performs leadership and coaching by demonstrating all managerial skills. All managerial responsibilities, assignments, and job responsibilities in projects are shared by the instructional designer. Fifth and the last domain is evaluation. The evaluation domain is the process of determining whether teaching and learning is adequate or not.

The definition of Seels and Richey (1994) differs from other definitions since it specifically lists different fields in the field of instructional technology. The domains in this definition include those that concern practitioners and scholars (Seels & Richey, 1994). The domains are thus a result of previous definitions that tried to list the different roles and components of instructional technology.

With this definition, it is seen that the term “educational technology” has changed to the term “instructional technology”. The change in terminology is a result of many factors. Seels and Richey (1994) justify their use of the concept of “Instructional Technology” as follows:

a)
As it is more widely used in the United States today,

b)
Because it encompasses many practice settings,

c)
Because it describes its function more precisely than educational technology,

d)
It allows the usage of “instruction” and “learning” concepts together.

Although the term “instructional technology” is used in the 1994 definition, “instruction” and “learning” are emphasized separately in this definition and therefore the two terms are considered synonymous (Seels & Richey, 1994). Hence, most researchers use these concepts interchangeably.

In fact, there are different opinions at the point of naming and defining the field. It can be said that the most accurate definition that different researchers and AECT have tried to put forward for decades has not yet been reached (or there is no consensus on how the field will be named and defined). According to AECT (1977), instructional is a subset of the concept of educational and therefore instructional technology has a narrower meaning than educational technology. For example, while the concept of educational technology was involved in the solution of problems in “all aspects of human learning”, the concept of instructional technology was involved in the solution of problems where “learning is purposive and controlled” (Januszewski & Persichitte, 2008, p. 271). On the other hand, Reiser (2001) named our field as “instructional design and technology” and defined as:

“The field of instructional design and technology encompasses the analysis of learning and performance problems, and the design, development, implementation, evaluation and management of instructional and noninstructional processes and resources intended to improve learning and performance in a variety of settings, particularly educational institutions and the workplace (Reiser, 2001).”

When these definitions are examined, it is seen that there is an inconsistency or differentiation in the context of naming and definitions. In fact, it can be mentioned that there is a constant change, a differentiation of terminology and therefore a need to redefine depending on the time. Educational technology or instructional technology concepts are concepts in which technology comes to the fore (it is at the center). However, instructional design should be prioritized in educational processes. This point of view overlaps with Reiser's (2001) terming the field as instructional design and technology.

In 2008, AECT changed the definition of the field as follows: “Educational technology is the study and ethical practice of facilitating learning and improving performance by creating, using, and managing appropriate technological processes and resources” (Branch & Deissler, 2008, p. 195). This definition emphasized facilitating learning and increasing performance in learners through educational technology.

The most recent definition found on the website of AECT is as follows:

“Educational technology is the study and ethical application of theory, research, and best practices to advance knowledge as well as mediate and improve learning and performance through the strategic design, management and implementation of learning and instructional processes and resources (AECT, 2019b).”

This current definition of the field of educational technology incorporates theory and research, emphasizes the improvement of learning, and aims to improve performance. The field of educational technology has been influenced by various factors such as historical events, paradigm changes in educational psychology, developing technologies, and developing research approaches (Küçük et al., 2013).

An examination of the definitions of instructional technology from the 1900s to the present reveals a shift in the understanding of instructional technology as a process rather than a tool. The involvement of computers in education in the 1980s resulted in an emphasis on sharing and managing information and ideas. When the Internet became widespread in the 1990s, the definition gained a more systematic structure. The steps included in the definition drew a roadmap for the use of instructional technology in the teaching process. The focus of the 2008 definition is on how instructional technologies contribute to the improvement of performance and make the learning process easier. Since 2000, the definitions have included the expression “ethical practices” due to the easy access to information offered by the widespread use of the Internet.

In the twenty-first century, the field of educational technology has continued to grow and to accumulate knowledge. Although it will continue to evolve in line with various dynamics, developing technologies and approaches, educational technology research now exhibits certain tendencies. The number of content analyses or systematic reviews holistically examining the studies conducted in the field is increasing day by day. Such studies aim at investigating a great number of research studies holistically and to reveal certain trends. Content analyses review the contents of articles and highlight their common characteristics (Hsu et al., 2013). These reviews are mostly conducted through articles (e.g., Baydaş et al., 2015; Bodily et al., 2019; Küçük et al., 2013; Latchem, 2006; Reeves & Oh, 2017). The reviews carried out with content analyses in articles are mostly subject area reviews or methodological screenings. In this context, the researchers screen large databases and present the findings with descriptive statistics. However, the methods for accessing data are generally performed by researchers manually; therefore, the data collection process is prolonged, and data analysis becomes more difficult. These limitations often mean that reviews cannot be carried out with wide date ranges or large databases as desired.

Purpose of the study
Kimmons (2020) states that it is often difficult for educational technologists to find reliable and up-to-date information about current trends in the educational technology field. Dickson-Deane (2020) describes this editorial by Kimmons (2020) as an important study reporting educational technology trends, emphasizing the areas of disconnection between research and practice. From this point of view, it is clear that there is a disconnect between research and practice in the field of educational technology. It is thought that this study might fill a gap in this respect. In this study, as in the above-mentioned definitions, the researchers aimed at performing deep analysis through keywords using the web scraping method, an emerging approach, to holistically conduct a content analysis that examines the changes occurring in the field of educational technology over time. A keyword is a signal to a particular audience that they can find articles on the topic they are interested in. This research is one of the first studies that can give clues in the field of educational technology in terms of screening keywords.

The web scraping method automates data collection processes. Scraping is a new technique developed for the automatic collection of online data (Marres & Weltevrede, 2013). According to a different definition, web scraping is the process of scraping web data to obtain and compile the desired data from webpages in a systematic way (Glez-Peña et al., 2013). Web scraping is also known as web data extraction, web data scraping, web harvesting, or screen scraping (Sirisuriya, 2015). The process of accessing data through scraping developed with the concept of big data and includes approaches to collecting and analyzing data that cannot be achieved with the methods of accessing data manually (Landers et al., 2016). A web scraper accesses webpages, finds unique data elements on these pages, reveals them, converts them if necessary, and finally saves them as a significant, analysable, and structured dataset (Boeing & Waddell, 2017).

In this research, 10,386 articles are examined using the method of web scraping. These articles were published between 2000 and 2018 in 14 educational technology journals indexed in the SSCI and found on the Web of Science database. This database does not cover all possible journals where educational technology articles are published. However, it continues to be the largest and the most complete collection of records on scholarly publications in various fields of inquiry encompassing publications from many countries of the world (Kuzhabekova et al., 2015). The research differs from previously conducted content analysis (as mentioned before, e.g. Baydaş et al., 2015; Bodily et al., 2019; Küçük et al., 2013; Latchem, 2006; Reeves & Oh, 2017) and tendency determination studies in terms of providing in-depth analysis through keywords with the method of web scraping and reaching findings through big data. In this context, the aim of this study is to perform an in-depth analysis of the tendencies and existing situations in the articles published in the journals indexed in the SSCI in the field of educational technology and found on the Web of Science database through the keywords. Using this information, the study aims to reveal the research frame of the field in recent years. This research contributes to the literature in terms of being able to extract data automatically through the web, reaching accurate findings, identifying tendencies in the field, and shedding light on future research.

Methods
In this research, screening was carried out with the web scraping method which enables the automatic extraction of data from the Internet, which has become the largest databank. The scraping process included 14 educational technology journals screened on the Web of Science database and indexed in the SSCI. In the selection of the relevant journals, a ranking was made according to impact factor as determined by the Web of Science database in the category of Education and Educational Research, and the journals specific to the educational technology field were selected. In this selection process, it was observed that the British Journal of Educational Technology (BJET) did not include keyword information in the articles it published, and the Australasian Journal of Educational Technology (AJET) did not include keywords before 2015. Although these two journals accepted articles in the field of educational technology, they were excluded for this reason.

Table 1 shows journal names, journal impact factors (2018 year), scraping dates, date ranges, total number of articles which has keyword(s), total number of keywords and total number of unique keywords.

Table 1 Descriptive statistics of journals
Full size table
Table 1 presents the articles of the 14 journals included in the scraping process and the years when they were published. The articles in all volumes and issues published between 2000 and 2018 of The Internet and Higher Education, Computers & Education, Journal of Computing in Higher Education, Educational Technology Research and Development, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, and Educational Technology & Society were scraped. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning began publication in 2006, and IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies began in 2008. All articles published since the first issues of these journals were included in the scraping process.

The journals Distance Education and Interactive Learning Environments began in 1980 and 1990, respectively, and they have been published under the same names from the beginning. These journals began using keywords in 2008, so all articles of these two journals published since 2008 were included in the scraping process.

Learning, Media and Technology has been published since 1975, Innovations in Education and Teaching International has been published since 1964, and Technology, Pedagogy and Education has been published since 1992. These three journals have changed their names at various times, but they have been known by their current names since 2005, 2001, and 2003, respectively. All three journals have been using keywords since 2008. Accordingly, all articles of these three journals published since 2008 were included in the scraping process.

The keywords of 10,386 articles of 14 journals included in the scraping process were collected, resulting in the determination of 49,963 keywords and 27,045 unique keywords from these journals.

Data collection procedure
We used the Web Scraper extension to scrape 10,386 articles. Web Scraper is built for data extraction from web pages. With this extension, a site map can be created to figure out how to scrape a website and which data should be extracted. Scraped data later can be exported as CSV.

The first step of web scraping was creating a sitemap. We named the sitemap and specified the start URL to which the scraping will begin. This URL was usually the archive pages, where journals listed all the issues. A screenshot of this step is given in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2
figure 2
The first step of the web scraping process

Full size image
After the sitemap has been created, we defined the selectors step by step to access the article's years and keywords. The extension has multiple selectors that can be used for different types of data extraction and for different interactions with the website. Figure 3 shows the selector types.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Selector types on plugin console

Full size image
We created different sitemaps for each journal due to different page structures. We also scraped the article titles to successfully complete the matching process of the years and keywords. You can see one of the created site maps in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Site map of Journal of Computer Assisted Learning (an example)

Full size image
Figure 4 shows the site map of the Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.

After completing all steps for the sitemap, we started scraping. A new popup window opened to load pages and extract data from journals. Then we exported the scraped data as CSV.

Data analysis
At the end of the scraping process, the data was exported as a CSV file and organized by the MS Excel program. In the first stage, the keywords were listed according to their frequency of use in journals. Then they were sorted by years which keywords are seen most frequently between current dates of 2000–2018. The time period of about 20 years was selected to provide an extensive corpus but also one that included contemporary findings. Afterward, by comparing the use of keywords between 2000–2018 and 2014–2018, it was presented which keywords are more popular and which keywords have decreased in the last 5 years. The differences between the rankings of keywords between 2000–2018 and 2014–2018 are defined as “The Difference in Ranking” in the tables. Finally, keyword usage was analyzed over different domains.

Findings
In this study, 10,386 articles of 14 journals published between 2000 and 2018 in the field of educational technology were examined. Table 2 presents the 27,045 unique keywords obtained through web scraping from these articles according to usage frequency and the distribution of the top 100 keywords by journals. Because the difference between the usage frequencies of the keywords decreased considerably, the keywords after the top 100 were not included in the study. Although Table 2 contains some keywords with similar meanings (such as “distance education” and “distance learning” or “gender” and “gender studies”), only the keywords with the same meanings (such as “simulations” and “simulation”, “CSCL” and “computer-supported collaborative learning”, or “MOOCs” and “MOOC”) were combined in order to avoid confusion.

Table 2 Distribution of the 100 most commonly used keywords between 2000 and 2018 by journals
Full size table
When Table 2 is examined, it is seen that the most frequently used keyword between 2000 and 2018 was “interactive learning environments” (fsum: 627). This keyword is known to be used most in the journal Computers & Education (fC&E: 592), which corresponds to 94.4% of its usage in all journals. The reason for this finding is that Computers & Education forces authors to make a selection from the keyword pool. This reason is also why “teaching/learning strategies” is the second most frequently used keyword in total (fsum: 611; fC&E: 583, 95.4%). Table 2 shows that “higher education” was the third most frequently used keyword. The distribution of this keyword by journals was balanced, and it was frequently used in almost every journal. This keyword is followed by “online learning” and “e-learning”, both of which were also used in all journals with relatively balanced distribution. “Pedagogical issues” (ranked 6th) and “improving classroom teaching” (ranked 7th) were included in the list because they are on the keyword pool available to authors who publish in Computers & Education (for pedagogical issues: fsum: 424; fC&E: 406; 95.8%; for improving classroom teaching: fsum: 410; fC&E: 396; 96.6%).

The journal Computers & Education offers authors the following keywords: “interactive learning environments”, “teaching/learning strategies”, “pedagogical issues”, “improving classroom teaching”, “computer-mediated communication”, “media in education”, “cooperative/collaborative learning”, “secondary education”, “elementary education”, “post-secondary education”, “applications in subject areas”, “evaluation methodologies”, “distance education and telelearning”, “evaluation of CAL systems”, “learning communities”, “multimedia/hypermedia systems”, “human–computer interface”, “simulations”, “distributed learning environments”, and “architectures for educational technology system”. The journal does not allow authors to select any other keyword besides those in this pool. As a result, it is natural that the frequencies of these keywords are high in Table 2 and they are weighted more heavily in Computers & Education. However, when these keywords were removed and other keywords with a homogeneous distribution were ranked, the most frequently used keywords between 2000 and 2018 were “higher education”, “online learning”, “e-learning”, “distance education”, “collaborative learning”, and “mobile learning” in order.

Table 3 provides the distribution of the 100 most frequently used keywords between 2000 and 2018. The same table also demonstrates a trend graph regarding usage frequencies.

Table 3 Distribution of the 100 most frequently used keywords between 2000 and 2018 by year
Full size table
As previously mentioned, Table 3 shows the distribution of the 100 most frequently used keywords between 2000 and 2018. The keyword “interactive learning environments”, which had the highest total frequency overall years, used at least 30 times a year since 2007. One reason for this finding is that the number of articles published in the journal Computers & Education has increased significantly since 2007. The trend graphs in Table 3 also show the keywords related to the subjects that have been studied as hot topics in recent years. For example, a significant increase has been observed in the last few years in the use of the keywords “MOOC or MOOCs”, “flipped classroom”, “learning analytics”, and “feedback”. In addition, Table 3 presents the keywords whose usage has consistently increased from 2000 to 2018. “Learning” and “motivation” are two examples of these keywords. Looking at Table 3 likewise shows which keywords have gradually decreased in usage and probably will be used less in the coming periods. Examples of these keywords include “Internet”, “web 2.0”, and “multimedia”. Conversely, some keywords have never been trends, have not been able to make a breakthrough, and were used for a while but are used less recently. “Learning objects”, “programming and programming languages”, and “navigation” can be given as examples for these keywords.

Table 4 presents the ranking of the first 100 keywords in the last 5 years, compares the rankings of the last 5 years and overall years and provides information regarding which keywords have become trendier in recent years. The keywords in the table are ranked from high to low according to the changes in their rankings.

Table 4 Comparison of the usage frequency rankings of the keywords between the last 5 years and 2000–2018
Full size table
When we examined Table 4, we saw that “flipped classroom” is at the 1st rank. This keyword was used 55 times in the period between 2014 and 2018, and its ranking in the same period was 31. The keyword “flipped classroom” ranked 86th between 2000 and 2018 as seen in Table 2. Accordingly, its ranking in the last 5 years has increased 55 steps compared to the ranking between 2000 and 2018 and shown the most increase in usage. From this point of view, we can state that “flipped classroom” was the keyword whose popularity increased the most between 2014 and 2018. The keyword with the second largest increase in ranking was “social media”. This keyword was used 61 times between 2014 and 2018, and its ranking among the usage frequencies of other keywords between these years was 23. As seen in Table 2, the keyword “social media” ranked 62nd between 2000 and 2018. Accordingly, it increased its ranking between 2014 and 2018 period by 39 steps. In contrast, the rankings of “online learning”, “e-learning”, and “instructional technology” did not change. The keyword whose popularity decreased the most was “Internet”, which was used only 7 times between 2014 and 2018. Along with the keyword “Internet”, the keywords “distributed learning environments” and “adult learning” constituted the keywords that decreased the most.

Based on the usage frequency of the keywords used in the educational technology journals, the top 100 keywords were examined in terms of their meanings. They were divided into the following five groups: Education Level, Analysis/Research Method, Technologies, Issues, and Methods/Models/Strategies or Pedagogies. Table 5 contains the rankings of the keywords included in the Education Level category, the total number of usages from 2000 to 2018, and the differences in ranking between the 2014–2018 and 2000–2018 timeframes.

Table 5 Descriptive Statistics of “Education Level” Group
Full size table
As can be seen in Table 5, this category includes 7 keywords that were used a total of 1490 times. This rate corresponds to 10.4% of the total within the top 100 keywords (1490/14,366). By examining the keywords under this category, it is possible to comment on the educational levels of educational technology research studies. Researchers have mostly published articles in the “higher education” category, followed by the “secondary education” level. Furthermore, researchers tend to write the study groups, samples or education levels in the keywords. In addition, the keyword in the Education Level category whose usage decreased the most in the last 5 years was “adult learning”.

Table 6 presents the keywords included in the Analysis/Research Method category, their rankings within the top 100 keywords, the total number of usages between 2000 and 2018, and their differences in ranking.

Table 6 Descriptive Statistics of “Analysis / Research Method” Group
Full size table
The Analysis/Research Method category includes 5 keywords that were used 354 times in total (see Table 6). This rate corresponds to 2.5% of the total usage within the top 100 keywords (354/14,366). Similarly, the usage rates of the keywords “learning analytics”, “design-based research”, and “social network analysis” have rapidly increased in the last period. However, the usage of the keyword “case study” has rapidly decreased. Based on the information in Table 6, it can be inferred that researchers did not include the analysis/research methods they used in their studies among the keywords.

Table 7 displays the keywords included in the Technologies category, their rankings within the top 100 keywords, the total number of usages between 2000 and 2018, and their differences in ranking.

Table 7 Descriptive Statistics of “Technologies” Group
Full size table
Examining Table 7 reveals that 25 keywords were collected under this category, and these keywords were used 2853 times in total. This rate corresponds to 19.9% of the total within the top 100 keywords (2853/14,366). In the Technologies category, the keywords whose usage has rapidly increased in the last period are “social media”, “augmented reality”, “MOOCs or MOOC”, “Facebook”, and “open educational resources”. Conversely, the usage rates of the keywords “Internet”, “multimedia”, and “multimedia/hypermedia systems” have decreased rapidly in the recent period.

Table 8 presents the keywords included in the Issues category, their rankings within the top 100 keywords, the total number of usages between 2000 and 2018, and their differences in ranking.

Table 8 Descriptive Statistics of “Issues” Group
Full size table
As shown in Table 8, 32 keywords were collected under this category and used 3689 times in total. This rate corresponds to 25.7% of the total within the top 100 keywords (3689/14,366). In the Issues category, the keywords “student engagement”, “engagement”, “satisfaction”, and “feedback” had the most rapid usage increases in the recent period. Conversely, the use of the keywords “evaluation methodologies”, “problem-solving”, “evaluation of CAL systems”, and “evaluation” decreased rapidly during the same period.

Finally, Table 9 shows the keywords included in the Methods/Models/Strategies or Pedagogies category, their rankings within the top 100 keywords, the total number of usages between 2000 and 2018, and their differences in ranking.

Table 9 Descriptive Statistics of “Methods / Models / Strategies or Pedagogies” Group
Full size table
An examination of Table 9 reveals that 31 keywords were collected under this category, and these keywords were used 5980 times in total. This rate corresponds to 41.6% of the total within the top 100 keywords (5980/14,366). In the Methods/Models/Strategies or Pedagogies category, the keywords with rapidly increasing usage in the last period were “flipped classroom”, “game-based learning”, and “self-regulated learning”. In contrast, the following keywords had the most rapid decrease in use: “distributed learning environments”, “distance education and telelearning”, “country-specific developments”, and “constructivism”.

Conclusion and discussion
As previously mentioned, this study involved the examination of 10,386 articles published between 2000 and 2018 in 14 educational technology journals indexed in the SSCI and found on the Web of Science database. The articles’ keywords were screened using the web scraping method, resulting in the identification of 49,963 keywords and 27,045 unique keywords. Afterward, analyses were carried out on the keywords, and research implications and results were obtained based on the analyses.

According to the results, two most frequently used keywords are “interactive learning environments” and “teaching/learning strategies”. These two keywords were selected from the keyword pool of the Computers & Education. Although these keywords were rarely used by other journals, articles in this journal made up 27.6% of the total sample; as such, this finding was not surprising (article fC&E: 2865 / article fsum: 10,386). Based on this understanding, when the keywords given by Computers & Education are removed, the highest-ranking keywords were “higher education”, “online learning”, “e-learning”, “distance education”, “collaborative learning”, and “mobile learning”. The placement of “higher education” on the first rank indicates that researchers mostly conduct educational technology studies with research groups at the “higher education” level. This may be due to the fact that it is easier to conduct research in Higher Education or because the researchers are usually faculty members or graduate students. Therefore, it is seen that there are more studies conducted in Higher Education compared to K-12 in recent years. On the other hand, designing research studies in K12 environments may not be as practical as in Higher Education since it is not very easy to manipulate the teaching processes of K12. In a content analysis study of the articles published between January 2000 (Volume 31, Issue 1) and November 2005 (Volume 36, Issue 6) in BJET, Latchem (2006) obtained results supporting this finding. In addition, in an examination of the articles published in BJET in the last 50 years, Bond et al. (2019) stated that the emphasis shifted towards “higher education” and “university” between 2000 and 2018. In a study of the trends in technology-based learning research between 2000 and 2009, Hsu et al. (2012) determined that the category of “higher education” was on the first rank within both 5-year periods of 2000–2004 and 2005–2009. Similarly, Küçük et al. (2013) examined educational technology research trends in Turkey and noted that half of their samples included teacher candidates and other undergraduate students, i.e. within the scope of higher education. In another conflicting study investigating the 40-year publication period of Computers & Education from 1976 to 2016, Zawacki-Richter and Latchem (2018) observed that the concepts of “K-12” and “schools” had a higher frequency than the concepts of “university” and “higher education” within the scope of educational levels. On the other hand, designing research studies in K12 environments may not be as practical as in Higher Education since it is not very easy to manipulate the teaching processes of K12.

Another result is that research methods are not used much in the keywords of educational technology research articles. Keywords included in the category Analysis/Research Method had a rate of only 2.5% among all keywords. In this group, “learning analytics”, “design-based research”, and “social network analysis” were identified as relatively new methods that were used in educational studies as hot topics, which may have afforded them a place among the keywords.

Another result revealed in this research is that the usage of the keywords “flipped classroom”, “MOOC or MOOCs”, “learning analytics”, and “feedback” has been rapidly increasing in recent years. The literature includes studies that support this finding. For example, Zawacki-Richter and Latchem (2018) emphasized that the main themes of the International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning and Distance Education journals in 2010 and the following years were “interactive learning, MOOCs and open education resources (OERs)” and “the emergence of MOOCs and OER”. Accordingly, it can be stated that the change in the perspectives of journals directly affects the research trends. Other research studies examining articles published in educational technology journals have identified MOOCs as the rising trend in recent years (e.g., Bodily et al., 2019; Bond et al., 2019). This study revealed that the flipped classroom is a very fast-rising trend. According to Bodily et al. (2019), the flipped classroom approach is a new field of research that has rapidly become a rising trend that was ranked 5th in 2015 and 2nd in 2016.

Another finding obtained in the research is that the topic “learning objects” has never been a main research topic as determined by keywords. Even in the year in which it had the highest frequency, it was used only 6 times in 14 educational technology journals as a keyword. This result coincides with the findings of the forecast study conducted by Martin et al. (2011). In this bibliometric research, Martin et al. (2011) made future predictions through Horizon Reports and determined that learning objects had not been able to create the expected impact in education and probably would not be able to do so in the future. The 2004 Horizon Report predicted the topic would have a short-term impact, and no prediction was made with the same name again. As for the 2010 Horizon Report, open contents began to be discussed but evolution flow from learning objects to open content seems to not have had the expected success (Martin et al., 2011).

Another striking finding revealed in this research is that the use of the keywords “evaluation methodologies”, “problem-solving”, “evaluation of CAL systems”, and “evaluation” has rapidly decreased in recent years. This finding can be interpreted to indicate that evaluation has lost its popularity in educational technology research.

Martin et al. (2011) stated that “augmented reality” studies would increase between 2009 and 2010 and that their use would become widespread in the medium term after 2010 with the support of mobile technologies. The current study examined that “augmented reality” was among the keywords whose usage increased most rapidly in recent years. Unlike “augmented reality”, “virtual reality” did not have a significant impact as determined by keyword frequencies. It was observed that the most rapidly increasing keywords among technologies were “social media”, “augmented reality”, and “MOOCs”; however, “Internet”, “multimedia/hypermedia systems”, and “multimedia” were the most rapidly decreasing keywords in the recent period in terms of use. Hsu et al. (2013) also stated that multimedia is a cold topic. Despite the use of the keyword “multimedia” has decreased in recent years, this does not mean that researchers have given up studying multimedia issues. The “multimedia” keyword is an umbrella concept. In recent years, researchers may have included different multimedia applications in their work, instead of using the multimedia keyword directly. In addition, Mayer (2014) states that there has been a terminological change in the concept of “multimedia” over the years. Terminological naming, which started as “model of meaningful learning” in the 1980s, was respectively replaced by “cognitive conditions for effective illustrations”, “dual-coding model”, “dual-processing model of multimedia learning”, “generative theory”, “generative theory of multimedia learning” and finally “cognitive theory of multimedia learning”. This means that naming may change, but the usage of the “multimedia” concept has been sustainable for many years. Although “Internet” was previously used many times as an umbrella concept, today’s studies include more specific forms such as “online learning” or “social media”. The fact that “social media” is the most rapidly increasing keyword in terms of use can also be presented as evidence for this finding.

So what do the results tell us about the field? This study has two main insights concerning with the trends. The first one is that the “management” domain, which is one of the main domains of instructional technology (see Fig. 1) is not sufficiently discussed in the educational technology studies. Perhaps the only point mentioned in the findings of this study regarding the “management” domain is “Learning Management Systems”, which is just only one keyword. Therefore, “management” domain has not been taken seriously. Similarly, the "management" node in the Fig. 1 and most of the elements contained within that node do not appear to be an area that researchers give much attention to in journal publication. Second and perhaps the most important insight is that these journals appear to embrace the latest instructional innovations or fads in the field of educational technology. This reveals that researchers tend to study popular topics or emerging technologies.

Limitations
This research has certain limitations. The first one is that almost every journal has its publishing understanding, purpose, and scope. The presence of a keyword is not a description of the research topic, but a signal to a particular audience that they may find the article of interest. Although all journals find a place for themselves under the umbrella concept of educational technology, some journals especially prefer to publish articles on certain subjects. It has to be noted that the journals always differ somewhat in their scope of topics, of preferences for research methods. E.g., some journals focus more in research on interaction or others prefer manuscripts with an experimental approach or also accept manuscripts, which conduct research in the field. Therefore, the result of the webscraping analysis depends on the input of journals. Second, Computers & Education forces authors to pick from pre-selected keywords, which may have skewed the results. It may be useful to evaluate the results and implications in this context. Third, there are also significant differences between the issues of the articles published by the journals examined within the scope of this research. In addition, 7 of the 14 educational technology journals included in this research were screened with their issues published from 2000, 1 journal from 2006, and 6 journals from 2008 to 2018. In this context, future researchers should consider this difference between years when interpreting results and implications. Fourth, British Journal of Educational Technology (BJET) and Australasian Journal of Educational Technology (AJET) are major educational technology journals but British Journal of Educational Technology (BJET) did not include keywords in any year and Australasian Journal of Educational Technology (AJET) did not include keywords before 2015. Therefore, these journals were not included in this research. This should be taken into account when dealing with research findings. Finally, another limitation is that this study only examined the articles available online. Future research can also look into articles in print journals, which would bring further insights into the field of educational technology.

Implications and future research
Some of the research findings revealed in this study show some orientations and draw implications in the context of policies, practices and research for new research in the field of “instructional design and technology”. The first of these implications that points to educational technology policy is that researchers still have an instructional technology-oriented perspective. It is seen that the trends and topic on rise determined in this research focus on new learning environments or technologies. Based on the fact that Russell's (2001) “no significant difference (NSD)” approach is also applicable to research in the field of “instructional design and technology” (Hattie, 2009; Reeves, & Oh, 2017), it can be said that the focus should be on instructional design instead of focusing on instructional technology in future research. Similar hopes that technology will transform education and instruction are as old as instructional technology history and go back more than 100 years (Reeves, & Oh, 2017; Reiser, 2001). However, the fact that educational technology has not made a breakthrough and meaningful difference in such a long time should raise awareness for researchers in the field of “instructional design and technology”. In fact, this awareness has been delayed. We now have to accept that technology as a research policy is just a tool. Instead of thinking about the usage of each new technology in educational context, researchers should focus their energies on the instructional design process. Because, trying to use every new technology in education strengthens Russell's (2001) point of view. Reiser (2001) named the field as “instructional design and technology” and has drawn the framework very clearly for researchers on this subject. Reiser's (2001) point of view on this issue should be our greatest guide. It no longer matters to discuss the subject of instructional technology, and trend research has demonstrated this for a long time. However, it should be sadly stated that this situation has not yet been reflected in the research.

One of the implications for the research in this study is that in the next period, higher education level research will lead the race ahead compared to other education levels. Also, looking at the trends in research topics, it was concluded that the keywords “MOOC or MOOCs”, “flipped classroom”, “learning analytics” and “feedback” are topics on rise. It can be said that the concepts of “Distance education and telelearning”, “multimedia”, “case study”, “multimedia/hypermedia systems”, “adult learning”, “distributed learning environments” and “Internet” are cold topics. The keywords “online learning”, “e-learning” and “instructional technology” stand out as stable topics. Winn (2002) stated that the studies in the field went through a series of stages focusing on the content to be learned, the format of instructional messages, and the interaction between computers and students, and continued to transform in a dynamic structure. For this reason, it can be said that screening studies conducted at certain time intervals can offer a perspective on the future of the field based on the past. Screening and forecast studies need to be repeated in a way that mutually confirms or falsifies each other.

The most important implication that can be put forward in this study in terms of practice is that researchers can now conduct research at all levels such as higher education, secondary education, elementary education, adult learning and lifelong learning. Winn (2002) stated that educational technology research was extremely disconnected from the practice in the past, and attributed one of the reasons to the fact that studies were carried out in isolation from the real life context, and another reason was the lack of sufficient information, materials, and programs of activities for practitioners to do research. The trends between the years 2000–2018 revealed in this study are provided by the determination made by Winn (2002). It is clear that in the last 20 years, these two obstacles for researchers have been removed and therefore the focus of current research has shifted towards schools.

Epilogue: The field of educational technology will continue to exist as an area of interest for research. The evolution that technology has experienced will inevitably be reflected in research studies. While educational technologists are testing the educational usage of each new innovative technology, they are mostly obtaining frustrated results. This is the most concrete piece of evidence that the tradition of looking at educational technology only as a tool is still occurring between educational technologists. For this reason, it is important to conduct some forecast studies with the available concrete data and to determine whether the expected change trend is achieved after a certain period. This longitudinal contribution seems to be an important field of study that can illuminate educational scientists who are trying to understand the past and predict the future while shaping technology policies in the educational context. Educational scientists would be wise to listen to Michael Crichton, who warned readers about the importance of history. According to Michael Crichton (as cited in Bodily et al., 2019), “If you do not know history, then you do not know anything. You are a leaf that does not know it is part of a tree”.