A personal annotation is a rich object with an important cognitive facet. In the e-Learning context, learners’ annotation can contain important emotional features. These features can be used to recognize the learner’s emotional state during the learning session; very important feedback that has been lost in e-Learning mode in comparison to in-school learning mode. This study investigates the relationship between the learner’s emotional state during the learning session and the colors he chooses for his annotations. The study finds its motivation, first, in the strong link between emotions and cognitive processes, and second, in the richness of learner’s annotation as an object. The experiment was designed to generate multiple emotional states. We collected learners’ annotations and learners’ emotional feedback. The CA (Correspondence Analysis) of the collected data shows a significant relationship between the learner’s emotional state and annotations’ colors. In particular, Black and Red are strongly related to Fear and Anger, while green and blue are strongly associated with Envy and Sympathy. These findings may help us to better understand the emotional dimension of colors during cognitive activities. These findings have, also, important implications for developing new tools to help tutors supervise their learners’ emotional states during distant learning.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Different theories exist in the literature regarding the link between emotions and cognition. After a long separation between the two components, Lazarus (1982) showed that cognition influences emotions and vice versa. Most researchers investigating this link in the learning context (Craig et al., 2004; Pekrun, 2014; Pekrun & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2014) focused on attention, attitude, memorization, and decision making. In their works, Bechara et al. (2000) detail how emotions can influence decision making and other cognitive components involved in the process (working memory for example).

In a learning context, the classroom is considered an emotional place (Zhu et al., 2020). The teacher can perceive and incorporate the emotional feedback to adapt learning activities and content (Afzal & Robinson, 2011). However, online learning platforms have been designed following a resource-centred vision (Balla, 2009). As a result, these platforms showed a low level of interaction (Angeli et al., 2003; Chorfi & Al-hudhud, 2019). Consequently, e-Learning platforms have limited support for the emotional facet. Furthermore, O’Regan (2019) showed that the technology itself can provoke negative emotions such as frustration, and anxiety. Better integration of the emotional facet can be used to enhance the learning adaptation (Picard & Klein, 2002) in addition to learner’s personal information, prior knowledge, and learning style currently used (Aeiad & Meziane, 2019). Despite the progress, incorporating the socio-cultural dimension in e-Learning platforms is still “challenging” (Feidakis et al., 2014; Güngör & Demirbaş, 2011).

A large part of the works investigated the use of learner’s traces on the e-Learning platform, also called learner-generated content (Kolog et al., 2019). The learner leaves multiple cognitive (traces such as comments, messages, reports, and questions. Consequently, they have an important emotional aspect and may contain several emotional features. Colace et al. (2014) explored the usability of textual resources in emotion recognition. Cobos et al. (2014) investigated the use of marks to determine the learner’s emotional state.

In this study, we will focus on learners’ annotations as a means for emotion recognition. During learning activity, the learner uses annotations as external personal memory (Azouaou & Desmoulins, 2005; Mostefai et al., 2010) or to support the learning process (Shukla & Chaudhary, 2012). In addition, annotations are complex objects with several rich components (Desmontils & Jacquin, 2002). They can provide sufficient features to support emotion detection. Indeed, annotation value is a text that can be processed for sentiment analysis). Its visual forms (emojis and icons) can also be used for emotional feedback (Boutefara & Mahdaoui, 2018) and for emotion recognition (Ptaszynski et al., 2010).

In this study, we will focus on a third visual component: annotation color. Colors are strongly related to emotions (Nijdam, 2009). Therefore, we can formulate the central thesis of this paper as follow: the learner’s annotation color is strongly related to his emotional state during the annotation (and consequently during the learning activity). The objective of this research is to determine whether there is a significant correlation between annotation’s color and the learner’s emotional state. If proven, this correlation between the annotation colors and the learner’s emotional state can be the foundation for emotion detection tools on e-Learning platforms. These tools can allow the tutor to adapt learning content and to intervene with the student if necessary.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II will summarize the literature concerning our study. Then, Section III will detail the experiment plan, choices, participants, and used tools. Finally, Section VI will present the experiment’s results and their discussion.

Background
Emotions
Emotions are a very intuitive notion that everyone experiences every day, however, it remains very hard to define. Many schools in many research fields have proposed their vision. In the e-Learning context, we prioritize interaction and communication, thus, we focus on two event-driven visions:

The James-Lange theory has been formulated during the nineteenth century by Wiliam James and Carl Lange (Cannon, 1927). This theory sees emotions as the awareness of a physiological response to emotion-arousing external stimuli. In other words, when an external event occurs and stimulates the person, the automatic nervous system reacts by a set of physiological changes (heart beating, respiration rhythm, blood pressure, etc.). Then, the person’s brain will interpret these changes into emotions (Pekrun & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2014).

Cannon-Bard theory is another interesting theory of emotions in psychology (Cannon, 1927; Dror, 2014). It was proposed in the late 1920s by Walter Cannon and Philip Bard. This theory says that the external event (stimuli) triggers simultaneously arousal (physiological changes) and the person’s experience of emotion.

These two theories find their importance in the e-Learning context by seeing emotion as a physiological reaction to environmental events and stimuli. In contrary to other theories, these theories do not focus on modelling how the emotion itself is “felt” or “interpreted” by the subject. The cognitive theories study thoughts and other mental activity and their relationship with emotions. The neurological theories explore the activity within the brain and how it leads to emotional responses. In an e-Learning context, these theories are very complex to integrate into distant learning platforms.

Emotion models
For a better representation and manipulation of emotion, several emotion models have been proposed. These models aim to allow a clear, distinctive, and exhaustive representation of emotional states. Some emotional models can study emotions in the largest context while other models define a precise context of the study.

Emotion models can be classified into Categorical models and Dimensional models. First, Categorical models define a set of basic emotions to describe the emotion phenomenon (Ekman, 1992). Many models have been proposed to define a set of “basic emotions” (Tracy & Randles, 2011). Ekman (1992), for instance, defined: anger, awe, contempt, disgust, embarrassment, excitement, fear, guilt, interest, sadness, shame, and surprise as being the basic emotions. However, these models are general and are not adapted for learning situations. In this context, Craig et al. (2004) propose a model of six emotions: frustration, boredom, flow, confusion, eureka and neutral. This focus on learning situated emotions suggests that there is a set of basic emotions that are more likely to be perceived during learning activities (Astleitner, 2001). This suggestion stays debatable as many authors perceived a larger set of basic emotions among children, particularly when serious games are used as a means of learning (Ouherrou et al., 2019).

Second, Dimensional models consider a continuous representation of emotions in a multidimensional space. An emotional state takes his position by taking a value for every dimension (Binali & Potdar, 2012). The most used dimensions are Valence and Arousal (Fig. 1). The valence axis measures the degree of pleasant and unpleasant (i.e., positive and negative) feelings. The arousal axis represents the degree of excitement and calm (i.e., activation-deactivation) of the emotion (Yu et al., 2016).

Fig. 1
figure 1
Dimensional representation of emotions (Binali & Potdar., 2012).

Full size image
Emotions in e-learning situation
In an e-Learning context and following the Socio-constructive approach, both visions can be adopted as a foundation in emotion-aware system design for two main reasons. First, the communication nature of the learning activity puts the learner in an event-driven environment (Sandanayake et al., 2011). As an active actor, he must communicate, make researches, collect data and information, and participate in discussions and produces results. Second, both theories confirm that emotion is strongly associated with a set of changes on multiple levels (influence on cognitive processes, facial expression, changes in tone, and changes in bio-signals). Thereby, the emotional state is deductible from different emotional features using adequate models.

Several works proposed emotion models for learning situations. Models from both categorical and dimensional approaches can be found. Categorical models define sets of emotions strongly related to online educational situations and learning experiences (Craig et al., 2004). In contrary to other basic emotion models, this model focuses on academic emotions. For example, FEASP model is a categorical model (Astleitner, 2001). FEASP defines five (05) basic academic emotions; FEASP stands for Fear, Envy, Anger, Sympathy, and Pleasure (Astleitner, 2001). Astleitner proposed an Emotional Design of Instruction approach that aims to decrease fear, envy and anger, and to increase sympathy and pleasure. In the learning context, fear is mainly “test anxiety” which is related to distress and uneasiness. Envy occurs when the learner lacks something in comparison to other learners or to self-relevant attributes. Anger is looked upon as a feeling that can have destructive consequences. It can occur when inappropriate obstacles are used during learning activities. Sympathy is related to friendships between students and teachers. Finally, pleasure in learning context is a positive emotion in relation to mastering a situation.

Dimensional models are used to study the learner’s position changing on both axes. These models do not focus on a particular emotion mapping or recognition. Kort et al. (2001) associate the valence axis (positive/negative emotions) to a learning axis (learning new concepts/un-learning misconceptions) to define a model for the learning cycle. Although the model confirms the emotion dynamics during the learning process, it does not focus on a particular emotion.

On a more concrete level, introducing an affective facet in an e-Learning platform is a very challenging task. Despite the important number of conducted studies, the promises of affective computing in e-Learning have not been met yet (Feidakis et al., 2014).

Personal annotations
During learning activities, the learner can use multiple tools to increase his performance. Some tools aim to enhance cognitive processes such as focus and memorization. In this context, the learner can add his personal notes to learning materials. This process is called “personal annotation”. The main goal is to assist the learner memory by playing the role of external memory.

Personal annotation can also refer to the object itself (Azouaou & Desmoulins, 2005). In the following paper, annotation refers to the object resulting from the annotation process.

Personal annotations have been largely studied in several fields such as Human-Computer Interaction (Chen et al., 2012), Semantic Web (Azouaou & Desmoulins, 2005), Information Retrieval (Desmontils & Jacquin, 2002), and in the enterprise environment (Boufaida, 2012). In the e-Learning context, annotations are seen as external personal memory (for teacher (Azouaou & Desmoulins, 2005) and learner (Mostefaiet al., 2010; Shukla & Chaudhary, 2012; Mokeddem et al., 2009)), support to the learning process (Ochi et al., 2002), and collaborative medium between different actors (Chen et al., 2012).

Several annotation models have been proposed. Veron’s model proposes a set of properties to represent an annotation. These properties are the annotation’s goal, form, anchor, timestamp, author, and support (Boufaida, 2012).

Azouaou and Desmoulins (2005) propose the MemoNote model. This model adds additional properties and proposes an organization of three facets. First, the personal facet presents the author and its attributes. Second, the knowledge facet is the set of concepts linked to the annotation. Finally, the cognitive facet represents the visual form and its interpretation by the author and other addressees.

The cognitive facet groups visual form (underlining highlighting, text insertion for Shukla and Chaudhary (2012)) and visual attributes (shape, color, icon for Desmontils and Jacquin (2002)). These attributes make the annotation a useful object by engaging cognitive abilities. From the emotional state relationship with the cognitive process, we can deduct that the user’s emotional state can indeed affect this cognitive facet of the annotation object. This richness is our main motive to investigate the relationship between the learner’s emotional state and the annotation color. Such a relationship can be used to design tools for monitoring the learner’s emotional state and to add a new tool to the pedagogical toolbox on e-Learning platforms.

Related works
The first step in affective computing is emotion recognition. For a better emotion-based reaction, the system must recognize the user’s emotional state. After that, the system has the possibility to react using an emotion computational model, or by adapting its content, navigation or environment. Therefore, emotion recognition takes the largest part in Affective Computing researches.

Emotion detection approaches can be categorized into invasive and non-invasive approaches. On one hand, we find invasive detection approaches. These approaches are based on explicit feedback tools to ask the learner about his emotional state during the learning activities (Afzal & Robinson, 2011; Hatziapostolou & Paraskakis, 2010). Feedback tools can vary from simple forms (Helgason et al., 2001), emoji-based forms (Boutefara & Mahdaoui, 2018) to more complex forms with multiple emotional layers and more complete models (Afzal & Robinson, 2011). The main inconvenience of these approaches is their invasive nature where the learner must take action and express explicitly his emotional state.

On the other hand, we find non-invasive detection approaches (Sottilare & Proctor, 2012). These approaches try to detect and recognize the learner’s emotional state in a transparent way. The idea is to use physiological and body changes associated with emotions. Features from different natures can be used (Sottilare & Proctor, 2012).

First, physiology-based approaches exploit the biological signals to determine the user’s emotional state(Cacioppo et al., 1997). For example, Shen et al. (2009) analyzed the same parameters using SVM technique; the system achieved 86% accuracy. Shen et al. (2008) opted for a set of sensors to collect Skin Resistance (SR), Heart Rate (HR) and Blood Volume Pressure; these features will be analyzed using SVM and KNN techniques. In their survey, Constantine and Hajj (2012) show that biosignal-based approaches have an accuracy that varies from 75% to almost 90%.

Second, facial expression-based approaches use image-based techniques to determine the learner’s emotional state from its face or body gesture. Volenti et al. (2007) used face structure detection to determine the user’s emotional state. The method showed around 80% of accuracy. Ashwin and Guddeti (2020) propose the detection of the emotional state of the entire class by using a hybrid convolutional neural network. The approach can process images with multiple faces. An accuracy of 86% for posed and 70% for spontaneous affective data has been achieved (Ashwin & Guddeti, 2020).

Finally, speech-based approaches use audio records in input for emotion recognition. This technique is possible because of the impact of emotions on pitch, timbre, loudness, and vocal tone. Dasgupta (2017) show the differences every emotion can cause regarding these speech features. The accuracy for “anger” exceeded 80% while accuracy for “surprise” was not higher than 54%. Other surveys (Lopatovska & Arapakis, 2011; Zeng et al., 2009) observed an average of 70% of accuracy.

However, all the previously mentioned methods suffer from some serious disadvantages when applied in an e-Learning environment. First, they need additional equipment and software to be installed on the client-side. Many works (Girardi et al., 2017; Petrovica et al., 2017; Zeng et al., 2009) agree that the need for additional equipment constitutes a real challenge for e-Learning platforms. By definition, e-Learning platforms aim to guarantee access to learning material for the largest possible number of learners (Balla, 2009); for some of them, these types of equipment and software are not affordable or accessible.

Second, additional sensors can cause a certain level of discomfort. Petrovica et al. (2017) recommend taking into account the level of discomfort caused by the sensors during data analysis.

Finally, these approaches tend to use deep learning technics (CNN in facial recognition for example). However, deep learning technics in the e-Learning context present several problems. First, model training needs a large amount of data that can be difficult to collect in respect of the privacy of learners. For example, Ashwin and Guddeti (2020) collected and manually annotated more than 20.000 images (8.000 images with a single face, and 12.000 images with multiple faces). Then, the training needs particularly high processing power; an additional load on some educational institutions. Finally, running a deep learning-based system needs also a high level of processing power that can compete with other more important and top priority components of the e-Learning platform (Lopatovska & Arapakis, 2011).

Fortunately, e-Learning platforms offer more lightweight and less expensive resources. Text, for instance, is largely used to detect the learning emotional state (Binali & Potdar, 2012). Although most of these approaches do not offer real-time detection, they are encouraged in an e-Learning context for several reasons:

They exploit already available resources on the e-Learning platform.

There is no need for additional types of equipment or software to be installed on the client-side.

Text processing for sentiment analysis consumes less processing power.

The use of text is justified by the strong relationship between the emotional state and the cognitive processes (Craig et al., 2004; Pekrun & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2014; Petrovica et al., 2017). Consequently, learners’ traces produced during cognitive activity (learning activity) can contain emotional features (Binali & Potdar, 2012; Kolog et al., 2019).

These approaches can, also, achieve a high level of accuracy. Using an SVM-based technique, Colace et al. (2014) obtained more than 80%. Depending on available data, text-based approaches achieve more advanced and human-like natural language processing and generating (Brown et al. (2020) used 175 billion to train the GPT-3 model).

In our study, we focus on another type of learner’s traces: we study the learner’s annotation of learning materials. In our study, we focus on another type of learner’s traces: we study the learner’s annotation of learning materials.

In addition to the textual component and the annotation icon or emoji, the annotation color is a particularly important component when it comes to emotional features. Colors are deeply present in all cultures with an important affective dimension (Andrieu, 2010). Recently, multiple studies investigated the link between colors and emotions. Kaya and Epps (2004) explored the link between emotions and colors for college students. The pioneering study confirmed the hypothesis and defined a model of projection between colors and emotions. Later, several models have been proposed. Nijdam (2009) presented an interesting survey on these models. For example, Strapparava and Ozbal (2010) defined a projection model of emotions in text. Another example is the study conducted by D'andrade and Egan (1974). The proposed model takes into account multiple color features such as combinations, saturation, and brightness.

Today, these findings are at the core of software design. For example, the commercial program Color Wheel Pro2 gives certain definitions of what colors are to us based on Goethe propositions applied by Johannes Itten, a twentieth-century painter (Table 1.) (Nijdam, 2009). In recent work, colors have been used to indicate the emotion value in chat (Huang et al., 2017).

Table 1 Color wheel pro color signification proposition (Nijdam, 2009).
Full size table
Other studies explored the emotional perception of colors. For example, the study by Carruthers et al. (2010) uses the arousal (Positive/Negative) dimension of the 2 dimensions continuous model (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
figure 2
Positive and negative ratings for each color by healthy volunteers

Full size image
Considering all of this evidence, it seems that the learner’s emotional state is strongly related to the colors of his annotation during a learning activity (session). The next section presents the conducted study in the light of the defined hypothesis.

The emotional aspect in Learner’s personal annotation colors: Case study
In this section, we will present our case study. To carry our study, we have followed Yin’s single case study model (Yin, 1981). Consequently, the case study design must define the main topics to be covered by the study, the type of individuals, from whom information might be obtained, and the unit of analysis. In our context, two models must be used to represent manipulated information. On one hand, we must define an emotional model to represent emotion-related information. On the other one, we must define a color model to represent the color-related model.

In this section, the case study design defines the main objectives of the study, the subjects, the experiment scenario, the emotional model, the color model, and the data collection approach.

Main objectives
Learner’s emotion recognition in distant learning is a major challenge for tutors. On one hand, the emotional state is a key element in the learning activity and content adaptation. On the other hand, learner traces on e-Learning platforms are limited; the use of specialized equipment and tools can forbid the platform from reaching a larger number of learners. Therefore, many studies explore the emotional dimension of different learners’ traces on the e-Learning platform and how they may be used to determine their emotional state during learning activities. In our case, we will focus on the learner’s annotations.

The current study aims to determine whether there’s a significant link between the color used by the learner in his annotations and his emotional state during the learning activity. This hypothesis finds its theoretical justification in two main points:

The deep link between the affective state and the cognitive process and, consequently, the profound link between the learner’s emotional state and his annotations.

The profound emotional facet of colors and the author’s emotional state (artist, decoration engineers, etc.). In our case, we will consider the learner as the author who selects the color in his annotations and highlights.

The presence of a link means that it is possible to rely on personal annotation to determine the emotional state of the learner. This new possibility will have some major advantages. First, it will be possible to recognize the learners’ emotional states in a passive (non-invasive) way. The learners do not have to complete particular tasks or fill the emotion feedback form. Second, the emotional state recognition cost will be very low. There will be no need for additional types of equipment or particular software to be installed and managed in addition to the default e-Learning platform tools.

Participants
The participants were 39 college students and employees. The subjects followed a non-mandatory ICT course on Microsoft Office suite. The participants represented all of the enrolled students in the non-mandatory course; therefore, no additional selection method has been applied. Participants’ ages ranged from 17 to 25 years old. They were from different fields; Fig. 3 illustrates the participants’ fields.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Participants’ fields of study.

Full size image
Every participant annotated two texts during two separate learning sessions. During this study, we will focus on the emotional dimension of annotations. Therefore, we expect 78 annotated texts (n = 78).

The annotation practice makes part of most learners’ learning activity, but not all. Also, the tool to be used is specifically designed for the current experiment; the learners were not familiar with it. To eliminate the significant influence of both factors, the learners had an introduction to annotation activity in general and using the developed tool. The participants were able to assimilate the concepts very easily and were able to perform the requested task without, particularly strong assistance.

The assistance during the experiment aimed mainly to ensure: a) a better understanding of the experiment and its goal, b) a better understanding and application of personal annotations as a part of learning activity, c) avoid any interference of IT-related difficulties or computer manipulation related struggling with the experiment and the collected data. We confirm that the provided assistance did not include any form of guidance or suggestion.

Experiment scenario
During the design of the experiment, we aimed to generate multiple emotional states in the subjects. Therefore, we have taken into consideration two elements:

Two parts in every text: the first part content was already explained to the students. This part is considered to be within the students’ comfort zone and supposed to generate some positive emotions. The second part contained elements that have not been yet presented to subjects. This part is considered to be outside the students’ comfort zone and supposed to generate some different emotions than the first part. This design choice is based on the works of Arpiainen et al. (2013) and Efklides (2006). The goal is to cause a feeling of uncertainty, confusion, and difficulty (It ensures that the person needs to invest more effort).

Two texts: the two texts are presented to the subjects in two separate sessions and both texts respect the part structure explained in the previous point. This design choice is made in relation to the episodic facet of emotions. By definition, emotions do not last (Pekrun & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2014).

Making these choices, we do not aim to induct particular emotions. However, we aim to generate emotional states with high valence that push learners to take action (in our case, to make an annotation) (Arpiainen et al., 2013; Pekrun & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2014).

During the experiment, learners will be asked to annotate the text parts that engender a particular emotional state. They are also to not hesitate to use different colors and to take into account different emotional states. After the end of the annotation task, the learners are asked to fill the emotional feedback form with a basic explanation of the used emotion model.

Emotional model
Given the aim of the study, choosing a categorical emotional model is more appropriate. If the (valence/arousal) dimensional model allows the understanding of the learner’s actions, it makes it more complicated for a learner to define (or choose) particular values for valence and arousal to define its emotional state during the learning (annotation) session. Therefore, a categorical approach seems to be more appropriate ad more adequate for our experiments. In this study, we have opted for the FEASP model (Astleitner, 2001), a categorical and academic emotion model. This model is also used as a basis for emotional explanation and presentation to the case study subjects.

Color model
The FEASP model allows us to think about a simple annotation color set. Another factor that encourages the use of a limited set of colors is the number of students compared to the available computers. The need of a physical equivalent of the annotation tool is inevitable. Taking into account these factors, we have opted for the following set of colors: Red, Black, Blue, Green, Yellow, and Brown.

Data collection
Collecting annotations
To collect the students’ annotations, we have designed and built a simple text annotation tool (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4
figure 4
Simple Text Annotator.

Full size image
The tool allows its user to open a text and to highlight desired parts. The graphical annotation model is reduced to the highlight color. We have also omitted annotated text value to reduce expression mean.

The tool uses an HTML like tag language that focuses exclusively on colors with a simple structure with new lines. However, the final result can be exported to HTML format.

figure a
Collecting emotional feedback
The emotional feedback was collected using a simple form in which the students attributed a color for every emotion. The subjects have been left free to attribute a color for every emotion whether the color has been used in the annotated text or not. For example, Hatziapostolou and Paraskakis (2010), Afzal and Robinson (2011), Helgason et al. (2001), and most recently Molinari et al. (2016) collected emotional feedbacks using a form; the feedbacks were used as reference or as training data.

Results
Collected data
During the experiment, the objective and the annotation principal was explained and encouraged. However, the amount and variations of annotations were left to the subjects’ judgment. Therefore, the collected data show a large variation in the number of annotations per text (from 1 to 15), the size of annotated text (from a single word to a full sentence), and the number of different colors used (from 1 to 5)(Fig. 5 and Fig. 6)

Fig. 5
figure 5
The first text annotated by a learner.

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure 6
The second text annotated by the same learner.

Full size image
Collected data are rich and deserve a more profound analysis. In the following, we will respect the main aim of this study. Therefore, we will limit our analysis to explore the relationship between the annotation color and the learner’s emotional state. The collected data from the 42 annotated texts are summered in Table 2 and Fig. 6.

Table 2 Collected data.
Full size table
Discussion
The experiment was conducted following the designed scenario. No particular difficulties were noted during the experiment presentation, annotation activity and emotional feedback collection. The experiment presentation focused on the notion of personal annotation and on how to use the annotation tool. The participants were able to assimilate the notion easily; all participants confirmed being familiar with the notion of personal annotation during learning.

The second part of the experiment presentation was necessary before the emotional feedback collection. Given that the first presentation focused only on the concept of personal annotation, a more detailed presentation of the notion of emotions during learning was performed. This second presentation included an introduction to academic emotions and the meaning of every emotion from the FEASP model.

The results of this study show that personal annotation, as a cognitive activity during learning sessions, hides an important emotional dimension. The participants were able to bind emotional states to annotation colors intuitively (Fig. 7). During the experiment, no precision was given about the strong link between cognitive activities and emotional states. Despite that, participants were able to easily recall their emotional states and perform the binding. In summary, we can say that cognitive actions are motivated by inspirable cognition judgment and emotional impression. This finding is in perfect correspondence to the works of Lazarus (1982), Pekrun and Linnenbrink-Garcia (2014), and Craig et al. (2004).

Fig. 7
figure 7
Summary of collected data.

Full size image
The results show also that participants changed colors depending on the annotation aim. This observation becomes obvious when analyzing the correspondence between the set of chosen colors during personal annotation and the set of emotions cited in the emotional feedback. All participants were able to bind an emotional state to chosen colors.

Several studies had as subject the emotional signification of colors. Some studies show clearly that every color can have different emotional signification (or value) between different subjects. Other authors tried to consider the most common emotion for different colors. The result is usually summarized in a Color Wheel (Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions, for example). However, both approaches had the emotional labelling of color as the main goal and main activity. The subjects were asked explicitly to associate each color to a particular emotion or Valence/Arousal value. The labelling activity did not make part of a larger process.

Despite those similarities, every study and experiment proposes the use of a different set of colors and emotions. The differences can be observed on different levels. For the emotional aspects, some experiments were based on a continuous model while the others used discrete models. In turn, used discrete models can be classified as belonging simple emotion models or complex emotion models. In summary, the literature does not offer a standard or a reference study for comparison.

In addition, our study differs from these studies in several important ways. First, the main activity is a learning activity; the participants were requested to annotate the desired parts of the text during the reading phase. Second, the emotional aspect of the experiment was introduced after the annotation activity (at least for the first session); during the color choice, the participants’ focus is supposed to be on their comprehension and evaluation of the annotated part of the text. Finally, the chosen emotional model for the current study focuses on academic emotions only. Therefore, we will limit our comparison efforts to two main studies:

The state of the art presented by Nijdam (2009) summaries many works that uses discrete models. The study cites the works of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Claudia Cortes, Naz Kaya, Color Wheel Pro (commercial software), Shirley Willett, and Yan Xue.

The study by Carruthers et al. (2010) uses the arousal (Positive/Negative) dimension of the 2 dimensions continuous model.

From this first summary, the relation with the emotional state is clearer for the same colors. First, the red color is remarkably used to express anger. Second, the black color is mostly used when it comes to expressing fear. The design of the experiment generated a certain fear and anger given that half of each text contains notions that have not been yet presented to the subjects.

We may also note that the red color is used to express pleasure. Pleasure is another emotion with high valence (Fontaine et al., 2007). However, Pleasure is considered as a positive emotional state, it is situated on the opposite side of anger and fear on the valence axis. Both emotions have the same level on the arousal axis (Fontaine et al., 2007).

Furthermore, green has been used to all emotional states except fear and anger. Despite being used to annotate 39 documents, green color has never been used to express Anger and Fear.

The blue color has been mostly used to express Envy. It has been also used to express Empathy. Envy and Empathy are very similar on the valence axis with a low absolute value. Therefore, both emotions are not likely to generate strong reactions. However, both emotions can be related in the learning context. Both emotions combined can be interpreted as a will to learn from a close teacher.

To better represent the correspondence between annotations’ colors and learners’ emotional states; we have proceeded to a Correspondence Analysis. “Correspondence analysis (CA) is a generalization of principal component analysis tailored to handle nominal variables. CA is traditionally used to analyze contingency tables”. Our data and analysis goal respect perfectly the application field of CA (Abdi & Béra, 2017).

To complete the CA, we have used R language with the FactoMineR1 and factoextra extensions. These extensions are additional software packages that need to be installed in addition to the R language. The result is displayed in Fig. 8.

Fig. 8
figure 8
CA result.

Full size image
Results show a clear correspondence between colors that have been chosen during annotation and learners’ emotional states during the learning session. The correspondence is particularly strong when it comes to Black with Fear, Red with Anger, and Green/Blue with Envy/Sympathy. These results confirm the main hypothesis.

Consistent with the literature, the results share the same or very close association between colors and emotions.

The Green mapping to Envy is the exact mapping in the Color Wheel Pro. Cortes and Willett proposed a mapping with Greed; in a learning context, the two emotions are very close.

Yellow mapping to Pleasure confirms findings of Goethe, Cortes, Color Wheel Pro model, and Kaya.

The Red color took a position between Anger and Pleasure. This double (Positive/Negative) position was also present in Cortes’s works and Color Wheel Pro model. Whillett, Kaya, and Xue cited only the negative mapping (Anger).

The color Black was present in Kaya’s work only. The color had the same mapping with Fear emotion.

The color Blue was mapped to the Understanding emotion. We consider Sympathy as a close emotion in the academic context.

When considering the Carruthers et al. (2010) study, we find that colors are mapping to emotion with the same arousal nature.

First, the Yellow color was associated with very positive emotion (197 positive/4 negative if we consider all yellow shades). Second, the Green color was mapped to fairly positive emotion (101 positive/39 negative if we consider all shades). Third, the Black color was associated with very negative emotions. Finally, the Red color took the middle position between positive and negative values (73 positive/70 negative if we consider all shades). These results are very similar to those obtained in our study.

However, the Brown color mapping to Pleasure is significantly different from the proposed models in the literature. On one hand, Willett model, which is the only model that considers the color brown, maps it to Depression. On the other hand, the Manchester wheel associates it with a negative emotion (3 positive/38 negative if we take both shades). The main reason for this difference is the relatively small color palette of the used tool. However, the color was rarely used compared to other colors in our study and in Carruthers et al. (2010). Indeed, the brown color was present in only 28 annotated texts from a total of 78 annotated texts. In Carruthers et al. (2010), it was picked by 41 participants from a total of 255 participants.

These findings add a new tool to the teacher’s box to follow and have indirect emotional feedback from his students in a transparent and non-invasive way.

Conclusion
Emotions recognition plays a major role during learning. Its importance becomes greater in distant learning. In the latter mode, the absence of human-to-human communication makes the tutor perception of the learner’s emotions very limited. Therefore, many studies explore emotion detection and recognition techniques.

This paper presents our study on the potential correlation between the learner’s emotional state and his choice of colors during learning annotations. The presence of such a relationship means the ability to develop tools for emotional feedback based on annotations color statistics. These tools can be a valuable addition for teachers during distant learning.

The experiment implied 39 students. The subjects annotated two different texts and every text contained two very divergent parts. The results show a strong correlation between the learners’ emotional states and their annotations’ colors. This relationship becomes more evident in the case of Black color with the Fear, and Green and Blue colors with Envy and Sympathy.

The results show a clear and notable alignment between the learners’ emotional states and their annotations’ colors. This relationship becomes more evident in the cases of Black and Red colors with Fear and Anger, and Green and Blue colors with Envy and Sympathy. In summary, these findings confirm the results of earlier studies i) there is a strong dependence between cognitive processes and emotions, ii) emotions are strongly linked to cognitive appraisal, and iii) objects produced during cognitive activities have an important emotional dimension. In addition, the findings confirm i) being an external memory; annotations have an emotional dimension, and ii) the presence of a bidirectional association between colors and emotions: learners associate a color to an object depending on their emotional state. These results can be used to design a set of new tools to assist tutors during distant learning activities: by reporting annotation content and colors, the tutor will be able to estimate the learner’s emotional state.

Future works may focus on annotation activity in the long term. Some subjects showed changing annotation behavior between the two sessions. More technical works can aim to develop a complete system to evaluate the proposition from a teacher’s point of view.