Visible Light Communication (VLC) is a subset of Optical Wireless Communication (OWC) originally based on Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) for data transmission in an imperceptible way to human vision. Thanks to its wide license-free bandwidth, high security, and its low cost, VLC becomes a revolutionary alternative to the Radio Frequency (RF) networks. This paper presents a comprehensive survey of VLC channel modeling techniques. It describes the main VLC channel components. It gives different channel models in indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground environments. It draws a synthesis comparing the algorithms proposed in each environment. Moreover, the paper gives concluding remarks and future research directions for VLC channel models.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Channel models

Visible Light Communications

Optical Wireless Communications

Light Emitting Diode

Channel impulse response

1. Introduction
The rapid development of various multimedia applications, the growing demand for high Quality of Service (QoS), high data rates, larger bandwidths, and the emergence of fifth and sixth-generation (5G and 6G) wireless communication systems have attracted academics and researchers to explore new advanced access approaches, new network architectures, and new wireless communication technologies such as Optical Wireless Communications (OWCs).

OWC is a promising wireless technology that utilizes optical spectrum as the propagation communication media. It has attracted growing research interest in recent years due to its excellent features such as wide spectrum, electromagnetic interference-free, high security, high data rate, high energy efficiency, and low-cost (Arnon et al., 2012, Grobe et al., 2013, Kedar and Arnon, 2004). In OWC, three different optical bands are used as a propagation medium including infrared radiation (IR) (Eldeeb et al., 2019), ultraviolet (UV) (Lee et al., 2017), and visible light (VL) (Komine and Nakagawa, 2004).

VLC can be used in indoor wireless communications (Younus et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2013, Eldeeb et al., 2020d, Zhang et al., 2021), intelligent transport systems (Kumar et al., 2011, Eldeeb et al., 2020g, Cailean et al., 2013), localization (Şahin et al., 2015, Moradzadeh et al., 2020, Chaabna et al., 2019, Mousa et al., 2018), smart cities (Ayub et al., 2013, Demir et al., 2020), underwater (Zhao et al., 2020), vehicular (Liu et al., 2011, Darlis et al., 2021), and underground communications (Iturralde et al., 2017). The growing interest of this technology has resulted in many research activities including surveys gathering different propositions (Karunatilaka et al., 2015, Sevincer et al., 2013, Pathak et al., 2015, Khan, 2017, Li et al., 2018, Vappangi and Mani, 2019, Obeed et al., 2019, Matheus et al., 2019a).

In this background, the optical channel is one of the critical aspects for the design of the VLC system. It has a significant impact on its performance. It mainly depends on the type of communication environment such as indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground.

Indoor VLC systems are defined as optical communication within a limited space. They support both line-of-sight (LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) (Ghassemlooy et al., 2019, Haas et al., 2017, Eldeeb et al., 2018). In fact, several approaches have been proposed to model and characterize the indoor VLC channel, most of them are an extension of conventional indoor IR channel models (Rodríguez et al., 2013, Chowdhury et al., 2014, Grubor et al., 2008, Eldeeb et al., 2017a).

On the other hand, VLC can be also used for outdoor applications, one such promising approach is Vehicular VLC (VVLC). However, this type brings additional challenges due to the atmospheric conditions (Ghassemlooy et al., 2019). Therefore, several studies have been carried out in the literature in order to model the VVLC channel taking into account the LOS (Kumar et al., 2011, Akanegawa et al., 2001, Kitano et al., 2003, Kumar et al., 2009), and NLOS links (Lee et al., 2012b, Eldeeb et al., 2020c, Lee et al., 2012a).

Another potential application area of VLC is marine communication. This one has attracted increasing attention as an alternative to acoustic communication due to its features such as high bandwidth and low time latency (Jamali et al., 2018). Generally, light propagation in the marine medium is affected by absorption, scattering, and turbulence phenomena due to the optical properties of water and object (Illi et al., 2019). In the literature, several approaches have been proposed to analyze and model an underwater VLC channel.

Most recently, VLC has also been introduced for underground mines. This environment is considered as the most hazardous with a very complex structure (Yarkan et al., 2009) due to the presence of toxic gases, poisonous substances, and dust (Ranjan et al., 2019). There are some works reported in the literature that describe the underground VLC channel (Iturralde et al., 2017, Wang et al., 2017a, Wang et al., 2018, Zhai and Zhang, 2015, Farahneh et al., 2017, Játiva et al., 2020a, Mansour, 2020, Wu and Zhang, 2016, Játiva et al., 2019b, Krommenacker et al., 2016).

Some surveys on VLC channels field have been published in the past couple of years. Each of them brings a different contribution as it is shown in Table 1. In fact, Johnson et al. (2013) focused on the underwater environment, in which the different modeling approaches such as Beer–Lambert Law, Radiative Transfer Function, and Monte Carlo are briefly discussed. Zeng et al. (2016) presented a more general underwater survey, which is based on three aspects including Underwater Optical Wireless Communication (UOWC) channel modeling, modulation and coding technologies, and experimental UOWC prototypes. The VLC channel models in the indoor environment have been surveyed in Qiu et al., 2016, Ramirez-Aguilera et al., 2018 and Miramirkhani and Uysal (2020). Al-Kinani et al. (2018b) gathered a set of OWCs channel measurement campaigns and channel models. Despite that, to the best of our knowledge, no work evolves the four environments simultaneously, especially the outdoor one. Motivated by this vision, we propose in this paper an inclusive survey of the VLC channel models considering indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground environments. It gathers state-of-the-art researches on different channel models. It draws a comparison between these models and discusses the strengths and weaknesses of each environment modeling approach.

Fig. 2. Number of publications on VLC channel per year.

This article presents a comprehensive survey of VLC channel models considering different environments i.e., indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground. The survey considers various well-regarded databases such as IEEE, Springer, Elsevier, OSA, Taylor & Francis, Wiley, IET, Hindawi, and others. Fig. 1 shows the number of related VLC channel models publications per publisher where IEEE is the one who published the most about VLC channel models. Fig. 2 presents the number of VLC channel models publications per year and per publisher. We can see that VLC channel models attracted a lot of interest over the last 5 years with a peak recorded in 2015. Fig. 3 represents the top 10 countries ranked by the number of VLC channel models publications where China and Turkey are the most active countries in this area ahead of England, Spain, Korea, Japan, USA, France, Saudi Arabia, and Canada. Finally, Fig. 4 shows the tag cloud of the works we have summarized, reviewed, and analyzed in this paper.

The remainder of this survey is organized as follows. Initially, we present a fundamental introduction to the area along with a description of our research methodology. In Section 3, we define the VLC system with its different components. In Section 4, we discuss the theoretical foundations of the VLC channel. Section 5 introduces the state-of-the-art of different channel models in indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground environments. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

Fig. 3. Top 10 countries ranked by number of publications on the VLC channel models.

Fig. 4. A world cloud of VLC channel models-related keywords.

2. Research methodology
In the process of the literature survey on VLC channel modeling techniques under different environments (indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground), we adopt the systematic literature review methodology (Masdari, 2017). Firstly, we start by looking for research papers providing a survey or a review on this area. In order to find an initial list of target review articles, we use Google Scholar by employing the following search strings:

•
Visible light communication channel models survey;

•
Visible light communication channel models review;

•
Visible light communication channel models overview.

The results obtained give some interesting review papers which are presented in Table 1.


Table 1. Summary of survey works of VLC channel models.

Authors	Year	Environment areas	Key features
(Johnson et al., 2013)	2013	Underwater	- Different channel modeling approaches for underwater optical wireless
communication
- Channel challenges for UOWC
(Zeng et al., 2016)	2016	Underwater	- Different link configurations (point-to-point LOS, diffused LOS, retroreflector-based LOS, and NLOS)
- Various channel modeling approaches for UOWC (Beer–Lambert law,
Monte Carlo…)
- Modeling of link misalignment and turbulence for UOWC
- Summary of existing UOWC models
(Qiu et al., 2016)	2016	Indoor	- Theory of photometry
- Channel modeling for visible light communication
- Classification of VLC channel models
- Comparison of existing VLC channel models
- Different parameters of VLC channel
- Future works
(Ramirez-Aguilera et al., 2018)	2018	Indoor	- Some VLC channel characteristics
- Review of different channel modeling approaches for infrared
wireless communication
- Review of different channel modeling approaches for visible light
communication
- Channel challenges
(Al-Kinani et al., 2018b)	2018	Indoor,
underwater, and
underground	- Different channel scenarios of OWC
- Different channel characteristics
- Channel measurements and models for indoor, underwater, and underground
environments
- Comparison of existing indoor, and underwater channel models
- Future research of UOWC channel
(Miramirkhani and Uysal, 2020)	2020	Indoor	- Different indoor VLC channel modeling approaches
- Comparison of the existing models
- Mobile channel models
- IEEE reference channel models
Secondly, for finding new proposals and research articles in the context of VLC channel modeling, we identify the main search keywords which are given in Table 2. Based on these keywords, we look for the search strings presented in the third column of the same table. This process, allows us to build a database of articles related to the VLC channel models.

The results achieved from these searches are screened to find credible and original papers, using a combination of inclusion and exclusion criteria. These criteria ensure that the selection process is objective and helps to limit irrelevant papers. The criteria considered in our study are summarized in Table 3. For example, articles from the journals which are not provided by the publishers listed in Table 4 are excluded.


Table 2. Research keywords.

Groups	keywords	Synonyms
Related to general area	OWC Channels	Optical Wireless Communication Channels
OWC Links	Optical Wireless Communication Links
UOWC Channels	Underwater Optical Wireless Communication Channels
UMCS Channels	Underground Mining Communications Channels
Related to target area	VLC Channels	Visible Light Communication Channels
VLC Links	Visible Light Communication Links
VVLC Channels	Vehicular Visible Light Communication Channels
V2I VLC Channels	Vehicle to Infrastructure Visible Light Communication Channels
V2V VLC Channels	Vehicle to Vehicle Visible Light Communication Channels
I2V VLC Channels	Infrastructure to Vehicle Visible Light Communication Channels
C2C VLC Channels	Car to Car Visible Light Communication Channels
UVLC Channels	Underwater Visible Light Communication Channels
UM VLC Channels	Underground Mining Visible Light Communication Channels
Related to research methods	CBM	Ceiling Bounce Model
RT	Ray-Tracing
MC	Monte Carlo
RM	Recursive Model
IM	Iterative Model
GBSM	Geometry-based Stochastic Model
RTE	Radiative Transfert Equation
SM	Stochastic Model
MMC	Modified Monte Carlo
GBDM	Geometry-based Deterministic Model
LOS Channel	Line of Sight Channel
Finally, we formulate a set of research questions (RQs), which are helpful to identify the lack of research in this field. Therefore, the present paper tries to answer six main questions described in Table 5.


Table 3. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria.

Inclusion Criteria	Exclusion Criteria
• Papers presenting new propositions for VLC channel models	• Papers published in predatory journals or predatory conferences
• Papers dealing with different channel modeling approaches	• Papers with less than 4 pages
• Papers addressing at least one of the identified research questions	• Papers written in a language other than English
• Paper representing a complete version when several versions exist	• Papers which do not provide details on the areas of interest of VLC channel
• Available papers until 2021	• Papers published in the form of tutorial, abstract, poster, keynote, or a summary of a conference
• The full paper is not available for download
• Not peer-reviewed scientific papers

Table 4. Electronics publishers.

3. Architecture of visible light communication system
The architecture of the end-to-end VLC transmission system is illustrated in Fig. 5. It consists of three main parts which are the transmitter (TX) front-end, the receiver (RX) front-end, and the propagation VLC channel. The characteristics of these parts have a significant impact on the VLC system. In the following, we explain each individual part highlighting its inherent components and main functions.

3.1. VLC transmitter (TX) front-end
In VLC systems, the TX front-end is the first critical part which has different components with different functions. As shown in Fig. 5, the source analog data is firstly passed to the “Source Encoder” to be converted into digital format, i.e., stream of bits ‘0’ and ‘1’. In order to fix part of the errors introduced due to the channel dispersion, a redundancy in data bits is required which can be achieved by the “Channel Encoder” element. There are various encoding techniques used in VLC systems with diverse advantages (See Lee et al., 2015 and references therein).

The encoded data is then used to modulate the intensity of the optical signal emitted from the light source with the help of the “Modulator” element. Generally, the simplest used modulation technique in the VLC system is the intensity modulation while other modulation schemes are also possible (Eldeeb et al., 2020a). In order to drive the current flowing through the LED and hence control its brightness, the LED “Driver Circuit” is utilized (Sebastián et al., 2018).

Once the electrical current flows through a light source, it generates an optical power in the form of light. Generally, LEDs are the most common light sources used in VLC systems. This is due to its inherent advantages comparing with conventional light sources such as low power consumption, long lifetime, cost-effectiveness, and fast switching.

There are four main types of LEDs with different optical characteristics which are suitable in VLC systems (Matheus et al., 2019b). The first one is the Phosphor Converted LED (pc-LED) which is widely used providing low complexity and low-cost (Karunatilaka et al., 2015). The drawback of this LED type is the limited band due to the slow phosphorus response. The second type is the Multi-Chip LED which consists of some chips to emit different light colors producing the white light (Sun et al., 2019). Using the intensity of each chip, such LED type has the ability to control the emitted colors. The third type is the Organic LED (OLED) which consists of a group of thin organic films between the two conductors. It is commonly used in displays of smartphones and is able to construct transparent and flexible devices but with less data rates (Nazari Chaleshtori et al., 2020). The final LED type is the μ-LED which is higher speed comparing with the OLEDs and can be also coupled in display panels. Karunatilaka et al. (2015) and Matheus et al. (2019b).


Table 5. Research questions.

Index	Research questions	Motivation
1	What are the most relevant application areas of VLC channel?	This question specifies the different fields of application of VLC channel. It also helps to regroup the different channel models into categories.
2	Which kinds of VLC channel methods are applied in each area?	This question specifies the main VLC channel methods used in each area.
3	Which factors are considered in the modeling and evaluation of VLC channel?	This question helps to investigate factors which have an influence on VLC system.
4	Which metrics are used to evaluate the different channel models?	This question defines the metrics applied to assess the efficiency of each channel model. This is also a useful information for the evaluation of the new proposed models.
5	Which area has the most researches on the VLC channel?	This question helps to find the interesting topic in VLC channel. It also illuminates the areas less explored that can be focused on in the future.
6	What are the research trends over time?	This question helps to find recent and future advancement in VLC channel.
3.2. VLC channel
The radiated optical signal from the LED, acting as a wireless transmitter, propagates through the optical channel where the light signal is influenced by many factors such as attenuation, interference (Eldeeb et al., 2017b), and noise (Ndjiongue et al., 1999). It should be further noted that through the channel, the light rays can be reflected, refracted, or scattered into sub-rays. At the end, the resultant VLC signal is the sum of two main components, i.e., Line-of-Sight (LOS) and non-LOS components. In the LOS channel, the emitted signal from the LED retches the RX front-end directly without touching any objects in between. In this case, the main parameters that attenuate the transmitted signal are the propagation distance and the weather conditions (i.e., in case of outdoor VLC channel). On contrast, in the NLOS channel, the emitted signal reaches the RX after reflecting/scattering from the obstacles in the channel medium (Al-Kinani et al., 2018c, Joshi et al., 2009).

3.3. VLC receiver (RX) front-end
A complete RX front-end system consists of different components including the optical filter, concentrator (RX lens), photodiode (PD), amplifier, demodulator, and decoder. As indicated in Fig. 5, the received light after propagation through the channel is concentrated on the photodiode via an optical concentrator in order to capture the maximum amount of light required for the conversion. Then, the rays passed through an optical filter to restrict the background radiation due to the sunlight and the artificial light sources. After that, the PD generates an electrical current proportional to the incident optical light (Ghassemlooy et al., 2019) which is then amplified using trans-impedance amplifiers and processed through the demodulation and decoder stages to get the final output (i.e., information data).

4. Theoretical foundations of VLC channels
To evaluate the performance of VLC systems, VLC channel modeling is an essential task. The basic VLC channel can be modeled as a base-band Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) system (Higgins et al., 2009) with a non-negative impulse response  as shown in Fig. 6.

In order to ensure a reliable, secure, and efficient design and implementation of the VLC system, it is crucial that the main features of VLC channels must be understood. Hereafter, we describe the primary features of VLCs.

4.1. Channel impulse response h(t)
The channel impulse response (CIR) is the evolution of the received signal over the time when the infinitely of light is launched by the emitter (Lopez-Hernandez et al., 2000). CIR provides all the statistics that can characterize the channel (Salam and Vuran, 2018). It is fixed for certain physical configurations of the transmitter, receiver, and reflectors (Carruthers and Kahn, 1997).

Mathematically, for a specific light source  and receiver , the total channel impulse response at time  is the sum of responses from LOS and all reflections from NLOS links, can be expressed as (Chen et al., 2017, Komine and Nakagawa, 2004, Qiu et al., 2016) (2)

Where 
 is the LOS response, 
 is the response of the light undergoing exactly k reflections.

The LOS impulse response can be expressed as (Barry et al., 1993) (3)
 
 

Where  represents the emitter’s radiation power as a function of the wavelength (),  is a Dirac delta function, m is the radiation lobe mode number,  denotes the distance between the transmitter and the receiver, c is the speed of light 
, 
 represents the effective area of the receiver, and  is the angle of incidence.

4.2. Channel direct current gain H(0)
One of the most critical characteristics of a VLC system is the Channel Direct Current (DC) gain. It returns the feasible signal-to-noise ratio for fixed transmitter power and can be expressed as (Ghassemlooy et al., 2019, Eldeeb et al., 2020e): (4)

Mostly, the channel DC gain amplitude value  is used to identify the losses in the channel, which associates the average optical power received 
, to the transmitted one 
, as follows (Al-Kinani et al., 2016b): (5)

In LOS path, if the emitter is modeled by a generalized Lambertian pattern,  can be obtained by (Komine and Nakagawa, 2004): (6) 
 
 where 
 represents the PD surface area,  is the Lambertian mode number, 
 is the receiver FOV (semi angle),  is the irradiance angle, and  denotes the distance from LEDs to the Rx point. Also, 
 is the optical filter gain, and  is the optical concentrator gain. In (6),  denotes the incidence angle at the PD.

4.3. Root mean square (RMS) delay spread
The Root Mean Square (RMS) delay spread is defined as the square root of the second central moment of the CIR. It is used to quantify the degree of time dispersion and to estimate the inter-symbol interference (Ramirez-Aguilera et al., 2018). RMS delay spread is given by the following equation (Mohamed and Hranilovic, 2009): (7)
 
where 
 represents the mean excess delay and  is the propagation delay time. The mean excess delay is given as follows (Mohamed and Hranilovic, 2009): (8)
 
The  delay spread is a critical performance criterion for calculating the upper bound of reliable data transmission rate. The maximum bit rate () transmitted through the wireless optical channel can be approximated by (Wu et al., 2012): (9)
 
Consequently, this allows to assign the limit on the symbol length used to avoid inter-symbol interference (ISI) (Al-Kinani et al., 2016b). It should be noticed that this equation is only valid if no equalization technique is used.

4.4. Optical path loss (OPL)
There are numerous attempts to accurately predict the optical path loss in different environments. For instance, an indoor VLC  model was proposed for a mobile user in Miramirkhani et al. (2017).  expression for a Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) visible light system was proposed in Karbalayghareh et al. (2020). In a similar way, Elamassie et al. (2018a) developed an  expression for an underwater visible light system. In addition,  model was presented in Wang et al. (2017a) for VLC in an underground mining environment.

4.5. Frequency response H(f)
The channel frequency response  characterizes the channel as a function of frequency. It can be obtained by applying Fourier Transform directly on the calculated impulse response  (Eldeeb et al., 2020e, Ding et al., 2015b), which is fixed for a specific room configuration and specific positions and configurations of transmitters and receivers. (11)
In practice, the 3 dB frequency of the optical channel can be obtained as (Long et al., 2016, Grubor et al., 2008, Haas et al., 2017): (12)

The 3 dB bandwidth is commonly calculated and defined as the frequency at which the amplitude of 
 declines 3 dB compared with that at the zero frequency or DC component (Qiu et al., 2016).

4.6. Rician factor
The Rician factor quantifies the power ratio between the LOS and Single Bounce (SB) components, keeping the assumption of the transmitted power as 1 W (Ghassemlooy et al., 2019). It is given by the following equation: (13)
 

4.7. Coherence bandwidth (
)
Coherence bandwidth (
) is defined as the range of frequencies over which the channel frequency response can be considered flat. In the literature, 
 was estimated using several approaches (Ghaddar et al., 2012). Based on 
, 
 is approximated as the bandwidth over which the frequency auto-correlation function (FCF) is above 0.5 (Ghaddar et al., 2012). It can be expressed as (Mitran and Stanic, 2016): (14)
 

5. State-of-the-art
In this section, we present a leading research review related to VLC channel modeling techniques and their characteristics. The majority of them follow the methodology described in Fig. 7. A classification based on their specific environment including indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground environments is detailed according to the distribution shown in Fig. 8. The percentage of the most used VLC channel models according to different environments is given in Fig. 9. As it is shown in this figure, outdoor has the highest percentage.

5.1. Indoor visible light communication channel models
Various indoor VLC channel modeling approaches are carried out in the literature as represented in Fig. 10. Most of them are an extension of conventional indoor IR channel models including both deterministic and stochastic techniques. The summary of the main characteristics of each of them is provided in Table 6.

5.1.1. Deterministic models
Deterministic channel models are usually based on the specific geometry of the environment including room, transmitter, receiver, and reflector. A review of different deterministic approaches for indoor VLC channel models is given below.

(A)
Recursive Models

Recursive channel model (Fig. 11) was originally proposed by Barry et al. (1993) for IR channel models, in which the reflecting surface of the room (ceiling, wall, and floor) is divided into  small reflective elements, each with its own area and reflection coefficient. In the following, we present the existing recursive channel models.

Komine and Nakagawa (2003) proposed a VLC system based on white LED lighting for indoor wireless networks. The recursive channel model based on Barry’s model was applied to calculate the channel impulse response. The performance of the proposed VLC system was evaluated based on two kinds of communication medium taking into account the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and the Bit Error Rate (BER) parameters. Experimental results showed that the performance of the proposed system depends on the power-line greatly if SNR obtains more than 22 dB.


Fig. 11. Recursive channel model (Al-Kinani et al., 2018b).

Another similar work was done by Komine and Nakagawa (2004), in which an indoor VLC system employing white LED lights was proposed. The pattern of Barry’s model was applied in VLC considering reflections in the second order. The performance of the VLC system was evaluated using different receiver Field Of Views (FOVs) and data rates taking into account the received SNR with inter-symbol interference. Simulation results showed that the communication performance is degraded severely by reflection and inter-symbol interference.

Nguyen et al. (2010) proposed a simulation VLC system for indoor environment. Barry’s model was adopted for obtaining the CIR in a visible light band. The performance of the VLC system was evaluated using an empty room with different transmitters positions, taking into account the illumination distribution, RMS delay spread, and received signal waveform. Experimental results showed that the maximum bit rate that can be transmitted through the channel (without needing an equalizer) will be limited to 28 Mb/s.

In the work of Lee et al. (2011), Barry’s model was proposed for calculating the CIR of VLC including the wavelength dependency nature of reflectors. Two metrics such as RMS delay spread and mean excess delay were investigated for a cubic room with two types of walls (plaster and plastic) and single/multiple white LEDs. Numerical results showed that VLC can provide a larger transmission bandwidth compared to infrared communications.

In Schulze (2016), Schulze developed a recursive frequency-domain matrix formalism for the indoor wireless optical communication channel. The performance of this method was evaluated based on four different configurations using different rooms (square and rectangular) with different wall reflectivities, transmitter/receiver locations and directions as well as different numbers of transmitters, taking into account impulse response, received power, RMS delay spread, and mean excess delay metrics. Simulation results showed that the proposed method presents a good agreement with the Jung-nickel model for an infinite number of bounces compared to previous results existing in the literature.

Ding et al. (2015a) proposed a modified recursive model to integrate non-ideal Lambertian sources with distinct radiation patterns. In this study, the authors quantified the effect of two non-ideal Lambertian sources on various channel characteristics such as frequency and impulse responses, OPL, and RMS delay spread, in comparison with conventional ideal Lambertian sources. Numerical results showed that the reduction in the standard deviation of RMS delay and OPL can reach more than 0.138 ns and 3.1 dB, respectively for two non-ideal Lambertian sources.

Nan et al. (2019) proposed a recursive complex channel model based on beam steering (Hussein et al., 2016) for the indoor VLC channels. This model was combined with the collision model in which the obstacle is described as a convex hull. The channel impulse response, RMS delay spread, and mean excess delay were calculated for five different scenarios with different positions, sizes, and shapes of the obstacles. Experimental results proved that the received energy has significantly decreased due to the existence of obstacles.

Jia and Hao (2019) proposed a recursive multi-path channel modeling method for VLC Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) link. Furthermore, the MIMO-DCO-OFDM system, based on the combination of MIMO and Direct-Current biased Optical orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (DCO-OFDM) was presented to deal with multi-path-induced dispersion and improve the channel capacity. The efficiency of the MIMO-DCO-OFDM system was verified in terms of BER under different clipping and DC bias levels, in comparison with Monte Carlo simulation results.

Ahmad and Srivastava (2020) proposed a novel modulation technique, called DP-OOFDM, based on the combination of Gaussian minimum shift keying (GMSK) pulse shaping and discrete Fourier transform (DFT) precoding for reducing the peak to-average power ratio (PAPR) of OFDM based VLC system. In their study, the recursive technique was used for obtaining the CIR of VLC channels. Experimental results showed the superiority of the DP-OOFDM compared to corresponding DFT precoded O-OFDM and O-OFDM techniques.

(B)
Iterative Models

Iterative models (Fig. 12) were proposed initially by Carruthers and Kannan (2002) for IR channel models as an alternative to the recursive models in order to reduce the computation time. These models are then extended to the VLC channel.

Long et al. (2014) employed an iterative site-based method for simulating the CIR of indoor VLC channels. In their study, the authors used the reflectance mean value of the whole spectrum of visible light for each surface. Three different metrics such as RMS delay spread, 3 dB bandwidth, and signal-to-interference ratio were investigated for two scenarios of medium-size and large rooms with different receiver positions. Simulation results showed that the signal-to-interference ratio is a useful metric.

Zhang et al. (2015a) proposed an adaptive channel estimation model based on iterative orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) and least-square discrete Fourier transform (LS-DFT) algorithm for VLC Asymmetrically clipped optical OFDM (ACO-OFDM). The accuracy of the proposed channel estimation model was evaluated for different training sequences and pilot spacing, taking into account the mean square error (MSE). Simulation results proved that the VLC ACO-OFDM system with the proposed channel estimation model is robust for the variation in SNR range and channel distribution. It can provide optimal BER performance and low computational complexity in both high and low SNR ranges.

Fig. 12. Iterative channel model (Al-Kinani et al., 2018b).

Long et al. (2016) applied an iterative-side based technique to estimate the CIR of indoor VLC channels including both LOS and NLOS components. The channel frequency selectivity was evaluated for different scenarios with medium and large room sizes, considering RMS delay spread, signal-to-interference-ratio, and channel frequency response metrics. Numerical results showed that the channel frequency selectivity arises primarily from multiple LOS paths rather than NLOS paths.

(C)
Ceiling–Bounce Models (CBM)

Ceiling–Bounce Models (CBM) are originally used for the IR wireless communication (Carruthers and Kahn, 1997), in which a closed-form expression of the CIR is established assuming a specific geometry of transmitter, receiver, and reflectors. We present below the existing CBM approaches applied on the indoor VLC channel.

Wang and Chen (2015) proposed a grouped discrete Fourier transform (DFT) precoding model for reducing the peak average power ratio of the OFDM-based VLC system. The Ceiling–bounce model was used to estimate the CIR of VLC channels. The performance of the grouped DFT model was evaluated based on two different group sizes taking into account the PAPR and the BER metrics. Experimental results showed the superiority of the grouped DFT precoding model compared to the conventional DFT precoding scheme and the original OFDM system by providing better BER performance and low computational complexity.

Chen et al. (2016) proposed an analytical approach based on the ceiling bounce model for estimating the NLOS component of CIR in the indoor VLC system. The efficiency of the analytical approach was validated using a cuboid room with a single wall reflection. Experimental results showed the superiority of the proposed approach compared to the conventional ray-tracing method in terms of accuracy and computational complexity.

(D)
Ray-Tracing Models

Ray-tracing is a very useful method for the estimation of the CIR through regions with various environment specifications including geometry, transmitter/receiver specifications, and reflection characteristics. There are two modes of ray-tracing: (i) sequential mode; (ii) non-sequential mode. In sequential mode, rays are traced through a sequence of surfaces, where only a single hit on each surface is considered. This mode is ideal for imaging systems (Miramirkhani and Uysal, 2020).

On the other hand, in the non-sequential mode, there is no predefined set of surfaces. The ray is propagated in any order through the environment that allows the scattering and reflection of the rays back to any object they encountered (Miramirkhani and Uysal, 2020). This mode is adopted by several researchers as presented in the following.

Cheng and Yan (2013) proposed a ray-tracing algorithm for modeling the indoor multi-source impulse response for VLC channels. RMS delay spread, path loss, and average time delay parameters were analyzed using three separate wavelengths and different locations of the emitter and the receiver. Experimental results showed that the blue light diode has a larger communication bandwidth than other wavelengths.

Xiang et al. (2014) proposed a human shadowing model, called shadowing ray-tracing (SRT), based on the ray-tracing algorithm to investigate the effect of human shadowing on the characteristics of the indoor VLC channel. They consider both LOS and NLOS channels. They also conducted a channel measurement experiment based on the relative angles and the receiver locations to validate the efficiency of the proposed SRT algorithm. Simulation and measurement results showed that the human shadow has a negative effect on the channel characteristics in the LOS scenario, which can be mitigated by changing the relative angle.

Sarbazi et al. (2014) proposed a VLC channel modeling approach, in which the non-sequential ray-tracing method was exploited for obtaining the CIR of indoor VLC channels. Five different configurations were used to investigate the different channel characteristics, including mean excess delay, RMS delay spread, time dispersion, and DC gain. They are based on different room sizes, different numbers of LEDs, and various receiver/transmitter locations. Experimental results showed that the value of the CIR does not change with different room dimensions when the detector is in the middle of the floor.

Miramirkhani and Uysal (2015) proposed a realistic VLC channel modeling approach based on the non-sequential ray-tracing model for obtaining CIR under the practical assumption of wavelength dependency and different types of reflections. In their work, the authors calculated various channel characteristics such as CIR, DC gain, RMS delay spread, coherence bandwidth, and mean excess delay considering various configurations using empty/furnished rooms with various dimensions, different surface materials, and different specifications of transmitter and receiver. Simulation results showed that the DC gains and RMS delay spread of VLC channels are smaller than those of IR channels for the same configurations.

The work done in Miramirkhani and Uysal (2015) was extended by Miramirkhani et al. (2015), in which a VLC channel modeling approach was proposed using a non-sequential ray-tracing method for obtaining the CIR of the indoor VLC channel. They used 15 different configurations with different numbers of illuminators, different wall/object materials, empty/furnished rectangular rooms, different room sizes, and various transmitter/receiver locations and rotations. Three-channel metrics were taken into account: (i) RMS delay spread; (ii) mean excess delay; (iii) channel DC gain. Experimental results showed that RMS delay and DC gain of IR channels are larger than those of VLC channels for the same configurations.

Miramirkhani et al. (2017) developed a mobile VLC channel model based on a non-sequential ray-tracing approach for obtaining the CIR in the indoor VLC environment. The different channel characteristics such as CIR, path loss, and RMS delay spread were determined for three different user movement trajectories within a living room with multiple luminaires and furniture. Simulation results showed a large variation in received power. Consequently, an adaptive system design with luminary selection is developed.

Lichtenegger et al. (2019) introduced a VLC channel approach based on the combination of the non-sequential ray-tracing algorithm and the self-developed algorithms in MATLAB. In this study, the proposed approach enables the determination of the receiver position dependence on VLC features with only one ray-tracing simulation. The accuracy of the proposed approach was tested using 26 different receiver positions along the diagonal axis of the room, considering channel DC gain and RMS delay spread metrics. Simulation results showed the effectiveness of the proposed approach which provides less time-consuming compared to the conventional ray-tracing method.

Játiva et al. (2019a) used a pyramidal angle diversity receiver (ADR) to mitigate the Inter-cell Interference (ICI) in a multi-cell indoor VLC system. The ray-tracing approach was used for the channel estimation. In this work, the authors applied three combining schemes including Equal Gain Combining (EGC), Select Best Combining (SBC), and Maximum Ratio Combining (MRC) to combine the obtained signal at the receiver side. The performance of the multi-cell VLC system with ADR was evaluated by a comparison between the three combining techniques (EGC, SBC, MRC), in terms of User Data Rate and SNR. Simulation results revealed that the ADR applied with the MRC technique is better than those with the EGC and SBC techniques.

Chaleshtori et al. (2020b) proposed a flexible indoor VLC system using substrate-based organic light-emitting diode (OLED) as a light source in a furnished office environment. The non-sequential ray-tracing method was applied for obtaining the CIR of the indoor VLC channel. The performance of the OLED VLC system was evaluated using both curved and flat OLEDs, in terms of BER and RMS delay spread metrics. Simulation results demonstrated that the VLC link with a curved OLED provides better BER performance than those with a flat OLED for a radiation angle .

Younus et al. (2020) proposed an indoor multi-user VLC system based on the angle diversity transmitter (ADT) to achieve a high data rate. The non-sequential ray-tracing method was used for estimating the CIR of the channel. The authors also introduced an algorithm to eliminate the effect of interference from the different LOS links. The performance of the multi-user VLC system was evaluated using 3 receiver configurations such as angle diversity receiver, wide-field of view (W-FOV) receiver, and imaging diversity receiver (IMDR), taking into account the effect of mobility, interference, diffuse reflection components, and multi-user number. Numerical results showed that the proposed multi-user VLC system can achieve a data rate of 1 Gb/s, 2 Gb/s, and 4 Gb/s for the W-FOV, ADR, and IMDR receivers, respectively.

Chaleshtori et al. (2020a) introduced a curved OLED-based VLC system to cover public places in the indoor environment such as the shopping mall. The ray-tracing approach was used to estimate different VLC channel characteristics. The performance of the curved OLED-based VLC system was evaluated for full and half-circular OLED, taking into account the BER metric in empty/furnished rooms. Simulation results showed that the average optical path losses using curved OLED in an empty room are lower by 5 and 4 dB, compared with the furnished room.

Eldeeb et al., 2020f, Eldeeb et al., 2021b conducted broadband measurements to validate the ray-tracing channel modeling approach in different indoor cases. In Eldeeb et al. (2020f), an empty room with single transmitter and single receiver was considered where three fundamental VLC scenarios were investigated including the LOS and NLOS channels. In Eldeeb et al. (2021b), the authors considered a 2 × 2 MIMO case in a furnished conference room. The same experimental setup was also modeled by OpticStudio simulator and the non-sequential ray-tracing was utilized to obtain the CIR and the CFR. The findings show a very good match between the simulation and the experimental results validating the ray tracing approach.

Wei et al. (2021) proposed an indoor MIMO VLC system that uses LED array, PD array, and two aspheric lenses (convex and concave). The ray-tracing model was used to estimate the channel characteristics. They also applied a signal processing method including successive interference cancellation (SIC) and signal combination to improve the channel capacity. Numerical results showed that the channel capacity can be improved up to 20 times and on average 4 times under the alignment and movement conditions, respectively.

5.1.2. Stochastic models
In stochastic approaches, the impulse responses of VLC channels are defined by the law of light propagation applied to a specific geometry of transmitter, receiver, and scatterer (Al-Kinani et al., 2018c). In the indoor environment, we can distinguish two stochastic models: Geometric and Monte Carlo.

(A)
Geometric-Based Stochastic Models (GBSM)

The Geometric-Based-Stochastic Model (GBSM) is one of the most important channel modeling approaches. It is derived from a pre-defined stochastic scatter distribution by applying the fundamental wave propagation laws. This model is adapted to various scenarios by modifying the shape of the scattering region (Yin and Cheng, 2016). Below is a review of different geometry-based stochastic approaches.

Al-Kinani et al. (2016a) proposed a novel approach, called Field of View Geometric-Based Single Bounce (FOV-GBSB) model, for tackling the effects of channel distortions in indoor VLC systems. Based on the proposed FOV-GBSB model, the authors investigated six different channel characteristics including CIR, DC gain, mean excess delay, RMS delay spread, Rician factor, and time correlation. Experimental results showed that the DC gain, delay spread, and Rician factor depend on the Angle of Arrival (AoA) and the distance between the transmitter and the detector.

Al-Kinani et al. (2016b) proposed a Regular-Shaped Geometric-Based Multiple Bounce (RS-GBMB) model based on the combination of the two-ring model with the ellipse method for VLC channels. RS-GBMB was used for modeling four CIR channel components including LOS, single-bounced (SB) rays, double-bounced (DB) rays, and triple-bounced (TB) rays. The effectiveness of RS-GBMB was assessed based on a variety of indoor scenarios (offices, homes, factories, and hospitals) taking into account four metrics such DC gain, mean excess delay, RMS delay spread, and Rician factor. Simulation results demonstrated the superior performance of RS-GBMB compared to other models existing in the literature.

(B)
Monte Carlo Algorithm (MCA)

The Monte Carlo algorithm (MCA) is one of the most popular alternative methods for estimating CIRs. In this approach, rays are emitted with equal optical power in directions generated with a probability density function of the Lambertian pattern. MCA was first applied to the IR channel (Lopez-Hernandez et al., 1998b, Lopez-Hernandez et al., 1998a) and later extended to the VLC channel. This model is also used in several propositions as given below.

Rodríguez et al. (2013) introduced a novel approach based on MCA for estimating the CIR of indoor VLC channels using two optimization methods. The first one divides the geometry of the environment into cubic regions of equal size. The second involves the parallelization of the simulation algorithm based on a static distribution of the rays generated at the emitter. Simulation results showed that the proposed tool gives better performance compared to other existing models in terms of computational cost and execution time.

Ding and Ke (2010) proposed a Modified MCA (MMCA) based on a new reflection model, called the Lambert–Phong pattern, for simulating the indoor VLC channel. The performance of the MMCA model was evaluated considering two different 3-D rooms with single and multiple sources in comparison with the Barry approach. Simulation results showed the superiority of the MMCA model compared to Barry’s model by obtaining low computational complexity.

Ramirez-Aguilera et al. (2016) proposed an efficient method, called (Matrix-MMC), based on MMCA and wavelength transformation matrix for calculating the CIR of indoor wireless optical channels. This technique enables to analyze the CIR as a function of the wavelength with a simplified matrix model. The proposed Matrix-MMC was evaluated based on two representative case studies in a typical office room of size 5 m × 5 m × 3 m with plaster walls and ceramic floor. Simulation results demonstrated the superiority of Matrix-MMC, which allows an easier calculation and reduced complexity.

Rufo et al. (2017) proposed the integration of four reflection models including Phong’s, retroreflective Phong’s, Blinn’s, and Lafortuneon’s models into MMCA for estimating the CIR in indoor optical wireless channels. These models are based on Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) theories. Simulation results revealed the performance of the proposed models compared to MMCA using the Lambertian approximation model in terms of bandwidth and channel estimation accuracy.

Ramirez-Aguilera et al. (2019) proposed a generalized method, called Matrix-MMC, based on MMCA for estimating the CIR of indoor wireless optical channels. In Matrix-MMC, a reflectance matrix was introduced in order to allow capturing reflection phenomena on a surface, implying changes in wavelength. The performance of Matrix-MMC was evaluated considering a typical office room scenario in comparison with the recursive (Lee et al., 2011) and ray-tracing (Miramirkhani and Uysal, 2015) methods. Simulation results showed the superiority of the Matrix-MMC method compared to the existing techniques by providing a more accurate channel and wavelength response estimation.


Table 6. Summary of indoor channel modeling technique for visible light communication.

Ref.	Modeling approach	Year	Surface reflection model	Modeling of reflectance	Radiation pattern of the light source	Software	Channel characteristics	No. of bounces	Operating wavelength	FOV of receiver	Environment
Barry et al. (1993)	Recursive	1993	Purely diffuse	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	70, 85 [deg.]	Empty room
Kahn and Barry (1997)	Recursive	1997	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
3	 nm	 70 [deg.]	Empty room
Komine and Nakagawa (2003)	Recursive	2003	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		0	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	60 [deg.]	Empty room
Komine and Nakagawa (2004)	Recursive	2004	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		2	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	60 [deg.]	Empty room
Nguyen et al. (2010)	Recursive	2010	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	50 [deg.]	Empty room
Lee et al. (2011)	Recursive	2011	Lambertian	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85 [deg.]	Empty room
Ding et al. (2015a)	Recursive	2015	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source as well as two distinct source radiation patterns	Not mentioned	 
3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	90 [deg.]	Empty room
Schulze (2016)	Recursive	2016	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	 
White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	90 [deg.]	Empty room
Nan et al. (2019)	Recursive	2019	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
 
2	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	Not mentioned	Empty/ Furnished room
Jia and Hao (2019)	Recursive	2019	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		1	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	80 [deg.]	Empty room
Long et al. (2014)	Iterative	2014	Lambertian	Averaged Reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	 
4	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	70 [deg.]	Furnished room
Long et al. (2016)	Iterative	2016	Lambertian	Average reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	70 [deg.]	Furnished room
Wang and Chen (2015)	Geometric-based	2015	Lambertian	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	Not mentioned	Not mentioned
Chen et al. (2016)	Geometric-based	2016	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		1	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	180 [deg.]	Empty room
Al-Kinani et al. (2016a)	Geometric-based(FOV-GBSB)	2016	Lambertian	Averaged Reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	 
1	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	80 [deg.]	Furnished room
Al-Kinani et al. (2016b)	Geometric-based(RS-GBMB)	2016	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	 
3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	80 [deg.]	Furnished room
Cheng and Yan (2013)	Ray-tracing	2013	Lambertian	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
40	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	70 [deg.]	Empty room
Sarbazi et al. (2014)	Ray-tracing	2014	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Zemax	
1	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	90 [deg.]	Empty room
Xiang et al. (2014)	Ray-tracing	2014	Lambertian	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
Not mentioned	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	60 [deg.]	Furnished room
Miramirkhani and Uysal (2015)	Ray-tracing	2015	Specular, Diffuse and mixed	Wavelength dependent	non-ideal Lambertian source	Zemax	 
White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85 [deg.]	Empty/ Furnished room
Miramirkhani et al. (2015)	Ray-tracing	2015	Lambertian	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	Zemax	 
White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	90 [deg.]	Empty/ Furnished room
Miramirkhani et al. (2017)	Ray-tracing	2017	Diffuse, Specular and mixed	Wavelength dependent	Non-ideal Lambertian source	Zemax	
8: Diffuse 14: Specular	White or RGB LED	85 [deg.]	Empty/ Furnished room
Lichtenegger et al. (2019)	Ray-tracing	2019	Lambertian	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	ASAP	
3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85 [deg.]	Furnished room
Chaleshtori et al. (2020a)	Ray-tracing	2020	Purely diffuse	Wavelength-dependent	Flexible OLED	Zemax	
4	Red (620, 553 nm), Green (454 nm), and Blue (480 nm) OLED	90 [deg.]	Empty/ Furnished office
Eldeeb et al. (2020f)	Ray-tracing + measurement	2020	Mixed reflection	Wavelength-dependent	Near IR LED	Zemax	
10		35 [deg.]	Empty room
Younus et al. (2020)	Ray-tracing	2020	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Laser source	Not mentioned	
2	Red LD (635 nm), Yellow LD (589 nm), Green LD (532 nm), Blue LD (457 nm)	90 [deg.]	Empty room
Chaleshtori et al. (2020b)	Ray-tracing	2020	Purely diffuse	Wavelength-dependent	Flexible OLED	Zemax	
4	Red (620, 553 nm), Green (454 nm), and Blue (480 nm) OLED	90 [deg.]	Furnished room
Wei et al. (2021)	Ray-tracing	2021	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Zemax		0	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned
Eldeeb et al. (2021b)	Ray-tracing + measurement	2021	Mixed reflection	Wavelength-dependent	Near IR LED	Zemax	
Not mentioned		35 [deg.]	Furnished room
Rodríguez et al. (2013)	Monte carlo (MC)	2013	Diffuse, specular and mixed	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	CAD			LED(Red (635 nm) Green (525 nm) Blue (455 nm))	85 [deg.]	Furnished room
Ding and Ke (2010)	Modified Monte carlo (MMC)	2010	Lambert–Phong	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	 
4	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	120 [deg.]	Empty/ Furnished room
Ramirez-Aguilera et al. (2016)	Modified Monte carlo (MMC)	2016	Lambertian, Phong, blinn, and Lafortune	Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	CAD		5	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85 [deg.]	Furnished room
Rufo et al. (2017)	Modified Monte carlo (MMC)	2017	Diffuse, Specular and mixed	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	Not mentioned	Empty room
Kowalczyk and Siuzdak (2018)	Modified Monte carlo (MMC)	2018	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
 
30	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85	Empty room
Ramirez-Aguilera et al. (2019)	Modified Monte carlo (MMC)	2019	Lambertian, Phong, blinn, and Lafortune	Averaged Reflectance/ Wavelength dependent	Ideal Lambertian source	CAD	
3	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85 [deg.]	Furnished room
Çürük and Kimyacı (2019)	Modified Monte carlo (MMC)	2019	Lambertian	Fixed reflectance	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	 
5	White LED (380 nm–780 nm)	85 [deg.]	Empty room
Kowalczyk and Siuzdak (2018) proposed a new approach based on MMCA for obtaining the CIRs of VLC indoor systems. Two metrics such as RMS delay spread and mean excess delay were investigated for five different scenarios with various locations of transmitters and receivers. Simulation results showed the efficiency and robustness of the proposed approach compared to the conventional Monte Carlo algorithm.

Çürük and Kimyacı (2019) presented a VLC channel approach based on the combination of the MMCA model with the deterministic Barry’s method for calculating the CIR of indoor VLC channels. The channel performance was examined under various configurations with different room conditions, single and multiple transmitters and different receiver/transmitter locations, taking into account Channel Frequency Response, RMS delay spread, Maximum Bit Rate (MBR), and Coherence Bandwidth Channel (CBC) parameters. Simulation results showed that the multiple transmitters are the most powerful factor influencing the channel frequency characteristics.

5.1.3. Discussion
As presented before, several VLC channel algorithms are proposed for the indoor environment. Advantages and limitations of each of them are summarized in Table 7 from which we can note the following observations. As we can see in Fig. 13, the most applied indoor VLC channel modeling techniques are ray-tracing, recursive, and Monte Carlo algorithms. In fact, the wide use of the recursive algorithm is due to its accurate results. However, it suffers from a high computational time which increases exponentially with increasing the number of reflections and small cells. To overcome this issue, an iterative algorithm was proposed as a method offering shorter simulation time. It is more than 90 times faster than the recursive method when considering 3 reflections (Carruthers and Kannan, 2002). Nevertheless, the gains are not sufficient for large-scale simulations. So, the ray-tracing algorithm was introduced with detailed geometry information to create more realistic models. However, this algorithm takes a long time to be executed due to the individual estimation of all rays from receiving points. Ceiling bounce is another simple and easy algorithm to use, but it does not take into account obstructions. Also, GBSM is easier than ceiling bounce, but it presents lacks in its accuracy. Against these limitations, the stochastic Monte Carlo algorithm is a popular alternative to deterministic techniques. It supports a complex environment with a high number of reflections. Nonetheless, the probability that the rays will be intercepted by the receiver is not high. To address this issue, a modified Monte Carlo algorithm was developed, which is much faster than Monte Carlo, but it can presents some variance in the CIR due to the random direction of the rays.

In general, the analysis of these algorithms reveals that the deterministic approach provides accurate results, which is a big advantage. Besides, 75% of the proposed techniques chose it (Fig. 13). However, it is limited to unrealistic scenarios and has more computational complexity than the stochastic approach, which is more useful for realistic scenarios even if its accuracy is lower.


Table 7. Advantages and disadvantages of indoor VLC channel techniques.

Algorithm	Advantages	Disadvantages
Recursive	- Reasonable accuracy.	- High cost in terms of computer memory requirements and total computation time. - Consider only the diffuse reflectors.
Iterative	- Short simulation time. - Consider the effect of all types of obstructions (man-made objects).	- No sufficient gains for large-scale system level simulations.
Ray-tracing	- Includes the environment specifications (geometry, furnishing, reflection, and Tx, Rx specifications).	- High computing time.
Ceiling Bounce	- Include the geometry parameters. - Simple and easy to use.	- Does not account for the presence of obstructions.
GBSM	- Simple than ceiling bounce.	- Limited accuracy.
Monte Carlo	- Less computational complexity. - Enables the processing of composed signals (with complex geometries, and a large number of reflections).	- A low rate of ray that can reach the receiver.
Modified Monte Carlo	- Faster and more accurate than Monte Carlo.	- CIR contain variance.
5.2. Outdoor visible light communication channel models
Several approaches were proposed to model VLC channels in the outdoor environment as shown in Fig. 15. The summary of their main properties is provided in Table 8.

5.2.1. Deterministic models
In the outdoor environment, the deterministic model can be divided into three categories including the LOS channel model, the Geometric model, and the Ray-tracing model.

(A)
LOS Channel

Akanegawa et al. (2001) proposed a traffic information system using LED traffic lights as a transmitter. This system considers a LOS path between the traffic light and the vehicles. The performance of the proposed system was evaluated using two road lanes taking into account the suitable modulation, required SNR, and the amount of receivable information. Simulation results showed the effectiveness of the proposed traffic information system in this problem area.

Kitano et al. (2003) proposed a VLC system based on the LOS channel model using LED road illumination which is configured to reach the norm Japan road lighting requirements. The performance of the proposed VLC system was evaluated based on two different lanes with different combinations of attachment angles and FOV angle of the receivers, taking into account the SNR distribution and the amount of data received. Simulation results proved the effectiveness of the VLC system for traffic information systems.

Kumar et al. (2009) analyzed the set-up model of the traffic system with LED traffic lights in order to optimize various design parameters, considering LOS configuration. The performance of the model was tested using the coverage of only one lane, considering the gain variation and the service area over different heights of traffic lights.

Kumar et al. (2011) presented the implementation of a low data rate traffic broadcast VLC system in road safety applications based on the LOS channel model. The performance of the VLC system was evaluated taking into account the BER and packet error rate (PER) for different interference ratios, processing gain (PG) values, SNR values, and message lengths. Experimental results showed that for reliable reception of data, SNR values of 8 to 10 dB are required.

Li et al. (2014) proposed a space–time block coding OFDM (STBC-OFDM) technology based on the LOS channel model to reduce the effect of inter-symbol interference induced by multi-path dispersion for VLC-traffic systems. The performance of the STBC-OFDM was evaluated in terms of BER in comparison with On–off keying (OOK) and OFDM schemes. Simulation results proved the efficiency of the proposed STBC-OFDM compared to OOK and OFDM schemes.

Shen and Haas (2020) proposed a novel channel model for a car-to-infrastructure link in order to investigate the impact of road surface irregularities. The received power and the SNR were investigated for five different configurations of headlights (position/orientation) and different road classifications. Simulation results demonstrated the effect of the road surface, which induces the fluctuation of the channel (SNR drop up to 4 dB).

Zaki et al. (2019) presented an analytical model to analyze the effect of different weather conditions including clear, rain, dry and wet snow on the outdoor VLC link. They consider three different attenuation models including France, Marshall, and Japan at different precipitation rates. Simulation results showed that dry snow attenuates the power more than wet snow. They also demonstrated the effectiveness of the Japan model compared to other models.

Yahia et al. (2021) studied the performance of a multi-directional V2V VLC system using an angle diversity receiver. The performance of the V2V system was evaluated considering three cars moving on a three-lane road in terms of signal-to-noise ratio for different transmitter half-angles, receiver FoVs, and bandwidths. Simulation results showed that a signal-to-noise ratio of about 13.5 dB can be achieved for a distance of 50 m.

Eso et al. (2021) performed an evaluation study on the usage of various vehicle taillights (TLs) based transmitters in visible vehicular light communications (V-VeLC). They considered four modules TL for different vehicles such as BMW, Audi, Truck, and Nissan. Simulation results showed that the radiation patterns of the different TLs have an impact on the transmission range, coverage area, and signal distribution.

(B)
Geometric-Based Deterministic Models (GBDM)

Luo et al. (2014) carried out an analytical performance analysis of the V2V VLC system based on the measured headlamp beam pattern. The geometric model considering both LOS and NLOS link configurations was employed to obtain the CIR of the channel. The performance of the V2V VLC system was evaluated considering different distances between two cars and different ranges of h (the height of the photodetector from the ground) for wet and dry road surfaces. Experimental results showed that the communication distance could be extended to 20 m with a data rate of 2 Mbps for a PD height between 0.2 and 0.4 m.

Luo et al. (2015b) presented an accurate performance analysis of the Car-to-Car (C2C) VLC system based on road-surface reflection and market-weighted headlamp beams models, considering both LOS and NLOS links. The geometric channel model was used for estimating channel characteristics. The performance of the C2C VLC system was evaluated in terms of the received optical power and BER for a series of vertical receiver planes under different communication ranges, PD heights, and road surfaces. Simulation results showed that a transmission range of 70 m can be achieved at a data rate of 50 Mbps when the PD is placed at a height of 0–0.2 m.

In the work of Luo et al. (2015a), the 2 × 2 multi-input multi-output C2C VLC system was presented to increase the transmission data rate considering LOS and NLOS links. The 2 × 2 MIMO C2C VLC system was evaluated in terms of received optical power and BER under various conditions including different vertical planes, transmission distances, and PD arrangements. Experimental results showed that for a separation distance of 1.2 m and a PD height of 0.2–0.4 m, the transmission range can reach 40 m at a data rate of 4 Mbps.

Fig. 15. Outdoor VLC channel models.

Chen et al. (2020a) proposed a non-stationary geometry-based multiple bounce model (GBSM) for street corner scenarios for MIMO-VVLC channel. Based on this model, the statistical channel characteristics including CIR, RMS delay spread, and channel gain were investigated, taking into account the variation of the vehicle velocity and the scatterers category (fixed and mobile scatterers). Simulation results showed an increase in the received light power and a decrease in both time delay and distance.

(C)
Ray-Tracing Models

Lee et al. (2012b) proposed a VLC channel modeling approach based on the ray-tracing scheme for obtaining the CIR for the automotive application. In this approach, the practical street Lamp and headlamp were used. The performance of the proposed approach was evaluated based on two scenarios including Crossroad and Metropolitan, using 13 scenes (six scenes in Crossroad scenario and seven scenes in Metropolitan scenario) for V2V and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication link. Simulation results showed that the V2I link and the metropolitan scenario have more dispersive channel characteristics.

Lee et al. (2012a) presented a VLC channel delay profile for Intelligent Transportation Systems. The ray-tracing model was used to determine the power and the path length of each optical ray for V2V and V2I configurations. The channel delay profile was evaluated for two scenarios (Crossroad and Metropolitan street), considering 13 scenes for both V2V and V2I communication links. Simulation results showed that the delay profiles from the Metropolitan street scenario are more dispersive than those from the Crossroad scenario.

Eldeeb et al. (2019a) proposed a new path loss expression based on the ray-tracing method for a V2V VLC system. This expression takes the form of a negative exponential function. Based on this expression, the BER performance of the V2V VLC system was evaluated in terms of the achievable transmission distance for different weather conditions (clear, rainy, and foggy) assuming single and dual PD deployment. Experimental results showed that the rain condition has a negligible effect on the VLC link while the fog condition causes considerable degradation.

Karbalayghareh et al. (2020) proposed a path loss expression based on the summation of attenuation loss and geometrical loss for a V2V VLC link. This expression takes into consideration the horizontal shift between two cars, the link range, the type of weather, the aperture diameter of the receiver, and the divergence angle of the transmitter beam. Based on this expression, the performance of the V2V link was evaluated in terms of the achievable transmission distance under different weather conditions (clear, foggy, and rainy) and system parameters including different receiver aperture diameters, Single Photon Avalanche Diode (SPAD) array, and background light noise ratios. Simulation results proved that the VLC system is capable of providing a reliable V2V connectivity solution with a suitable system parameters selection.

Eldeeb and Uysal (2019) investigated the effect of imperfect alignment between cars and the lane change scenario in a V2V VLC system using a 4-PD receiver. The non-sequential ray-tracing approach was applied to estimate the channel characteristics. The performance of the VLC-based V2V system was evaluated by considering three scenarios in a two-lane road with different lateral shifts, in terms of received power. Simulation results showed that the horizontal displacement of the cars has a direct influence on the received power.

Aly et al. (2020) experimentally studied the impact of using various lens combinations at the transmitter/receiver side in an outdoor VLC system. The authors adopted a non-sequential ray-tracing feature of OpticStudio ® software to calculate the channel impulse response. The performance of the VVLC system was tested by considering two scenarios (one with perfect alignment between the cars and the other considering the presence of a reception angle deviation) in terms of SNR at different transmission ranges.

Eldeeb et al. (2020b) studied the channel features of a VLC-based V2I link using a non-sequential ray-tracing methodology to obtain the channel impulse response. The performance of the V2I VLC system was evaluated considering 3 scenarios with different vehicle positions on a two-lane road, in terms of data rate and SNR. Numerical results showed that the V2I system can reach a capacity of about 70 Mb/s for a distance of 50 m.

Ivascu et al. (2020) proposed a path loss expression for the V2V VLC link, using the non-sequential ray-tracing approach. Based on this expression, the BER performance was evaluated under different weather conditions (clear, fog, and rain) and modulation orders, taking into account the maximum achievable distance. Simulation results indicated that the maximum achievable distance in the clear weather is about 72 m, and it is reduced to around 62 m in the foggy weather.

Eldeeb et al. (2021a) investigated the effect of commercial taillights (TLs) radiation patterns from different car manufacturers such as Audi A5, Nissan, and BMW on the path loss of the VVLC system. In their work, the authors used the non-sequential ray-tracing approach to obtain the CIR and proposed a new path loss model as a function of the link distance, taking into account the asymmetrical TLs radiation pattern. Numerical results demonstrated that for a target BER of 
 and a bandwidth of 100 kHz, a communication distance of 66 m, 75 m, and 80 m can be achieved for Nissan, Audi, and BMW, respectively.

Al-Sallami et al. (2021) proposed a statistical path loss model that considers the effect of the traffic conditions including inter-vehicle distance, traffic flow, and radiation patterns of the headlights (Lambertian, Gaussian, and asymmetrical radiation patterns) for a VVLC channel. They used the ray-tracing model to obtain the path loss distribution of the vehicular channel. Simulation results showed that the Gaussian radiation pattern has the lowest path loss compared to Lambertian and asymmetric patterns.

5.2.2. Stochastic models
Two stochastic models can be distinguished in the outdoor environment: Geometric and Measured models.

(A)
Geometric-Based Stochastic Model

Al-Kinani et al. (2018a) proposed a non-stationary regular-shaped geometry-based stochastic model (RS-GBSM) for vehicular VLC channels. This model used the combination of the two-ring model with the confocal ellipse method to describe the reflection and scattering from the roadsides. Based on the RS-GBSM model, channel statistical proprieties such as channel gain, RMS delay spread, and mean excess delay were investigated. Furthermore, the received optical power for LOS, SB, and DB components was evaluated under different distance ranges. Experimental results showed that the DB component carries inconsiderable optical power.

Alsalami et al. (2019) proposed a combined approach, called Regular-Shaped Geometry-Based Stochastic channel Model (RS-GBSM), based on the combination of the geometry-based stochastic model (GBSM) with the ellipse reflection model in order to derive a realistic V2V VLC channel. This approach provides flexibility in describing the location, speed, and direction of vehicles, as well as stationary/non-stationary reflectors that change rapidly and continuously. The received optical power was evaluated for LOS and reflection components considering different directions and relative speeds of vehicle motion. Simulation results showed that the LOS channel component is more influenced by motion direction than reflective components which are influenced by the relative speeds of the vehicles.

Al-Kinani et al. (2020) proposed a novel three-dimensional regular-shaped geometry-based stochastic technique (3D-RS-GBSM) for vehicular VLC multiple-input single-output (MISO) channels. The 3D-RS-GBSM technique is based on the combination of the two-sphere model and the elliptic-cylinder model, considering both LOS and SB components. Based on the proposed 3D-RS-GBSM, the received optical power was investigated under different receiver–transmitter (Tx–Rx) distances and different azimuth and elevation angles in comparison with 2D-RS-GBSM. Simulation results demonstrated the superiority of 3D-RS-GBSM compared to 2D-RS-GBSM. It is also proved that the azimuth angle has a significant impact on the received power.

(B)
Measured Channel

This type is based on the measure of the channel characteristics in a specific environment. Hereafter, some examples of these models are described.

Tseng et al. (2015) investigated the link asymmetry problem in the V2V VLC system using extensive optical radiation pattern measurements with off-the-shelf original equipment manufacturer (OEM) LED headlamps and taillights. The performance of the V2V VLC system was evaluated using 2015 Toyota Corolla Altis test cars, taking into account the received power difference of the incoming and the outgoing links. Simulation results demonstrated that in 80% of the cases, the received power of the outgoing link using headlamp of the car is 22 dB or more than the received power of the incoming link using the neighboring car’s taillight.

Turan et al. (2015) proposed the usage of the VLC dual-channel communication model in order to provide enhanced vehicular connectivity. This proposal is based on an experimental study to determine the spatial and angular limits of an off-the-shelf automotive LED fog light. The dual-channel communication performance was evaluated based on two different scenarios taking into account the received power and the data packet delivery ratio (DPDR) metrics at different inter-vehicular distances and angles. Simulation results showed that the dual-channel communication at short distances enhances the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), and increases the angular limitation up to 10° in comparison with the single-channel model.

Uysal et al. (2015) presented a performance evaluation study of a V2V VLC system using a measured headlamp beam pattern model. The results were assessed in terms of received optical power for two types of road surfaces (R2 and W3) on a vertical plane at different transmission spans. Experimental results indicated that a data rate of 50 Mb/s can be achieved at a transmission range up to 70 m, depending on the PD location.

Kim et al. (2015a) presented a V2V VLC system with a Modified Fixed Decision Threshold (MFDT) scheme using a red LED from the taillight as a transmitter and a photodiode as a receiver. The performance of the V2V VLC system was evaluated using a laboratory chamber with and without the effect of rain, taking into account the BER and the SNR metrics. Experimental results demonstrated the accuracy and the reliability of the proposed V2V system using MFDT compared to that using the fixed decision threshold (FDT).

Kim et al. (2015b) proposed a V2V VLC system based on a red LED, using a Fresnel lens and multiple photo-diodes. The performance of the V2V system was evaluated using a laboratory chamber with different fog densities and half-angles, taking into account the SNR metric. Experimental results showed that the proposed system ensures a robust and adequate performance, even under heavy fog conditions.

Turan et al. (2016a) studied the performance analysis of optical MIMO and modulation selection schemes for vehicular VLC, based on the measured channel model of vehicle brake lights. The system performance was evaluated based on seven different transmission modes using Repetition Code (RC) and Spatial Multiplexing (SM), different modulation orders, four different MIMO configurations (three 2 × 2 and one 3 × 2 MIMO) as well as four different transmitter configurations (C1, C2, C3, C4). Simulation results demonstrated that the selection of all possible transmitters does not always improve the system performance due to the power split at the transmitter end.

Turan et al. (2016b) proposed an IEEE 802.15.7 standard-compliant physical layer (PHY) implementation on Software Defined Radio (SDR) using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) automotive LED fog light in a V2V VLC scenario. The system performance was evaluated based on nine different operating modes taking into account the BER for various inter-vehicle distances. Experimental results demonstrated that the proper selection of the Modulation Coding Scheme (MCS) is a key for achieving reliable VLC transmission.


Table 8. Summary of outdoor vehicular channel modeling technique for visible light communication.

Ref.	Modeling approach	Year	Radiation pattern of the light source	Road surface	Modeling of reflectance	Channel characteristics	Software	Effect of light	Weather conditions	Geometry
Akanegawa et al. (2001).	LOS channel	2001	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	I2V
Kitano et al. (2003)	LOS channel	2003	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	I2V
Kumar et al. (2009)	LOS channel	2009	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	I2V
Kumar et al. (2011)	LOS channel	2011	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Artificial light source	Clear weather	I2V
Li et al. (2014)	LOS channel	2014	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	VVLC
Zaki et al. (2019)	LOS channel	2019	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Rainy and snowy weather	I2V
Shen and Haas (2020)	LOS channel	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Real road	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2I
Yahia et al. (2021)	LOS channel	2021	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Eso et al. (2021)	LOS channel	2021	Measured taillight	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Sunlight	Clear/Bad weather	V2V
Luo et al. (2014)	Geometric based	2014	Measured headlamp	Wet and dry	Lambertian	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	C2C
Luo et al. (2015b)	Geometric based	2015	Measured headlamp	Wet and dry	Diffuse, Specular and Mixed	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	C2C
Luo et al. (2015a)	Geometric based	2015	Measured headlamp	Real road	Lambertian	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	C2C
Al-Kinani et al. (2018a)	Geometric based	2018	Lambertian headlamp	Real road	Lambertian	 
Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Alsalami et al. (2019)	Geometric based	2019	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Lambertian		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Al-Kinani et al. (2020)	Geometric based	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Average reflectance	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	Outdoor VVLC
Chen et al. (2020a)	Geometric based	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	
Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	I2V
Lee et al. (2012b)	Ray tracing	2012	Measured headlamp and street lamp	Fixed reflectance	Lambertian	
CATIA V5, Light tool	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2I and V2V
Lee et al. (2012a)	Ray tracing	2012	Measured headlamp and street lamp	Fixed reflectance	Lambertian	
CATIA V5, Light tool	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2I and V2V
Eldeeb et al. (2019a)	Ray tracing	2019	Measured headlamp	Real road	Mixed Diffuse and Specular		Zemax	Not mentioned	Clear, rainy and foggy weather	V2V
Aly et al. (2020)	Ray tracing	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Zemax	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Eldeeb et al. (2020b)	Ray tracing	2020	Measured headlamp	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Zemax	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Karbalayghareh et al. (2020)	Ray tracing	2020	Measured headlamp	Wet	Diffuse, specular and mixed		Zemax	Not mentioned	Clear, rainy and foggy weather	V2V
Eldeeb and Uysal (2019)	Ray tracing	2020	Measured headlamp	Not mentioned	Diffuse, specular and mixed		Zemax	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Eldeeb et al. (2021a)	Ray tracing	2021	Measured taillight	Not mentioned	Diffuse, specular and mixed		OpticStudio	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Al-Sallami et al. (2021)	Ray tracing	2021	Measured headlamp	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		OpticStudio	Not mentioned	Clear weather	VVLC
Tseng et al. (2015)	Measured channel	2015	Measured headlamp and taillight	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	GNU, USRP	Ambient light	Clear weather	V2V
Turan et al. (2015)	Measured channel	2015	Measured fog light	Real road	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	V2V
Uysal et al. (2015)	Measured channel	2015	Measured headlamp	Wet	Lambertian	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient light	Rain, snow, fog weather	V2V
Kim et al. (2015a)	Measured channel	2015	Measured taillight	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Rainy weather	V2V
Kim et al. (2015b)	Measured channel	2015	Measured taillight	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Foggy weather	V2V
Turan et al. (2016a)	Measured channel	2016	Measured brake light	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Turan et al. (2016b)	Measured channel	2016	Measured fog light	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	LabVIEW	Not mentioned	Clear weather	V2V
Yoo et al. (2016)	Measured channel	2016	Measured headlamp	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	V2V
Siddiqi et al. (2016)	Measured channel	2016	Measured brake light	Real road	Not mentioned	
Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	V2V
Luan et al. (2017)	Measured channel	2017	Measured headlamp	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	V2V
Memedi et al. (2017)	Measured channel	2017	Measured headlamp	Real road	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Ambient light	Clear weather	V2V
Memedi et al. (2018)	Measured channel	2018	Measured headlamp	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	SDR	Not mentioned	Clear weather	VVLC
Eso et al. (2019)	Measured channel	2019	Measured taillight	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Clear and foggy weather	V2V
Tebruegge et al. (2019)	Measured channel	2019	Measured headlights	Wet and dry	Diffuse and specular	Not mentioned	SDR	Ambient light	Clear weather	VVLC
Caputo et al. (2021)	Measured channel	2021	Traffic light	Real road	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Ambient and artificial light	Clear weather	I2V
Yoo et al. (2016) introduced a V2V VLC system based on the LED headlamp. This system uses the inverse 4-PPM scheme with 75 dimmings under the light distribution regulation of the LED headlamp. The performance of the proposed system was evaluated according to the Tx–Rx distance under daytime conditions taking into account the BER parameter. Experimental results showed the capability of the proposed system for more than 30 m even in the daytime.

Siddiqi et al. (2016) designed a prototype of a VLC based V2V communication system for communicating hard brake warning to the vehicle. The performance of the proposed prototype was evaluated using a 1.3 km long road with high traffic density considering both daylight and twilight scenarios. Numerical results showed that the proposed prototype can detect hard brakes from a distance of 20 m and warn drivers at speeds up to 80 km/h.

Luan et al. (2017) proposed a piecewise-parabolic interpolator-based timing recovery method for evaluating the transmission performance of vehicular VLC system with the Sampling Clock Offset (SCO). The performance of the proposed method was evaluated under the presence of ambient light interference, using three different timing error detectors (TEDs) including Early–Late TED (ELTED), Gardner TED (GTED), and Zero-Crossing TED (ZCTED), taking into account the BER at different SCOs. Experimental results showed that the OOK 25 Mb/s real-time system was successfully proved over a VLC link up to 60 m.

Memedi et al. (2017) developed a realistic model based on empirical data from a measurement campaign to investigate the impact of the realistic headlight and the taillight radiation pattern on the communication performance considering two road scenarios. In the first scenario, they used a road with three lanes and seven vehicles driving (one reference vehicle), taking into account the PDR metric for different rotation angles of the reference car V0 and different distances. In the second scenario, they used a single-lane road with two turns and 2 vehicles driving (one reference vehicle), taking into account the PDR and received signal strength (RSS) metrics.

Memedi et al. (2018) introduced a modeling approach for investigating the impact of the lighting module and the vehicle type on the communication performance for V-VLC. The results was assessed based on a three-lane road using four different vehicles with five different pairs of headlight modules, taking into account the PDR for different distances and angles of the reference vehicle V0. Experimental results demonstrated that the impact of the lighting module and the vehicle type is not negligible and must be inherently considered when designing V-VLC communication systems and applications.

Eso et al. (2019) investigated experimentally the impact of fog on the camera-based VLC link for V2V communications utilizing a real car taillight as the Tx and a camera as the Rx. The performance of the V2V system was evaluated using a laboratory fog chamber with variable visibility levels and inter-vehicle distances taking into account the received light intensities for three modulation indexes (MI). Numerical results showed that the link was reliable up to 20 m and 10 m meteorological visibility for MIs of 0.5 and 1, 0.75, respectively, and degraded considerably below the 10 m.

Tebruegge et al. (2019) proposed an empirical approach in order to investigate the influence of NLOS components on the vehicular VLC system. The performance was evaluated based on two scenarios with different ground reflection characteristics (dry and wet road), taking into account the path length. Simulation results showed that the NLOS component has a constructive effect and improves the signal.

Caputo et al. (2021) performed an experimental measurement for the characterization of VLC channels, using a traffic light source and a photodetector receiver for VLC based-I2V communication. These measurements are conducted in an urban road for three different receiver heights in the presence of parasitic light sources. They also proposed three propagation models (I1, I2, and I3) using a linear regression technique. The results demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed models compared to the conventional Lambertian model in terms of complexity and accuracy.

5.2.3. Discussion
Table 9 summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of the reviewed outdoor environment channel techniques. We can see that the LOS channel, which is the first used technique, gives deterministic results with a high data rate. However, it is limited to unrealistic scenarios. To address this limitation, the widely geometry-based models including GBDM and GBSM were proposed. Both methods use simplified geometric calculations to be close to realistic situations. Nevertheless, they present some lack in their accuracy. The ray-tracing algorithm takes into account the detailed geometry information of the surroundings bringing better accurate estimations. Nonetheless, it cannot be extended to a large class of scenarios, due to its long time consuming to describe the propagation environment.

On the other hand, the measured channel presents a more practical scenario, but its main drawback is that all channel measurements are generated for a single location, which leads to a lack of the channel spatial consistency (Turan and Coleri, 2020). Despite that, the measured channel remains the most applied method as we can see in Fig. 16.


Table 9. Advantages and disadvantages of outdoor VLC channel techniques.

Method	Advantages	Disadvantages
LOS channel	- Deterministic results.
- High data rates.	- Not applicable to automotive street lamp and headlamps(low and high beam).
Geometry-based	- Simplified geometric calculations.	- Limited accuracy.
Ray tracing	- High estimation accuracy.	- Cannot be easily generalized to a wider class of scenarios.
Measured channel	- Consider a more practical situation.	- High cost. - Lacks the instantaneous channel spatial consistency (Turan and Coleri, 2020).

Fig. 16. Number of VLC channel techniques published in outdoor environment.


Fig. 17. The parameters used in the evaluation of the outdoor VLC channel.

At the same time, the models-based analysis (Fig. 16) conducted on the outdoor VLC techniques reveals that deterministic models are used in 56% of methods in comparison with stochastic ones. This is because they give accurate results.

To evaluate the outdoor VLC channel methods, many metrics are observed. The rate of their use through the studied techniques is given in Fig. 17. We can see that received power is the most measured one which makes it possible to show the effect of external factors such as weather conditions and artificial light.

5.3. Underwater visible light communication channel models
Another potential application area of VLC is marine communication. Several approaches (Beer–Lambert Law, Radiative Transfer Equations (RTE), Random-based, and Monte Carlo) are proposed in the literature in order to analyze and model an underwater VLC channel as shown in Fig. 18. Their main properties are summarized in Table 10.

5.3.1. Deterministic models
(A)
Beer–Lambert Law

Beer–Lambert law is generally used to model the underwater visible light communication (UVLC) channels. It is the simplest model applied to evaluate the optical loss (Zeng et al., 2016). It is assumed that the received power decreases exponentially as a function of the distance and attenuation coefficient. However, this approach considered that the scattered photons are completely lost.

Smart (2005) evaluated the performance of underwater optical wireless communication system based on the Beer–Lambert law model in various water types and communication ranges, considering the effects of environmental variability, such as refractive index variations with depth.

Arnon and Kedar (2009) introduced a novel NLOS UOWC system in which nodes communicate with each other through reflection at the ocean–air interface. The performance of the proposed system was evaluated in a clear ocean as a function of sensor node separation taking into account the received photons and the BER. Simulation results showed that the increase in node separation distance improves the BER of the proposed system.

Hamza et al. (2016) presented an analytical generic model of the solar noise and studied its impact on the point-to-point UWOC link performance in terms of BER. In their work, the authors investigated three different PD types including Positive-Intrinsic-Negative (PIN), Avalanche Photo-Diode (APD), and Photo-Multiplier Tube (PMT), considering different values of the receiver FOV and aperture diameter (dPD). Simulation results showed that the PIN-based receiver has more robustness against the background noise when compared with APD and PMT-based receivers.


Fig. 18. Underwater VLC channel models.

Wang et al. (2016) designed a long-distance UVLC system where a two-term exponential channel model with a SPAD receiver is established. The performance of the UVLC system was evaluated considering two types of underwater environments (pure seawater and clean ocean) under different configurations using different LED powers, half power angles, and FOV angles. Simulation results showed that the SPAD receiver can extend the transmission distance effectively by about 500 m in pure seawater.


Table 10. Summary of underwater channel modeling technique for visible light communication.

Ref.	Modeling approach	Year	Water type	Source modeling	Channel characteristics	Effect of noise	Operating wavelength	Receiver FOV	Environment
Smart (2005)	Beer–Lambert	2005	Pure sea,clear ocean, turbid and gulf	Ideal laser source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Arnon and Kedar (2009)	Beer–Lambert	2009	Clear ocean	Ideal laser source	Not mentioned	Dark current and Background noise	 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater sensor
Hamza et al. (2016)	Beer–Lambert	2016	Clear ocean	Ideal Lambertian source		Background noise	 nm	0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 45 [deg.]	Point to point UWOC
Wang et al. (2016)	Modified Beer–Lambert	2016	Pure sea and clear ocean	Ideal Lambertian source		Dark current noise	 nm	10, 30 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Elamassie et al. (2018b)	Modified Beer–Lambert	2018	Pure sea, clear ocean, coastal, and harbor water	Ideal Laser source		Background, thermal, shot and dark current noise	 nm	60, 120, 180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Jaruwatanadilok (2008)	Analytical RTE	2008	Sea water	Left-handed circular polarized (LHCP) light		Background, thermal, shot and dark current noise	 nm	10, 50 [mrad.]	Underwater environments
Cochenour et al. (2008)	Analytical RTE	2008	Pure sea, clear ocean, coastal and harbor water	Gaussian Laser source	Not mentioned	Dark current noise	 nm	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Dong et al. (2013)	Analytical RTE	2013	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal Laser source	Not mentioned	Background, thermal, and dark current noise	 nm	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Li et al. (2015)	Numerical RTE	2015	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal Laser source		Not mentioned	 nm	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Illi et al. (2018)	Numerical RTE	2018	Harbor-I, Harbor-II, and coastal	Ideal Laser source		Thermal and shot noise	Not mentioned	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Illi et al. (2019)	Numerical RTE	2019	Harbor-I, Harbor-II, and pure sea	Ideal Laser source		Thermal and shot noise	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Zhang et al. (2014)	Stochastic model	2014	Coastal water	Ideal Laser source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	 nm	20, 40, and 180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Zhang et al. (2015b)	Stochastic model	2015	Clear, coastal, and harbor water	Ideal Laser source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Zhang and Dong (2015)	Stochastic model	2015	Coastal and Harbor water	Ideal Laser source		Not mentioned	 nm	20, 40 and 180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Liu et al. (2016)	Stochastic model	2016	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal Laser source	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	 nm	10, 30, 60, and 80 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Zhou and Dong (2016)	Stochastic model	2016	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal Laser source		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Dong and Liu (2016)	Stochastic model	2016	Clear sea and seawater	Ideal Laser source		Background, thermal, shot, and dark current noise	 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Zhang et al. (2018)	Stochastic model	2018	Clear, coastal, and harbor water	Gaussian Laser source		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Gabriel et al. (2011)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2011	Pure sea, clear ocean, coastal, and harbor water	Ideal Laser source		Not mentioned		180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Li et al. (2012)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2012	Clear ocean, coastal, and harbor water	Gaussian Laser source		Not mentioned		10 [mrad.]	Underwater environments
Gabriel et al. (2013)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2013	Pure sea, clear ocean, coastal, and harbor water	Ideal Laser source		Thermal noise		180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Tang et al. (2013b)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2013	Clear ocean and coastal water	Ideal Laser source		Not mentioned	Not mentioned	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Guerra et al. (2013)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2013	Pure seawater	Ideal Lambertian source		Not mentioned	 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Tang et al. (2013c)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2013	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal laser source	
Not mentioned	 nm	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Guerra et al. (2014)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2014	Pure seawater	Ideal Lambertian source	 
Not mentioned	 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Choudhary et al. (2014)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2014	Clear ocean, and coastal water	Ideal laser source		Background noise	 nm	30, 60 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Dong et al. (2014)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2014	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal laser source		Not mentioned	 nm	20, 40, 180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Liu et al. (2014)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2014	Clear ocean, coastal, and harbor water	Ideal laser source		Thermal noise	 nm	60	Underwater environments
Dong et al. (2015)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2015	coastal and harbor water	Ideal laser source		Background noise	 nm	60, 120, 180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Liu et al. (2015)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2015	Coastal and harbor water	Ideal laser source		Thermal noise	 nm	60 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Jamali et al. (2018)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2018	Clear ocean, coastal water, and harbor water	Ideal Lambertian source	
Background radiation, dark current, shot and thermal noise	 nm	40 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Ghazy et al. (2019)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2019	Clear ocean and coastal seawater	Ideal laser source	Not mentioned	Thermal noise	 nm	180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Kammoun et al. (2019)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2019	Clear ocean, coastal, and harbor water	Ideal laser source		Not mentioned	 nm	90 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Jiang et al. (2020)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2020	Coastal water	Ideal laser source		Clipping noise	 nm	90 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Chen et al. (2020b)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2020	Turbid harbor	Ideal Lambertian source		Background, thermal, shot and dark current noise	 nm	80 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Mahmoud et al. (2021)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2021	Pure sea water, clear ocean water, and coastal ocean water	LED source		Not mentioned	 490 nm	Not mentioned	Underwater environments
Wang et al. (2021)	Monte Carlo (MC)	2021	Pure sea water, clear ocean water, coastal ocean water, and turbid harbor	LED and LD source		Solar noise	Not mentioned	15, 35, 180 [deg.]	Underwater environments
Elamassie et al. (2018b) developed a closed-form path loss expression based on a modified Beer–Lambert Law for UVLC systems. The proposed expression was used to determine the maximum achievable link distance in turbid water (coastal and harbor water) and non-turbid water (pure sea and clear ocean), considering different beam divergence angles and various receiver diameters. Simulation results showed that for a target BER  
, a transmission range of 21.33 m, 15.02 m, 11.82 m, and 4 m can be achieved for pure sea, clear ocean, coastal and harbor water, respectively.

(B)
Radiative Transfer Equations (RTE)

Another general deterministic model for the UVLC channel is the Radiative Transfer Equations. RTE allows the description of the energy conservation of the light propagating over an absorbing and scattering medium. The RTE is represented by an integro-differential equation where its derivation can be solved both analytically and numerically.

•
Analytical RTE

Analytical RTE is one of the proposed solutions. However, finding an accurate analytical solution is enough complicated. So, there are only few analytical RTE models were proposed in recent years.

Jaruwatanadilok (2008) presented a channel modeling approach based on the vector radiative transfer (VRT) theory for the estimation of the CIR of an underwater wireless optical communication system. This approach takes into account the effects of multiple scattering and light polarization. The BER performance was evaluated taking into account the received signal as a function of distance, data rate, and receiver FOV. Experimental results showed that as the distance increases, the performance decreases.

Cochenour et al. (2008) proposed an analytical RTE model for laser-based UOWC link. The link performance was evaluated considering the received optical power for various communication ranges and transmitter/receiver pointing accuracies. Experimental results showed that for more turbid water (), most of the received optical signal comprises scattered light.

Dong et al. (2013) used a numerical approach of BER calculation for evaluating the performance of downlink UWOC systems in both coastal and harbor water. They consider the effects of random sea surface slopes generated by wind and the scattering property of seawater. Numerical results demonstrated that an increase in seawater turbidity will cause less pointing errors which imply a reduction of the BER degradation.

•
Numerical RTE

Besides the utilization of analytical solutions, most researchers focused on developing numerical RTE solvers as shown in the following.

Li et al. (2015) proposed a numerical RTE approach for calculating the path loss of UOWC systems. In this approach, angular and spatial variables were firstly discretized and then the completely large system of linear equations was solved by a Gauss–Seidel iteration approach. The performance of the proposed approach was evaluated using three different water types taking into account the received power and the time gain parameters. Simulation results demonstrated the superiority of the proposed approach which has much faster speed when compared to the Monte Carlo technique.

Illi et al. (2018) proposed an improved numerical RTE approach for UOWC system. This approach is based on the upwind finite difference scheme involving two-neighbors points, as well as using the combination of the 3-points Simpson’s quadrature method and the 5-points Boole’s rule given by the Newton Cotes formula. The performance of the UOWC system was evaluated based on three different water types (Coastal, Harbor-I, and Harbor-II) taking into account the BER metric as a function of distance and time. Simulation results showed that the bit error rate decreases as the power increases.

Illi et al. (2019) proposed an enhanced numerical TD-RTE solver to measure the light propagation loss in the underwater medium. The proposed solver incorporated Simpson’s model alongside with 5-points and 7-points Boole’s rule given by the Newton-Cotes formulas. In this work, they applied three-phase functions such as single-term Henyey–Greenstein (STHG), two-terms Henyey–Greenstein (TTHG), and Fournier–Forand (FF). The performance of the proposed solver was evaluated as a function of propagation time and distance, absorption and scattering coefficient as well as the number of angles for two water type (Harbor-I and Harbor-II), taking into account the received light power. Simulation results showed the superiority of the proposed RTE solver which has low complexity compared to its MC counterpart.

5.3.2. Stochastic models
(A)
Random-based Models

As an alternative to RTE, in the underwater environment, several random-based models were also proposed based on the probabilistic nature of photon trajectory.

Zhang et al. (2014) proposed a stochastic model for UVLC channels. Their model adopted the Henyey–Greenstein (HG) function as a Probability Density Function (PDF) of scattering angle. The temporal and spatial distribution of photons was evaluated in coastal water using different configurations of receiver (FOV and aperture size) and link range, taking into account the probability of LOS and the single scattering components. Numerical results showed that the proposed stochastic model gives better results when compared with the Monte Carlo method.

In Zhang and Dong (2015), Zhang and Dong developed a general stochastic channel model for characterizing the spatial–temporal behavior of UWOC links. In their work, the authors considered all three types of components, including non-scattering, single, and multiple scattering. The link performance was evaluated in terms of path loss, attenuation, and scattering richness in coastal and harbor water using various configurations of receiver parameters (aperture and FOV), scattering orders, and link ranges. Numerical results showed that the stochastic model outperforms the Monte Carlo method in a turbid water environment.

Following the similar stochastic approach of Zhang and Dong (2015), Zhou and Dong (2016) derived an analytical model to represent the impulse response of a single scattering component. The accuracy of the proposed model was evaluated in both coastal and harbor water considering various link ranges, various receiver apertures, and various launch angles. Experimental results showed that the analytical model agrees with the Monte Carlo simulations.

Liu et al. (2016) extended the stochastic channel model proposed in Zhang et al. (2014) to characterize the spatial–temporal behavior of a misaligned UWOC link. The received intensity for the misaligned UWOC link was evaluated in turbid water considering different link ranges and different detector properties such as FOV, azimuth angle, and elevation angle. Experimental results showed that for a wider FOV, a higher intensity can be captured for misaligned UWOC links.

Zhang et al. (2015b) proposed a closed-form expression based on the stochastic technique to characterize the AOA distribution of photons for ballistic and single scattering components. The proposed closed-form expression was validated in clear, coastal, and harbor water considering several link ranges and receiver apertures, in comparison with Monte Carlo. Experimental results showed that the proposed approach distribution agrees well with Monte Carlo simulations.

Dong and Liu (2016) introduced UWOC MISO systems with a uniform circular array (UCA) of detectors. In their work, the authors adopted the combination of stochastic and log-normal turbulence models to characterize the underwater channel. The performance of the UWOC MISO systems was evaluated considering the presence of weak turbulence as well as absorption and scattering. Simulation results demonstrated that turbulence can deteriorate the BER performance of UWOC MISO links.

Zhang et al. (2018) introduced a theoretical fading model based on the stochastic model (Zhang and Dong, 2015) for representing the weak turbulence of UWOC links. Based on this model, the authors evaluated the average capacity of a turbulent buoy-based MIMO system using different water types(clear, coastal, and harbor water) and different attenuation lengths. Numerical results demonstrated that turbulence has a direct influence on the capacity performance.

(B)
Monte Carlo Models

Several researchers have employed the Monte Carlo algorithm to study the characterization of the UVLC channels. It is a probabilistic method that allows the evaluation of the optical path loss in an underwater medium, by tracking the propagation of a huge number of the emitted photon.

Gabriel et al. (2011) presented a realistic channel model for an underwater optical wireless communication system based on the Monte Carlo technique, considering Haltrin & Kattawar model and one-term Henyey–Greenstein (OTHG) scattering phase functions (SPF). The channel impulse response was evaluated under different conditions of water type, link distance, and transmitter/receiver parameters. Simulation results demonstrated that the channel delay dispersion is negligible in most practical cases.

Li et al. (2012) developed a Monte Carlo method to model the impulse response of the UOWC channel. The efficiency of the Monte Carlo method was tested under several receiver parameters such as aperture size and FOV, and different types of water taking into account the pulse response. Simulation results demonstrated the accuracy of the proposed model compared to the VRT model.

Similar to Gabriel et al., 2011, Gabriel et al., 2013 presented a modeling approach based on the Monte Carlo model for the UOWC system. This approach employed the TTHG SPF function to model the volume scattering function (VSF). The time dispersion was quantified for different water types, link distances, and transmitter/receiver characteristics. Numerical results demonstrated that in a clean water environment, the channel time dispersion can be neglected when operating at a moderate distance (20 m).

Tang et al. (2013b) proposed a path loss model based on Monte Carlo simulations for NLOS UWOC links. They take into account the effect of both scattering properties of seawater and random sea surface slopes. Experimental results indicated that the wind-induced random surface slopes may increase the path loss and decrease the received signal, while this effect can be reduced by the multiple scattering light.

Guerra et al. (2013) presented an impulse response calculation algorithm for UWOC, based on the Monte Carlo ray-tracing algorithm (MCRT). In their study, the authors proposed two parallelization schemes based on both multiprocessor and GPU architectures in order to reduce the simulation time. The performance of the algorithm was evaluated considering the received intensity for various ranges, the concentration of particles, and the transmitter Lambertian order. Experimental results showed the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Guerra et al. (2014) presented a statistical modeling approach of the probability distribution in UWOC channels, in order to find the best-fitting option for the channel parameters. This approach is based on Monte Carlo simulation for the estimation of the channel impulse response. The received intensity was quantified for various link distances, concentration of particles, and particle sizes. Simulation results showed that only Kernel and Generalized Extreme Value show a much better fit compared to other options.

Choudhary et al. (2014) proposed NLOS underwater wireless optical communication channel based on Monte Carlo simulation. They considered an UOWC system, in which a two-dimensional HG model is employed in order to model the multiple scattering effects. The performance of the UOWC system was evaluated taking into account the path loss and the CIR for different water types and receiver FOVs. Simulation results showed that the proposed NLOS model is accurate to characterize the underwater channels.

Tang et al. (2013c) presented a closed-form expression of double Gamma functions to model the channel impulse response of the UOWC link. The channel impulse response was investigated for various link ranges and receiver FOVs in turbid water (coastal and harbor water). Experimental results demonstrated the effectiveness of the double Gamma functions compared to the Monte Carlo method.

As an extension, Dong et al. (2014) applied a similar approach in Tang et al. (2013a) to derive the impulse response for 2 × 2 UWOC MIMO links, using a weighted double Gamma functions (WDGF) model for the turbid water environment. The channel impulse response was investigated for various link ranges and receiver FOVs. Numerical results showed that the proposed WDGF model fits well with the Monte Carlo approach in turbid coastal and harbor water.

Dong et al. (2015) developed a 2-by-2 UWOC MIMO channel model based on the weighted double Gamma functions model proposed in Dong et al. (2014), considering the presence of inter-symbol-interference. The channel capacity was evaluated as a function of average transmit power, seawater type, symbol rate, attenuation length, and detector FOV, in terms of mutual information. Simulation results showed that the channel capacity decreases with the increase of the symbol rate and can be improved by adjusting the FOV of the detector or increasing the average transmit power.

Zhang and Dong (2016) extended the 2-by-2 MIMO UOWC system (Dong et al., 2014) into a more general  MIMO system. In their study, the authors proposed a closed-form expression of weighted Gamma function polynomial (WGFP) to model the impulse response of the general UWOC MIMO links. The proposed WGFP function was validated considering three MIMO configurations (2 × 2, 3 × 3, and 4 × 4) with different water types and link ranges, in comparison with the Monte Carlo approach. Experimental results showed that the proposed WGFP model fits well with Monte Carlo simulations in turbid water environments.

Liu et al. (2014) modeled the underwater scattering channel for LOS UOWC links in the wavelength band of 400 nm–600 nm, using the Monte Carlo ray-tracing technique. The path loss for the UOWC system was investigated as a function of water type, communication range, detector FOV, misaligned angle, and divergence angle. The BER performance of the UOWC system was then evaluated as a function of link ranges for various optical powers. Simulation results showed that the path loss will increase significantly if the LOS condition is not satisfied.

Liu et al. (2015) modeled the underwater scattering channel for the NLOS UOWC link, using the Monte-Carlo ray-tracing simulation in the optical transmission window (400 nm–600 nm). The channel characteristics such as the channel impulse response and the path loss were investigated for various wavelengths, water types, link ranges, and transmitter/receiver inclination angles. Numerical results showed that the NLOS channel is less susceptible to the distance from the transceiver than the LOS case.

Jamali et al. (2018) presented a comprehensive study of underwater visible light communications systems over different channel conditions and system configurations. In their study, the authors apply MIMO transmission and evaluate analytically the performance of MIMO-UVLC systems with respect to all channel degradation effects, including scattering, absorption, and fading induced by turbulence. They used the Monte Carlo approach to estimate the fading-free impulse response (FFIR) of the underwater channel. The BER performance was tested for different MIMO configurations, using both laser-based collimated and LED-based diffusive links, various water types, and link geometries. The results showed an excellent agreement between analytical and simulation results.

Ghazy et al. (2019) proposed an angular imaging MIMO architecture (A-MIMO) for underwater wireless sensor networks (UWSN). In the A-MIMO system, the information is associated with angle rather than position. The Monte Carlo ray-tracing model was used to obtain the angle of arrival distributions. The performance of the A-MIMO system was evaluated considering different channel lengths and misalignment (off-axis transmission) in clear and coastal seawaters. Experimental results demonstrated the superiority of the A-MIMO system to maintain high link capacity in dynamic environments compared to the conventional C-MIMO system.

Kammoun et al. (2019) adopted the chlorophyll-based model in order to investigate the impact of wavelength and water turbidity on the NLOS underwater communication links. They used the Monte Carlo solver to calculate the path loss. The performance of the underwater link was evaluated using a TTHG function under different water types and wavelengths, taking into account the path loss. Experimental results showed that the best performance in non-line-of-sight scenarios is obtained at longer wavelengths with increasing turbidity.

Jiang et al. (2020) studied the performance of DC-biased optical orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (DCO-OFDM) UVLC system in a weak turbulence channel. In their work, the authors used the Monte Carlo ray-tracing method to estimate the impulse response and the path loss for different diversity orders. The effectiveness of the DCO-OFDM system was tested for various diversity orders and DC-bias levels, taking into account BER, in comparison with the analytical prediction. Experimental results demonstrated that the turbulence-induced channel fading can be effectively reduced by spatial diversity.

Chen et al. (2020b) proposed Sherman–Morrison Formula (SMF) based CEs (SMF-CEs) scheme for the design of the cost-efficient channel estimation (CE). They adopted the Monte-Carlo method for the channel impulse response estimation. The performance of the proposed SMF-CE scheme was evaluated in comparison with the conventional optimum linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE-CE), taking into account the BER parameter. Simulation results proved the effectiveness of the proposed SMF-CE scheme compared to LMMSE-CE by obtaining a lower computational complexity.

Mahmoud et al. (2021) applied the Monte Carlo ray-tracing algorithm to study the dynamic underwater channel modeling using a combined Zemax OpticsStudio and Zemax Programming Language (ZPL). The probability distribution function (PDF) of the UVLC system was examined in complex scenarios considering four different parameters (link distance, source array, movement area, and detector area) and three water types (pure sea water, clear and coastal ocean waters). Simulation results showed that an increase in the area of detection from 1 cm2 to 5 cm2 enhances the received power at least 1700%.

Wang et al. (2021) developed a simulation platform based on the Monte Carlo photon tracing algorithm (PTA) to characterize the underwater optical wireless channel. They also proposed an efficient method to quantify the level of solar noise at some depths in the UOWC system. The performance of the UOWC system was evaluated assuming different receiver specifications (aperture diameter and FOV) and solar radiation levels in turbid harbor and coastal waters, in terms of BER versus different communication distances. Simulation results showed that the small FOV and the large aperture can mitigate the degradation of the performance due to ambient noise.

5.3.3. Discussion
As addressed in this section, several channel algorithms are proposed for the underwater environment. The advantages and disadvantages of each of them are summarized in Table 11.

The deterministic Beer–Lambert law is the simplest model used to evaluate the path loss in the underwater environment. Nonetheless, with this algorithm, total scattering photons are completely lost, which leads to an overestimation of the path loss (Kaushal and Kaddoum, 2016). Alternatively, the radiative transfer equation (RTE) is another modeling method taking into consideration scattering photons. It provides accurate analytical results, but it is limited by the complexity of its integro-differential equation (hard to apply). So, various numerical RTE solvers were proposed for this purpose. They are more flexible and easy to program and implement. Nevertheless, they suffer from statistical errors and low efficiency. One of the proposed solutions is the use of random-based models. Actually, they are easy to use but suffer from low accuracy too. On the other hand, the Monte Carlo model was proposed. It is easy to implement and has an acceptable accuracy which makes it the most used as shown in Fig. 19. However, its main issues are the random statistical error and the long-running time. In addition to this analysis, some statistics are generated from the studied papers. Indeed, the first observation is that up to 71% of approaches chose to be based on stochastic models (Fig. 19). This is due to its simplicity of use. Similar to previous environments, several metrics are used to evaluate underwater VLC channels. According to Fig. 20, measuring Received Power, CIR and PL seem to be imperative in this context.


Table 11. Advantages and disadvantages of underwater VLC channel techniques.

Method	Advantages	Disadvantages
Beer–Lambert Law	- Simplified calculation.	- Inaccurate estimation of the path loss.
RTE	- High efficiency and accuracy of calculations.	- A complex and lengthy equation.
Random-based	- Solved more easily than RTE. - Less calculation complexity.	- Low accuracy.
Monte Carlo	- Easy implementation in computation platforms. - Accurate results and high flexibility.	- Random statistical errors. - Low simulation efficiency (long running time).
5.4. Underground visible light communication channel models
The application of VLC technologies in Underground Mining (UM) is still at a very early stage. Only few researchers have focused on the modeling and the characterization of VLC channels in this environment as shown in Fig. 21. The summary of the most interesting parameters of UM channel approaches is given in Table 12.

5.4.1. Deterministic models
(A)
Recursive Models

Wang et al. (2017b) used the recursive model to estimate the CIR for VLC underground mining communications (UMCs). The performance of this model was evaluated based on two environmental parts including the working face and mining roadway. It takes into account the channel gain, mean excess delay, and RMS delay spread metrics for two different scenarios (miner-to-miner (M2M) and infrastructure-to-miner (I2M)). Numerical results showed that the proposed channel model is sufficiently accurate when taking the LOS and the first-order reflections into consideration.

Wang et al. (2017a) proposed a path loss channel model based on the recursive approach for UMCs, considering both LOS and NLOS scenarios. The path loss and RMS delay spread were analyzed for three movement trajectories in the mining roadway and working face environments with different numbers of transmitters. Simulation results showed that the value of the NLOS is larger than that of LOS and the RMS delay spread decreases as the receiver moves away from the transmitter.

Fig. 21. Underground VLC channel models.

Wang et al. (2018) extended their work in Wang et al. (2017b) in order to study the optical path loss and shadowing effect of VLC channels in underground mines. In their study, the shadowing effect was modeled by a Bi-modal Gaussian distribution. The channel characteristics such as the path loss and RMS delay spread are investigated considering two scenarios (LOS and NLOS) over three routes in working face and mining roadway environments with different numbers of transmitters and various link ranges. Numerical results showed that the path loss and the RMS delay spread are related to the link distance.

(B)
Geometric-Based Deterministic Models (GBDM)

Zhai and Zhang (2015) proposed an energy coupling model of a VLC system applied to a coal mine. In this work, the authors also proposed a GBDM model considering the LOS component and the reflections from different locations such as the floor, roof, and hydraulic column support sides for the coal mine face.

(C)
Ray-Tracing Models

A UM-VLC channel model was applied by Játiva et al. (2020a) for analyzing the behavior of the path loss in the UM environment. In their work, the mathematical expression of the path loss distribution was obtained using the curve fitting technique, considering both LOS and NLOS propagation components in mining roadway and working face scenarios. Furthermore, empirical path loss estimations were also conducted for different dimensions, transmitters locations, and link ranges. Numerical results showed that the distribution of UM path loss for the mining roadway scenario is smaller than that of the mining working face.

Játiva et al. (2019b) presented the analysis of a VLC system in underground mining (UM) environments. In their work, the authors applied the ray-tracing approach to estimate the different channel characteristics such as channel gain, channel impulse response, and received power on two mining scenarios (mining roadway and mine working face) with different link ranges. Simulation results showed that the VLC system has favorable characteristics in small and hostile areas.

Játiva et al. (2020b) proposed a novel VLC channel model based on the ray-tracing algorithm for underground mines. This study considers the effect of five main factors that affect the VLC underground link such as arbitrary orientations and position of LEDs and PDs, non-flat walls, scattering by dust, and shadowing by large machinery. Different channel characteristics such as CIR, DC gain, RMS delay spread, and received power were investigated and compared with a reference underground VLC channel. Simulation results demonstrated the notable difference between the proposed model and the reference model.

Palacios Játiva et al. (2020) proposed a novel angular diversity receiver structure, named hemi-dodecahedron ADR, for VLC underground mine environment. Three signal combination schemes were included with the hemi-dodecahedron ADR such as equal gain combining (EGC), select best combining (SBC), and maximum ratio combining (MRC). The ray-tracing methodology was employed for estimating the CIR of the channel. The performance of the hemi-dodecahedron ADR structure was evaluated in comparison with the pyramid structure used in Nuwanpriya et al. (2015), taking into account the Signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR), user data rate (UDR), BER, and cumulative distribution function (CDF) metrics. Simulation results demonstrated that the proposed hemi-dodecahedron ADR combined with the MRC scheme has shown good performance compared to other combination methods.

5.4.2. Other models
Farahneh et al. (2017) introduced a LED-based communication system for the underground mining environment based on intensity modulation and direct detection (IM/DD) technique. The performance of the LED-based communication system was evaluated considering all the effects on the optical signal including shadowing, tunnel size, properties of the wall/ceiling/floor of the mine, and the air and dust inside the mine. Simulation results showed the effectiveness of the proposed system for the short transmitter–receiver distance.

Mansour (2020) presented a VLC system for the underground mining environment in order to provide communication and illumination facilities for mine operations. The performance of the system was evaluated in both mining roadway and work face areas for LOS and NLOS paths, considering the effect of shadowing and dust concentration, taking into account the BER metric. Experimental results showed the superior performance of the proposed system on this problem area.


Table 12. Summary of underground channel modeling technique for visible light communication.

Ref.	Approach	Year	Source modeling	Surface reflection	Channel characteristics	Receiver FOV	Affected factors	Environment
Wang et al. (2017a)	Recursive	2017	Ideal Lambertian source	Fixed reflectance	
60 [deg.]	Not mentioned	Mining roadway and workface
Wang et al. (2017b)	Recursive	2017	Ideal Lambertian source	Fixed reflectance	
60 [deg.]	Not mentioned	Mining roadway and workface
Wang et al. (2018)	Recursive	2018	Ideal Lambertian source	Fixed reflectance	
60 [deg.]	Particulate Matter	Mining roadway and workface
Zhai and Zhang (2015)	GBDM	2015	Not mentioned	Not mentioned		Not mentioned	Coal dust	Coal workface
Játiva et al. (2020a)	Ray tracing	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Fixed reflectance		60 [deg.]	Not mentioned	Mining roadway and Workface
Játiva et al. (2019b)	Ray tracing	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned		60 [deg.]	Not mentioned	Mining roadway and working face
Játiva et al. (2020b)	Ray tracing	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
70 [deg.]	Dust particles	Irregular tunnel
Palacios Játiva et al. (2020)	Ray tracing	2020	Ideal Lambertian source	Not mentioned	
60 [deg.]	Not mentioned	Mining roadway and working face
Wu and Zhang (2016) proposed a LED-based communication system integrated with power line communication (PLC), Infrared Data Association (IrDA), and VLC technologies for the underground mining environment. This system offers communication and illumination simultaneously. The performance of the proposed system was evaluated considering the received power from two main functions such as alarm and positioning. Simulation results proved the effectiveness of the proposed system on this problem area.

Iturralde et al. (2017) proposed a VLC system based on the trilateration technique for localizing personnel as well as machinery in underground mining tunnels. The performance of the proposed VLC system was evaluated in comparison with other well-known techniques taking into account the location estimation error. Simulation results showed that the proposed system is a feasible localization solution in underground mining tunnels.

Krommenacker et al. (2016) proposed a VLC positioning system in underground mine tunnels based on the cell-ID method. This system presented an analytical model to determine the optimal distribution of the LEDs in order to solve the distribution problem of overlapping cells. The performance of the proposed system was evaluated in terms of the position accuracy according to tunnels (width, height) and LEDs characteristics with a maximum of five overlapping cells. Numerical results showed the effectiveness of the proposed system on this problem area.

5.4.3. Discussion
Modeling the VLC channel is a challenging task in an underground mining environment. That is due to conditions imposed by the medium such as the presence of poisonous substances, toxic gases, and dust. The findings of this analysis are summarized as follows:

•
The VLC channel modeling in the underground mining environment is still in a very early stage. Comparing to other environments, there are few studies (Játiva et al., 2019b) concentrated on describing underground VLC channels over the last five years.

•
Some works extended the recursive approach proposed for an indoor scenario in order to model the underground VLC channel (Wang et al., 2017b, Wang et al., 2017a, Wang et al., 2018).

•
Few authors applied the GBDM approach proposed originally for indoor scenarios to describe an underground VLC channel (Zhai and Zhang, 2015).

•
The ray-tracing is another approach recently used for modeling the VLC channel in an underground mine (Játiva et al., 2020a, Játiva et al., 2019b, Játiva et al., 2020b).

In this background, Fig. 22 indicates the percentage of the different techniques used for modeling the underground VLC channel.

6. Conclusion
Reliable knowledge of the communication channel is the foundation of the design and development of VLC systems. In this regard, this paper provides a comprehensive survey of VLC systems in terms of channel models under different environments. We discuss the main optical channel characteristics affecting the VLC link. Afterward, we classify the different VLC channel models according to a wide range of communication environments including indoor, outdoor, underwater, and underground. Furthermore, a summary of their main properties including transceivers specification, channel characteristics, and environment details are presented. Finally, a comparative discussion of different modeling approaches is drawn, pointing out the advantages and limitations of each model. This synthesis gives the opportunity to highlight some areas in which further researches are required. In this context, we suggest the following possible future research directions:

•
Development of new models that consider other propagation phenomena such as absorption and refraction.

•
Development of new models that take into consideration the mobility of people or objects.

•
Development of models adapted better to a wide range of realistic VLC scenarios.

•
Development of new models that support the new communication scenarios such as aircraft environment, optical trans-dermal communication, and smart toy networks.

•
Development of 3D models to a better characterization of VLC channels.

•
Development of new channel models dedicated to the hybrid VLC network.

•
Estimation of VLC channels using machine learning algorithms.