Collaborative learning is the favored approach educators use to inculcate social skills and promote peer interactions in students. Embedded Systems is a compulsory Electronics and Communication Engineering and Electrical Engineering course, which solves real-time problems. The collaborative learning approach compliments the learning style needed for this course. The inclusion of teaching–learning tools based on Augmented Reality (AR) offers more space for educators to implement a collaborative learning approach in their classroom. The research aims to analyze the impact of AR-based collaborative learning activity on the learners' knowledge gain and collaborative skills while undergoing an embedded system course. A total of 78 first-year engineering students divided into two groups (traditional style and AR-based) participated in a "Think-Pair-Share" collaborative activity to complete a predefined task of the embedded system course. The AR-based collaborative activity group used Augmented Reality Interactive Tabletop (ARITE) to understand and explore the embedded system concepts. A pre-test and post-test were conducted with both groups to evaluate the gain in knowledge and assessment of collaborative skills done using a survey questionnaire. The experimental results showed that AR technology played a crucial role in enhancing learners' knowledge gain and social skills using the ARITE system through a collaborative learning activity compared to traditional learning group students. At the same time, no change in positive interactions between students of two groups was observed, which means that collaborative learning promotes peer interaction irrespective of the use of technology. Future work will focus on assessing the learners' critical thinking and systematic abilities (leadership, teamwork), which may be necessary to become employable.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Learner autonomy has been a popular notion in many educational settings. It has emerged as an essential element of the learning process during the 1970s & 1980s. This concept of autonomy was closely linked to individualization. Students were allowed to conduct their tasks while being monitored by their teachers. However, several other learning strategies (active learning, flipped classroom, collaborative learning, cooperative learning and PBL's, etc.) emerged and followed in parallel inside the classroom in the recent decades. These strategies assisted in gaining effective learning and achieving course-specific student learning outcomes (Yasmin & Naseem, 2019). Collaborative learning is one such strategy followed by many educators inside the classroom to promote peer interactions and social skills (Herro et al., 2017). Alvin Toffler, in 1983, proposed "Theory of System," in which collaborative learning is represented as an integral part of the systems approach. Figure 1 shows the system model and how collaborative learning is based on four components of the entire system: (i) subject/course, (ii) environment, (iii) instruments, and (iv) commitment. The first aspect represents the course materials required for completing a particular course theoretically or practically. The environmental aspect of the system plays a crucial role in the learning process as it determines the context in which course material is being utilized. The third aspect, i.e., instruments, refers to the methods, approaches, techniques, and assessments followed that impacted the course effectiveness. Finally, the learner's commitment to the course is essential as it represents the student's mental attitude and motivation for successfully completing the course (Margunani et al., 2020).

Fig. 1
figure 1
Theory of System, Alvin Toffler (1983)

Full size image
Collaborative learning refers to learning within groups organized for the sole aim of attaining predefined learning outcomes. Small groups, often no more than five members, are intended to provide an environment favorable to achieving a successful learning outcome. This may be exhibited by acquiring expertise and competencies or accomplishing a predetermined task (Göl & Nafalski, 2007; Johnson & Johnson, 2009). Collaborative learning allows two or more students to engage in extensive and varied interactions with various aspects of learning to achieve a common goal (Dillenbourg, 1999; Klopfer et al., 2005; van Leeuwen & Janssen, 2019). The learning environment promotes positive interactions between group members, encourages learners to ask questions, devise new ideas, interchange arguments, and solve problems (Johnson & Johnson, 2009; Scager et al., 2016; Tibi, 2015).

The term collaborative learning is interchangeably used with cooperative learning.(Göl & Nafalski, 2007; Smith, 1996; van Leeuwen & Janssen, 2019). According to Panitz (1996), "Collaboration is a philosophy of interaction and personal lifestyle whereas cooperation is a structure of interaction designed to facilitate the accomplishment of an end product or goal" (Panitz, 1996). The focus in collaborative learning is on working together, while completing the output is essential (Hernández, 2012; Johnson & Johnson, 2009). Collaborative learning encompasses various approaches that vary in the amount of time spent in class and outside of class on group activities. The activities may include in-person discussions and/or the use of computers to facilitate discussion. Due to the upsurge in Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and the evolution of disruptive technologies (Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, and Mixed Reality), the scope of collaborative learning activities had widened up (Ansari & Khan, 2020; Eh Phon et al., 2014; Hernández, 2012; Siddhpura et al., 2020) The need for active learning strategies inside the classroom is very much evident from the literature. Embedded System (ES) is the introductory course in Electronics & Communication Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Computer Science Engineering. The ES course integrates knowledge of hardware and software is to design and develop a wide range of applications (Bruce et al., 2004; Kao et al., 2010; Nooshabadi & Garside, 2006). The current teaching–learning environment challenges learners while understanding and visualizing the output generated by the microcontroller's internal operations. Further, students find it difficult to execute from hardware abstraction level to application development in most of their proposed solutions for real-time problems (AlNajdi et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2020). Augmented Reality is one such kind of emerging technology that offers overlaying of virtual contents onto the real-time space and assists students in visualizing and understanding complex problems (Eh Phon et al., 2014; Göl & Nafalski, 2007; Von Der Pütten et al., 2012; Yüzüak & Yiğit, 2020). AR is fundamentally composed of three components: a) integration of real and virtual items in real space, b) interaction with virtual content in a real space, c) superimposition of 3D-generated virtual data on top of the real object (Azuma et al., 2001). Augmented Reality Interactive Tabletop Environment (ARITE), an assistive tool developed, is one such solution to the problems described above. It provides the real-time transition from software code to hardware abstraction visualization to the learners. It uses AR-markers, Arduino UNO development board, web-camera, Embed-AR application, and tabletop setup. It offers space and interaction for group learning and problem-solving (Kumar et al., 2020). The main goal of this work is to analyze the impact of the ARITE system on learner's knowledge gain and collaborative skills when employed through an active learning strategy inside the classroom. Based on the above studies, following research questions were framed for this study work:

Research Questions
How has collaborative learning influenced the knowledge gain of learners taught using immersive technology tools compared to traditional teaching?

What is the difference between the collaborative skills learners taught using immersive technology tools and traditional teaching?

Is there any correlation between students' knowledge, social skills, and promotive interaction in collaborative learning?

Other sections of the paper discuss literature review, use of ARITE system for teaching embedded system course, study design, result & discussion, and conclusion.

Literature Review
Augmented Reality Applied in Engineering Education
Engineering education is an integration of laboratory practices with theoretical frameworks and concepts. The laboratory environment comprising lab-equipment’s, apparatus, and materials requires a good understanding of the standard operating procedures. Due to high costs and time constraints, sometimes students refrain from using a proper laboratory environment. Thus an alternate solution must solve this issue and ensure relevant laboratory learning experience to engineering students. Augmented Reality, an emerging technology in education, shows the readiness to anticipate this issue. Several systems, learning environments, learning resources, and materials have been developed over the past two decades to ensure and promote quality education to engineering students. (González et al., 2013; Md Enzai et al., 2021; Sırakaya & Alsancak Sırakaya, 2020). Table 1 represents some of the work presented by researchers in their studies during the last decade.

Table 1 AR-system developed for Electrical and Electronics Engineering Domains
Full size table
From the literature, it can be easily stated that researchers have developed various AR-learning systems in the past decade. These are either mobile-based or table-top-based used for teaching–learning in engineering education. The majority of courses in engineering education are supported with laboratory work to impart practical knowledge to students. The systems thus developed in the past focus on interlinking theoretical concepts with the practical notion of learning. For example, the AR-learning system developed by Singh (Singh et al., 2019) is a desktop-based system used to interact with measuring instruments used in electronics engineering. Andujar, 2011 (Andújar et al., 2011) designed a system to understand critical concepts related to FPGA and have the capability to work as a remote laboratory. Prit Kaur has designed a tabletop framework using AR technology to teach Linear control system courses. Students can visualize and interact with graphical functions used in the control system in the virtual world (Prit Kaur et al., 2018). Table 1 summarizes the major work done by the researchers, especially in the area of electronics engineering, covering domain expertise from FPGA’s to Embedded Systems. Parameters like laboratory skill, cognition, learning gain, motivation, social skills, self-efficacy, and system usability were measured. The use of AR-based learning systems is increasing day by day. Several authors have approached different aspects of teaching–learning, student-centric learning, and the impact of the AR-learning system on students. The implications of AR technology in the education domain are to disseminate technical skills and engineering graduate attributes. But still some of the attributes like collaborative skills, interpersonal skills, and professional skills in students (Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2015).

Collaborative learning in Engineering Education
Collaborative learning has become an increasingly important component of higher education curricula (Meijer et al., 2020). Collaborative learning enables students to interact with and with instructional content simultaneously, resulting in increased understanding and motivation (Martín-Gutiérrez et al., 2015). Groups are small, typically no more than five members, and are designed to facilitate the acquisition of knowledge and skills and accomplish a specific job. Engineers, for the most part, do not operate in isolation. Most engineering work requires group working and collaboration of individuals to be committed to completing the assigned job (Göl & Nafalski, 2007; Menekse & Chi, 2019). Additionally, collaborative work can aid in the development of processes like critical thinking, solving problems, and interaction. This feature can benefit students who struggle to visualize complicated learning topics. It was discovered that augmented Reality could assist students in comprehending and learning new concepts and phenomena that are not visible in the real world. a. Numerous studies indicate that when participants are confronted with a tremendous amount of information, the task's intricacy and unfamiliarity with the technology may result in cognitive overload. Thus, when using augmented reality, it is vital to build appropriate scaffolding mechanisms or instructional cues to increase students' learning capacity while minimizing cognitive loading issues (Eh Phon et al., 2014). Entrepreneurship is now one of the focus areas in engineering education days. Instilling entrepreneurial abilities in students requires a conceptual and practical grasp of collaborative learning to prepare them for a firm commitment to entrepreneurship (Margunani et al., 2020). In augmented reality systems, users can collaborate by face-to-face, remote, or a combination of both. Research on the interaction of users and virtual objects in an augmented reality environment is also necessary (Billinghurst & Thomas, 2011).

ARITE system for teaching Embedded System Course
The term "Embedded System" refers to a computer system that integrates both software and hardware for processing and generating valuable results for the input data provided. Its presence can be seen in various devices, including smartphones, laptops, desktop computers, game consoles, and digital reading devices. These digital devices significantly influence modern classroom learning environments (AlNajdi et al., 2018; Chan et al., 2013; Figueiredo et al., 2016). The embedded system course contents are designed to get comprehensive knowledge regarding peripheral devices, software programming, control, and actuation. However, the transition from application development level to hardware abstraction level requires visualization and understanding of the internal workflow operations of the complete system. AR technology offers the power of visualization and interaction of real-world objects into virtual space, thus assisting in the teaching–learning process at various education levels (Akçayir et al., 2020; An et al., 2019; Echeverría et al., 2012).

Augmented Reality Interactive Tabletop Environment (ARITE) is an assistive tool developed to teach concepts of microcontroller-based embedded systems to undergraduate engineering students. ARITE system uses Arduino UNO (Atmega328 microcontroller-based) embedded platform for exploratory study and hands-on learning activities (Kumar et al., 2020). Figure 2 represents the framework of the developed ARITE system.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Framework for ARITE system

Full size image
The system framework utilizes AR fiducial marker, webcam, desktop/laptop, Arduino UNO development board, LED's, Connecting wires, and USB cables. In addition, the system uses Embed-AR application (indigenously developed for this system) using Unity 3D and EasyAR SDK for augmenting natural objects into virtual space. Figure 3 shows the actual developed ARITE system.

Fig. 3
figure 3
ARITE system for teaching embedded system course

Full size image
The Embed-AR application of the ARITE system provides four features as described below and shown in Fig. 4 below:

Explore: This feature guides the student to explore and understand different functional units embedded on the Arduino UNO development board. Students can visualize these functional units in an AR environment. Furthermore, they can interact with them with features like zooming, shrinking, and rotation. Also, audio-textual information of the same unit is provided simultaneously for improved understanding than other learning methods.

Pin Diagram: This feature will enable learners to understand the different types of I/O pins available in microcontroller IC with their specific functions. With the help of an interactive user interface (UI), a learner can navigate to different types of I/O pins available on IC.

Quiz: Embed-AR application provides a self-assessment quiz for learners for quick knowledge check. After Explore and Pin-diagram tab, the user can attempt a quiz and check knowledge gained.

Activity: Another crucial feature provided by the Embed-AR application of the ARITE system is Activity, where users can simultaneously interact with virtual and real components. The user can see the change in the internal hardware connection setup while making changes/ setting I/O port values using the software program. All I/O ports can be controlled through the designed UI, and output received in virtual space can be verified simultaneously in the real world.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Different features provided by Embed-AR application of ARITE system

Full size image
The learners can interact with virtual objects in real-world space and learn the concepts of an embedded system using the ARITE system. Further section discusses study design and results & discussion overuse of AR-based collaborative learning activity on knowledge gain of learners.

Study Design
This study aims to assess the impact of the AR-based collaborative learning approach on the knowledge gain of learners in embedded system courses. In order to accomplish this, key components of collaborative skills gained through the collaborative learning approach and gain in the knowledge level of learners are measured statistically. The components of this study design are participant's details, research instrument used, and implementation of collaborative learning activity.

Participants
The research sample chosen for this study is from freshman engineering students of Chitkara University, Punjab. A total of seventy-eight students across four different domains: Electronics & Communication Engineering, Computer Science Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Electronics & Computer Engineering participated in this study. Table 2 highlights the demographic profile of the research participants.

Table 2 Demographic profile of research participants
Full size table
According to this table, 78% of the research participants are male, whereas 22% are female. The average age for male participants is 19.2 years as compared to female participants of 18.6 years. The research participants were divided into two sub-groups: the Control group (N = 38) and the Treatment group (N = 38) for further implementation and assessment purposes.

Research Instrument Used
The following research instruments were used in this study for evaluation and assessment of the respondent response collected.

1.
Learning Gain

In basic terms, learning gain can be defined as the amount of knowledge a learner gains between two points of time, which may be the start and finish of an activity or course. Additionally, this gain entails knowledge of information, expertise, competencies, and personal development during the learning period (Evans et al., 2018). Therefore, a knowledge gain test referred to as "pre-test and post-test" was administered to the research participants to analyze the learning gainers. The format for both tests is represented in Table 3, and detailed mapping of questions with Bloom’s Taxonomy is presented in Appendix.

a.
Pre-Test

A pre-test was used to measure the prior knowledge level of research participants in both groups (Control group and Treatment group) for the ES course. This test consisted entirely of MCQs with an equal weightage for each question. The questions were constructed to assess Understanding and Memory, learning levels as defined by Bloom's taxonomy. The test was conducted using an online platform titled Google Form. The total time allocated for the test was 20 min. The collected responses of all the participants were analyzed statistically.

b.
Post-Test

After the experiment concluded, a post-test was conducted to determine the extent to which both groups (Control group and Treatment group) gained knowledge of concepts for the embedded system course. The format of this test is as follows: All questions on this test were also multiple-choice-based and weighed according to the difficulty level's testing items. The test was conducted via an online platform called Google Form. It lasted for a total of 30 min to assess learners' ability on Application, Analysis, and Evaluation learning level of Bloom's taxonomy, for the topic taught using two different teaching styles.

2.
Collaborative Skills

The notion of collaborative skills is based on the interpretation of effective group collaboration for small groups of students in a collaborative learning space. It has five components: positive interdependence (PI), individual accountability (IA), promotive interaction (Pin), social skills (SS), and group processing (GP) which represents the construct of collaborative skills (Göl & Nafalski, 2007). The variation in collaborative skills of two groups is measured using a survey questionnaire designed by Moanes, 2015 (Tibi, 2015). A total of 37 test items designed on a five-point Likert Scale were present in the survey questionnaire, where 1 indicates "strong disagreement" and 5 indicates "strong agreement." Table 4 represents values for the reliability scale of these test items represented by Cronbach's alpha evaluated using IBM SPSS Statistical v14 tool.

From Table 5, it is interpreted that the internal consistency between the test items of the questionnaire varies from 0.792 to 0.857, signifying a large scale of reliability. Overall, Cronbach's alpha value for all components, when measured as one variable, comes out to be 0.951 also shows a higher reliability scale, hence appropriate to be used as a research instrument in the context of the present study.

Table 3 Pre-Test and Post-test format
Full size table
Table 4 Cronbach's alpha values for collaborative skills component
Full size table
Implementation of collaborative Learning Activity
The implementation framework of this study is shown in Fig. 5 below. The study initializes with conducting a pre-test to assess the prior knowledge of the research participants.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Implementation framework of the study

Full size image
The pre-test items present in the pre-test check students' fundamental knowledge of the Arduino UNO Embedded platform. Soon after conducting this, the whole sample participants were divided into two sub-groups: the control (traditional-style) and treatment group (AR-based).

The students (N = 39) in the control group were taught using the traditional teaching style (PPT and Chalkboard). In addition, a lecture session was conducted with control group students, and hands-on activities were performed using IDE/simulators. Printed lectures notes were provided to students.

The students (N = 39) in the Treatment group were taught the same concept using an AR-based teaching tool, i.e., ARITE. A lecture session on fundamental concepts of the Arduino UNO development board was conducted using the ARITE system. Students could see the visualization of actual functional units of an embedded device into virtual space. They could interact with this synthetic data and learn the concepts being taught.

Soon after completing lecture sessions, both group members were divided into sub-groups of size three students to participate in collaborative activity. Students of both groups were introduced to the proposed collaborative learning activity to enhance their learning experience and comprehension of the embedded system course. Think-pair-share is the technique adopted in the proposed activity. Students were sub-grouped in a pair of three in their respective main groups to participate in the activity (Raba, 2017). A total of twenty minutes were allocated for brainstorming, analyzing, and synthesizing the Activity contents to participants of each sub-group. A team of two faculty members and one instructor is formed to administer the collaborative learning activity and ensure smooth conduct of the same. After finishing the activity, a post-test to assess the gain in learners' knowledge level was presented to each student and conducted online mode (Google Forms) for thirty minutes. Lastly, students' feedback was gathered using a collaborative skills feedback questionnaire, designed over a five-point Liker scale, having 37 items. All the responses were collected and analyzed using IBM SPSS statistical tool.

Result and Discussion
RQ1: How has collaborative learning influenced the knowledge gain of learners taught using immersive technology tools compared to traditional teaching?
To assess the knowledge gain of learners of two groups: traditional style and AR-Style, both groups were scrutinized using the same pre-test & post-test. The recorded responses were analyzed using IBM SPSS v21, a statistical tool. The research participants in both groups are mutually exclusive to each other; hence an independent sample t-test was applied to compare the means of the two groups. The inferential statistics for the pre-test are given in Table 5.

Table 5 Inferential statistics for pre-test
Full size table
The mean and SD for AR-based group students are 7.89 and 1.846 compared to traditional-style group students' mean and SD of 7.10 and 1.788, respectively, as shown in Table 5. Therefore, the t-value (1.931) is less than the critical value (1.990). Thus, there is zero level crossing observed in the analyzed result. Also, significance value, i.e., p > 0.05, which inferred that with 95% confidence level, it establishes the conclusion that there is no significant difference in the knowledge level of participants before their respective treatments. In other words, all students participating in this study are at the same knowledge level.

On the other hand, mean and SD for AR-based group students are 15.74 and 2.435 compared to traditional-style group students' mean and SD of 12.87 and 2.249 respectively for post-test responses of participants as shown in Table 6. Thus, the t-value (5.409) is greater than the critical value (1.990). Thus, there is no zero level crossing observed in the analyzed result. Further, the significance value, i.e., p < 0.05, interprets that 95% establishes a significant difference in the knowledge gain of participants of both groups. Thus, the students in the AR-style group had performed better and shown a significant impact on knowledge gained as represented by Cohen's d value of 1.22 in post-test analysis than the traditional style learner group.

Table 6 Inferential statistics for post-test
Full size table
RQ2: What is the difference between the collaborative skills learners taught using immersive technology tools and traditional teaching?
To answer the above-stated research question, the first internal consistency of test items is measured using reliability test. Then, mean score values of all components were compared to see any significant gain in collaborative skills by two groups. Cronbach-alpha value represents the internal consistency of test items for survey questionnaires and lies between 0 to 1. The details of Cronbach-alpha value for participants received responses are shown in Table 7:

Table 7 Cronbach's alpha values evaluated from participant's response
Full size table
From Table 7, it is clear that Cronbach's alpha value for all the components of collaborative skills is more significant than 0.7. The overall value is 0.829, which signifies that the internal consistency between the test items is good and acceptable. The next step is to compare the mean score values for each component of collaborative skills and analyze the gain. An independent sample t-test was conducted to measure the mean score of two groups for all components of collaborative skills. The inferential statistics for all components of collaborative skills are shown in Table 8

Table 8 Inferential statistics for collaborative skills components
Full size table
The mean and SD values for each component of collaborative skills are shown in Table 8. The inferential statistical data represented in Table 8 interprets that the significance value, i.e., p-value < 0.05, is observed for social skills, positive interdependence, individual accountability, and group processing components of collaborative skills. This means that a 95% confidence level confirms that AR technology has played a crucial role in infusing collaborative skills in AR-style learners than traditional style learners. On the other hand, it is also estimated that both teaching styles promote interaction between group members during collaborative learning activities inside the classroom. Similarly, the effect size, represented by Cohen's d-value, is maximum, i.e., 0.805 is for Group Processing, and minimum, i.e., 0.356 is for promotive interaction. Thus, AR technology for collaborative learning activity is observed maximum for the Group Processing component and minimum in promotive interaction.

RQ 3: Is there any correlation between students' knowledge gain, social skills, and promotive interaction in collaborative learning?
A Pearson correlation test was conducted to measure the relationship between students' knowledge gain, social skills, and promotive interaction while learning concepts of embedded systems. The coefficient of the Pearson-correlation test signifies the amount of linear correlation amongst two datasets. The value for Pearson-coefficient lies from -1 to 1, where -1 represents "negative correlation" and + 1 denotes "positive correlation," and 0 denotes "no correlation" between two datasets. Table 9 shows the coefficient values compared between social skills & knowledge gain. Table 10 shows promotive interaction and knowledge gain.

Table 9 Correlation test analysis for social skills and knowledge gain
Full size table
Table 10 Correlation test analysis for social skills and knowledge gain
Full size table
From Table 9, the values for mean and SD for social skills are 3.945 & 0.525, and for knowledge, the gain is 14.307 & 2.741, respectively. The Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.256 with a significance value of 0.024 (p-value < 0.05), representing the weak correlation between the participants' social skills and knowledge gain. While from Table 10, the values for mean and SD for promotive interaction and knowledge gain are 4.039, 0.609, and 14.307, 2.741, respectively. The Pearson correlation coefficient, in this case, is 0.146 with a significance value of 0.203 (p-value > 0.05), representing the same-week correlation between social skills and knowledge gain of the participants. Thus, the overall results interpret that social skills are significantly correlated with the knowledge gain of learners as compared to promotive interaction factors.

After analyzing the results thus obtained, it is evident that social skills have more impact on learners' knowledge gain than promotive interaction as both learning styles facilitate interaction between peers while working in a collaborative learning environment.

Limitation
The present study is focused on measuring the impact of AR-based collaborative learning activity on students' knowledge gain. However, the instrument used for measuring the learning gain is self-designed and validated using Bloom’s Taxonomy level. As the test was administered in online mode, which could pose a limitation to this study or might affect the desired result. The access to ARITE system, as the main infrastructure required to conduct the study was limited to small number of students at one time. This was another challenge while conducting this study.

Conclusion
In engineering education, more emphasis is laid on imparting practical skills to learners predominantly. Apart from practical skills, other skills like interpersonal skills, social skills, and entrepreneurship skills are also required to infuse graduate attributes in learners. With the inclusion of technology, either ICT or interactive technology, student learning outcomes of engineering graduates has met largely in the past decade. Collaborative learning style has already been incorporated mainly in higher education curricula, and AR technology in implementing activities has emerged as a new epitome in teaching pedagogy. The present study investigated the role of AR-based collaborative learning activity in learning concepts of embedded systems. ARITE, an AR-based learning system designed to teach embedded system concepts, was used for implementing collaborative learning activities. It offers a smooth transition of theoretical concepts into practical understanding using AR technology. The inclusion of the ARITE system in the teaching–learning process had significantly improved the knowledge gain of the learners. Further, the collaborative skills of learners taught using the ARITE system had improved better than the students taught using the traditional style. Also, it was evident from the results of the study that peer interaction, one of the sub-component of collaborative skills, has no effect of technology on it. As the central notion of collaborative learning is peer interaction, and it is evident from the results that both groups showed significant peer interaction and solved assigned tasks. The future work will assess the learning motivation and cognitive load on learners while working with the ARITE system so that it can be inducted into the regular curriculum of engineering education.