The purpose of this study is to discover pre-school children's vocabulary learning, retention levels, and perspectives of English language learning using augmented reality (AR) technology. To achieve this goal, a one-group pre-test, and post-test design was used to assess the effect of using AR-supported educational toys on pre-school children's learning of English words/concepts and retention levels. The case study method was used to investigate the children's perspectives of their AR learning experiences. The sample of this study consisted of 39 pre-school children aged between 5-6. Firstly, the word/concept test was conducted as a pre-test. After 4 weeks of implementation, the test was applied as a post-test. Two weeks after the implementations were completed, the same test was conducted again, and the retention level of the children was determined. Then, face-to-face interviews were done with six children within the week after the final tests. Results showed that there was a 72-point increase in their word/concept learning after the implementation. The children dropped 17 points in the retention test after a two-week break following the post-test. It was found that the children correctly answered 93% of the words saying the English versions of the visual and 55% of the words saying the English equivalents of the words. In addition, the children remembered 77% of the English version of the words shown in the visual and 50% of the English equivalents of the words. Qualitative results indicated that children liked AR materials in general and that it had a positive effect on their learning.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Globalization which has become a popular movement in the world has necessitated the gathering of nations on common ground to achieve various goals. One of the most important factors in achieving these goals healthily and efficiently is the need to establish effective communication between different countries (Mowlana & Wang, 2018). English is the lingua franca of today's world, allowing individuals from various countries to communicate with one another (Ke & Cahyani, 2014; Seidlhofer, 2011; Taguchi & Ishihara, 2018). As a result, modern people are expected to have a high level of skill in this popular language in order to adapt to the demands of a globalizing world (Kaufman, 2013).

Regarding the English learning and teaching process, it is claimed that the age at which language education begins is an important factor in acquiring the required competencies (Dolean, 2015; Schwartz & Yagmur, 2018). Given that children reach approximately 70% of their mental and perceptual growth between the ages of 0 and 6 (Ilter & Er, 2007; Kilicarslan, 2012; Od, 2013), early language teaching can be assumed to be efficient in the development of children's language skills. Krashen (1973), focusing on the early language education process, emphasized that foreign language learning in children is to start at the age of two. As a result, beginning the language learning process at a young age would have a positive impact on the child's successful language growth and efficient use of language skills (Kalaycioglu, 2011; Üstün-Aksoy & Dimililer, 2017).

Given the pre-school student profile, it is critical to remember that English teaching should be carried out through games and gamification (Bicen & Kocakoyun, 2018). Larsen-Freeman (2000) stressed the role of games in early foreign language teaching in terms of addressing multiple intelligences. Considering the factors that reduce the efficacy of the language teaching process, such as a lack of student motivation and interest in teacher-centered traditional methods (Lamrani & Abdelwahed, 2020), it should be noted that the inclusion of games in early language education is needed for the process to be carried out efficiently (Goksun & Gürsoy, 2019). However, there are some problems in maintaining student motivation in foreign language teaching in the pre-school period, keeping the attention of children for a long time, and finding educational materials prepared for student-centered activities for games. In addition, the scarcity of educational materials that can hold the attention of young children for a long time is an important problem. In order to solve these problems and to include games in language learning processes creating student-centered activities, "toys" are among the most important educational resources for pre-school children (Latipova & Latipov, 2015; Trawick-Smith et al., 2015). Toys that serve as a bridge between the real world and children's creativity can be said to help children's imagination and enrich their experiences (Bekmezci & Özkan, 2015). Toys provide major benefits to children and educators with their educational potential (Klemenović, 2014).

Recent technological developments have also enhanced the functions of toys. Toys now have digital features as a result of digitalization brought on by developing technologies (Kara et al., 2013). Considering that pre-school children are digital natives (Nelissen & Van den Bulck, 2018), it is reasonable to assume that children of this age would choose smart toys over traditional toys (Goksun & Gürsoy, 2019; Kara & Cagiltay, 2020). Smart toys have advantages over traditional toys, such as developing imagination and creativity and growing engagement (Brito et al., 2018). Smart toys, which integrate real and virtual experiences, often provide children with a rich learning experience (Kara & Cagiltay, 2020).

While several different tools are used in language teaching, from picture cards to puzzles, from puppets to visuals, the main problem is that technology-supported educational tools cannot be used sufficiently. The need for digitalization in the language education process, as well as the trend toward digitization observed in children's preferences, served as the framework for this research. In addition, the inability of young children to keep their attention in the lessons for a long time is a very important problem for language education at an early age. However, Aziz et al. (2012) stated that the attention span of children can be increased with the use of Augmented Reality (AR). Dalim et al. (2020) emphasized that such practices allow children to act in the learning process and thus enable them to participate more actively in the lesson. For this reason, educational applications supported by AR technology were used in this study in order to contribute to the solution of the aforementioned problem. Accordingly, this study aims to make English vocabulary learning successful and permanent by integrating digital features to traditional educational toys with AR technology, which allows simultaneous interaction between real and virtual objects and has recently gained popularity. Thus, it will be ensured that the current potential of toys is combined with the benefits of digitalization and used as educational material in English vocabulary teaching in the pre-school period. In this context, a fun English word/concept learning experience has been presented to pre-school children aged 5-6 years with AR-supported educational toys to increase the retention of their knowledge. In addition, children's views of their learning experience have been evaluated. The following research questions will be investigated for these purposes:

1.
Is there a significant difference between the pre-test scores of the children and the post-test scores applied after teaching with AR-supported educational toys?

2.
What is the retention level of words taught with AR-supported educational toys?

3.
What are pre-school children's views on learning experiences with AR-supported educational toys?

Theoretical Framework
Learning a Foreign Language in Pre-school Period
Pre-school years are crucial for children's physical, social, mental, and linguistic growth, as well as for learning a foreign language (Cameron, 2001; Cook, 2013; Hakuta et al., 2003; Hyltenstam & Abrahamsson, 2001; Sayer & Ban, 2014; Scheffler & Domińska, 2018). Foreign language learning is as easy as learning a mother tongue when pre-school children begin to have adequate cognitive skills for foreign language learning (Halliwell, 1993). During this time, children's brains form a second language learning mechanism, allowing them to learn more than one language. As a result, opportunities for second language learning in the pre-school period must be created while keeping brain flexibility (Albaladejo et al., 2018; Becker & Roos, 2016; Garner & Waajid, 2012). Children that have achieved a large majority of their biological, neurological, and perceptual growth during pre-school years will benefit from the language learning process because of this structured development (Copland & Garton, 2014; Goh, 2019). Furthermore, language learning at an early age is necessary because previous development in the mother tongue provides training for the next period. According to the European Union's 2004 action plan, many European countries have moved foreign language education from primary school to the 3-6 age group, known as the lower critical threshold, for at least three years (European Commission, 2012). Kimsesiz (2017) reported that learning a foreign language would be enjoyable and successful for children between the ages of three and five, focusing on their interest and willingness to learn. Given the benefits of language learning at a young age, the importance of language teaching to children in the pre-school period becomes clear.

When the process of foreign language education in the pre-school period is analyzed, it is revealed that language development in this age group is primarily dependent on listening and speaking abilities, similar to the case in native language acquisition (Goh, 2019; Sun et al., 2017). Pre-school foreign language education starts with learning sounds and vocabulary (McGlothlin, 1997; Tabors, 1997). Learning vocabulary, in particular, is a prerequisite for foreign language learning and is one of the most critical factors that should be considered (Bromley, 2007). Children must increase their vocabulary in the target language in order to understand what they hear and communicate effectively (Ahmadian & Tajabadi, 2017; Bahtiar, 2017; Hagen, 2018; Kara & Eveyik-Aydin, 2019). According to Coyle and Gómez Gracia (2014), vocabulary is the most important factor in the growth of language skills when teaching children, a foreign language. Children who learn a second language in pre-school go through three stages. The first step is to learn vocabulary in one's mother tongue and other languages. In pre-school years, there are two basic approaches to vocabulary learning. The first is expressive vocabulary and the second is receptive vocabulary (Gámez et al., 2019). The expressive vocabulary approach expects children to say the English equivalent of an object they see while the receptive vocabulary approach expects children to know the mother tongue equivalent of the same word. As a result, the first stage of language learning, concentrating on distinguishing phonemes, understanding of words, and the points of giving meaning to them is included within the framework of the research.

When teaching English to pre-school children, the developmental characteristics of the children should be included in the vocabulary teaching process. Children's kinesthetic learning tendencies should be considered in the process, and the resources to be used in word teaching should promote active and concrete learning while still contributing to children's tactile senses (Ormond, 2010). When evaluating children's cognitive growth, it can be stated that pre-school English education should concentrate on the teaching of specific terms. The words to be learned should be the words that children will encounter in their daily lives and materials should be presented by concretizing the words to be taught (Karabulut & Dollar, 2016). Considering the social and linguistic development of children, the materials used in the English vocabulary teaching process should be designed to enhance children's communicative skills and vocabulary (Hagen, 2018).

Considering the all-inclusive nature of the above-mentioned developmental stages, games which can be regarded as children's most natural learning method allow them to actively learn a language while also supporting their cognitive development (Piaget, 1964) as well as their social and emotional development (Koycekas & Koycekas, 2015). As a result, the educational potential of games and toys that are utilized as concrete materials in games in pre-school English education attracts attention. Educational toys used in language teaching can make the teaching process more enjoyable and active, as well as contribute to children's growth in understanding similarities and differences between the words and concepts they study, identifying the cause-effect relationship, and developing the piece-whole relationship (Klemenović, 2014; Ozdemir, 2006). Since AR technology enriches educational materials with the integration of audio, video, and animations (Christ et al., 2018), this technology has become popular in English language education.

AR Integration in Pre-school Foreign Language Education
Combining simultaneous interaction between real and virtual objects, AR technology identifies markers and turns these markers into audio and visual materials (audio, video, image, text, animation, and 3D) on mobile devices, enabling users to form new perspectives of reality (Azuma, 1999; Billinghurst et al., 2001; Wu et al., 2013). Enabling the observation of costly or dangerous situations, AR technology concretizes information (Turkan et al., 2017; Wojciechowski & Cellary, 2013). Requiring children’s active participation in the learning process through simultaneous interaction with real and virtual objects, AR applications, which are considered as magic by children (Author, 2016), has been reported to encourage learners to develop positive attitudes towards learning (Cai et al., 2014; Rambli et al., 2013; Sommerauer & Müller, 2014).

Activating audio-visual learning channels, AR technology allows children to enjoy the learning process while still achieving their goals by integrating their senses into the teaching process (Akpinar, 2019; Redondo et al., 2020). Research has also shown that students who use these applications are satisfied, want to use them again, are motivated to learn, and can retain the knowledge they have learned for a longer period, and that this technology encourages the learning of difficult and complex subjects (Bujak et al., 2013; Radu, 2012; Yuen et al., 2011). Because of these benefits, it is expected that AR applications would make significant contributions to education (Cheng & Tsai, 2013). Easy-to-use and low-cost AR technology support materials and processes in traditional education, and thus AR is widely used in education at all levels (Dunleavy et al., 2009; Kerawalla et al., 2006) including pre-school foreign language education offering a more efficient and enjoyable learning experience (Cabero & Barroso, 2016; Chen & Chan, 2019; Safar et al., 2016).

As a significant part of foreign language education, the efficacy of vocabulary teaching in pre-school was primarily investigated using AR-supported methods and applications in previous studies. Rambli et al. (2013) found that using AR technology to teach the English alphabet to children aged between 5 and 6 offered children an experience of fun learning. Safar et al. (2016) observed that after developing an AR-supported application to teach the English alphabet, the group learning the alphabet with the AR application outperformed the group learning the alphabet with the traditional method. Developing an AR-based application to teach the English alphabet for a similar purpose, Pan et al. (2021) stated that children who learn letters with the AR application know the letters better. In a quasi-experimental study in which AR-supported English teaching was integrated, Redondo et al. (2020) observed that the children in the group using AR applications had increased motivation and could establish social relationships more easily.

According to He et al. (2014), in an experimental study comparing traditional and AR-supported vocabulary teaching, children who learned vocabulary with an AR-supported application had higher vocabulary success. Developing teacher as an AR-supported vocabulary-learning tool, Dalim et al. (2020) compared the effectiveness of this tool in teaching basic level English words to traditional methods and reported that the AR-supported tool increased the enjoyment and effectiveness of vocabulary learning. Lee et al. (2017) developed an AR-based application to teach basic-level English words, and parents agreed that this application increased efficiency by removing time and space constraints in vocabulary teaching. Chen et al. (2017) found that developing an AR-based mobile application to teach basic-level English words to 20 pre-school children increased interest in vocabulary learning and student participation in the process. Martínez et al. (2017) found that using an AR-based application to support basic level English vocabulary learning for a similar purpose increased vocabulary learning efficiency and supported autonomous learning. Cevik et al. (2017) concluded that by using AR-based applications to teach basic-level English words, children in the experimental group learned the words more effectively. Pu and Zhong (2018) stated that the students who used the application had almost the same level of success as those who learned words with traditional methods; however, they stated that the students in the experimental group had higher learning interests and lower cognitive load. Chen et al. (2017) concluded that when he taught English vocabulary with AR in pre-school, experimental-group children's vocabulary learning levels, motivation, and interest in the lesson increased more than those in the traditional group.

Despite an increase in the number of studies on AR integration in language education during the pre-school period which is a critical period for language development, studies on this topic are still limited (Cevik et al., 2017). According to the related literature, more research is needed to effectively integrate AR technology into English language teaching at the pre-school level. As a result, the purpose of this study was to teach basic concepts in English to children aged 5-6 using educational toys supported by AR technology.

Method
Research Design
In the study, one group pre-test and post-test design, which is one of the quantitative research methods (Fraenkel et al., 2012), was used to determine the effect of using AR-supported educational toys on pre-school children's learning English words/concepts and their retention levels. The case study method of qualitative research methods (McMillan & Schumacher, 2010) was used to reveal the children’s views on their learning experiences with AR. Due to the difficulty of obtaining quantitative data from pre-school children; both quantitative and qualitative methods were used in combination to ensure the reliability of the data. As a result, the quantitative findings that explained the general trend and the qualitative findings that revealed the children's views in depth were mentioned holistically. Fig. 1 summarizes information on the relationship between the method and the research questions.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Details on the research questions and research method used within the scope of the study

Full size image
Within the scope of the one-group pre-test and post-test design, the word/concept test was applied as a pre-test. After 4 weeks of practice, the test was applied as a post-test. Two weeks after the implementation was completed, the same test was applied again, and the retention level of the children was determined. Schools were closed due to the pandemic for two weeks; therefore, the children did not take English lessons during this time. As part of the case study, face-to-face interviews were conducted with six children within the week after the final tests were applied to the children. Detailed information about the research method is summarized in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Detailed information within the scope of the research method

Full size image
Sample
The sample of this study consisted of 39 pre-school children aged between 5-6 determined by convenience sampling. The children in the study had never been taught with AR technology before, but they had been previously taught with various learning materials (videos, animations, songs, educational apps, etc.) on the smartboard. The level of children was A1 according to CEFR (Common European Framework of Reference for Languages). The participant group for the qualitative case study consisted of six pre-school children randomly chosen from the sample. Table 1 contains demographic information about the sample used in the analysis.

Table 1 Demographic information about the sample included in the study
Full size table
Data Collection Tools
Word/Concept Test
A word/concept test has been developed by researchers on English animal names for pre-school children. While developing the test, the words in the AR materials were taken as a basis, and the test was presented to the opinions of experts in both English Language Teaching and Computer Education and Instructional Technology. Two English teachers approved the final version of the test. In order to evaluate the clarity of the questions, the questions were applied to a different group of pre-school children and it was determined that the test was appropriate. The Cronbach Alpha value of .721 was calculated to assess the reliability of the word/concept test answers. This value indicated that the test was reliable.

In the test, vocabulary knowledge and retention levels of children were evaluated through different dimensions. These dimensions are the children’s ability to tell the English version of the word in the visual, to tell the English equivalent of the word pronounced in Turkish, to understand the word in the sentence in English, and to tell the Turkish equivalent of the word pronounced in English.

The word/concept test was used as both a pre-test and a post-test. Accordingly, while determining the retention levels of the children, what percentage of the words they remembered, and the evaluations of retention levels were handled from the above-mentioned dimensions. The test was administered to each student by the English teacher who conducted the implementation process. A PowerPoint Presentation with instructions was prepared for the teacher (Ex: Ask the child to say the Turkish equivalent of the word pronounced English). The questions in the presentation also included English/Turkish pronunciation of the words besides their visuals. For scoring, checklists were prepared for the practitioners with the options "Correct", "False", "Partially (In case the child cannot pronounce the word exactly)". The answers each child gave in the test were noted in this checklist. Each true answer in the test was 10 points, and the total score was 100. Fig. 3 presents example questions in the test and their specific purpose.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Example questions in the test and their specific purpose

Full size image
Interview Form
An interview form was prepared by the researchers. Interview forms used in previous research on AR supported educational applications were analyzed while preparing the interview questions. Two experts in instructional technologies, an expert in pre-school education, and an expert in English language teaching checked the form for its convenience. The questions were checked by pre-school English teachers. In addition, the understandability of the interview questions was checked by conducting pilot interviews with a boy and a girl. These children did not experience problems in understanding the questions, but it was understood that alternative questions could be asked in situations in which children could not clearly express themselves because of their personality traits (shyness, limited self-expression). The details of the interview form are as the following: 

In the student interview form, the questions were related to whether the participants enjoyed the AR applications, the reasons for their likes or dislike, the aspects they liked or disliked, and their overall evaluations related to the AR application.

AR-supported Materials
In this study, AR-supported flashcards, match cards, and puzzle applications were developed to teach animal names in English (Fig. 4). In the flashcard application, after the markers were shown to the camera, a 3D model and animation related to the word appeared on the screen and the English pronunciation of the word and an English sentence involving the word were available. The voice records and animations were activated when the buttons on the screen were pushed. The sentences and 3D models were related and animated in the flashcard application. For example, for the word “elephant”, both a 3D model of the animal and its real sound were used. In addition, the “Leantouch” feature was available to minimize and maximize the size of 3D models.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Example visuals of the AR applications used in the study

Full size image
In the Match card application, after the markers were combined with the numbers and shown to the camera, the related number appeared on the screen in 3D form and the 3D model involved the word as many as the related number (For example, when number 3 matched the word “horse”, 3 horses appeared on the screen). When the button with the English pronunciation of the word was pushed, the English equivalent of the number and the word were pronounced (For example, the pronunciation “three horses” was heard). When the button to count numbers in English was pushed, a red arrow appeared on the screen and counted as many as the number in the 3D model (For example, an arrow appeared on three horses on the screen and counted “one, two, three”). When there was a wrong match, a cross appeared on the screen and a sound denoted the wrong match.

In the puzzle application, after pieces of the puzzle were done and shown to the camera, a 3D model related to the word appeared on the screen. This 3D setting involved the models of all the words. The puzzle application was based on a 3D forest model. When the children touched on the animals, they heard the English pronunciation of the animal. An animation of the related animal was also on the screen.

Implementation Process
In the school where the implementation was done, an English teacher taught the related animal names to three classes using the AR-supported materials in one month. The implementation process was based on the schedule the researchers prepared. In the implementation in which 39 children of 5-6 ages participated, a pre-test was first applied to identify the children’s word/concept levels related to the target words. Then, the implementation process, 2 hours a week for 4 weeks (8 in total) started.

A PowerPoint presentation was used to teach the topic in the first week. AR-supported flashcards were used in the second week, AR-supported matching cards in the third week, and AR-supported puzzle applications in the fourth week. Fig. 5 presents the pictures of the material use of the children during the implementation process.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Student pictures in implementation

Full size image
In order to ensure that the children were exposed to the selected vocabulary items only in the classroom environment, the English teacher was requested to use the vocabulary items during instruction, but not in other out-of-classroom activities. The teacher paid particular attention to this issue to ensure in-class exposure to the items.

After all the implementation process was completed, each student took the word/concept test. After a two-week break, the same word/concept test was applied to evaluate the children’s retention levels. In the week after the implementation of the post-tests, six children were interviewed face-to-face.

Data Analysis
The quantitative data were transformed to SPSS 20 software, and the quantitative data were transcribed. Missing values were identified in the quantitative data, and skewness and kurtosis coefficients were calculated, showing normal distribution. Before the analysis of the qualitative data, the audio recordings of the interviews with the children were transcribed. Thematic coding was done based on content analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014) in order to examine the qualitative data in depth (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015). Accordingly, all data were read repeatedly by the researchers to ensure data familiarity, and meaningful codes were created with the evocative In Vivo Code Method. Then, with the Focused Code Method, those who repeated these codes were gathered under the same theme and the frequencies were calculated (Saldaña, 2012). Direct quotations from student (SX) statements were made to provide evidence for these codes. Table 2 summarizes the research questions, related data collection tools, and data analysis.

Table 2 Data collection tools and analysis methods used in the study
Full size table
Findings
Is there a significant difference between the pre-test scores of the children and the post-test scores applied after teaching with AR-supported educational toys?
To identify the differences between pre-test and post-test scores of the children’s word/concept learning, dependent samples t-test was adopted and the results are shown in Table 3.

Table 3 The comparison of the children’s pre-test and post-test scores
Full size table
As shown in Table 3, it was seen that the children’s vocabulary knowledge before the implementation was low (M=10.26, SD=12.405), but there was a 72-point increase in their word/concept learning after the implementation (M=82.18, SD=22.82). These findings revealed a significant difference between the pre-test and post-test scores of the children (p<.05).

What is the retention level of words taught with AR-supported educational toys?
In order to identify the retention level of the words taught through AR-supported educational materials, the post-test and retention test scores of the children using the materials were analyzed. The descriptive results are displayed in Table 4.

Table 4 The mean scores of the children’s post-test and retention test scores
Full size table
As shown in Table 4, the children dropped 17 points in the retention test (M=65.26, SD=22.30) after a two-week break following the post-test (M=82.18, SD=22.821). The mean scores of the true answers given in the post-test and retention tests are presented in Table 5.

Table 5 The mean scores and percentages of true answers the children gave in the post-test and retention test
Full size table
It was found that the children correctly answered 93% of the words saying the English versions of the visual and 55% of the words saying the English equivalents of the Turkish words. They also correctly answered 98% of the words saying the Turkish equivalent of the word in the English sentence and 77% of the words saying the Turkish equivalent of the word they listened to in English.

After a two-week break, the retention score was 65.26. The results showed that the children remembered 77% of the English version of the words shown in the visual and 50% of the English equivalents of the words pronounced in Turkish. The children remembered 75% of the Turkish equivalent of the words they listened to in the English sentence and 57% of the Turkish equivalent of the word they listened to in English.

What are pre-school children's views on learning experiences with AR-supported educational toys?
Face-to-face interviews with six children were conducted to identify the evaluations of pre-school children related to AR-supported educational materials. The data were analyzed through content analysis. The results are presented with related codes and their frequencies. The quotes are provided with student numbers (ex: S1=quote from the first student). The interview questions focused on whether the children liked the AR-supported educational materials and the reason for their like/dislike. All the children stated that they liked the materials. The features the children liked in the materials are given in Table 6.

Table 6 The overall features the children liked in all the AR-supported educational materials
Full size table
The children stated that they mostly liked “the movement of 3D models”, “listening to English words/sentences” and “hearing the real sounds of the models”. 33% of the children said they enjoyed the educational materials because they “looked to the cards through the tablets” and “had fun”. The least mentioned feature was “Having numbers in English in matching cards” with 17%. Some quotes related to the liked features are given below:

“I liked looking at the cards through tablets. I liked the moving animals.” S2

“The animals moved in the puzzle. I liked doing the puzzle. I also liked hearing the sound of the animals.” S4

“I really liked the English sounds. I liked listening to English sounds most.” S5

The children were asked which AR-supported educational material they liked most and the reason for this. The findings are shown in Table 7.

Table 7 The children’s favorite AR-supported educational tools and their features
Full size table
The children liked doing puzzles most (50%). They liked this application because of “the movement of the models when touched” and “combining the pieces of the puzzle”. The children who liked the matching cards most explained that they favored this activity because of “the multiplication of the models”. Only 17% of the children liked flashcards. The flashcards were favored because of “the movement of the models” and “watching the cards through the tablets”. Some quotes related to the applications the children liked are as follows:

“I liked combining pieces in the puzzle. I liked looking through the tablet after combining the pieces. S3

“The model in the flashcards both moves and makes the sound. I liked the butterfly flying.” S1

“I liked the multiplication of the animals when the numbers match with the animals. It also counted one, two, three, four. I liked it.” S2

The children were asked to rank the applications from their most favorite to least favorite. The findings are shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6
figure 6
The children’s preferences for AR-supported teaching tools

Full size image
Figure 6 shows that the children liked puzzles most, then matching cards and flashcards. Some statements related to this ranking are as the following:

I liked matching cards most, then puzzle, and then flashcards … because we have as many animals as we want in the matching cards.” S5

I liked puzzles most because combining pieces was so nice. And, the animals moved and made a sound when touched.” S2

“I liked flashcards most because it both makes sound and move. I liked the butterfly flying.” S4

The children were also asked about the features they disliked about the materials and the difficulties they had using the materials. The findings are displayed in Table 8.

Table 8 The disliked features of AR-supported educational tools and the difficulties
Full size table
As shown in Table 8, 67% of the children stated that they liked all the features of AR-supported materials. Some of them did not enjoy the real sounds of the models (17%), some did not like combining pieces in the puzzle (17%), and some did not like the multiplication of the models (17%). While 83% of the children explained that they did not have difficulty in following the applications, 17% said they were afraid of dropping the tablet, and 17% had difficulty in holding the tablet. Some quotes showing the features the children disliked in the materials and the difficulties they faced are given below:

“I want to see more than one animal. I didn’t like when they multiplied. When it is just one, it is not confusing. When there are 4-5, it confuses me. I think of which one to start. I am confused.” S6

“Combining pieces of the puzzle was difficult. I didn’t like it much”.S4

“I had difficulty while holding the tablet. Holding it and looking at the screen is difficult. I was afraid to drop it. The tablet was a bit heavy.” S2

Discussion
For this study, AR-supported educational materials to contribute word/concept learning in English were designed, and these materials were used to create a fun learning experience for 5-6-year-old pre-school children. The children’s word/concept learning levels, their retention, and their evaluations of the experiences were examined. The results showed that the participants with low levels of in word/concept achievement before the implementation had increased levels of achievement, which points at the contribution of the AR-supported educational materials developed for this study to achievement. These results of the study are in line with those reported in previous studies (Barreira et al., 2012; Cai et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2020; Dalim et al., 2016; Liu, 2009, Redondo et al., 2020; Safar et al., 2016; Sirakaya and Cakmak, 2018; Solak & Cakir, 2016). Literature underlines such advantages of AR-supported materials as the inclusion of animations, virtual objects, audio, and video which can increase learners’ motivation, enthusiasm, and enjoyment (Rambli et al., 2010).

The children in this study explained that they enjoyed AR-supported materials because of “the movement of 3D models”, “listening to words/sentences in English” and “listening to the real sounds of the models”. In this sense, this result is in line with the literature since previous studies highlight the effectiveness of using audios and animations in promoting fun and achievement in learning (Aghlara & Tamjid, 2011; Zhu, Fung, & Wang, 2012). Chen and Chan (2019) stated that AR-supported flashcards can enrich the learning experience through audio and visual components, and Zhang (2018) maintained that AR applications could promote meaningful learning by attracting learners’ attention. These conclusions underline the need to design AR-supported learning contexts in teaching English at all levels in general and pre-school education in particular. The participants in this study also pointed at these elements as advantageous in integrating AR technology in learning English vocabulary. This case can be the underlying reason behind the 72-point increase in the participants’ vocabulary learning levels. However, this increase contradicts the results in Chen and Chan’s (2019) study which reported no significant difference between AR-supported and traditional flashcard integration in vocabulary teaching.

While the children correctly answered 93% of the words that said the English versions of the visual, they answered only 55% of the words that said the English equivalents of the Turkish words. Besides, they correctly answered 98% of the words saying the Turkish equivalent of the word in the English sentence and 77% of the words saying the Turkish equivalent of the word they listened to in English. These results raise the question of why children show less success in the questions about the words that say the English equivalents of Turkish words compared to the other questions. This may be because Turkish pronunciations are not used at all in AR applications. While teaching, they first heard the English pronunciation and then spoke Turkish. Reversing this situation and saying the Turkish word first may surprise the children. Preschool children may not be able to establish a reverse relationship. Their high success in questions about visuals and sounds in the AR applications can be explained by the use of sound, image, 3D model multimedia materials in a context. In this sense, it can be concluded from the results of the present study that the variety in virtual materials (3D models and animations) and the use of match-cards and puzzles besides flashcards can be the factors increasing the participants’ achievement levels.

Two-thirds of the children in this study enjoyed all the features of the AR-supported materials. Rambli et al. (2010) noted that the markers and 3D objects on the markers were reported to be the reasons why children enjoy AR-supported materials. However, some of the children explained during the interviews that they did not enjoy listening to the real sounds of the models, combining pieces of the puzzles, and multiplication of the models. This result echoes the comments of Chen and Chan (2019), who maintained that some children may not enjoy some features in AR-supported animations. Therefore, certain aspects are suggested to be taken into account in future research designs.

The retention tests were applied two weeks after the post-test to evaluate how much the children could remember the words/concepts they learned in English. There was a 17-point decrease in the retention scores of the participants using AR-supported educational materials after a two-week break, showing a slight decrease in retention rates. The probable reason for this decrease can be because the children did not have any revision/repetition of the words they learned in these two weeks. This decrease can be an expected outcome considering the characteristics of a 5/6-year-old learner profile (Piaget, 1964). The decrease in the retention tests compared to post-tests is also reported in some studies (Dünser et al., 2012; Estapa and Nadolny, 2015). However, it is emphasized that AR applications help children remember the information they learned more easily by making a connection between what they hear and what they see (Liu, 2009; Wu et al., 2013). Akcayir and Akcayir (2016) at the university level and Solak and Cakir (2016) primary level noted that participants learning through traditional materials forget more words compared to those learning through AR-supported materials. Although this study differs from the above-mentioned ones because of not having a control group, it is expected to contribute to the literature with its reference to retention at the pre-school level.

Although the children in this study had high rates of retention in the post-test, there was a slight decrease in the retention test. There were similar levels of true answers for the questions requiring the pronunciation of the English words both in the post-test and the retention test. The children said the Turkish equivalents of the words in the sentence in English almost totally true in the post-test and with a high percentage true in the retention test. While the children truly answered a great percentage of the Turkish equivalents of the words they listened to in English in the post-test, they answered more than half of the words in the retention test. In other words, though there were different questions to evaluate the retention rates of the children, there was not a significant decrease in retention from the post-test to the retention test. It can be concluded from this result that the integration of audio and visual elements in multimedia materials supported through AR technology enabled the children to establish associations between what they listen to/see and increased the retention rate, as also suggested by Pérez-López and Contero (2013) and Wu et al. (2013). The comments of the children also point to the benefits of audio integration in the AR application. The children expressed that they remember the words they learned with their 3D models and pronunciation.

These results can indicate that AR technology provided the children with a chance to learn while having fun (Giannakos, 2013; Rambli et al., 2010). The use of three material types (flashcards, match-cards, and puzzles) in this study and different functions integrated into the materials can be considered as the advantages of the AR design in this study. This integration could have provided the children with flexibility and choices while learning the target vocabulary, which may have increased their achievement and retention rates, as noted by Pan et al. (2021). Therefore, the integration of various materials with different functions is suggested for future research. At this point, it is suggested that future research can also investigate the effectiveness of AR technology with the integration of various educational materials and toys besides flashcards, as it was done in this study, to assess children’s word/concept retention rates.

The analysis of the interview showed that the children enjoyed puzzles the most. “Listening to the sounds when you touch the models” and “combining pieces of the puzzle” were the major reasons for the enjoyment. This situation can be the result of the richness of interaction in AR-supported puzzles. Interaction with AR materials fosters a positive attitude towards learning in children (Cai et al., 2014; Sommerauer & Müller, 2014). The children had active participation and interaction with their peers to choose and combine pieces of the puzzles. As also suggested by Dalim et al. (2020), interaction and physical activeness in AR applications can be the major factor attracting children’s attention. For those children who enjoyed match-cards more, “multiplying models” were the stimuli. Rambli et al. (2010) underlined that by combining real and virtual objects, AR technology attracts young learners’ attention and offers a fun learning environment. In this study, the attracting aspects in match-cards were the count functions and the arrows on the models, which can be the differentiating features in the AR materials in this study. It is well known that AR technology, which activates the audio-visual senses, allows children to enjoy the learning process while also achieving their goals (Akpinar, 2019; Redondo et al., 2020). “The movement of the models” and “watching the cards through the tablets” were the stimuli for some children to enjoy flashcards. Flashcards as commonly-used materials in vocabulary teaching (Chen & Chan, 2019) bring certain advantages when combined with the advantages of digitalization (Azabdaftari and Mozaheb, 2012; Chen & Chan, 2019; Hung, 2015). Since digitalized flashcards supported through AR technology were used in this study, it can be concluded that the flashcards attracted the children’s attention and increased their concentration time, as suggested by (Aziz et al., 2012).

Most of the children in this study stated no difficulty in using the AR applications, which supports the results of Dalim et al.’s (2020) study. Other studies in the literature indicate that students want to use this technology again because of its ease of use (Bujak et al., 2013; Radu, 2012; Yuen et al. 2011). However, some children reported being afraid of dropping the tablet and having difficulty holding the tablet. Pointing at this case, Rambli et al. (2010) explained that the way children hold the tablet may affect the proper display of the markers. Thus, instructions to lead children to properly use the tablets are suggested.

Conclusion and Recommendations
The study examined the children’s word/concept learning and retention and their evaluations of the process. The results showed that AR-supported educational materials contributed to the children’s word/concept learning. After a two-week break, the children who used the AR-supported educational materials forget some of the words. The retention of the children was low when they were asked to remember the English version of the words shown in the visual. The children said the English equivalents of the words almost at the same level in the post-test and retention test. In addition, they mostly said the Turkish equivalent of the words they listened to in the English sentence. In the retention test, they truly said more than half of the Turkish equivalents of the words they listened to in English.

As suggested by Gundogdu et al. (2008), how something is learned is more important than what is learned during pre-school education. In line with multimedia theory, content addressing audio and visual channels are more effective in learning (Mayer, 2009). In parallel with Dale’s (1969) Cone of Experience, it is suggested that different senses should be integrated into the learning process as much as possible to make learning more permanent. At this point, AR technology is considered effective in enriching the learning experience as it addresses aural and visual channels (Chen & Chan 2019; Ruwe et al., 2011). In this sense, combining flashcards, match-cards, and puzzles and integrating multimedia functions to these learning materials through AR technology is thought to promote learning through audio, visual, and tactile learning channels, which supported the children’s achievement in word/concept learning in this study. It can be concluded that AR integration in this study attracted the children’s attention, provided them with a fun context to learn English vocabulary, and develop positive attitudes towards vocabulary learning through AR technology. This study was carried out with a limited number of children and for a limited time during the COVID pandemic period. Since schools were closed frequently in these period and infected/contaminated children were not sent to schools, the number of children decreased and experimental-control groups could not be formed. This is the limitation of the study. However, in order to address this limitation, the variables that were analyzed quantitatively through interviews were tried to be discussed in detail. In the process, not only the posttest was applied, but the children's retention levels were measured by applying the test again after a two-week break. Schools were closed due to the pandemic for two weeks, so the children did not take English lessons during this time. Thus, their exposure to the words taught during this period has decreased. Considering these limitations, it is recommended to conduct new studies examining the long-term effects of AR by forming experimental and control groups.