The methods and techniques used by teachers have an important place on the basis of many students’ negative perspectives and failures towards mathematics. Integrating technology into mathematics learning environments is inevitable since it is of great importance to create rich learning environments to increase students’ interest and understanding of mathematics. This study aims to examine both the effectiveness of technology-assisted interactive activities that make the students learn mathematics with fun and love, and teachers’ perceptions on technology-assisted mathematics teaching. To this end, 50 technology-based interactive activities has been prepared based on the topics of “exponential and square root numbers”, which were selected by taking the views of 10 mathematics teachers who were actively teaching in the field. In this study, as a technique of the qualitative research, a case study has been conducted. The participants in the present study were 25 teachers who were assigned according to the maximum variation and criterion sampling techniques. The data of the study has been collected by using semi-structured form with 6 items prepared by researchers. Under the views of teachers, alongside with the technology-assisted teaching and technology-assisted mathematics teaching, the results based on employability, productivity and efficiency of the prepared interactive activities have been achieved. In general, it has been observed that teachers like interactive activities and support the use of technology in learning environments, but they experience various problems in practice. In this context, various suggestions have been made for the improvement of the technology integration process and for future studies.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Mathematics is one of most important sciences that enables an individual to make sense of his surrounding and demonstrate high level thinking skills in different cases he experiences. In spite of this, it is seen that students perceive mathematics as a difficult lesson in general and they have negative prejudice against mathematics (Peker & Mirasyedioglu, 2003). This negative perspective towards mathematics the students have is noticed in Turkey in general (Senol et al., 2015). Although the Turkish education system is based on a constructivist approach, the quality of education is adversely affected because of physical inadequacies, society’s perspective on education, teachers’ inadequate field knowledge, and adopting a memorizing approach (Kayadibi, 2001; Telef, 2011; Tasdemir, 2015; Akbaba & Turhan, 2016; Ozdemir & Kaplan; 2017). This also negatively affects mathematics teaching (Toptas, 2011; Dagdelen & Unal, 2017). Negative perspectives on mathematics emerge in students because of inadequate mathematics teaching. This negative approach of the students in Turkey towards Mathematics is clearly seen in the evaluations done by the International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and Program for International Student Assessment (PISA). In the evaluation reports of TIMSS 2019 and PISA 2018, Turkey’s taking place in the middle of the list in the fields of mathematics literacy and mathematics performance, and remaining below the international average in the exams done up until now are considered to be the results of this issue (Ministry of Education [MEB], 2019, 2020).

Mathematics Curriculum in our country adopts an understanding based on creating a positive perspective by endearing mathematics to students (MEB, 2018). This understanding is a perspective that emerges from the constructivist learning approach. According to this understanding, mathematics teaching should be done with an approach based on mathematical communication and modern teaching methods and techniques (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 2009). However, the most important reason for the unsuccess in mathematics is the traditional teaching methods and techniques frequently preferred by the teachers (Ozdemir et al., 2020). With this approach, teachers cause the students to perceive mathematics as the constituent of complicated and abstract rules, and prefer learning by memorization (Deryakulu, 2002). This situation can only be eliminated with learning environments based on constructivist understanding. Regardless, it is also clear that constructivist classroom environments cannot be technology-independent for effective mathematics teaching. Especially in these days of the age of science, it is inevitable that learning environment is also affected by the technological improvements. Being able to isolate mathematics from rote learning and render it with contemporary methods and techniques makes it necessary to integrate technology into learning environments (Dikovic, 2009).

Integration of technology into mathematics teaching
Integration of technology into teaching helps learning environment enrich and improve its quality (Ashrafzadeh & Sayadian, 2015; Aydogan Yenmez & Gokce, 2019; Kuzgun & Ozdinc, 2017). Each student’s way of learning and perspective on learning are different, and it is highly important to arouse different sense organs of the students in the learning process in order to actualize the efficient and permanent learning (Yucel & Ergun, 2015). As the learning environment enriched with multimedia items such as visual, audio, video, and animation appeal to multiple sense organs, it enables learning to actualize in more effective way (Boz & Ozerbas, 2020). On this aspect, to create multiple learning environments, integration of improved technology into mathematics teaching is highly important.

In order to change the students’ attitudes towards mathematics by having them make connections between mathematics lessons and their daily lives, educational technologies can be used (Sahin, 2013). Educational technologies can be defined as creating, using and managing duties of technological processes and resources suitable for the acquisition of desired skills in teaching environment, and the complete set of necessary tools and equipment for that (Boz & Ozerbas, 2020). Technology provides opportunities for the students to use high level thinking skills and make sense of mathematics by encouraging them to actively participate in class (Lee et al., 2012; Raines & Clark, 2011) which provides more effective and permanent learning for the students (Altikardes & Koyunkaya, 2020). Similarly, Schreyer-Bennethum and Albright (2011) highlight the idea that, in contrast to traditional teaching approach, technology use in mathematics teaching makes more contribution to the students’ development of conceptual learning, problem solving skills and calculation skills.

It is very important to provide proper environments for the students in which they interact with technological tools in order to make them learn different representation forms of concepts and explore connections between them, and to improve their skills like reasoning and problem solving by modelling (Erdem, 2015; Karaarslan et al., 2013). According to Tutkun et al. (2011), technological tools provide an opportunity for especially very young learners to learn mathematics better by concretizing abstract concepts of mathematics. Similarly, with the proper use of software related to mathematics, mathematics learning can be enhanced (Kokol-Voljc, 2007; Onal & Cakir, 2016). Kosa and Karakus (2010) point out that mathematics software helps students interpret mathematics by visualization, and it makes contribution to their spatial thinking. Similarly, by using software in teaching mathematics, it is possible to build a strong bridge between mathematics and the student. Also, as a result of feeling close to mathematics, the students tend to participate in high level cognitive activities more (Aydogan Yenmez & Gokce, 2019; Bouck & Flanagan, 2009; Erduran & Tataroglu, 2009).

In the relevant literature review, there are plenty of studies emphasizing the impact of technology on the improvement of students’ motivation to learning mathematics (Cai et al., 2019; Divjak & Tomic, 2011; Higgins et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2003; Ng & Gunstone, 2002; Raines & Clark, 2011; Serhan, 2019; Yorganci & Terzioglu, 2013; Zaini & Ahmad, 2010), and the lesson performance of the students including the students suffering from learning disability (Bouck & Flanagan, 2009; Cviko et al., 2014; Hofmann, 2002; Kulik & Kulik, 1991; Li & Edmonds, 2005; Raines & Clark, 2011; Strayhorn, 2006; Wenglinsky, 1998; Young, 2017).

Interactive activities in mathematics teaching
“Learning activities” is one of the materials for teachers to use in learning environments. Learning activities are seen as effective materials especially for making the students feel part of learning by giving them different tasks and increasing their motivation and courage for the lesson with this way (Kloosterman & Gorman, 1990). In today’s world, the involvement of technology in our lives to a great extend leads to the differentiation of education system comparing to last decade, and in accordance with this, pen-paper activities are rapidly beginning to give their places to interactive learning activities. The interest and expectation of the students from generation Z (Junco & Mastrodicasa, 2007) play an important role in this transformation. Collins and Halverson (2018) put forward that technological revolution creates a student generation growing with multi-dimensional and interactive media resources, and clearly get the bottom of it. In this aspect, in today’s world it is inevitable for teachers to use learning activities that require processes such as drag-and-drop, gap-filling with technologically supported interactive learning activities such as interactive video, virtual and augmented reality applications and simulations in learning environment.

It is considered that interactive learning activities stimulate learning more (Van Eck, 2006), improve students’ cognitive, social, and moral attitudes, promote the students to be more creative and independent (Zavaleta et al., 2005), and also contribute to student skills such as strategic thinking, planning and communication (Kirriemuir & Mcfarlane, 2004). With this way, interactive activities are thought to be a good teaching material which supports mathematics teaching in accordance with the requirements of the constructive approach. When the literature review is analyzed, the findings of the research has revealed that the use of interactive activities in mathematics teaching improves students’ academic success and boosts their self-confidence and affects the students’ attitudes towards the lesson in a positive way. (Bassam & Yaser Abu, 2017; Hamari et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2014; Kim & Chang, 2010; Papastergiou, 2009). Maximizing the positive impact of interactive activities in mathematics teaching on the students is closely related to teachers’ interests and skills. This case prioritizes the teacher’s role in technology-assisted mathematics teaching.

Teacher’s role in technology-assisted mathematics teaching
Computers are only the tools used for different educational purposes, and the most important factor of the process of integration of technology into mathematics teaching to succeed is the teacher (Oksuz & Ak, 2009). Alongside with Marban and Mulenga (2019) reform studies based on the importance of information and communication technologies in mathematics teaching, it has been stated that the teacher factor still maintains its importance in the process of mathematics teaching.

Teachers’ attitudes towards instructional technology and their level of self-efficacy are the most important factors determining the use of technology in lessons. In their studies, Niederhauser and Stoddart (2001) put forward that even though the educational institutions reach the highest level in equipment, support and staff training; teachers’ attitudes towards technology limit the level of using technology in classes. It has been determined that the majority of the teachers acknowledge new technologies, but they show unwillingness to use it in classroom (Eisenhart et al., 1993; Kellogg & Kersaint, 2004). For instance, there are plenty of software relevant to the field that can be used in mathematics teaching such as Logo, Cabri, Sketchpad, GeoGebra and Maple. In spite of this, it is seen that teachers mostly use common applications in teaching process such as Word, PowerPoint and Excel (Baki et al., 2009; Weimer & Hall, 2009). In other words, unlike the applications that support conceptual learning, teachers prefer basic computer programs which allows them make presentation or filing.

The research reveals that integration of technology into the classroom is highly difficult and complicated for the majority of teachers who aim to do so (Lumb et al., 2001; Monaghan, 2004). Ozcakir and Aydin (2019) underline the fact that some of the teaches remain noncommittal in using technology in the teaching process because of their past habits and their fears about using technology. In this regard, it is obvious that teachers are the most important elements in the implementation of technology-assisted mathematics teaching in an effective and fruitful way. Under the scope of effective teaching, providing the outcomes of technology, pedagogy and content knowledge altogether to the teachers becomes more of an issue (Koehler & Mishra, 2005; Mishra & Koehler, 2008; Niess, 2005; Niess, 2006; Oksuz et al., 2009; Oksuz & Ak, 2009; Suharwoto, 2006).

Purpose and research questions
When the literature review is examined, the research stating the strong impact of teachers’ views on the process of education and their opinions on the role of technology in this process on the integration of technology in teaching environment has been noticed (Garthwait & Weller, 2005; Kim et al., 2003). Besides, some researchers have stated that especially teachers’ attitudes towards technology affect this integration process considerably (Drier, 2001; Guerrero et al., 2004; Schmidt & Callahan, 1992). This fact reveals that teachers play an important role in the integration of technology into mathematics teaching. Therefore, taking the opinions of the teachers, who are the applicators of technology in learning environment, about this issue is highly important. Although many studies in which teachers’ views on technology-assisted mathematics teaching in our country has been reached (Yenilmez & Karakus, 2007), considering the importance of the issue, the studies are thought to be highly insufficient. In today’s world where technology has become an important part of our lives, it has been considered that reviewing teachers’ views and approaches under the scope of the sample activities based on mathematics teaching carried out in technology-assisted learning environments makes a great contribution to the field. Accordingly, the aim of this research is to examine the efficacy of digitally interactive activities developed by researchers that allow students to learn mathematics with love and fun, have them overcome their inner despair formed against learning mathematics in their learning environments, and provide an opportunity for them to develop their own mathematics knowledge. Concordantly, collecting teachers’ views on technology-assisted mathematics teaching has also been aimed. The research questions of the study are determined as follows:

RQ1) What are the perceptions of the teachers on the use of technology in education?

RQ2) What are the perceptions of the teachers about the technology-supported activities prepared by the researchers?

RQ3) What are the perceptions of the teachers on technology-assisted mathematics teaching?

Methodology
The study design
Within the scope of the research, as a method of the qualitative research, a case study pattern has been conducted. Case study is a qualitative research model that consists of an in-depth description and analysis by using data collection tools containing multiple sources of one or more cases (interview, observation etc.) (Chmiliar, 2010; Creswell & Poth, 2016; Merriam & Tisdell, 2015). In this research, the use of case study pattern has been approved with the purpose of doing in-depth description and analysis of the views of 8th grade mathematics teachers on technology-assisted learning activities developed by the researchers.

The study group
As more in-depth analysis is done in a qualitative research, non-probabilistic sampling methods that provide information-rich cases are being used (Vogt et al., 2012). Two of the non-probabilistic sampling methods which are used frequently in qualitative research are maximum variation and criteria sampling methods. In this research, while determining the study group, maximum variation sampling has been undertaken since a variation is tried to be created according to the socio-economic conditions of the institutions where teachers are working and the age-sex factors. In addition, criteria sampling has also been conducted as the criteria of teaching or having taught in the 8th grade and having at least two years of teaching experience are taken into consideration while including the teachers in the study group. In this regard, in this research, 25 mathematics teachers who are working in educational institutions affiliated to the Ministry of Education are included in the study group. The demographic characteristics of the teachers included in the study group are presented in Table 1:

Table 1 Characteristics of the teachers participated in the study
Full size table
Data collection tools
The data of this research has been collected using technology supported activities and a semi-structured interview form prepared by the researchers.

Technology-assisted interactive activities
In this research, it has been taken into consideration that the course content to be prepared is based on the topics in High School Entrance Exam (LGS) that the 8th grade students are having difficulties with. In this sense, a focus group meeting has been done via Google Meet, an online video conference application, with 10 mathematics teachers who are teaching in secondary schools affiliated to the Ministry of Education. Accordingly, during the meeting, the teachers have been asked to make a list of the certain topics of the LGS exam which the 8th grade students are thought to have difficulties in particular. In accordance with the common views of the experts, it has been determined that the students have difficulty in the questions from the sub-learning area called “Exponential and Square Root Numbers” of the learning area called “Numbers and Operations” at most. Therefore, in this research, the preparation of interactive activities based on these learning areas in the first place has been decided.

While presenting the instruction, the best way to make the instruction permanent and comprehensible is to create an interactive learning experience. In the interactive learning environments, the main aim is to make the students develop their own experiences by incorporating them in the learning process. Thanks to the information technologies, nowadays students are able to perform the learning activities by actively participating in their learning environment. In the eLearning environments, a lot of interactive types such as gap-filling, multiple choice, true/false test, drag-drop, instructive animation, application simulation, virtual and augmented reality to involve the students in the learning environments. While preparing learning activities, it must be particularly noted that they should be publishable in the internet environment, operable in a web browser and compatible with different technologies. Moreover, it is also important that the activities should be integrable to learning management systems by means of SCORM and AICC compatibility. In this regard, Raptivity software has been used in this research as it supports the assessment and interaction types required while designing activities, provides rapid and flexible development features for application simulation, ensures compatibility of multi-environment objects with web environment automatically, and produces contents that can function in various environments (desktop, web, mobile) and support up-to-date standards. Besides, eLearning content development applications such as Adobe Animate, Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Captivate and CrazyTalk Animator have also been used.

Using the relevant reviewed literature based on the determined outcomes, 50 activities in total have been prepared by researchers, and transferred to the paper. In this research, expert opinions have been taken regarding each of the prepared activities and lesson contents. In this regard, the prepared activities have been submitted to the opinions of 5 academicians who are experts in Mathematics, 5 teachers who teaches 8th grade mathematics and 2 academicians who are experts in technology. For the experts to evaluate the activities wholesomely, an evaluation form has been prepared by the researchers. In the activity evaluation form, teachers have been asked to evaluate the activities under the scope of their compatibility to students’ computer literacy level, outcome relevance, comprehensibility, efficiency, noticeability, practicality, compatibility to learning environment and outcomes, duration of use, compatibility to class level and interaction level. The forms have been prepared in paper-based primarily. For the teachers who are interviewed online, the evaluations forms have been imported to Google Forms application. The prepared forms have been applied to the teachers before the interview. After the paper-based versions of the activities that are finalized according to the latest feedback have been created in accordance with the traditional learning method, they have been applied to three randomly picked students who remain weak-average and successful level according to 8th grade mathematics success score. With this way, regardless of their literacy levels, evaluation of the students’ skills of understanding and performing the activities has been aimed, and all the scientific-based shortcomings of the activities are tried to be spotted before transferring them to technology-assisted platform.

After the minor necessary changes on the paper-based activities (changing font size, writing the explanations of the activities in more detailed way etc..) have been made, all the activities have been transferred into technologic environment. The same experts were asked to re-evaluate the activities transferred to the technological environment. After that, to conduct pre-applications of the activities on the computer, apart from the students who are conducted the paper-based activities, 3 more 8th grade students have randomly been selected by taking into consideration of the levels of weak-average and successful in terms of mathematics report grade. In consequence of the pilot application and expert reviews, some adjustments have been made such as extending the duration of the activities, adding competition elements to the activities such as earning points, changing the font color. By this means, the activities have been finalized by evaluating them under the scope of clarity, comprehensibleness, tone of motivation and drawing attention. Screenshots of some of the prepared activities are presented in Fig. 1:

Fig. 1
figure 1
Sample images of designed activities.

Full size image
Interview form
In this research, a semi-structured interview form has been prepared to collect the views of the teachers in the study group on the use of technology in mathematics teaching and the activities prepared by the researchers. The interview form consists of 6 questions in total on three main categories as the use of technology in teaching, technology-assisted activities, and technology-assisted mathematics teaching. In the research, the validity and reliability studies of the form were also carried out. Expert views have been used to determine the sufficiency of the interview questions in terms of content. Using at least 5 and up to 40 experts in determination of the content validity is suggested (Lawshe, 1975; Veneziano, 1997). The interview questions have been submitted to the opinions of 3 academicians from Mathematics Teaching field, and 3 academicians from instructional technology teaching field. According to the feedback from the experts, Lawshe technique has been used while determining the content validity. The experts’ views taken in determination of content validity ratio and content validity index are subjected to a three-point rating scale called “relevant”, “relevant but improvement needed” and “must be omitted”. Besides, in case the experts demand improvement of the items, they have been asked to explain the details of required improvements and write a justification note for the items asked to be omitted.

In qualitative research, the other criterion that demonstrates the credibility of the data is reliability. Triangulation technique is the most commonly used strategy for reliability (Baskale, 2016). In this research, investigator triangulation has been used as the interview has been conducted by different researchers. To this end, before initiating the interview process, by holding a meeting with all the researchers, some decisions regarding the conduct of the interview protocol with a common understanding have been. Apart from this, by holding short meetings during the interview, the prevention of the interviewer’s prejudices and the occurrence of complications during the interview have been tried. In this research, it has been taken into consideration that participants must teach in 8th grade and have at least two years of teaching experience. During the interview to prevent the loss of data, the data has been recorded via a voice-recording device. A more trustworthy and intimate environment has tried to be established between the interviewee and the interviewer by not applying time limitations to the participants. This case was thought to improve the credibility of the interview.

Data collection
In this research, primarily, the teachers to be interviewed have been introduced the sample activities randomly picked from the technology-assisted activities prepared by the researchers. Thereafter, the interview stage has been initiated. The interviews have been conducted at either the participants’ schools or the online locations picked by the participants’ themselves to make the participants feel comfortable. Throughout the interviews, time-limitation has not been applied to the participants. The interviews have been carried out between the interviewers and the participants either face-to-face or online and have been recorded with the permission of the interviewers. In this study, informed consent forms were presented to the participants before the interview protocols and their consent was obtained on a voluntary basis.

Data analysis
The recorded interviews done with each of the participants have been converted into hardcopies. The raw data collected in this process have been put into the categories determined beforehand by using NVivo bundle program, and the data has been divided into relevant sub-categories. Afterwards, by doing content analysis, codes have been determined. The frequencies and the percentages of the answers given to each determined code have been calculated and demonstrated in this research in charts and graphics.

Results
Based on the sample activities developed in this research, the data collected from teachers’ views on employability and efficiency of technology-assisted activities in learning environment has been gathered under 3 categories in total as “using technology in teaching”, “technology-assisted activities” and “technology-assisted mathematics teaching”. On this part, the teachers’ views on each category are to be discussed by means of sub-categories and codes.

Using Technology in Education
In this research, teachers’ views on the use of technology in education have been gathered in the first place. The subcategories, dimensions and codes obtained based on the teachers’ views on this category are demonstrated in Fig. 2, and the frequencies and percentages generated under each subcategory have been demonstrated in Fig. 3:

Fig. 2
figure 2
Subcategories, dimensions, and codes under the category of using technology in education.

Full size image
Fig. 3
figure 3
Frequencies and percentages of the codes in the category of using technology in education.

Full size image
The data collected from the interviews done with the teachers on using technology in education have been discussed under four subcategories as trainings, teacher-technology interaction, student-technology interaction, and technological infrastructure of schools. As it is seen, some of the teachers think that the trainings given about using technology in education are satisfactory, and unsatisfactory for some of them. Sample teachers' views on these two situations are as follows:

T19 … In our university times, in 2004-2005, they were calling the overhead projector as a technological device. When we went to school, there were no overhead projectors. The projectors were brought later, but nowadays they are used no more. Unfortunately, no one is telling us about it or making us use it anymore.

T20 … I attended to a seminar only once. It was adequate, it was not instructive, but it is forgotten as we do not use it.

The views collected from teacher-technology interaction sub-category have been discussed in three dimensions as positively affecting factors, negatively affecting factors and technology literacy. The teachers participated in the research, new generation teachers state that they are more inclined to technology and have more positive attitudes on this topic. Apart from this, teachers have expressed that especially the trainings they received in their university years have negative effect on their preferences about using technology. Some of those teachers’ views on this issue are as below:

T24 … Young teachers are more inclined to technology. Aged 40 and below are inclined, this slowly starts to decline for the aged above 40. They are more likely the ones who give importance to classic education and carry out with it.

T18 … Use of technology is related to teachers’ points of view. You use it If you think that things like using computer, doing activities, or preparing activities are more appropriate.

T2 … Generally, technology education should have been received before graduating from university. I definitely think the one who received this education does not have any difficulties in any type of technology, besides it is not so difficult to learn it.

The most important factor which affects the use of technology negatively according to the teachers is lack of education. Apart from this, seeing it unnecessary, old age and lack of material are drawn attention as the other factors. Teachers’ sample views on this topic are as below:

T15 … The seminars based on technology education must be permanent and continuous. A great deal of teachers does not attend to these courses. Yes, if it is within their area of interests, and they can really manage to use technology in learning environment. But if they are not interested in technology, we fall short in terms of technology as the trainings are also inadequate.

T13 … So, the teachers are not open to innovations, or because of their age they don’t know how to use the computer or technology.

T16 … I got formatter teacher course and attended to computer courses, but I couldn’t apply the majority of these at schools. Because the technological facilities are limited at our school, and there is a shortage of materials.

As it is seen, while a half of the teachers participated in the interview thinks teachers’ technology literacy is adequate, it is inadequate for the other half. Sample views covering each case are as below:

T20 … One way or another we use technology. I can say that many of my friends have good technology literacy, or they are open to use and learn it.

T24 … If they don’t provide us the ready-made activities like the activities you prepared, and demand from us as teachers, do we have the equipment like this? No, we don’t. I cannot do that if I need to speak for myself. I cannot design any of activities you applied to us. Because I do not have this kind of technology literacy, or education.

The views of the teachers who participated in the interview in student-technology interaction subcategory have been discussed in three dimensions as cognitive factors, affective factors, and technology literacy. While a part of the teachers thinks that technology has no effects on students’ cognitive development, the other part underlines the positive effect. The sample views of the teachers on this issue are as below:

T16 … I don’t believe that our students use technology with the intention of learning. They only use social media applications. They do not even use it for a source of news or research.

T11 … I think that if the technology assisted activities are used properly and fittingly, it can cover the students’ needs and contribute to their personal development.

A great deal of the teachers who participated in the interview states that technology use in learning environment increases students’ interest, motivation and eagerness on the lesson and learning. Some of these views are as below:

T6 … Even though the student is beside the point, when he listens via technology, a visual item can be appealing for him. Even just for touching the smartboard, the students want to participate which I think increases self-confidence. When I instruct them orally, they can get bored, but when they see an effective picture or an interactive activity, they take pleasure. Participation to lesson rate reaches to almost %95, or maybe %100.

T25 … Yes, technology-assisted activities seem easy for the students, and more enjoyable to apply. They don’t get bored, too.

According to the views, an important part of teachers sees the students adequate according to technology literacy. The views related to this are as below:

T6 … As the students are in the loop, they are all almost youtubers. They all have channels. As they all grew up with technology, they are looking for technology in the lesson anyway. So, in a way, technology is a need for them, and this need should definitely be satisfied.

T7 … Students use technology better than we do. As they are accustomed to smartphones and tablets, they can use smartboard very comfortably. I was in a small Anatolian town once, even there the students could use technology very comfortably.

The teachers participated in the interview have discussed technological infrastructure of school category in two dimensions as tools and internet access. Although the majority of the teachers think that the schools do not have enough infrastructure in terms of equipment, plenty of teachers think that the equipment is sufficient as well. Teachers’ views on this topic are as below:

T11 … Technological infrastructure in our school is not sufficient. We don’t have smartboard. Internet is really slow. Therefore, it impossible to use technology actively.

T14 … When I think of my school, I can say that, compared to the previous years, the technological infrastructure is in much better condition. For instance, we didn’t use to have smartboard and internet connection in the previous years, but this year we have both.

According to teachers’ views, it is seen that the internet access is efficient in some schools, but inefficient in others. Some of the gathered views on this topic are as below:

T7 … There is an internet connection at the school I am teaching now. You can search for anything you want on the internet instantly. This is really necessary and useful…

T8 … Unfortunately, we couldn’t activate the internet at our school in anywise. The connection is lost all the time and we can almost never connect to the internet.

Technology supported activities
In this research, teachers’ views on technology supported activities developed by the researchers have been taken. The subcategories, dimensions and codes obtained in accordance with teachers’ views in this category are demonstrated in Fig. 4. The frequencies and percentages belonging to the codes formed in each subcategory are demonstrated in Fig. 5:

Fig. 4
figure 4
Subcategories, dimensions, and codes in the category of technology supported activities.

Full size image
Fig. 5
figure 5
Frequencies and percentages of the codes in the category of technology supported activities.

Full size image
Teachers’ views on technology supported activities developed by the researchers have been handled in three subcategories as teachers’ perspective, preferred application types and characteristics of preferred activities. Teachers’ views on technology-assisted activities have been evaluated in the dimensions of cognitive, affective, and practical. It is seen that a significant part of the teachers thinks that technology-assisted activities create cognitively positive effects. Some of the views are as below:

T7 … It definitely has positive impact on the cognitive development of the students. As Mathematics is an abstract lesson, students cannot visualize. Assisted with visual activities and technology, students can quickly comprehend and learn.

T5 … I think technology improves reasoning skill of the students. It may seem that the technological assistance given in the classroom environment does not provide anything related to Mathematics. But on the background, like the logic games, students’ reasoning skill improves as they keep playing.

In the affective dimension, a great deal of the teachers has stated that technology-assisted activities attract students’ attention and intercede with loving mathematics. Sample views on this topic are as below:

T21 … Technology-assisted activities should of course be used in lessons… As constant direct instruction, problem solving, writing applications distract the students, getting technologic assistance occasionally is really beneficial. Students can be adapted to the lesson more, and you can save the lesson from being mediocre.

T13 … In technology-assisted activities, even the student who is never interested in mathematics wants to participate in the activity. This happens a lot in the middle-school grade. It is like even the student who sleeps suddenly regains consciousness. I think it is very useful for taking attention and motivation.

When teachers’ views are analyzed in practical dimension, it is found that a great deal of the teachers think that technology-assisted activities are practical and time-saver, and it improves the efficiency of learning. Some of the teachers’ views are as below:

T3 … I think technology is necessary. I love teaching book-based and mathematics-based more I said earlier but describing some concepts can be difficult. Some of the students are visual learners, some comprehend what they listen etc. but maybe if we express better by visual, it will be much better.

T25 … And I think that they understand quickly when I visualize while using technology. It is also useful in terms of time because we don’t lose time as the students do not write. When I reflect on the board, for instance, we can solve more questions quickly and fast.

T17… These are the activities that each student can answer and participate. They can be included to the process with these activities. My examples have increased, I am still waiting for them but at least I am not getting tired so much on board. I just give the solution and make them participate. They also like getting to the board and writing on it. It gets their attention at the same time.

In the dimension of application, the issue that the teachers complain about most is seen as the preparation phase of the technology-assisted activities. A sample view on this issue is as below:

T12 … I don’t think that the majority of the teachers do the preparation of the activities. Most teachers prefer using ready-made activities. They won’t have enough time to prepare activities for each lesson.

The teachers have stated that the important point for them to prefer technology-assisted activities is that it does not require preliminary preparation. Therefore, they have stated that they prefer ready-made activities especially. Along with this, the teachers are seen to prefer teaching with fun and improve visual perception type activities. The sample views based on this issue are as below:

T6 … Generally, I prefer using the activities prepared beforehand by someone else. I search ready-made activities on the internet and share the application steps of the activities with the students.

T5 … The concepts you taught has the mind-placing process. On that process, making the students talk is very important. Because everybody has his own mathematics world. It is important to know what is happening in the students’ mathematics world. For instance, students do not do the homework we give. That’s why, I also prefer integrating activities into homework. Students are having fun while doing homework.

T13 … Actually, we need technology-assisted activities not for algebra topics, but especially for geometry topics more. Geometry topics require the skills like drawing and three-dimensional thinking skills. Students cannot imagine. It is also very nice to have the activities or animations based on this.

The application types that are commonly preferred by the teachers in the learning environment are games, videos, and animations. Some of the views on this issue are as below:

T20 … The competitive gamified activities based on earning points are very good. For example, about the topic of numbers, when there are games that allow the students to recognize perfect square numbers and ask them to find the simplified root numbers or to progress by choosing the correct rational or irrational numbers among the given numbers, it can be much more useful.

T25 … Especially about the topics which are difficult to draw or outlasting to teach, I prefer to show them videos. This is very useful.

Technology-assisted mathematics education
In this research, teachers’ views on technology-assisted mathematics teaching have also been taken. The subcategories, dimensions and codes obtained from the teachers’ views in this category are demonstrated in Fig. 6, frequencies and percentages of the codes generated in each subcategory have been demonstrated in Fig. 7:

Fig. 6
figure 6
Frequencies and percentages of the codes in the category of technology supported activities.

Full size image
Fig. 7
figure 7
The frequencies and percentages of the codes located in technology-assisted mathematics education category.

Full size image
Teachers’ views on technology-assisted mathematics teaching have been discussed in three categories as used technologies, curriculum-technology relation and problems and suggestions in practice. Teachers have evaluated the technologies used in teaching on the aspects of hardware and software. It is seen that the technological equipment most frequently used by the teachers in mathematics teaching is the smartboard. Among the software, EBA (Educational Information Network is an online social education platform in Turkey which is founded by Ministry of National Education) and GeoGebra come into prominence. Some of the teachers’ views on this issue are:

T6 … I actively use smartboard in my lessons. For example, I reflect the questions to the smartboard. The students spend less time as the questions are seen on the screen already.

T18 … EBA comes to my mind when it comes to technology-assisted mathematics teaching. Any teacher who wants can upload data and activities to EBA. Therefore, there is a great sharing environment.

T11 … I think the teachers needs to be trained hard about using technology. For instance, GeoGebra is one of the best user-friendly software. I use it on the related subjects.

In the interviews, teachers’ awareness about the relation between technology and the mathematics teaching program they are responsible with. The collected views demonstrate that some of the teachers are aware of the relation between technology and the teaching program, and they think that the program fosters the use of technology. Nevertheless, it is also seen that there is a great deal of teachers who are unaware of the connection between the teaching program and technology. Some of the views of both sides are as below:

T11 … The new teaching program supports and fosters the use of technology in classroom. Apart from GeoGebra, there are many similar programs, but the exemplifications in mathematics program is made only via GeoGebra.

T25 … I haven’t seen one in teaching program, I have also no idea about it as we barely manage the outcomes anyway. I think the teaching program is not integrated with technology enough.

The views of teachers participated in the research on the problems they face in technology-assisted mathematics teaching and the solution proposals have also been taken. The leading ones among the problems that the teachers experienced are breakdown of devices, internet connection issues, student-related issues, teacher-related issues, the power cut, and access denials. Some of the views on this topic are as below:

T7 … Computers may suddenly shut down automatically. The solution of this problem is beyond us. These are the problems that can only solved by either computer teachers or the school. The touchscreen problems of the smartboards can also be a serious problem most of the time.

T19 … We cannot access to some pages because of the internet restrictions. The intermittent loss of internet connection can happen. We cannot have connections with our phones, too.

T8 … To be honest, we cannot teach activity-based lessons enough. We mostly carry out teacher-centered course content. Because when you want to teach activity-based lessons, you can experience serious problems. Students are uninterested to the lessons. They lack motivation and unfortunately, they don’t have enough information about the proper use of technology.

T2 … Sometimes there can be teacher-based problems. For instance, the teacher does not know how to use that technology, or he doesn’t want to use it. Unfortunately, some of those teacher experience occupational burnout…

T10 … Relying upon technology can sometimes be problematic, as well. For example, once I had planned my lesson based solely on the smartboard and had made my preparations beforehand, but when I got to school, there had been a power cut.

T15 ... Access denial to the websites occurs in general … That is surely a problem, too … Even though they are educational, some websites have security wall which does not grant access to us.

It is seen that as a solution for the problem teachers experience in technology-assisted mathematics teaching, they propose maintenance-repair and expert support. Sample views are as below:

T16 … Generally, regular check, maintenance, and repair of all the technological tools used at the school are necessary.

T14 … As we actively use the tools, they should of course be checked regularly. There was a formatter teacher in our school, and we were constantly getting support from him.

Discussion
In this research, practicality and efficiency of the technology-assisted interactive activities prepared by the researchers based on the topics in 8th grade Mathematics Teaching Program that the students have difficulty in comprehend have been examined. Along with this, teachers’ perceptions mainly on technology-assisted mathematics teaching have been investigated in detail. Accordingly, the findings collected from the interviews done with the teachers constituting the study group have been discussed under four titles.

The findings on teachers and students’ views on technology and their competencies
One of the basic conditions of the productivity of technology-assisted mathematics teaching is the point of views of the teachers who are the applicator of the method on technology and their competencies. In order for the method to be effective in learning environment, teachers’ creation of positive impact on the students with interesting learning activities is a must (Brouwer et al., 2009; Lofstrom & Nevgi, 2008). The teachers who participated in the research have stated that the positive point of views on technology and the trainings they received have an impact on the use of technology. In a research done by Ertmer et al. (2012), they have stated that teachers’ point of views on technology and their believes have a positive impact on the integration of technology.

In this research, on the interviews done with the teachers, it has been found that the experienced teachers prefer classical methods rather than following the up-to-date approaches, and do not pay enough attention to technology use accordingly. The most important reason behind this result is seen as the inadequacy of the great deal of teachers’ technology literacy. This inadequacy leads to disinterest of the teachers on technology use, that is to say, teachers don’t embrace technology and not prefer using technology in learning environment. When the literature review is examined, a lot of research findings putting forward the disinterests of the teachers on using technology have been collected (Akkoyunlu, 2002; Eisenhart et al., 1993; Kellogg & Kersaint, 2004; Niederhauser & Stoddart, 2001; Oksuz & Ak, 2009; Ozcakir & Aydin, 2019; Suharwoto, 2006).

The teachers participated in the research highlight the importance of the trainings on the improvement of their competency and their perspectives on technology. There are a lot of findings putting the emphasis on the importance of the effective way of using technology and organizing enriched learning environment of effective trainings to be given to the teachers (Akpinar, 2003; Ebert-May et al., 2011; Tatli & Akbulut, 2017).

It is being considered that students’ embracement of technology and their tendencies towards technology-assisted learning are the elements that improve the efficiency of technology-assisted teaching. The teachers participated in the research consider that the technology literacy of the students in general is on the adequate level which helps them keep the pace with technology-assisted teaching. Prensky (2010) has stated that nowadays young people’s aptitudes for technology have developed permanently and deeply and has become a part of their lives more than ever seen in any other generations. Similarly, Rienties et al. (2013) have stated that nowadays as the result of the frequent use of social media applications like Twitter and Facebook by the students, their aptitude of technology has improved. Moreover, in today’s world where we live together with technology, nearly all of them have information technologies in their houses (%99,4) (Turkish Statistical Institute, 2020) which dramatically increases their technology literacy level. In today’s world where technology is intensively being used in all fields of our lives, it is not a surprising fact that students who live together with technology become competent and well-informed on this issue. The important thing is turning technology which has a crucial place in students’ lives into an effective and important part of leaning environments.

The application of technology-assisted teaching and the findings on the prepared activities
It has been understood from the obtained views that in case of the proper and effective use of up-to-date technologies in learning environments, technology can contribute to development of students. However, this issue is not put into practice enough in the application phase. For an effective mathematics teaching, enriching the learning environments with the activities appealing to the different senses of the students, and with this way getting the students ready for the lesson in terms of affective aspect is very important (Altikardes & Koyunkaya, 2020; Ashrafzadeh & Sayadian, 2015; Aydogan Yenmez & Gokce, 2019).

In the interview, it has been seen that the most preferred tool in technology-assisted learning environment is the smartboard. Besides, via smartboards, teachers has stated that they can create enriched learning experiences by including the applications which take students attention such as game, animation or video (Pinar & Donel Akgul, 2020). Especially, it is expected that using these kinds of applications the students prefer in their daily lives in general as learning tools improve productivity. At this point, teachers have stated that they need a strong internet network. Moss et al. (2007) specifically highlighted this topic and stated that the technologies together with the smartboard that the teachers are in need of most are communication network of the schools and internet connection in their classrooms.

In the interviews done with the teachers, it has seen that they liked the activities prepared by the researchers and thought that they make a contribution to emotional and cognitive improvement of the students regarding mathematics. The preference and use of technology-assisted activities in learning environment also require a different skill. Although we are in the technology era, in the interviews, it has been found that the majority of teachers unfortunately do not possess this skill. Teachers have stated that they do not have enough knowledge about the preparation of technology-assisted activities, and prefer ready-made activities for this reason. Moss et al. (2007) have stated that mathematics lessons are suitable for finding ready-made technology-assisted activities, and they largely prefer ready-made activities and proper websites prepared by their colleagues. This case necessitates the revision and questioning of both the in-service trainings and courses that train teachers in the institutions.

The findings on the contribution of technology-assisted trainings to students’ emotional and cognitive development
As the mathematical concepts and their connections between each other are based on abstract structure, mathematics is perceived as difficult and hard to understand in the society and among the students. The solution for this problem is thought to be achieved with the activities which improve the conceptual instruction by appealing to students five senses (Boz & Ozerbas, 2020; Yucel & Ergun, 2015). In the related literature review, a lot of studies are found which put forward the idea that technology-assisted activities improve the high-order thinking skills of the students by enriching the learning environment, and improve conceptual learning skills based on mathematics with this way (Ali, 2012; Clemons et al., 2003; Gee, 2006; Means & Olson, 1994; Shiveley & Vanfossen, 1999; Wall et al., 2005).

As much as cognitive skills, emotional skills are also important for the students to be successful in mathematics. In the studies done in recent years, emotional skills are more highlighted, and it is being thought that using technology supported activities in learning environment makes a great contribution to students’ emotional development (Sahin, 2013; Schreyer-Bennethum & Albright, 2011). As it is understood from the teachers’ views, with the support of technology assistance in learning environment, it is possible to appeal to students’ different senses and increase their interests and motivations to the lesson. It is also known that students’ positive emotional characteristics towards the lesson and learning hasten the cognitive development, too (Ashrafzadeh & Sayadian, 2015; Aydogan Yenmez & Gokce, 2019). When the literature review is analyzed, many studies which underline the claim that using technology in learning environment makes a great contribution to both emotional and cognitive improvements of the students have been come across (Chen et al., 2010; Erduran & Tataroglu, 2009; Morgan, 2008; Northcote et al., 2010; Wall et al., 2005; Yunus et al., 2013). These findings demonstrate the efficiency and practicality of technology-assisted activities. Along with this, even though some teachers find the use of technology-assisted activities in learning environment as time-consumer, when the outcomes provided to the students are considered, it is understood that they are time-saver.

The findings on problems and proposed solutions
Ertmer (1999) stated that there are two types of obstacles affecting teachers’ technology use in classroom environments. One of them is the obstacles that are not teacher-based covering software-hardware opportunities, trainings, and technical support. The other one is the teacher-based obstacles including the internal factors such as teachers’ self-confidence and believes in using technology in learning environments. The teachers participated in the interview have stated the external obstacles by mentioning the inadequacy of the trainings on technology use in education provided in the university period and at the institutions they are teaching. Along with this, although there are teachers who find the trainings adequate, it has been understood from the interviews that these teachers are not able to get benefit from the trainings enough. Ertmer et al. (2012) agreed on this issue and demonstrated that the biggest obstacle in the integration of technology to classroom environments is the teachers’ foundation of technology literacy and the inadequacy of the trainings. This problem has been highlighted by Oz (2014), as well. On the other hand, it is seen that teachers point out that they couldn’t receive the trainings on use of technology enough in their undergraduate education. Generally, teachers consider that both the quality and the continuity of the trainings on the use of technology in learning environment are important. In addition to this, equipping the school in an appropriate way to the conditions of the era, and making the infrastructure suitable are given so much importance by the teachers.

Although we live in the era when technology is effective in every field of our lives, the teachers participated in the research state that they are in insufficient level regarding the technology literacy and put the emphasis on the internal factors affecting the technology use in learning environment, as well. The inadequacy of the teacher on this issue has affected the effective use of technology in learning environments negatively. In the relevant literature review, there are a lot of research findings supporting this case (Dincer et al., 2013; Salehi & Salehi, 2012). Several actions such as trainings, seminar and course which feed their believes on positive effects created by the proper use of technology in learning environments, support their self-confidence in technology use, and remedy their deficiencies on this issue must be taken.

For being able to use technology at schools effectively, technological infrastructures need to be suitable for the necessities of the era. One of the important applications done in our country on this issue is the equipping the majority of classrooms nationwide with smart boards. Smartboards increase the student participation by making great contributions to the enhancement of learning environments (Clemons et al., 2003; Erduran & Tataroglu, 2009; Kennewell & Beauchamp, 2007; Northcote et al., 2010; Oz, 2014; Wall et al., 2005). Along with this, one of the most important requirements of the teachers who prefer technology is the appropriate software. Especially the GeoGebra software which is used by the teachers with the encouragement of the teaching programs is an important software that can enrich the mathematics teaching. Besides, EBA, the platform which provides the opportunity to share the technology-assisted activities, allows the teachers affiliated to National Ministry of Education to use these activities in their lessons. However, according to the views gathered from the teachers, in our country there are some crucial shortcomings such as not having a proper digital lesson content developed for the smartboard, and not getting a technical support based on smart board use. Equipping the classroom with smartboards is unfortunately not the only solution for putting effective learning into practice. As Tosuntas et al. (2020) emphasize, teachers must urgently be provided an information and equipment assistance that allow them to use smartboards in learning environments effectively.

In creation of classroom environments appropriate for today’s conditions, internet access is seen to be very important. Internet is the most important source for reaching to information in our age. Internet use is very important in especially creation of rich learning environment in classroom. The developed countries in recent years are making huge investments for increasing technology access in classrooms (Brown et al., 2020; Culp et al., 2005; Dickard, 2003). However, the findings gathered from the interviews with the teachers put forward that the schools in our country are not in sufficient level on this aspect. This case negatively effects the integration of technology into education and makes the educational applications appropriate to the requirement of the era difficult. Salehi and Salehi (2012) state that insufficient internet access is an important factor that has negative effects on the application of technology assisted teaching at schools.

Both in middle school and in secondary education, the importance given to the use of communication technologies in learning environments is seen clearly. Teachers’ knowing of teaching programs based on their fields is very important for the efficacy of teaching. In this research, it is a striking fact that a great deal of the teachers does not have any idea about the relation between mathematics teaching program and technology. Teachers’ not having any awareness like this is seen as one of the most important problems regarding technology-assisted mathematics teaching (Oksuz et al., 2009; Oksuz & Ak, 2009; Suharwoto, 2006).

The interviews done with the teachers put forward serious problems about technology-assisted mathematics teaching. Especially in technology era, it is a very upsetting fact that our schools still have problems like poor internet connection and power cut. Beside this, the frequent breakdown of the devices is also underlined as the problem which affects the teaching quality. Providing technical assistance especially on this issue is seen as an important need.

Conclusion
In this research, teachers’ perceptions on technology-assisted mathematics teaching and the technology-assisted interactive activities prepared by the researchers have been analyzed inclusively. According to the findings, the importance of teachers’ positive points of view on technology in the application of technology-assisted mathematics teaching successfully has been highlighted. Apart from teachers’ professional competency or field knowledge, these points of view of the teachers are closely related to their knowledge on technology and development (Garrett, 2009; Mishra & Koehler, 2006). When a great deal of teachers’ seeing themselves ineligible about technology literacy is considered, it is clearly seen that planning training programs which improve teachers’ inclination to technology is extremely important. It is being considered that a basic reason for teachers’ disinterest in technology-assisted teaching and their avoidance of preferring it is the inadequacy of their technology use skills. The majority of the teachers participated in the research have stated that they did not take lessons which improve their technological competencies in their university lives. This case, the programs and lesson contents in teaching faculties need to be revised according to the requirements of the era. On the other hand, although it is seen that National Ministry of Education conducted some training programs on this issue, application has not been given place enough. It is believed that especially the training programs which instruct them how to use different up-to-date technologies in learning environments, or how to prepare an interactive learning activity can be meaningful and useful.

It is seen that, apart from their knowledge on technology, not wanting to spare time for the preparation of these activities is also effective in teachers’ avoidance of preferring to use technology-assisted activities in learning environments. However, this case is not seen as a sufficient reason for not preferring the technology-assisted activities. A lot of technology-assisted activities can be found either on the internet or in teacher newsgroup. These activities should particularly be chosen more as they enrich learning environments and prepare students to the lesson both cognitively and emotionally. In terms of solving this problem or decreasing it to a minimum level, providing different sharing environments to the teachers in which they can reach to technology-assisted activities or share the activities they prepare, ensuring that the teachers are informed about the current sharing environments, and increasing their awareness of sharing are seen important.

It is also very important that for the technology-assisted mathematics teaching to be effective and preferred by the teachers, getting the technologic infrastructures of the schools appropriate to the requirements of our era. Especially getting the suitable hardware and software appropriate to teachers’ use is a must. On this issue, our schools are obviously not suitable for the information era. In today’s conditions in our country, there are still plenty of schools which do not have internet connection and up-to-date equipment (computer, smartboard etc.). In order to determine the technological needs of the schools and fulfilling these needs, planned and scheduled practices need to be done.

A comprehensive examination of teachers’ perceptions on technology-assisted mathematics teaching through original interactive activities prepared by researchers is the strength of this research. However, the limitations of the research can be counted as preparing only 50 activities, the activities are only for “Exponents and Square Root Numbers”, and just using the interview technique to collect data. In this context, teacher perceptions regarding the use of technology-supported activities in different subjects and disciplines can be examined in future studies. In addition, studies that adopt the data triangulation approach, in which two or more methods are used together, can be carried out to verify the findings and results.