In this paper, the researchers’ goal was to examine the influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services use and the expected competencies for research among postgraduates in federal universities in Southwest, Nigeria. This descriptive survey studied a purposive sample of 1008 postgraduates from five universities. For the analyses of data, the researchers used mean, standard deviation and t-test. The results indicate that postgraduate students pointed out the expected competencies that should be possessed for the effective utilization of cyberspace resources and services for research. The researchers note that there is a non-significant difference between male and female PG students’ responses in view of accessing cyberspace resources and services for research. The researchers also found a non-significant gender influence on competencies expected of PG students for utilization of cyberspace resources and services for research. The study recommended that universities should provide free access to electronic resources; and the internet connection should be improved upon.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Cyberspace is an online environment where different human activities take place, activities such as studying, research, teaching and learning. It is a virtual environment that allows the use of computer networks for communication amongst users (Mesagan et al., 2021). Omekwu (2010) defines cyberspace as a digital communication terrain including three-dimensional computer network data that facilitates a virtual reality experience amongst users. Cyberspace benefits schools and information users in several ways like expansion in libraries’ global reach and collaboration, service improvement for users, access improvement to information and making it feasible for users to access library resources and services effortlessly and globally without distance barrier (Mesagan et al., 2021).

AdomBent and Hoffmann (2013) notes that competency consists of ability, knowledge, and enthusiasm of the individual relevant for handling issues in successful and responsible ways. In this research, competencies in the use of cyberspace are said to be students’ knowledge of cyberspace, ability to access what is available in the cyberspace environment, and the application of what is retrieved for research and academic purposes. Luke and Osahon (2012) defined cyberspace competency as the extent that one's digital skills are applicable in regard to making use of cyberspace for actualizing research and educational goals.

It is the responsibility of university libraries to make available cyberspace resources required by postgraduates (Mesagan et al., 2021). Cyberspace resources required by these students include all electronic resources used in the library that contain information that can be used to answer a need. According to Oyewusi and Oyeboade (2009), these resources include online databases, e-journals, computer software, e-books and other media. Research investigating whether the use of these cyberspace resources among PG students differs across gender is still limited.

Gender includes the socio-culturally held beliefs concerning the attributes, aptitudes and probable conducts of women and men in various societies (Forte, 2009; Umoh, 2013). In this research, gender is the behavioural, cultural and psychological attributes of male and female students capable of determining how much they use cyberspace resources and services. Tong and Klecun (2012) observe that gender and cyberspace competencies could be related in that a lot of gender issues are linked to a variety of activities and abilities in cyberspace environment.

Gender is a factor that plays an essential task in the use of cyberspace resources. Francisco, et al. (2010) states that gender roles includes some mode of behaviours which are viewed as social norms for both males and females. The Ministry of Defense Japan (2012) opines that gender may not be a crucial factor when conversing about cyberspace resources and services use. The consideration of concept of gender could help researchers to encourage equity for both sexes in cyberspace resources and services use. It is expected that both males and females possess the same kind/level of competencies that can make them relevant in cyberspace environment (Panteli et al., 1999).

Gender disparity as seen in other fields can also occur in cyberspace resources and services use. Wajcman (2016) argues that most women are unwilling to adopt technology due to stereotypes. According to Sanda and Kurfi (2013), the use of cyberspace in Nigeria notwithstanding, the females are always not well represented in this area. In another research, it was demonstrated that sex variation exist in use of technology amongst students (Mahmood & Bokhari, 2012). Kenny and Donnelly (2020) notes that information technology profession has continued to witness less number of women professionals than men. Earlier on, Panteli et al. (1999) reiterated that the proportion of women participating in information technology is on the decrease. Jackson et al. (2011) showed that cyberspace nervousness affects females the more, and when it comes to using computers they tend to be inefficient in terms of retrieving online information and making use of services available in space and have unfavorable attitudes towards using cyberspace generally.

Information resources and services use has been traditionally attached to masculinity (Agbatogun & Lawunmi, 2009). Nysveen et al. (2015) indicate that the impact of technologies on females in terms of mobile chat services is enormous. Mazman et al. (2009) indicate that because of social influence, females have more likelihood of adopting new technologies than males whose decisions to use new technologies is often based on personal decision rather than social influence. Reinen and Plomp (1997) notes that there are gender differences amongst students by stressing that female students have lesser understanding about information technology compared to male students.

Agbatogun and Lawunmi (2009) argues that in order for students to effectively be active in the use of cyberspace, beginning from childhood, there should be provision of computers in every household for the children. The academic setting as a research-oriented environment demands that postgraduate students have the necessary competencies for efficient use of the cyberspace. For Nicholas (2013), the term cyberspace competencies refer to having basic computer knowledge and mastering ways of utilizing the computer as a resource. In a broader category, Mastromatteo (2009) posits that competencies possessed by postgraduate students for cyberspace are as follows: information management skills (skills on how to manage the information they have access to in cyberspace); hi-tech competencies (how to use ICTs gadgets, with respect to students’ information at times, they are more technical); and knowledge related competencies. Students also need search skills to navigate available information on the cyberspace (Adeleke & Emeahara, 2016). Obuh (2009) state that users at times ignore the required skills for locating resources with excuses that they are really complicated. The expertise for locating and retrieving resources effectively is a kind of knowledge that can be passed on by the university to future scholars. In this regard, Adeleke and Emeahara (2016) stressed that the importance of giving user education and guidance cannot be overemphasized if a realistic output must be achieved.

To effectively navigate the cyberspace, users need to be information literate. For Ojedokun and Lumade (2015), information literacy refers to the capability for locating, appraising, governing and utilizing information from various sources for the purpose of decision-making and/or research; it encompasses computer literacy and computer usability. In Ojedokun’s (2007) perspective, irrespective of the information source, so far it is cyberspace-based, an individual needs information literacy skill so as to comprehend and utilize such information. For this study, therefore, cyberspace literacy skill describes the ability of postgraduate (PG) students to utilize cyberspace resources and services to meet their research needs.

Another skill needed is said to be online searching skills. Julien (2002) states that this skill is required of individuals who are expected to be knowledgeable as per research information search and retrieval. Online searching skills involve the capability to choose suitable search keywords, adopt insightful search techniques and coherently appraise information. This implies that for the postgraduate education, new technological skills are expected of postgraduate students to appreciate the later technology.

In library terms, resources can perhaps be said to be a curated collection of sources of information available for human information utility. For Awolola (2010), library resources consists of books, research papers, magazines, journal articles, video recording, films, audios, and data stored in computer and disks. According to Oyewusi and Oyeboade (2009), these resources include also audio visual materials like records, audio cassettes, e-journal, e-resources, internet enable computer, video cassettes and projectors. These resources when used by the library to meet the need of library users in an online environment, is known as cyberspace services. Popoola (2008) explains cyberspace resources to be an organized electronic collection and other forms of recorded knowledge that meet the exigencies for information among present and future users.

The importance of cyberspace resources is to enhance teaching and research activities in educational institutions. Aina (2014) stated that for a university library to perform its functions in the digital era, its collections should include audiovisual materials. University services have been upgraded to audiovisual materials and microforms services such as CD-ROM services, and internet services to meet its myriad functions (Adigun et al. 2011). Libraries connect users to digital services to support information search process like e-reference services (Hong & Mia, 2007). Meena (2016) revealed that the merits of cyberspace for the individual students include the vast amount of information that can be retrieved online. For Singh (2009), emailing utility is beneficial to the shy students by communicating without speaking to anyone in a class. Presently, cyberspace resources and services in Nigerian universities seems to be growing, but what requires investigation is the influence of gender and the expected competencies in accessing and utilizing the cyberspace resources and services for research by postgraduate students which is the hub of this study.

Purpose of the study
This study has the general purpose of investigating the influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services for research by postgraduate students in federal universities in Southwest, Nigeria. The specific research goals are to investigate the:

i.
influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services for research by postgraduate students.

ii.
competencies expected from PG students in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research.

Research questions
1.
What is the influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services use for research by postgraduate students?

2.
What are the competencies expected from male and female postgraduate students in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research?

Hypotheses
H01: The influence of gender on PG students’ access to cyberspace resources and services for research federal universities in southwest, Nigeria is not significant.

H02: The influence of gender on PG students’ expected competencies in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria is not significant.

Methodology
The descriptive design was used and guided with two objectives. The study used the purposive sampling technique to select a sample of 1066 postgraduates in five federal universities in Southwest Universities, Nigeria. Questionnaire was the instrument used with overall Cronbach’s alpha of 0.86. A total of 1058 copies out of the 1066 copies of the questionnaire were retrieved from postgraduate students amounted to 95% return rate. All participants provided informed consent in writing to participate in the study. The study used mean score (x¯¯¯), Standard Deviation (SD) and t-test statistics for data analysis.

Results
Demographic variables of the study include that of the institutions, the gender and the categories or groups the study focused on. The institutions under study along with their frequency and percentages includes Federal University of Technology, Akure (f = 170; 16.0%), University of Lagos (f = 288; 27.1%), Federal University of Agriculture, Abeokuta (f = 141; 13.3%), Obafemi Awolowo Univeristy, Ile-Ife (f = 227; 21.4%) and University of Ibadan (f = 234; 22.1%).

Also, gender was considered during the course of data collection as another variable responsible in accessing and utilizing cyberspace resources and services. This helped in understanding the make-up of the respondents as male accounted for 55.5% and female 44.5% of the population.

In addition to the factors under consideration was the educational level or educational categories of the respondents. The study focuses on three categories of postgraduate students with their frequencies and percentages in the five institutions under study as follows: PGD (f = 137, 12.9%), Masters (f = 670, 63.2%) and Ph.D (f = 253, 23.9%).

Research questions
What is the influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services use for research by postgraduate students?
In view of the above research question on the influence of gender of PG students on the use of cyberspace resources and services in the selected universities under study, gender was cross-tabulated with cyberspace resources and services so as to ascertain if gender influences the extent to which those resources are being utilized.

Table 1 focused on the influence of gender on cyberspace resources use by PG students. Library-based software, Electronic Bulletin Boards, Electronic Books, Online Newspapers, AGORA (Access to Global Online Research in Agriculture), DOAB (Dictionary of Open Access Book) with mean scores of 2.97, 3.29, 2.57, 2.60, 3.04, 3.06, 2.87, and 2.59 respectively were moderately influenced by gender in terms of usage. While services such as Institutional Repository (IR), Online Service by SMS, Online Service by E-mail, Online Service by Telegram, Online Service by ResearchGate, Online library orientation, Online Students’ Supervisor Interaction, Ordering of Research Resources by E-journal articles had mean scores of 2.80, 3.01, 2.51, 2.86, 2.56, 2.34, 2.50 and 2.48. The standard deviation of gender influence on the use of cyberspace resources items ranges between 1.07 and 0.88 as well as that of services ranges between 1.14 and 1.07 indicating that the opinions of the respondents closely tended towards each other.

Table 1 Influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services use
Full size table
What are the competencies expected from male and female postgraduate students in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research?
In view of the above research question regarding the competencies expected in the use of cyberspace resources and services in the selected universities under study, PG students were expected to indicate the extent of agreement on the competencies expected.

Table 2 shows the competencies expected for cyberspace resources and services use by PG students. Library based software, Electronic Bulletin Boards, Electronic Books, Online Newspapers, AGORA, and DOAB with mean scores of 2.97, 3.29, 2.57, 2.60, 3.04, 3.06, 2.87, and 2.59 were moderately influenced by gender in terms of usage. Services such as Institutional Repository (IR), Online Service by SMS, Online Service by E-mail, Online Service by Telegram, Online Service by Research Gate, Online library orientation, Online Students’ Supervisor Interaction, Ordering of Research Resources by E-journal articles had mean scores of 2.80, 3.01, 2.51, 2.86, 2.56, 2.34, 2.50 and 2.48. The standard deviation of gender influence on the use of cyberspace resources and services items ranges between 1.07 and 0.88 as well as that of services ranges between 1.14 and 1.07 indicating that the opinions of the respondents closely tended towards each other.

Table 2 Competencies expected for access to and use of cyberspace resources and services
Full size table
Hypotheses
H01: The influence of gender on PG students’ access to cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria is not significant.

Table 3 is a t-test analysis of the mean rating on the influence of gender on PG students’ access to cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria. Results showed a non-significant influence of gender of PG students on access to cyberspace resources and services for research. The cluster t-value of -1.09 with a degree of freedom of 1058 and a significant value of 0.89 was obtained. Thus, the null hypothesis that the influence of gender on PG students’ access to cyberspace resources and services for research is not significant in the institutions under study was accepted.

H02: The influence of gender on PG students’ expected competencies in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria is not significant.

Table 3 t-test analysis of the influence of gender of PG students on their access to cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria
Full size table
The result in Table 4 is a t-test analysis of the mean rating on the influence of gender on PG students’ expected competencies in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria. Results presented in Table 4 showed that there was no significant influence of gender on PG students’ expected competencies in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities. The cluster t-value of 2.79 with a degree of freedom of 1058 and a significant value of 0.28 was obtained. Thus, the null hypothesis that the influence of gender on PG students’ expected competencies in the use of cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria is not significant was accepted.

Table 4 t-test analysis on gender influence on of PG students’ expected competencies for use of cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest, Nigeria
Full size table
Discussion
In this paper, the researchers’ goal was to examine the influence of gender on cyberspace resources and services use and the expected competencies in the utilization of cyberspace for research among PG students in federal universities in Southwest, Nigeria. Our finding unveiled a non-significant gender influence on access to as well as the expected competencies in the utilization of cyberspace for research among PG students in the studied universities. This finding corroborates the opinion of the Ministry of Defense Japan (2012) that gender may not be a crucial factor when issues of cyberspace resources and services use are being analyzed. On the contrary, Wajcman (2016) unveiled that many feminists think that technology is designed in a way that is difficult to navigate and as such most women are not willing to start using it. For Sanda and Kurfi (2013), females are often under-represented in cyberspace usage regardless of the high emphasis placed on the use of cyberspace.

This study found that the cyberspace competencies in the questionnaire were approved by the PG students as expected competencies for accessing and utilizing cyberspace resources and services for research. In this respect, Mastromatteo (2009) had concurred that cyberspace competencies required of students include skills for technological and information management. In another past research, Akpe et al. (2018) showed that students utilize these resources for actualizing the exigencies for academic and research information. Lou et al. (2010) highlights that cyberspace skills required of students include information and computer literacy. Thus, it is recommended that universities should provide free access to electronic resources for students; and the internet connection should be improved upon.

There abound few limitations during the course of gathering data for this study. We were faced with the challenge of inadequate finance for traveling around to different institutions to gather very large amount of data. Also, in some of the universities such as UI and UNILAG, the researchers were denied access to some of the Ph.D students in their hall of residence. This led to the inability of the researchers to access a good number of the Ph.D students as expected which resulted to low response among the Ph.D students compared to the other categories.

Suggestions for further study
1.
The researchers suggest investigation about cyberspace resources usage among postgraduate students in private universities.

2.
The researchers suggest investigating the correlation between cyberspace resources and services access and research output in Nigerian federal universities.

Contributions to knowledge
The major contributions of the study

1.
It is new as it tries to look at cyberspace in a holistic approach and how it influences PG research in South-West Nigeria.

2.
The study also provided empirical evidence on the state of gender and expected competencies in the course of using and accessing cyberspace resources and services for research in the universities under study.

Conclusion
Based on the study outcomes, the researchers note that gender does not influence postgraduate students' use of cyberspace resources and services for research. In other words, there are no significant mean discrepancies in male and female postgraduate students’ ratings on access to cyberspace resources and services for research in federal universities in southwest Nigeria. Furthermore, there is no significant influence of gender on competencies expected of PG students in the utilization of cyberspace resources and services for research.