Computer security competitions have been playing a significant role in encouraging students to get into cybersecurity, as well as enhancing the cybersecurity education system. The level of difficulty of the computer security tasks could be intimidating for most students and learners, one of the reasons there has been a shortage of cybersecurity professionals, in addition to that the lack of technical training and materials. The risks posed by the cyberattacks keep constantly evolving that positions the cybersecurity education as constantly changing area, which are at times hard to teach. Furthermore, the cybersecurity laboratories are hard to setup and the assessment tools are not accurate. This obviously impacts the proper engagement of students and the learning outcomes. To address these issues, we propose a game-based learning platform to enhance cybersecurity education. The platform applies an adapted ARCS motivational model to design and evaluate different challenges, it includes a virtual lab for students with the necessary tools for practice and a web portal where all challenges and learning materials are hosted. The aim is to help students learn at their own pace about different cybersecurity challenges, give them the opportunity to gain hacking skills with ethics taken in mind in a much safer environment. Learning by solving fun puzzles and playing educational games has a huge impact on students’ performances in cybersecurity. Although the contributed solution is developed for UAE University, we believe it imparts same gains in similar educational institutes.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Cybersecurity is the practice of protecting assets from malicious digital attacks as per the definitions provided by CISCO and Kaspersky technologies (Cisco, 2015; Kaspersky, 2007). They both emphasis of the notion of protecting network systems, mobile devices, and data from digital attacks that could impact organizations. Due to the major dangers of these threats to the authenticity of assets handled by organizations, the requirement to have enough Cybersecurity professionals is important.

In this context, it is required to have educated professionals that have went through enough practice with common Cybersecurity concept implementation along with techniques to tackle them at some point during their degree studies (Hart et al., 2020). Hence, the need to have a learning approach to reinforce learned concepts is vital. A more interactive learning environment that complements the traditional learning approach is being encouraged as it gives learners the opportunity to apply what they learn in controlled settings that leads to longer containment of learned theory (Graham et al., 2020).

Several games have been developed with the objective of raising awareness about Cybersecurity and its threats. These games focus on educating individuals about the dangers of Cybersecurity when using the Internet or sharing information online (Hart et al., 2020; Graham et al., 2020; Giannakas et al., 2019). Other games have been developed with the objective of allowing players to interact together in an adventure-like controlled environment where they are required to complete certain objective and tasks related to Cybersecurity in order to win (Graham et al., 2020).

In this paper, we aim to propose a learning platform that aims to educate its target audience about Fundamental Cybersecurity threats and attacks along with providing a virtual controlled environment where they can apply the taught theory. By giving students the proper environment to tackle common Cybersecurity attacks, they will gain the proper skills and knowledge when faced with similar cases in the real world. Through our proposed platform we aim to answer the following Research Questions:

1.
How does the integration of a game-based platform contribute to learners skills and achieving learning outcomes?

2.
Is the integration of a game-based platform relevant in the field of Cyber security to enhance learners skills?

This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 covers the Related work and literature in the field of game-based platform. Section 3 covers the Game-based learning methodology which includes the Objectives , Models integrated with the platform, and the target audience. Section 4, covers the platform architecture and design, and Section 5 covers the evaluation mechanism of our proposed platform. Then the paper is wrapped up in Sections 6.

Related work
Computer security competitions also known as Capture the Flag (CTF) are generally designed to help participants gain computer security skills to secure systems and respond to threats, as cyber attacks have been on the rise in recent years (Kucek & Leitner, 2020; Harmon, 2016). CTF competitions are typically held online or on-site, and they are hosted in virtual environments with a web portal. The environment include game configurations such as a scoreboard and different challenges.

Overview of game based learning platforms
The concept of combining learning and entertainment have appeared in the Information Technology (IT) field through the years. The new terms shaped to include ”learning by playing”, ”Game-Based Learning”, and ”Educational entertainment (Edutainment)”. The Game-Based Learning platform is a platform that includes the game characteristics and principles are implemented within learning activities. The Game-Based Learning platform encourages participant engagement and motivation them to learn. The Game Based Learning Platform has been used successfully in various fields such as medical, military, physical training, security, technology, and business. Game-Based Learning platform proposed as a new approach to complement cybersecurity education and training because of the great complexity of the cybersecurity concepts. The benefits of implementing the game in cybersecurity provide an enjoyable educational environment, it allows the participants to learn concepts and theory in cybersecurity and place them through the game into practice. Game-based learning provides participants a form of imagination or real-world scenarios that they are requested to act out based on the specific situation. There are many different games that were developed to increase awareness of information technology and cybersecurity such as Control-Alt-Hack, CyberProtect, CyberAware, Anti-Phishing Phil, CyberCIEGE, CyberNEXS, and other games (Oo & Lim, 2016; Awojana & Chou, 2019).

Current cybersecurity awareness platforms
The CyberAware gaming application supports two learning goals, first goal to define and explain to learners the fundamental cybersecurity technologies that are required to keep their Internet-connected devices protected against legacy threats, as well as to keep their passwords safe. The second goal is to increase the awareness of learners on privacy issues generally related to their identity and the protection of their personal information published on the web (Giannakas et al., 2015).

Many countries lack focus and effort in curricula computer security for teens, and in general for people who have basics computer skills. Therefore, the CyberAware app is based on the notable cybersecurity curricula or campaigns for children aged 6 to 12 years old, based on the educational content and security/privacy scenarios.

The CyberAware app has been intending with the following principles. Such as, the learning goals should be clear and easy to comprehend, the challenges for the player should be short, attractive, and easy to understand, the learning content should be possible to alter or extend at any time, focused on specific learning topics, concise, and easy to comprehend, and the app should be able to navigate and run on a variety of modern computing platforms, including mobile ones. To reach the previously mentioned four goals and ensure the quality of the learning experience, and guaranteeing the learning outcomes, the app must guide by an instructional strategy. The strategy should be driven by an Instructional Design Model (IDM) (Gibbons, Boling, and Smith, 2014) that details how the learning experience can be aggregated so that the acquired knowledge and skills become more attractive to the learners. In general, an IDM contains general principles that guide the creation of engaging educational scenarios that include realistic learning goals.

The new current work is considered as an improvement of Giannakas et al. (2015) in terms of both platform architecture and educational content. So that the work done by Giannakas et al. is a germinal version of the CyberAware platform without the LCMS back-end, which supports a limited number of mini-games dedicated only to information security topics. After an observation stemming from the related work is that the majority of contributions focus on the technological aspect such as usability rather than on the learning theories the app should embrace. Only who have been works and built the learning theory in mind are Sheng et al. (2007), Kumaraguru, Sheng, Acquisti, Cranor, and Hong (2010), Tupsamudre, Vaddepalli, Banahatti, and Lodha (2018).

The CyberAware platform consists of a web-based custom LCMS and an app as the front-end. The app comprises a suite of seven serious learning minigames destined for cybersecurity and privacy education. To take the mobile device as an example, where the app connects to the LCMS to retrieve the appropriate learning and informational material. Besides, the platform of the front-end is designed to be independent, where the app can run virtually in any computing platform, including Android and desktop.

One of the web-based games called ”GAP” (Tupsamudre et al., 2018) is mainly for educating users about different features that have a negative effect on password security. So it guides the participants during the game and asks them to identify insecure password practices.

In the game design, the authors have combined two principles from the learning theory: reflection and contextual procedural. The participants who played GAP improved their awareness of insecure password practices. It shows that there are many benefits regarding the GAP game in increasing the awareness of cybersecurity.

Anti-PhishingPhi purpose is to teach users how to use signals in Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) to protect themselves against phishing attacks. The Anti-Phishing Sheng et al. (2007) is complements of Kumaraguru et al. (2010) stated that PhishGuru is considered a story-based anti-phishing educational standalone software that aims at alerting learners about email phishing attacks. Also, Anti-Phishing Phil provides an entertaining platform for teaching more difficult anti-phishing tactics in which PhishGuru lacks.

The main objective of the authors is to familiarize users with ways of identifying if a cue that appears in the web browser’s address bar corresponds to a malicious site. The Kumaraguru et al. (2010) results show that those who played the previously mentioned games were more skillful in identifying fraudulent websites and phishing-account emails. On the other hand, there is an online web-based game that embeds the graphical concept of cartoons as its media type called SecurityCartoons Srikwan and Jakobsson (2008). The SecurityCartoons game is designed to increase users’ security awareness against security threats as well as to advise them on how to protect themselves against Internet attacks, including identity theft, phishing, and others (Giannakas et al., 2019).

Current cybersecurity learning platforms
Over the years, several games have been designed and developed that help end-users to understand the importance and need of security, and to help the security professionals to make better decisions in security (Graham et al., 2020). Therefore, there is a small fraction of serious games intended for computing education that focus on cybersecurity such as Cyberspace Odessy, CyberCIEGE, CounterMeasures, SecurityCom, CyberProtect, and HackNet.

Cyberspace odyssey (CSO) is a serious game which mean there is a primary purpose, not only for entertainment. CSO designed to afford students practical experience in computer network security in an engaging and fun way. Cyberspace odyssey is a puzzle-solving game that allow each team that have ”hacking” skills with critical thinking uses computer and network to solve puzzle. Therefore, CSO is for multiplayer not for single-player, and it encourag team members to cooperate and competition with other teams, which make the game nondeterministic. CSO allows students to integrate three-dimensional (3-D) virtual environment with real-world components (Graham et al., 2020).

CyberCIEGE is an on-going project and developed by the Naval Postgraduate School for awareness purposes and information security training. CyberCIEGE is a computer game designed to teach information assurance (IA) and network security concepts to educational institutions and government organizations and is available costless. CyberCIEGE is a graphical user interface (GUI) for a single-player, it is a simulation game that places the player in the response to information assurance decisions, and the player tries to protect information from attacks while allowing those who demand access. The simulation in CyberCIEGE is accomplished by an extensible game engine that allows developers to create various scenarios for numerous training purposes. one of these scenarios, the basic user scenario that designed to educate information system users in fundamental computer security such as password management, basic safe computing, malicious software, and physical security mechanisms. The aim of the basic user scenario to improve user cyber decision-making processes. Another scenario was developed by the NPS for IT staff to introduces them to access control, filtering, physical security mechanisms, antivirus protection, password policies, data backups, and patching configurations. In addition, other researchers developed scenarios that concentrate on identity theft prevention and decreasing the risks of distributing viruses and worms (Xuquan & Kim, 2011).

CounterMeasures is a simulation game for single-player, it is concentrated on helping players to learn security principles. Therefore, CounterMeasures doesn’t assume any previous security knowledge but it requires an introductory level of knowledge of computer science. Players are guided to basic hacking techniques to accomplish objectives in a sandboxed shell environment. The game was developed by using Flex/Flash running in an Adobe Air client and performed with a client-server architecture. The client contains a simple GUI, and it connects to a Java server. Players send commands to a virtual machine through the GUI to execute commands and receiving the information of the mission from XML les. The implementation of this game provides a user-friendly, graphical interface for players (Jordan et al., 2011).

SecurityCom is a game that has the same training objectives as CyberCIEGE. It is designed to educate in information systems security, test team interaction. SecurityCom game demands players to work and negotiate with each other to make decisions about information assurance, and it did not support multiple teams. SecurityCom consists of a user interface that is intuitive and simple, which request a minimal amount of training from player to accomplish the exercise (Twitchell, 2007; Graham et al., 2020).

CyberProtect is a simulation tool of network security designed by the US Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA). It is a part of cybersecurity. The CyberProtect game is available at no charge for Cybersecurity Simulations provided by Defense Information Systems Agency Online Training. The CyberProtect game was finalist in Serious Games Showcase and Challenge (SGS&C) in 2010, because it provides a clearly learning objectives. The game provides players a clear identified problem, and the player get a feedback of progress of learning objectives. CyberProtect game specifying the player as a network administrator to achieve the purpose of the learning information assurance resource management and basic computer network defense (Gultom & Alrianto, 2017)-(Graham et al., 2020).

Hacknet game is super immersive, modern, and terminal-based hacking simulator with an internally-consistent network simulation. Hacknet game was the winner of SGS&C in 2015. It makes the player in the role of an offensive hacker by using metasploit-like tools and UNIX-like commands. The player goes through harder challenges that contain lessons that learned from former missions (Graham et al., 2020). Authors in Nagarajan et al. (2012) focus on state of practice by describing the gaming tool used in most cybersecurity challenges at educational institutes in U.S e.g., CyberNEXS. The article also touches upon the crucial topics that need to be addressed in cybersecurity training e.g., management of the passwords, malware protection, phishing techniques, etc. In addition to the details on the CyberNeXS, authors discuss other potential platforms including: Cyberprotect, CyberCIEGE, NetWars, etc. Similarly (Lehrfeld and Guest, 2016) contributes with solution for ethical hacking. Author looks into build-yourwon capture hacking simulations to help learners engage and understand penetration testing. Authors highlight that high level of students engagement was achieved when adequate time was allocated and they were encouraged to develop creative CTF scenarios. In the experiments, the students were asked develop a capture the flag platform that scored participants’ status of learning when the the he/she is exploiting a vulnerable website. An initial set of the learning outcomes were defined e.g., identifying common attack vectors on website, creating attach platforms for exploiting web-based technologies, evaluating how the given attack may be mitigated.

Although holding competitions through gamifications is a very useful way to enhance the teaching and learning processes, Margalit (2016) highlights that the cybersecurity field has two unique challenges i.e., we do not intend to teach criminal activities and it is difficult to comprehend the future of the Internet world. To address such issues, authors propose to let the students solve hard out-of-the-box computer programming tasks, which are correlated to the current cybersecurity techniques. Authors create a task of writing a complex program that generates an hexadecimal dump. The complexity is evident from the fact that the problem involves reverse engineering, which requires crucial expertise in cybersecurity domain. Readers are encouraged to refer to the article for examples of the game.

It is accepted that the rapidly evolving and diversified competitions attract the attention of students more. Furthermore, the importance of the competition in boosting the learning cannot be denied, where the participants are provided with the opportunity to practice techniques and knowledge application. However, the learning outcomes are implicit, where the players expand their apply their knowledge to solve new problems (Pusey et al., 2016). The impact of the competition is evident in different studies e.g., increased STEM program enrollment, as the competition related extracurricular programs attract students who are already engaged with the STEM fields and likely to enroll in STEM programs in college.

The recent past has seen larger number of CTF contests e.g., DEFCON, NYU-CSAW. One may see the same pattern in research literature e.g., Kucek and Leitner (2020) studies the CTF environments and its underlying infrastructures with specific focus on open-source platforms including: PicoCTF, FacebookCTF, HackTheArch, WrathCTF, Pedagogic-CTF, RootTheBox,CTFdandMellivora. The article discusses features and functions of these platforms e.g., scoring, statistics or supportedchallenge types. Furthermore, the game configuration options are explained in details e.g., multiple flags, points, hint penalities. One of the major takeaways of the research literature survey is that most of platforms provide similar base functionality and game configurations e.g., hint penalty, time frames for solving challenges, limited number of attempts or dependencies between challenges, etc. The analysis of the extensive research literature reveal that the following major challenges hinder the pace of game-based educational activities:

The cumbersome process and amount of time required to design the games

Uncertainty in achieving the set goals.

Incurring costs in terms of human efforts. infrastructure, and licenses, which at times may become a big amount.

Delays in grant allocations. Usually, the design and development efforts are funded through grants, which may take longer time.

Heterogeneous capabilities and capacity issues of the team. The developers may not have the right pedagogical knowledge. Hence, an efficient mechanism of knowledge transfer and testing should be in place during the development stages. Needless to mention that this also provisions more costs.

Creating the accessing mechanism for the platform with different roles for the proper configuration of games.

Evaluation criteria before the launch of the game. It is difficult to test and estimate the outcomes of the games after they are developed. This is because the evaluation is mainly based on subjective measurements.

It is hard to achieve the universal appeal for a game, which is based on the pedagogical drive.

The trend advocates that the games are usually associated with the leisure rather than academic drive, which needs a paradigm shift.

It is hard to align the learning objectives with the game dynamics so that the education model may be met. Usually, the core objective of the game design remain as ”becoming a fun” activity.

It may be a time taking activity to have the proper alignment of the game with the curriculum.

Game-based learning methodology
Objectives
The main objective is to give students the right tools to learn at their own pace about different cybersecurity challenges.

Give them the opportunity to gain hacking skills with ethics taken in mind in a much safer environment.

Provide them with high quality educational materials and exercises, which are selected using a review process to make sure that the items meet the requirements based on the ARCS model.

Anyone can contribute with content and challenges (Problems or Tasks) by following the learning model’s guidelines, where all submitted contributions go though a review process to keep flawless and quality content.

Ensure an accurate assessment with high quality challenges and exercises.

Prevent cheating by looking for anomalous activities

Apply a review process on challenges to make sure that are harmful and designed to encourage learners to get a better learning experience.

To attain these objectives, in what follows next, we discuss the design goals and procedures that our approach follows.

Our approach is inspired by the CTF approaches. To ensure the proper engagement of the students and their enhanced participation in the learning process, the students are introduced to the game concept, the stages therein, the operational steps, basic methods of ethical hacking and penetration testing, etc. Inspired by the Dunphy and Dunphy (2003) and Dennen (2004), we suggest the following:

Make the relevant context available such that the participant may recall any pre-requisite knowledge.

Create various stages of the learning process with concretely defined goals and sub-goals, which may be defined as successful attainment of the goals specific objectives.

Gradually move from easy to more difficult stages of the security puzzles.

Incentivize the team work.

Highlight the importance of finalizing the questions during the learning process.

To bridge the knowledge gap, the process of self-learning capabilities may be enhanced.

The difficulty levels of the scenarios is sustained while ensuring the learners’ comfort level.

Amongst other, we rank the following major goals as the most crucial ones: subject knowledge improvement, technical skills relevant to the fundamental concepts of ethical hacking and penetration testing. Furthermore, to guide the readers for learning with hacking with ethics, in what follows next, we briefly discuss the a few tools and relevant research literature.

Hacknet Labyrinths is a simulation-based hacking computer game, which emulates a real system infrastructure and features real-world networks. The tool provides necessary components and problems that help the learners to understand the hacking with ethics. For more on the set of toolkits that are used for penetration testing and ethical hacking, the readers are encouraged to refer to Gonzalez et al. (2017). On the similar lines, NITE Team, a simulation based computer game also focuses on the topics of cybersecurity. The game emulates real world tools. Major attributes of the game are: ethical hacking tools and methods. Obviously, as all the games, NITE Team also aims at enhancing the engagement of the students. One of the attractive features of the game is its capability to create custom puzzles and challenges. An improvement of NITE Team over the Hacknet is that NITE Team 4 emulated the components very close to the real ones and the steps are clearly stated in terms of learning basic concepts of cybersecurity. Moreover, the in-game context is enhanced with educational material regarding real-world information such as real ethical hacking tools and penetration testing methods.

To equip the readers on the relevant contents about ethical hacking and penetration testing, we list methods in the following: (i) Reconnaissance and Intelligence Gathering: this process is relevant to network scanning, network mapping, and sub-domain enumeration by making use of the game tool such as sfuzzer and OSINTscan. This is followed by the process of inviting the participants or port scanning and vulnerability analysis through suitable software components and tools. (ii) Network Infiltration: Participants are asked to try connecting to the network by making use of available exploits and rootkits. (iii) Network Scanning: In this step, the participants are asked to execute netscan and airodump lime commands so that any devices connected to the network may be discovered. This will also allow the enumeration of the folders across the network e.g., shared folders. (iv) Password Attacks: During this step, the participants are to launch attacks to access services. Various tools and files are made available at this stage e.g., John the Ripper, rootkits Assassin, RockYou.txt, etc. Foxacid Server is usually used for exploits like Metasploit. (v) Additional options: Participants are also provided with various other options and information regarding the relevant concepts and tools. Participants are directed to various websites, blogs and Wikipedia pages in order to learn more information regarding to real commands and software tools.

Instructional design model (IDM) - an overview
As we know that the IDM may be systematically designed as mechanisms for translating principles of learning in instruction material, source of information, evaluation strategies, and other relevant activities. Such translation is carried out through reflective process (Balaban et al., 2016). IDMs can be more generic or universally usable or more specific depending on their design e.g., consider the Fig. 1 (inspired by Balaban et al., 2016),

Fig. 1
figure 1
An Overview of IMD, Downward arrow corresponds to increasing universality of IDM and lower precision of IMD, whereas the vice versa is captured by the downward arrow

Full size image
which stands for the claim that depending on the purpose of IDM, it may be placed at different levels. For instance, more generic IDM is placed on the top layer in the figure, whereas more specific one is placed at the bottom layer. Our model is positioned nearer to the top layer. As we target the implicit generalization of the knowledge, where we provide sufficient guidelines across broader areas of knowledge. Major product of an IDM is basically the a developed model of the instructional unit, which corresponds to specifying the activity types e.g., evaluation activities, their supporting material, and sequence of actions. We aim at having a very generic IDM with respect to the role of instructional designer and developer. The idea is that it assumes that the person designing instructions and developing instructional materials follows the IDM, has access to domain knowledge, and other resources. In what follows next, we briefly summarize a few steps involved in the design of the IDM:

Creating the initial set of assumptions about the IDM e.g., weekly lecture, delivery mode, etc.

Identifying the scope of the instruction, which is done by gathering resources e.g., researching the books, papers, etc.

Identifying learner’s entry level. This is purely related to the progression in the curriculum. In this step, the instructional designer estimates acquired knowledge and kills from completion of previously introduced units.

Defining instructional contents, where the proposed concept is systematically analyzed targeting different objectives e.g., learning objective, business objectives, etc.

Formulation of the learning objectives. In this step the intent of the instruction is defined.

IDM consists of the following phases: objectives, pretest, instruction, and post-test. It also includes a looping process for revision purposes. IDM basically adapts a system engineering process for problems associated with workplace training and instruction.

The learning model
In this section, a design model is covered in relation to their integration with our proposed solution followed by a learning content management system. It is worth noting that in addition to the aforementioned gains of integrating game based learning in cybersecurity, a few of its important characteristics are highlighted in the following:

Decomposes the global goals into local goals allowing participant the achievement of interim goals. Hence, achieving the local objectives make the participants feel that they are processing.

Game-based learning reinforces the fact that failure is not a setback nor an outcome but indication that more skill building is needed

Achieving the local objectives lead to achieving the global objective through discrete steps allow the participants to comprehend the interrelationship of tactics and strategy.

Enable the participants to learn about procedure and the value of alternative paths

Achieving smaller goals and gradual progression increase the confident of the participants preparing them to tackle large scale project / problems.

The integration of games in the proposed model is driven by the very framework of the ARCS model, which serves as the base for implementing the proposed model.

ARCS model stands for Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction; while the content management system is a Learning Component Management System to govern the content and material that will be hosted on our platform (Giannakas et al., 2019).

ARCS Design Model: The motivation to choose ARCS model was basically driven by the following features of ARCS. The ARCS model is a motivational design process designed by Keller in 1983 that includes motivational concepts and theories clustered into four categories as follows:

1.
Attention (A): This category focuses on the idea of designing a platform that can maintain learner’s attention throughout the platform. This is achieved by indulging user’s participation on focused tasks and activating their sense of challenge.

2.
Relevance (R): This category focuses on developing a platform that builds upon learner’s prior knowledge regarding the material and concepts covered by the platform.

3.
Confidence (C): This category focuses on achieving motivation through your platform by providing achievable goals and displaying score boards to allow learners view their progress through the usage of the platform. Additionally, this category is achieved when the platform gives feedback to the learner’s achievements and progress while completing tasks on the platform. This will help them stay motivated and have the confidence of being able to achieve the requested tasks and challenges.

4.
Satisfaction (S): The final category in this motivational model is linked to a learner’s content regarding the platform used and the results. This is one of the most important and critical categories of the ARCS model because it is what makes the learner want to try the platform again. This is achieved through providing learners with rewards upon completing the required tasks and challenges.

The ARCS Model is applied accordingly into our proposed platform as our platform’s main audience targets learners and individuals that want to learn through practice.

In what follows next, we provide the integration process of the ARCS with the design of CyberSecurity Games, the design is inspired by Kaneko et al. (2015).

Figure 2 pictorially depicts the connection between the ARCS design processes and educational game. ARCS model is decomposed into five sections namely: i) collecting information, ii) analyses of the demands, iii) goal setting, iv) motivation stimulation, and v) evaluation strategies.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Integration Process of ARCS and the Game-based Learning

Full size image
The design of the game at any teaching stage is fully driven by the ARCS motivation strategies. This is to say that the attention strategy for each game is to design it based on the story to catch learners’ attention and help them understand the context of the game. In this connection, the proposed approach suggests the requirement analysis stage (please refer to ”Educational Game” part of the Fig. 2), where the preferences of the learners, relevant and updated information and goal confirmation is captured. In this stage, the current context information is collected, the average capabilities of learners are defined, and goals are identified and detailed. This corresponds to the second stage of the ARCS (labelled as 2 in the upper part of the Fig. 2). The goal setting stage of ARCS (labelled as 3 in upper part of the Fig. 2) or its counter part stage ”match game types” deal with relevance strategy, the relevance of the game directs learners and gives them a useful purpose with understandable content related to the learners’ abilities and experiences.

As can be seen in the figure that this stage feeds into the game to ”Look for meeting between the game and Teaching”, which then decides over the game, identify design goals, and align them to the goals of technology. Having achieved this contributes to the ”Goal Setting” stage of ARCS. Game imparts new knowledge by proving users with the probability of winning. This corresponds to the ”Motivation Stimulation” stage of the ARCS (labelled as 4 in the upper part of the Fig. 2). In the confidence strategy, the learners are informed about the learning requirements and evaluation criteria, also they are provided with the opportunity of attaining incentive to applying their skills in the circumstances. The sense of learning success is linked to the effort and ability of learners, this adds to enhancing the learning motivation. This is captured by the ”Motivation Stimulation” stage of the ARCS (labelled as 4 in Fig. 2). In the satisfaction strategy, encouragement and support are essential to make the learning experience enjoyable, and providing positive feedback maintains consistency of success. Having integrated the game in the educate, it is crucial to evaluate its impact. The evaluation criteria stage (labelled as 5 in Fig. 2), whose outcomes set the evaluation criteria against which the game is evaluated. Based on the outcomes of the evaluation stage, the ”Reflection and Modification” stage implements the adjustments. This is captured by the last stage of the Education game (please refer to Fig. 2).

There are a number of other design models, each with their individual characteristics e.g.,

ADDIE, which stands for Analysis, Design, Develop, Implementation, Evaluation. The phases of this model provides an opportunity for repetitions and further adaptation before moving to the next phase.

MPI (Merrill’s Principles of Instructions) model. This model integrates five components holistically, which include: principles that are task-centered, principles of activation, principles of demonstration, principles of application, and principles of integration.

Gagne’s Nine Events of Instruction, which comprises of the following nine steps: Gain attention of the students , Inform students of the objectives, Stimulate recall of prior learning, Present the content, Provide learner guidance, Elicit performance, Provide feedback, Assess performance, Enhance retention and transfer to the job

Bloom’s Taxonomy, which has the following six categories: creating, evaluating, analysing, applying, understanding, and remembering.

Learning Content Management System:

Learning Content Management System (LCMS) is an integrated platform that administers, monitors, and delivers content to applications that integrate it. The main goal of this system is to ensure that the content being hosted by the application is governed, managed, and updated accordingly on a regular basis (trainingindustry, 2020). Generally, the software program is consisting of server that performs the core functionality and user interface to be used by administrators, instructors, and students.

Notably, our proposed platform has utilized a Learning Content Management System in a way where it is divided into 2 components:

1.
The platform has ”Tutorials” and ”Material Resources” sections that include hands-on materials for each category such as (Cryptography, Reverse Engineering, Forensics and Web security...)

2.
The platform has a back-end administration feature where instructors hosting content on the platform can manage and edit the material accordingly.

Challenge design and review process
Challenges are meant to be educational and fun, the design process of a challenge must follow the ARCS model and each challenge contributed to the platform go through a review process to ensure that the challenge has a learning value and encourage learners to seek more knowledge.

As shown in Fig. 3, after the review process we check the conformity of the challenge with the ARCS model, if it is not conform then the challenge must be revised or rejected, otherwise the challenge is deployed and published in the platform.

Platform design and architecture
Platform’s architecture is not so different from other existing platforms, it is inspired from the PicoCTF platform (Burket et al., 2015; Chapman et al., 2014). The learning platform composed of two components: Web platform, Docker containers and the virtual laboratory.

Web platform
The web platform is the main portal in which students use to authenticate and start exploring different sections like tutorials, discussions, games and challenges with a variety of categories such as (Web security, Cryptography, Reverse engineering, Program exploitation, Network security, Forensic).

The platform is based on Flask framework which makes it easy to build modular and scalable web apps, and with the rich Python packages, interacting with different services such as Docker would easy. It is a wrapper around Service running python based Flask application. It is a microframework, which does not provision specific tools or libraries. It does not have any database abstraction layer or any other components with pre-existing third-party libraries provide common functions. Flask allows the extension that assist in adding application features as if they are implicit part of the Flask itself. There are a number of extensions, which may be used for object-relational mappers, handling of the upload, validations of the forms. and authentication. The choice of using Flask was driven by its following features:

Appropriate usability features: Flask is very easy to Use. The concepts of flasks are easy to comprehend even for beginners. This feature makes it the framework of choice for developer to navigate around and create the a large variety of application with ease.

Flexibility: Flask is very flexible, as its components can easily be adapted. This feature of the flask allows for easy customization of the website.

Efficient Testing: Flask provides with unit testing, which is offered as an integrated service. Furthermore, it provides with efficient debugger, built-in development server, and restful request dispatching. All these make the testing much more efficient.

The learning platform contains the following sections:

Profile: it presents personal information about the student, rank, and achievements of the student.

Scoreboard: A list of students ordered by rank with the total gained points for each student

Challenges: in this section, a series of challenges and games available for all students. Each challenge has a name, a description, a value (points) and a link or an attachment to it.

Tutorials: where learners can browse tutorials to get familiar with each category at their own pace, and understand how they approach different kinds of challenges.

Discussion rooms: this section let students have discussions about different topics in cybersecurity, they exchange knowledge without sharing solutions for any challenge available, and that would be considered cheating.

Materials and resources: A list of security related documentations, e-books and tools, students may use these resources to acquire knowledge.

Docker containers
Docker is ”a platform for developers and system admins to develop, ship, and run applications”, based on containers. It is open-source, mainly created in Go and originally on top of libvirt and LXC. Dockers simplifies and standardizes the creation and management of containers. Docker is a set of platform as a service (PaaS) products that uses OS-level virtualization to deliver software in packages called containers. Containers are isolated from one another and bundle their own software, libraries and configuration files; they can communicate with each other through well-defined channels. All containers are run by a single operating system kernel and therefore use fewer resources than virtual machines.

Docker containers are used to host and deploy challenges when needed, challenges like web applications, binary services, programming challenges and interactive games. Docker containers are easily managed using Python SDK for rapid development and deployment, all containers are stored in a local registry server (Private Docker registry).

Docker can package an application and its dependencies in a virtual container that can run on any Linux server. This helps provide flexibility and portability enabling the application to be run in various locations, whether on-premises, in a public cloud, or in a private cloud. Docker uses the resource isolation features of the Linux kernel (such as cgroups and kernel namespaces) and a union-capable file system (such as OverlayFS) to allow containers to run within a single Linux instance, avoiding the overhead of starting and maintaining virtual machines. Because Docker containers are lightweight, a single server or virtual machine can run several containers simultaneously A 2018 analysis found that a typical Docker use case involves running eight containers per host, but that a quarter of analyzed organizations run 18 or more per host.

The Linux kernel’s support for namespaces mostly isolates an application’s view of the operating environment, including process trees, network, user IDs and mounted file systems, while the kernel’s cgroups provide resource limiting for memory and CPU. Since version 0.9, Docker includes its own component (called ”libcontainer”) to directly use virtualization facilities provided by the Linux kernel, in addition to using abstracted virtualization interfaces via libvirt, LXC and systemd-nspawn. Docker implements a high-level API to provide lightweight containers that run processes in isolation. The service has both free and premium tiers. The software that hosts the containers is called Docker Engine.

Virtual laboratory
The virtual lab is based on a Linux distribution were lot of security tools are preinstalled. Registered students can access the virtual lab using the same credentials for the web platform.

The webshell (an interactive shell thourg web) also provide instant access to the virtual laboratory, in this case a learner can use only a laptop with a browser with no dependencies or additional programs.

Learning-platform evaluation
It goes without saying that theory alone does not suffice to achieve the goals of the leaning outcomes, specifically when it comes to the complicated topics of the rapidly evolving cybersecurity. Practical exercises undoubtedly complement the understanding of the topic. However, the crucial issue with the cybersecurity education is the practical exercises ask for complicated and time taking solutions e.g., practical deployment of the infrastructure and creating the realistic scenario. This is where the gaming comes into play, as it enhances the engagement and learning of the participants. For instance, according to a study by Pulse Learning (Resources, 2021), 79 % of participants were of the view that they are more productive and motivated if their learning environment is more like a game. The statistics also so that around 60% of increases was witnessed in the engagement of learners because of the gamification. The impact of gamification was also evaluated in terms of learners performance, where an increase of 43% was recorded.

Although the above the statistics do point to the improvement in cybersecurity education, the studies also show explicitly the pre- and post- experiment status e.g.,

in an experiment where the participants were required to create strong passwords, the Table 1 shows the mean and standard deviation of the pre- and post-study. As can be seen that there is a significant improvement of the gamification (Alqahtani and Kavakli-Thorne, 2020). Similarly, in a study done by Chapman et al. (2014), they prepared a pre-post competition survey to measure the performance and engagement of all participants. The survey data showed that 83% of students had no prior participation in this kind of competition and no experience with computer security problems. The average team size reported in the pre-competition was 4.07 students per team. However, in the post-competition survey, an average of 2.38 was reported. It suggested an interval of 5000 to 8500 participants. The post-competition survey reported by both instructors and students showed significance in terms of educational experience. The majority of instructors agreed that their students were engaged and dedicated more effort to the game than they usually did in class. About 67% of students reported that they gained new skills more than they did in class. As can be seen that there is a significant improvement in the gamification that effectively helps at engaging students.

Table 1 Pre and post-study of the strong passwords
Full size table
In another study, we introduced a set of challenges in one of the weekly competitions. Competitions meant for students who had limited experience. The difficulty levels of the challenges are easy, medium, and hard. We had five categories: Reverse engineering, cryptography, web security, forensics, and binary exploitation. All categories were designed in a form of a WarGame. It is a type of game where the student must solve the first level to move on to the next level, and it created a competitive environment between students. And after few weeks of playing, the cumulative score of students who had limited knowledge about hacking had increased tremendously, and students showed new skills.

We invited more than 120 graduate and undergrad students from different universities to participate in weekly competitions. Students were assigned randomly to teams of four members maximum and two members minimum. We grouped the teams into two clusters to participate in the pre-test/post-test, and skill represents a test variable, where the pre-test and post-test are different in terms of problem sets and methodology.

The first cluster participated in our competition and the second cluster participated in the traditional competition. Both clusters took the pre-test and post-test, and then another post-test to improve the validity of the results and avoid knowledge decaying.

The assessment of the results showed an improvement where more than 76% of students from the second cluster successfully solved all problems. We surveyed participants from both clusters and reported that many participants from the second cluster agree that they learned new skills at a faster pace. Participants from the first cluster experienced difficulties with fewer problems. Therefore, it is critical to design and review problems to meet certain criteria to help fresh students and learners engage in such competitions.

We have designed an evaluation method to verify the proposition that a Game-based Learning platform will enhance cybersecurity education. We prepared survey links for the pre-questionnaire to get an insight into the knowledge level regarding game-based cybersecurity. In addition, we prepare some questions for a Post questionnaire that we may use as future work to evaluate our platform. It aims to collect information about how effective our platform is and how it helps the students increase their knowledge about cybersecurity aspects and concepts.

Pre-questionnaire
In this method, our primary goal is to examine the learner’s prior knowledge. We have used this pre-questionnaire to have an idea of the students’ pre-existing knowledge and awareness regarding the security-related topics and problems. We have shared this survey among many students in the United Arab Emirates University. Most of the students have shown their interest to participate with their friends with the game platform. We received about 105 Responses and depending on what each answered, we got the following results which are showing below.

In Fig. 2, the pie chart shows the different degree levels of each student that holds, and we can see that ”Bachelor’s degree” dominates the rest, having as high 69% compared to the two others, where ”Master’s degree” at 27% then ”Ph.D.’s degree” which is the lowest at only 4%. So, by observing the pie chart, we can say, regarding the major/degree field, the majority of the graduate is with a bachelor’s degree. That helps us comparing the survey results between those three categories.

Going further, the pie chart in Fig. 3 shows individual knowledge of information security and its related field. As we can see, the pie is divided into three slices where the level of ”Intermediate” comes highest at 38% and the lowest ”Advanced” at 25%. The thing about Fig. 3, where it shows ”Intermediate” as the highest, can be an advantage to our study of game-based cybersecurity education since most students will have an easier time engaging in such security game activity because they will have some idea about cybersecurity.

Fig. 3
figure 3
The review process flowchart. After the review process the conformity of the challenge with the ARCS model is checked, if it does not conform then the challenge must be revised or rejected, otherwise the challenge is deployed and published in the platform

Full size image
Figure 4 represents a graphical bar chart and which shows the level topics in computer science major per number of students, and as we can observe, mainly the student chooses to go into ”Programming” and ”Computer hardware and software” , and the least areas are the ones are ”Hacking”, and ”Robotics”.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Overall architecture of the platform

Full size image
Now, if we go deeper into Fig. 5, there are many computer security problems, and each student has specialized with its respected field. The most common computer security problem we found is ”Web” with more than 30 students, following with ”Cryptography” and ”Forensics” What we can deduce is that if students with ”Web” or ”Cryptography” entered a game-based tournament, he/she will have a high chance in doing well.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Degree level of the students

Full size image
Next, looking at Fig. 6, we can understand better the preference of the students who participated in the questionnaire on how they would want to learn about cybersecurity which not surprisingly through ”Games” at 45% as the most chosen one, and understandably it makes the leaning process more appealing to the player than rather having it through ”Tasks” or ”Seminars”.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Knowledge level of computer security and awareness to students

Full size image
The following Table 1 is one of question type forms that have been used in the questionnaire to figure out and collect participants response regarding game-based educational cybersecurity. If we go through the questions that are given to the participants, we can follow each with his/her respected response, and combining the answers we get an overall percentage results following such as the question ”Did you hear about cybersecurity games and challenges before” answering 48% yes and 53% no. Additionally, the question ”Do you want to join a cybersecurity game of challenges” got a yes approval of 92% and 8% with no and that shows the huge number of students that are interested to participate on our cybersecurity game platform (Figs. 7, 8 and 9).

Fig. 7
figure 7
Computer science background of students

Full size image
Fig. 8
figure 8
Security problems background of students

Full size image
Fig. 9
figure 9
Learning perference for cybersecurity

Full size image
The outcome of performing a questionnaire type has provided us a much clearer idea of what the participant thinks of game-based cybersecurity through pointing out: their educational background, a field of knowledge, awareness, and preference type.

Below mentioned are important findings from the Pre-questionnaire.

The majority of the students have a novice or intermediate knowledge about computer security and awareness as many questions show that they do not know about many computer security problems and topics. That shows how important to perform a platform that teaches them new and various Cybersecurity concepts.

Most of the students like to learn by games and challenges and that shows how effective our platform will be as it can be a powerful and great education tool or method to learn Cybersecurity in an interesting way.

By analyzing the different answers, we deduce that the responses are varied and students need a security awareness method to be adequately learning the concepts.

Table 1 Yes/No questions

figure a
Post questionnaire
In this part, we aim to find out how much our game-based learning platform is effective and how it helps students to get experience and increase their knowledge about Cybersecurity concepts. Some of the questions that may ask after implementing this game-based learning platform are ”How many points did your earn?”, ”Will you encourage students to participate with this game?”, ” Did you learn new cybersecurity concepts?”. There are many more questions that we may provide for the students after they participate and that will helps us also to improve our game-based learning platform in case there are some comments that students may give us.

Conclusion
A game-based learning platform has been presented. It is designed to enable students of the United Arab Emirates University (UAEU) to learn cybersecurity at their own pace, and give them the right tools to practice on different kinds of challenges. As result, the platform and its virtual laboratory can be very effective at engaging students into cybersecurity and ensure a safer learning environment for them.