The purpose of this study was to examine how pre-service teachers’ competence beliefs, value beliefs, pedagogical beliefs, and their intention to integrate technology were related to one another. The sample was composed of 137 pre-service teachers from 22 schools in Taiwan. Using path modeling, the current study found that there was an interaction between competence and pedagogical beliefs. The relations between pedagogical beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology were only significant when competence beliefs were low. These findings highlight the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs and suggest that pedagogical beliefs are not necessarily an internal barrier for teachers’ technology integration as long as competence beliefs are high.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Advancement in technology has brought much potential to classrooms. Teaching with technology effectively has been shown to be related to student engagement and academic performance (Chang et al., 2020; Jeno et al., 2017). Technology integration is a complex process and influenced by external and internal barriers (Hur et al., 2016). External barriers are environmental determinants that inhibit teachers’ technology integration, such as technology availability, technical support, or school funding (Bingimlas, 2009). Internal barriers are personal determinants that inhibit teachers’ technology integration, such as teacher beliefs (Cheng et al., 2020). Research has shown that eradicating external barriers is not sufficient for successful technology integration (Ertmer, 2005). Teacher beliefs also play a substantial role in explaining how and how often technology is used in classrooms (Vongkulluksn et al., 2018).

Statement of the Problem
Teacher beliefs about technology integration are composed of three major domains: competence beliefs, value beliefs, and pedagogical beliefs (Cheng & Xie, 2018; Tondeur et al., 2017). These beliefs are nested in a dynamic and concentric circle-like system and assumed to be highly intertwined (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010). However, the majority of the existing literature has focused on the additive relations between teacher beliefs and technology integration, that is, the unique and independent contribution of these beliefs in explaining teachers’ technology integration (Inan & Lowther, 2010; Uslu & Usluel, 2019). Therefore, the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs about technology integration has been overlooked. Tondeur et al. (2008) and Vongkulluksn et al. (2020) are among the few that made the first effort to investigate how teacher beliefs may be intertwined with one another. However, both studies only focused on specific types of teacher beliefs (either pedagogical or value beliefs). Therefore, how competence, value, and pedagogical beliefs may interact with one another is still not clear. A recent study responded to the need and found additional evidence that teacher beliefs are not independent of one another; rather, the relation between teacher beliefs and technology integration is multiplicative: the effects of teacher-centered beliefs (i.e., a subdomain of pedagogical beliefs) on technology integration depended on the levels of competence beliefs (Cheng et al., 2021). In addition, student-centered beliefs (i.e., the other subdomain of pedagogical beliefs) were not a significant predictor of teachers’ technology integration. Since this study is specific to the in-service teacher population, it is not certain if the findings can be replicated and generalized to different populations such as pre-service teachers. In sum, the current state of the evidence points out the need to shift the research focus on the unique contribution of different teacher beliefs to the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs and to revisit the role and significance of pedagogical beliefs in relation to technology integration. Without clarifying how teacher beliefs and technology integration are related, researchers and stakeholders could be misled to target a belief factor that is not effective for intervention. The goal of this study is to answer this call, in hope of providing insights into the complex systems of teacher beliefs and identifying the focal beliefs for future experimental research and intervention work.

Literature Review
Competence Beliefs and Technology Integration
Competence beliefs about technology integration can be defined as teachers’ personal beliefs regarding their abilities to effectively integrate and utilize technology in a classroom setting (Cheng et al., 2020). The term, competence beliefs, is chosen here to encompass similar constructs used by other researchers to capture teachers’ perceptions of their capabilities to successfully integrate technology in classrooms, such as ability, expectancy, and efficacious beliefs (Hsu, 2010; Kale, 2018; Lee & Lee, 2014). Research has consistently shown that there is a positive relation between teachers’ competence beliefs and their intention to integrate technology. A study by Cheng et al. (2020) showed that competence beliefs had a significant and positive correlation with how often technology was used in classrooms and the extent to which technology was used to support student-centered learning among in-service teachers. Vongkulluksn et al. (2018) showed that in-service teachers’ competence beliefs significantly and positively predicted how and how often technology was used in classrooms. Another study by Uslu and Usluel (2019) also demonstrated that in-service teachers’ competence beliefs significantly and positively predicted the use of ICT (information and communications technology) for teaching preparation. In terms of pre-service teachers, Joo et al. (2018) found that among pre-service teachers in Korea, competence beliefs significantly predicted their intention to integrate technology over and beyond their technological pedagogical content knowledge. Also, researchers in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) found that one of the strongest predictors of pre-service teachers’ intention to integrate technology was their competence beliefs (Parkman et al., 2018).

Value Beliefs and Technology Integration
Value beliefs are defined as the reasons teachers use technology in their classrooms and can be grouped based on valence (positive versus negative) (Cheng et al., 2020). Positive value beliefs can be divided into at least two domains. The first domain of positive value beliefs is interest, which refers to teachers’ subjective beliefs that using technology in classrooms is fun and enjoyable. The second domain of positive value beliefs is usefulness, which refers to teachers’ subjective beliefs that using technology in classrooms can fulfill their instructional goals. Negative value beliefs or cost beliefs refer to teachers’ views of the time and effort they must commit to for using technology in classrooms. Research has shown that positive value beliefs are positively associated with technology integration, while perceptions of cost are negatively related to it. For instance, a study by Cheng and Xie (2018) showed that in-service teachers’ positive value beliefs were significantly and positively correlated with technology use experience and Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK). Both Vongkulluksn et al. (2018) and Bowman et al. (2020) found that in-service teachers’ positive value beliefs significantly and positively predicted how technology was used in classrooms. A study by (Cheng et al., 2020) demonstrated that in-service teachers’ perceived cost was a negative predictor of how frequently they used technology in classrooms over and beyond competence beliefs and positive value beliefs. In terms of pre-service teachers, Sánchez-Prieto et al. (2019) found that pre-service teachers’ positive value beliefs in terms of interest significantly predicted their intention to use mobile technologies in classrooms. Shittu et al. (2017) also showed that pre-service teachers’ positive value beliefs in terms of usefulness significantly predicted their intention to use electronic resources for teaching.

Pedagogical Beliefs and Technology Integration
Pedagogical beliefs refer to teachers’ views in regard to what comprises effective teaching and learning (Ertmer, 2005). These beliefs differ from competence beliefs and value beliefs in that competence and value beliefs are formed specifically in relation to ICT. It is suggested that pedagogical beliefs are developed over a long period of time and established long before teachers enter teacher education programs (Lortie, 1975). Hence, compared to competence and value beliefs, pedagogical beliefs are less malleable and could be harder to change.

It has come to be accepted in the field that pedagogical beliefs can be divided into two major subcategories: teacher-centered beliefs and student-centered beliefs (Tondeur et al., 2017). Educators who hold strong teacher-centered beliefs tend to view themselves as the center of the educational process. The teacher holds the knowledge and is responsible for disseminating facts with little to no interaction from the students. Antithetical to this, educators who hold strong student-centered beliefs advocate for the learner to fulfill the role of the knowledge builder, with themselves acting as a facilitator. Given that technology is sometimes perceived as a threat to disrupt traditional instruction (Goodson & Mangan, 1995), it has been hypothesized that teacher-centered beliefs are negatively associated with technology integration, while student-centered beliefs have a positive relation with teachers’ technology use in classrooms (Ertmer, 1999). In support of these assumptions, research has found that student-centered beliefs significantly predicted intention to integrate technology among English teachers in China (Teo et al., 2018). Other studies have also found that teachers who hold teacher-centered beliefs were prone to reject technology as a learning tool on the basis that they believed their traditional practices served their needs and those of their classrooms (Donnelly et al., 2011; Lim & Chan, 2007).

Interdependent Nature of Teacher Beliefs about Technology Integration
In the existing literature of teacher beliefs about technology integration, many studies have focused on the additive relations between teacher beliefs and technology integration with an assumption that the effect of one teacher belief factor is independent from that of another teacher belief factor. Some of these studies have examined the role of specific teacher beliefs in relation to technology integration (Chai et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2017; Ottenbreit-Leftwich et al., 2010), while others have studied the roles of competence beliefs along with either value beliefs (Bowman et al., 2020; Vongkulluksn et al., 2018) or pedagogical beliefs (Chai, 2010). These previous studies provide important insights into the unique role of each teacher belief factor in relation to teachers’ technology integration. However, this line of inquiry is short of capturing the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs as proposed and emphasized in early conceptual frameworks.

Theoretically, individuals’ subjective beliefs are highly intertwined and embedded in a complex and concentric circle-like belief system (Bryan, 2003; Ertmer, 2005). This interdependent nature suggests that the relation between a specific belief factor and intended behavior will be dependent upon, rather than independent from, the level of other beliefs. In academic settings among the student population, it has been demonstrated that the relation between value beliefs and academic achievement depends on the level of competence beliefs (Trautwein et al., 2012). In the context of teacher technology integration, Tondeur et al. (2008) showed that the negative effects of teacher-centered beliefs on technology use were neutralized as long as student-centered beliefs were extremely high. A recent study by Vongkulluksn et al. (2020) indicated that the relation between value beliefs and technology integration could be influenced by the level of cost beliefs. These findings provide preliminary evidence to support the hypothesis that teacher beliefs are highly interdependent. However, both studies did not examine competence, value, and pedagogical beliefs simultaneously and were not able to reveal how these beliefs would relate to one another.

Although a recent study by Cheng et al. (2021) addressed this gap and found that the relation between teacher-centered beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology was specifically dependent upon the level of competence beliefs, the sample was exclusive to in-service teachers. Therefore, it is not clear to what extent the findings based on in-service teachers can be generalized to pre-service teachers given that the relation between teacher beliefs and technology integration could differ to some extent between these two populations (Scherer et al., 2019; Teo, 2015). Studies on the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs will contribute to the field in at least three ways. First, they will be able to evaluate the hypothesis on the relation between teacher beliefs and technology use in classrooms, which is critical for building theory on teacher beliefs about technology integration. Second, they will provide important directions for future intervention work. For instance, without clarifying the complex relation between teacher beliefs, the maladaptive nature of teacher-centered beliefs may prompt stakeholders to devote resources to alter teachers’ views on what constitutes effective teaching and learning. However, if the negative relation between teacher-centered beliefs and technology integration will be cancelled by high levels of competence or value beliefs, then stakeholders can focus exclusively on enhancing competence and value beliefs about technology integration. Third, they will also allow stakeholders to accurately identify teachers who need the most support. In a similar scenario, stakeholders do not need to reach out to all the teachers who have a high level of teacher-centered beliefs if they know that effects of teacher-centered beliefs may depend on the levels of other beliefs.

Research Questions and Research Hypotheses
To address the gaps in the existing literature as described in the previous section, the current study was guided by the following research questions and aimed to test related hypotheses:

RQ1: How do competence beliefs, value beliefs, and pedagogical beliefs correlate with pre-service teachers’ technology integration?

Hypothesis 1: Competence beliefs are significantly and positively correlated with technology integration.

Hypothesis 2: Positive value beliefs are significantly and positively correlated with technology integration.

Hypothesis 3: Negative value beliefs are significantly and negatively correlated with technology integration.

Hypothesis 4: Teacher-centered beliefs are significantly and negatively correlated with technology integration.

Hypothesis 5: Student-centered beliefs are significantly and positively correlated with technology integration.

RQ2: What are the predictive relations between competence beliefs, value beliefs, and pedagogical beliefs, and pre-service teachers’ technology integration?

Hypothesis 6: Competence beliefs significantly moderate the relations between pedagogical beliefs and technology integration.

Hypothesis 7: Positive value beliefs significantly and positively predict technology integration after controlling for the effects of the other beliefs.

Hypothesis 8: Negative value beliefs significantly and negatively predict technology integration after controlling for the effects of the other beliefs.

Method
Sample
A total of 137 pre-service teachers from 22 schools in Taiwan participated in the current study. The cluster size ranged from 1 to 42 with a mean of 6.23. Among these participants, eighty-five (62.04%) were females and fifty-two (37.96%) were males with an average age of 25.81 (SD: 7.20). Teaching subjects included business administration, chemistry, physics, English, engineering, mathematics, and computer science. Eighty-four (61.31%) were still in college or had a bachelor’s degree and fifty-three (38.69%) were in graduate school or had a master’s degree.

Measures
Competence Beliefs
Teachers’ perceived capabilities to integrate technology were assessed using four 5-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree) adapted from Lai (2011). Cronbach's alpha is .76. A sample item is “Even if there is no one teaching me how to use technology, I am still confident with integrating technology into my teaching.”

Value Beliefs
Value beliefs were divided into positive and negative valences. Teachers’ perceived interest in integrating technology was assessed using three 7-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree) adapted from Chen (2015). Cronbach's alpha is .90. A sample item is “Integrating technology into classrooms is fun.” Perceived usefulness was measured using five 5-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree) adapted from Lai (2011). Cronbach's alpha is .90. A sample item is “Using technology can improve my overall teaching performance.” In terms of the negative valence, teachers’ perceived cost in terms of task effort was assessed using five 9-point Likert scale items adapted from Flake et al. (2015). Items were rated on a 9-point Likert scale (1 = completely disagree; 9 = completely agree). Cronbach's alpha is .89. A sample item is “Integrating technology into my teaching will consume too much energy.”

Pedagogical Beliefs
Teachers’ conceptions of effective teaching and learning were assessed using the instrument adapted from Chu and Yeh (2003). The scale of teacher-centered beliefs was composed of eight 6-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 6 = strongly agree). Cronbach's alpha is .89. A sample item is “Learning activities should center on knowledge acquisition. Other things are not important.” The scale of student-centered beliefs was composed of eight 6-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 6 = strongly agree). Cronbach's alpha is .86. A sample item is “Teachers should encourage students to learn in different ways according to their own abilities and interests.”

Technology Use
Teachers’ intention to integrate technology in the future was assessed using four 5-point Likert scale items (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree) adapted from Chen (2018). Cronbach's alpha is .93. A sample item is “I intend to integrate technology in my teaching plan.” Apart from the validation process implemented by the original authors, all the survey items were further validated in our previous study using confirmatory factor analysis (Cheng et al., 2021). The results showed that all the constructs were distinct from one another. Since a second-order factor model for perceived interest and usefulness of using technology did not fit worse than a first-order factor model, we created a composite for these two variables and named it “positive value beliefs” in the current study. Perceived cost was termed “negative value beliefs.”

Data Collection
The corresponding author of the current study had been serving as a consultant for some of the post-secondary schools across Taiwan and maintained a close relationship with the school administrators. After obtaining approval from the principals, pre-service teachers who enrolled in the teacher education program in the partner schools were invited to fill out an online questionnaire on their competence beliefs, value beliefs, pedagogical beliefs, and intention to integrate technology in the future along with demographic information during the spring semester of 2019. Links to the online questionnaire were first electronically sent to school principals, who then distributed links to pre-service teachers. Teachers were informed that participation in this study was completely voluntary. The purposes of the current study and participants’ rights were explained on the first page of the questionnaire. All the personally identifiable information was de-identified upon being collected. The questionnaire took them about 15 minutes to complete.

Statistical Analysis
To investigate the correlations between teacher beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology, Pearson’s zero-order correlation coefficients were first examined. Then, path modeling with the robust maximum likelihood estimator (MLR) was employed to investigate the predictive relations between teacher beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology and to account for clustering of observations and possible non-normality (Kline, 2016; McNeish et al., 2017). The Type = Complex command was used in Mplus 8.4 throughout the analysis. In the current study, two models were built consecutively. The first model, baseline model, was composed of one endogenous variable, intention to integrate technology, predicted by five exogenous variables, including competence beliefs, positive and negative value beliefs, teacher-centered beliefs, and student-centered beliefs (Fig. 1). The second model, augmented model, involved an addition of interaction terms between teacher beliefs (Fig. 2). The augmented model is considered a better model than the baseline model if the interaction term is statistically significant at the .05 level. There was no missing value in the analytic sample.

Fig. 1
figure 1
The Baseline Model

Full size image
Fig. 2
figure 2
The Augmented Model

Full size image
Design of the Study
The current study was designed to explore the relations between pre-service teachers’ beliefs and their intention to integrate technology in the future. Specifically, we examined how competence beliefs, positive value beliefs, negative value beliefs, teacher-centered beliefs, and student-centered beliefs, and technology integration were correlated with one another. Also, how these beliefs collectively predicted technology integration was investigated. To these aims, a nonexperimental correlational and predictive research design without direct intervention was employed (McMillian, 2012). Pre-service teachers’ competence, value, and pedagogical beliefs along with their intention to integrate technology were assessed through self-report survey instruments. All the quantitative survey data were collected once during the spring semester of 2019.

Results
Descriptive Statistics and Bivariate Correlations
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations of teacher beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology. In general, our participants held high competence and student-centered beliefs and moderate negative value beliefs. Competence and positive value beliefs were significantly and positively associated with one another. Teacher-centered beliefs were significantly and negatively associated with student-centered beliefs and technology use. Student-centered beliefs were significantly and positively associated with competence beliefs and positive value beliefs. Teachers’ intention to integrate technology was strongly associated with competence beliefs, positive value beliefs, and student-centered beliefs.

Table 1 Descriptive Statistics and Bivariate Correlations
Full size table
Relations between Teacher Beliefs and Intention to Integrate Technology
To examine the relations between teacher beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology, we first entered five exogenous variables, including competence beliefs, positive and negative value beliefs, teacher-centered beliefs, and student-centered beliefs, and one endogenous variable, intention to integrate technology in classrooms, into the model. The result showed that competence, positive value, teacher-centered, and student-centered beliefs significantly predicted teachers’ intention to integrate technology (Table 2). Negative value beliefs were not a significant predictor. In the second model, interaction terms between teacher

Table 2 Relations between Teacher Beliefs and Intention to Integrate Technology
Full size table
beliefs were added to the baseline model. The result showed that there was an interaction between competence and teacher-centered beliefs and between competence and student-centered beliefs.

To probe the significance of interaction, the pick-a-point approach was implemented (Hayes, 2017). The simple slopes of teacher-centered and student-centered beliefs were assessed based on the values of -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, and 3 of competence beliefs. Table 3 presents the extent to which the relations between pedagogical beliefs and intention to integrate technology varied by levels of competence beliefs. It was found that when competence beliefs were at or below the mean, the relation between teacher-centered beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology was significantly negative. This magnitude increased as the level of competence beliefs became lower. On the contrary, when competence beliefs were one standard deviation above the mean or higher, the negative effects of teacher-centered beliefs became nonsignificant. In terms of student-centered beliefs, when competence beliefs were one standard deviation below the mean, the relation between student-centered beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate

Table 3 Probing Interaction Effects
Full size table
technology was significantly positive. This magnitude increased as the level of competence beliefs became lower. On the contrary, when competence beliefs were two standard deviations above the mean or higher, the positive effects of student-centered beliefs became nonsignificant.

Discussion
The findings of the current study provide important insights into the relations between teacher beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology and point out factors that should be targeted in future experimental studies and intervention work. Regarding RQ1, the bivariate correlations align well with the theories and, hence, support their validity (Cheng et al., 2020; Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010). The first five hypotheses are all supported. Specifically, competence, positive value, and student-centered beliefs had a positive association with teachers’ intention to integrate technology (Teo, 2009; Teo et al., 2008; Vongkulluksn et al., 2018), while negative value and teacher-centered beliefs had a negative association with technology integration (Cheng et al., 2021; Teo et al., 2008). A large effect size (r ≥ .50) was found for competence beliefs, positive value beliefs, and student-centered beliefs in relation to technology integration (Cohen, 1988). These correlation coefficients were all statistically significant, which suggests that, if not tended to, all the beliefs could constitute a barrier for technology integration.

In terms of RQ2, the results of path modeling reveal more nuanced relations between teacher beliefs and technology integration. As hypothesized by Bryan (2003) and Ertmer (2005), teacher beliefs are not independent from one another; rather, they are highly intertwined and organized in a concentric circle-like belief system. Certain beliefs are closer to the center of the system and weightier than others. Accordingly, the relation between teacher beliefs and technology integration is not merely additive. Rather, they are assumed to interact with one another to exert effects on technology integration. This interdependent nature has been overlooked in the existing literature given that previous studies have dominantly focused on examining the unique contribution of different beliefs to explaining teachers’ technology integration (e.g., Bowman et al., 2020; Teo et al., 2018; Uslu & Usluel, 2019).

In the context of the current study, the hypothesis on the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs (Hypothesis 6) is supported. Specifically, the relations between pedagogical beliefs and teachers’ intention to integrate technology depend on the levels of competence beliefs. When competence beliefs are high, the negative effects of teacher-centered beliefs on technology integration are neutralized and turn nonsignificant. That is, competence beliefs act as a buffer between teacher-centered beliefs and technology integration. In a similar vein, when competence beliefs are high, the role of student-centered beliefs in relation to technology integration diminishes and becomes minimal. Therefore, pedagogical beliefs matter for teachers’ intention to integrate technology only when competence beliefs are low. This new insight does not refute the existing theory on the significance of pedagogical beliefs; rather, it adds a new layer of understanding on how pedagogical beliefs may work with other beliefs in exerting effects on teachers’ technology integration.

In the context of teacher technology integration, Tondeur et al. (2008) made the earliest effort to examine the interaction between teachers’ pedagogical beliefs in relation to technology integration. Recently, Vongkulluksn et al. (2020) investigated the interaction between teachers’ value beliefs about technology integration. Both studies highlight the importance of considering the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs when it comes to researching teacher technology integration. However, these studies focus on the interaction between specific types of teacher beliefs among in-service teachers and, hence, are not able to reveal how different types of teacher beliefs could be related to one another in a dynamic manner. The study by Cheng et al. (2020) is one of the few to consider competence beliefs, value beliefs, and pedagogical beliefs altogether. It was found that the relation between teacher-centered beliefs and technology integration depended on competence beliefs. Since the findings were new to the field and specific to in-service teachers, it was not clear if that specific interaction could be replicated with other populations such as pre-service teachers. The current study answers those questions by confirming the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs and highlighting the role of competence beliefs in moderating the relations between pedagogical beliefs and technology integration among pre-service teachers.

Apart from these multiplicative relations, teachers’ positive value beliefs also play a substantial role in explaining teachers’ intention to integrate technology, which supports the hypothesis (Hypothesis 7). This finding aligns with the existing literature on the importance of teachers’ perceived interest and usefulness in relation to technology integration (Bowman et al., 2020; Nelson, 2011; Sánchez-Prieto et al., 2019). However, controlling for the effects of the other predictors, negative value beliefs did not significantly predict teachers’ technology integration, which contradicts our hypothesis (Hypothesis 8). In both baseline and augmented models, negative value beliefs did not significantly predict technology integration, which indicates that the non-significant result does not stem from the addition of the interaction terms. In studies by Cheng et al. (2020) and Wozney et al. (2006), the negative value belief factor was found to be a significant and negative predictor of teachers’ technology integration. On the contrary, Cheng et al. (2021) found the identical finding as the current one, that the negative value belief factor was not a significant predictor. Although it seems that the effect of negative value beliefs on teacher technology integration has not been consistent and conclusive, there are two similarities between all these studies. First, the negative value belief factor was significantly and negatively correlated with technology integrationFootnote1. Second, the effect of negative value beliefs on technology integration was lower than that of competence and positive value beliefs. These findings suggest that negative value beliefs are important for technology integration. However, competence beliefs and positive value beliefs play a more salient role in relation to technology integration.

Limitations and Future Directions
There are two limitations associated with the current study. First, the current study is relational in nature; hence, no strong causal inference can be drawn from the research findings. However, the results point out reasonable targets for manipulation in future experimental studies. Second, the current study focused on teachers’ intention to integrate technology. It is not clear if the findings will remain similar if the focus is on how pre-services will use technology in classrooms. This will be an important avenue for future research.

Conclusion
The current study examined how competence beliefs, value beliefs, pedagogical beliefs, and pre-service teachers’ intention to integrate technology are related to one another. Using path modeling, the results support the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs. Specifically, the role of pedagogical beliefs in relation to technology integration depends on the levels of competence beliefs. When competence beliefs are high, the negative effects of teacher-centered beliefs are neutralized, and the significance of student-centered beliefs turns minimal. In addition, positive value beliefs also play an important role in explaining teachers’ intention to integrate technology. These findings, along with the entrenched nature of pedagogical beliefs, point out that competence beliefs and value beliefs are a more reasonable target for manipulation in future experimental research and intervention work. Examining the interdependent nature of teacher beliefs in relation to how technology is used in classrooms will be an important avenue for future exploration.

Implications for Practice
One major implication for practice and policy based on the findings of the current study is to identify the target in future experimental studies and intervention work. The role of pedagogical beliefs in relation to technology integration has been emphasized a great deal in the literature (Ertmer, 2005; Tondeur et al., 2017). There are even suggestions and intervention programs aimed at changing teachers’ pedagogical beliefs (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010; Lim & Chan, 2007). These practices seem reasonable if teacher beliefs are considered independent from one another. However, if teacher beliefs are highly intertwined and interdependent as evidenced in the current study, then targeting pedagogical beliefs in experimental studies or intervention programs could be ineffective because the effects of pedagogical beliefs will not be enacted when competence beliefs are high. Also, in contrast with competence and value beliefs, pedagogical beliefs are less malleable since they are shaped and well established by pre-service teachers’ early experience as a student in school through observing and absorbing how their teachers taught specific subject areas (Lortie, 1975; Pajares, 1992). On the contrary, competence and value beliefs are context-specific and, hence, are subject to change (Bandura, 1997; Eccles & Wigfield, 2020). With these reasons and the current evidence, we recommend that researchers and stakeholders in charge of teacher education programs consider choosing competence and value beliefs as the target for intervention in the future. Also, program resources and support should be devoted to pre-service teachers with low competence beliefs, low positive value beliefs, and high teacher-centered beliefs first.