The benefits of MOOCs have attracted many Higher Education institutions globally to use them as a means of increasing efficiency of education delivery and process. Without institutional support, the MOOCs have a high dropout rate of 90 – 95 percent, leading to low academic impact. The role of academic library in the integration of MOOCs in the higher education curriculum has not been clearly defined in the literature, and for this reason there has been no attempt to define the success of such MOOC services of academic libraries. The contribution of this study to the academic literature is development of a list of ‘Academic Library MOOC Services’ (ALMS) and attempt to create an ‘ALMS – Success Scale’ based on DeLone and McLean Information Systems Success Model. The Research Model derived from the findings of the literature has been tested empirically using Confirmatory Factor Analysis method. 'MOOC Infrastructure Services', 'MOOC Information Services' and, 'MOOC Learner Support Services' are the key drivers for increasing 'Learner Intention to Use ALMS', which determines the level of 'Learner Satisfaction'. Learner Satisfaction is measured to estimate the success of the library's MOOC services. For MOOC based curriculum, ALMS – Success Scale has practical implications for libraries, institutions and policymakers.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
MOOCs and higher education
MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) have gained the interest of researchers and institutions all across the globe since they arrived in 2012 (Massis, 2013). Learners get high-quality content for free or for an affordable fee from anywhere in the world, and without any entry requirements (Liyanagunawardena et al., 2013). MOOCs have democratized the distribution of high-quality education for learners from every part of the world (Moura et al., 2017), as access to premium educational institutions has been traditionally been available to only a handful of fortunate students.

MOOCs represent disruptive innovation in the field of Higher Education in the form of Technology-Enabled Learning (TEL). The literature has classified MOOCs into two main categories, 'cMOOCs' and 'xMOOCs'. 'cMOOCs' (Connectivist MOOCs) are based on the connectivist pedagogical model (Siemens, 2013), which means to do the learning through networking and student collaboration. They provide more student autonomy, as they get to organize their own learning goals, collaborate to gain knowledge, by the means of blogs, online forums, social media networking tools, without the guidance of any instructor (Kruiderink, 2013). On the other hand, 'xMOOCs' are used more as compared to the cMOOCs. It can be best described as the MOOCs offered by edX and Coursera (Breslow et al., 2013). In this conventional format, 'teacher is the expert', and 'learner is the knowledge consumer' (Siemens, 2013). xMOOCs are a more preferred format for universities and educational institutions than xMOOCs. Here, unlike cMOOCs, the learning and interaction take place on the MOOC platform itself.

xMOOCs (Extended MOOCs) are primarily based on behaviourism and cognitivism theories with some components of social connectivism. It focuses more on 'heuristics', or 'experiential learning' in the form of project-based or task-based activities (Yousef et al., 2015). The number of universities using xMOOC based education is increasing gradually. Such a form of pedagogy is considered as an indicator of the institution's educational technology initiative, which has an impact on the institution's economic and organizational model (García-Peñalvo et al., 2018).

Curriculum-based MOOCs offer more than any traditional classroom-based courses (Pérez-Sanagustín et al., 2017). The advantages of switching to MOOC based education are 'anytime learning', 'large group of learners for peer discussion on online forums', 'flipped learning', 'instructor guidance', 'institutional resource support'. The studies also show that the course completion rate of MOOCs is much higher in this hybrid format (Fidalgo-Blanco et al., 2015). Usually, without institutional support, the MOOCs have a dropout rate of 90–95%, leading to their low academic impact (Hong et al., 2017).

The inclusion of MOOCs into university curricula has radical advantages for both these educational systems (MOOCs and Traditional Classroom). MOOCs have the potential to solve the issue of increasing enrolment pressure on the universities, and its effect on the educational quality due to the limited availability of resources with any higher education institution. MOOC based higher education curricula would increase the enrolment base of the universities without having a toll on the quality of education. Also, this process provides flexible learning hours and opportunities for equal access to resources through digital means (Badi & Ali, 2016).

According to Haggard et al. (2013), MOOCs are disruptive, and at their very modest form of acceptance by higher education (H.E.) institutions, MOOCs would enhance the innovativeness and experimentation in H.E., creating a restructured education model, improved learning outcomes and lower costs. But, if MOOCs manage to evolve and get accepted at the current pace, which many researchers, governments and H.E. institutions are expecting, they would make H.E. radically transform itself, and those institutions who would fail to keep up with this change would eventually die out.

Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS)
As many universities all over the world have started to include MOOCs in their curriculum (Pérez-Sanagustín et al., 2017), the academic library has started gaining its importance again as Luan (2015) has shown how academic libraries were getting neglected before the onset of the MOOC era due to the availability of an increasing amount of learning material on the internet and mobile devices. But, with the arrival of MOOCs in higher education, the academic library is seeing a shift in its role from a passive support body to an active agent of MOOC delivery and management through embedded resources, digital infrastructure, technical support and several other MOOCs services (Yanxiang, 2016), summarized in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Source: Yanxiang, 2016)

Services of Academic Libraries for MOOC (

Full size image
More and more universities in America, Europe and Asia are adopting MOOC based curriculum, and are using their libraries to support the MOOC information services (Rambe & Moeti, 2017). The MOOCs have also gained momentum due to the changing patterns of learners to acquire knowledge on the internet and mobile devices (Mohapatra & Mohanty, 2017). In our previous research, we have shown a clear set of commonalities between the MOOCs and the Academic Library, to set a relationship between these two systems.

MOOCs are perceived as a model of Technology Enabled Learning (TEL) (Yousef et al., 2014), and the Academic Libraries have been known for teaching and research support. But, when an analysis is done between the roles and objectives of MOOCs and Academic Libraries, the following highlights are important for this study:

Dissemination of knowledge and information sharing are common objectives of both.

The learners and users for both of them are similar.

Both models primarily focus on information resources.

The users are free to choose their source of information and knowledge in both these models.

Hence, the academic library should involve directly in the development and integration of MOOCs in the university curriculum as it specialises in information and services (Luan, 2015). Libraries use software and IT infrastructure to support their information services for users, and MOOCs are also based on ICT (Information Communication Technology). MOOC based curriculum requires strong service support for information needs, technical support and guidance (Yanxiang, 2016). The academic library's being service-centred organizations are well suited to provide MOOC services.

As MOOCs are making their way into the University curriculum, the trend is going upward in the days to come. So, to keep up with the pace, the University Libraries need to involve themselves in the process of embedded teaching process (Hoffman & Ramin, 2010) and evolve their skills, technology and infrastructure to stay prepared for their new roles for supporting MOOCs. Many researchers in the recent decade, from different parts of the world, ranging from developed economies to emerging economies, have emphasized the importance of Academic Libraries towards the development and integration of MOOCs into higher education. Table 1. has summarized such research. Table 1, forms the basis of current research, to lead us to further investigate the issues raised in the research literature regarding MOOCs usage and adoption, which will form the basis of Academic Library MOOC Services.

Table 1 Research Literature emphasizing the relationship between Academic Libraries and MOOCs
Full size table
In order to interpret the nature of the MOOC services of the academic library, Table 2 displays a list of features and activities of any Academic Library, which makes it the most suitable department within a university to lead the MOOC curriculum integration and management, based on the academic literature in the past decade. Table 2 also succeeds in presenting a comprehensive list of Academic Library MOOC Services, based on extant literature. The academic library MOOC services in the higher education system have been loosely defined. Although many contemporary authors have identified the importance of an academic library for MOOCs, the services of an academic library have not been mapped to the issues about MOOC adoption for consumption in the H.E. institutions. In this research the Table 2. presents a clear comparison of the Academic Library's existing roles mapped to the proposed MOOC requirements presented in the literature (Table 3).

Table 2 Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) (Based on extant literature)
Full size table
Table 3 Summary of Literature on MOOC Success Factors for Learners (Azevedo & Marques, 2017)
Full size table
MOOCs success criteria
Haggard et al. (2013) have discussed the viewpoint of MOOC sceptics, who think that format of MOOCs is flawed. There are issues on its access, learning content, learning quality, pedagogy and instructor support, accreditation, inadequate engagement of weaker learners who lack IT or social networking skills.

The importance of understanding the factors responsible for MOOC success has been frequently discussed in the research literature (e.g., Azevedo & Marques, 2017). The MOOC success factors would vary for different stakeholders viz. Learners, Universities, Academic Libraries, MOOC Providers, Publishers and Content Providers, Instructors, Educational Technology Vendors and Employers. Each stakeholder would have a different perspective and motivation. Thus, defining the success factors and quality parameters for MOOCs is challenging (Walker & Loch, 2014). The educational provider would strive to increase the quality of delivery of education, increase the enrolments or enhance its reputation or ranking. The student would define the success based on perceived quality, user satisfaction and goal achievement (Albelbisi et al., 2018).

Learners are the primary stakeholders of MOOCs and MOOC services (Albelbisi, 2020). Exploring the factors most critical to learner acquisition, learner retention and learner satisfaction would form the basis of MOOC service success.

Rai and Chunrao (2016), have discussed the learning behaviour of students in online learning and the success and failure factors of the MOOCs. According to their research, the learners and the factors relating to them are most important in determining the success, but at the same time they have pointed out that the following issues are extremely critical to MOOC success:

Internet connectivity

Proper guidance about MOOCs

Language barrier

Personal support and human intervention

The High difficulty level of MOOC courses, and

Lack of self-motivation

Azevedo and Marques (2017) have summarized literature-based MOOC success factors and concluded that the factors which contribute towards learner enrolments.

Azevedo and Marques (2017) have considered 'Continuance' and 'Learning outcomes' of the MOOC participants shall be considered as the critical factors in deciding the MOOC success factors. Hence, if the Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) contribute to alleviating the critical issues, they can contribute towards MOOC success. Therefore, the success factors for Academic Library MOOC Services should also be evaluated on the same basis.

Criteria of ALMS Success based on the available research literature are:

1)
Learner Continuance, and

2)
Learning Outcomes

Both of these success factors are closely related to 'User Satisfaction'. As, the desire to continue with the MOOC courses and the positive effect on the learning outcomes of MOOC courses would lead to user satisfaction with the MOOC Courses and MOOC Services (Albelbisi, 2020).

MOOC success scale
Academic Library MOOC Services – Success Scale (ALMS-SS) is adapted from the study of Albelbisi (2020) & (Albelbisi et al., 2021) to develop a MOOC Success Scale (MOOC-SS). This scale was developed using a systematic literature review on MOOCs and using the DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Success (DeLone & McLean, 2003). The instrument's validity and reliability were tested by the author using EFA (Exploratory Factor Analysis), CFA (Confirmatory Factor Analysis), and Construct Validity. The instrument developed by Albelbisi showed that the MOOC-SS had good validity and reliability for the desired purpose of the scale.

DeLone and McLean proposed the Information Systems-Success Model (D&M IS Success Model) in 1992. This model was widely accepted in the research community which is evident from more than 15,000 citations of their study. Their interactive model clearly describes the 'dependent variable' of IS Success, which has its use in IS Management and IS Investments. In 2003 they presented an updated D&M IS Success Model, due to the big changes happening in the field of Information Systems in the 2000s, especially after the arrival of e-commerce.

In D&M Model, there are three primary dimensions, namely, 'Information Quality', 'Systems Quality' and 'Service Quality'. Each dimension is independent of the other and must be managed separately. These three dimensions together control 'Subsequent Use', and 'User Satisfaction' (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
figure 2
D&M IS Success Model (DeLone & McLean, 2003)

Full size image
‘Use’, and ‘User Satisfaction’ are inter-related. Although, logically ‘Use’ must precede ‘User Satisfaction’, but in the practical sense, the causal model works better, where 'User Satisfaction' leads to 'Use'. Hence, in the model, increased 'User Satisfaction' is the predecessor of 'Intention to Use' (DeLone & McLean, 2003).

'Net Benefits' are achieved due to the combined effect of 'Use', and 'User Satisfaction'. The 'Net Benefits' form a feedback loop for positive or negative reinforcement of both 'Use', and 'User Satisfaction'.

Hence, the major takeaway from the D&M Model for ALMS-SS is the importance of defining the stakeholders clearly, for whom, the 'Net Benefits', needs to be measured, to define the system's success. So, the perceived 'Learner Benefits' from the MOOC Services of an Academic Library would define the 'Success' of the MOOC Services. Also, the D&M Model defines the primary dimensions for MOOC Success. These are 'Information Quality', 'System Quality', and 'Service Quality'. The MOOC service parameters need to be aligned to these three primary dimensions to be evaluated for their effect and influence on learner's use and satisfaction.

The MOOC-SS Model of Albelbisi (2020), as summarized in Fig. 3 is based on two primary perspectives, which would be adopted for the ALMS-SS Model of this current research:

1)
Technical Perspective: Technical Aspects of MOOC Services.

2)
Educational Perspective: Ease of Use due to MOOC Services.

Fig. 3
figure 3
MOOC Success Model (Albelbisi, 2020)

Full size image
In the MOOC-SS Model, the factors selected in the light of the above perspective were evaluated based on learner's satisfaction to understand the MOOC success. Hence, in ALMS-SS Model, the selected factors will be evaluated for their relationship with the 'Learner Satisfaction', for determining the success of the Academic Library MOOC Services.

Table 4, presents the categorical distribution of the Academic Library MOOC Services Success Factors, according to the three primary dimensions, namely, 'Information Quality', 'Systems Quality' and 'Service Quality' defined in the D&M IS Success Model and subsequently in the MOOC-SS Model from the learner's perspective.

Table 4 Definition and Categorical distribution of Academic Library MOOC Services – Success Factors from Learner’s Perspective
Full size table
The ALMS success factors are based on the extensive literature survey done for this current research, for the proposed MOOC services. These MOOC Services of Academic Library are discussed in the previous section in this research article, and also summarized in Table 4.

Current Research
Research gaps
Evaluation of the available literature on MOOCs, and the role of 'Academic Library' provides valuable insights on the definition of success factors from the learner's perspective. The Academic Library MOOC Services have been summarized in Table 2. The D&M IS Success Model (DeLone & McLean, 2003) has been studied along with the MOOC-SS Model of Albelbisi (2020). Based on these researches, along with the literature on MOOC success factors for learners, such as the research of Azevedo and Marques (2017), two research gaps are evident in our understanding:

Gap 1: The role of academic libraries in alleviating the issues concerning the success of MOOCs in higher education have been loosely described in the literature. Many authors have identified the importance of academic libraries for MOOCs, but the Academic Library MOOC Services have not been defined according to the current functions and capabilities of the academic library.

Gap 2: As the literature insufficiently defines Academic Library MOOC Services, it is naturally lacking in any research on defining the success of such MOOC services of academic libraries. There are many research articles on MOOC success factors, but they need to be re-interpreted for Academic Libraries providing MOOC services.

Significance and aims of current research
This study aims to explore the influence of the ALMS identified in Table 4 on the learner's satisfaction derived from the MOOC services consumed. The Learner's Satisfaction would be evaluated on two parameters based on 'Learner Perception' (Albelbisi et al., 2021):

Ease of Use of ALMS

Usefulness of ALMS

The Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) are categorised into three success factors or quality antecedents namely, (i) System Quality, (ii) Information Quality, and (iii) Service Quality, which were adapted from the updated D&M IS Success Model (2003). These three success factors have been adopted in the context of Academic Libraries in the form of, (i) MOOC Infrastructure Services, (ii) MOOC Information Services, and (iii) MOOC Learner Support Services, respectively.

The relevance of this article is established, first, through the establishment of 'Academic Library MOOC Services' (ALMS) through extant literature, and comparing and classifying them with the corresponding Library Services, offered by Academic Libraries worldwide in the current form. This makes it abundantly clear for the Information Professionals and Institutions to plan the MOOC services for learners in a university setup. Second, the research would be the starting step towards developing a measurement scale for Academic Library MOOC Services, named, ALMS-SS, which has the potential to evaluate and suggest a practical set of recommendations for any Academic Library to deliver MOOC services. This scale would help the higher education institutions to decide their budgets and plans for resource allocation and service expansion, based on the evaluation of their Academic Library's performance on the ALMS-Success Scale. The most interesting fact is the focus on the learner's satisfaction, based on the learner's intention to re-use the Library MOOC Services and their Learning Outcomes from the MOOCs. The learner is at the centre stage, empowers them, and makes the system focussed on outcomes, rather than the processes.

ALMS-SS would also be beneficial for national policy-making bodies, to evaluate the performance of higher education institutions based on the quality of MOOC services offered by their libraries, to rank them. For example, the 'National Assessment and Accreditation Council' (NAAC), of the Government of India. NAAC is an autonomous body that assesses and accredits Higher Education Institutions. NAAC rating is widely used by prospective students and prospective employers to decide upon the institution's reputation and quality.

Research model and hypothesis
The research gaps identified for this current research through the extant literature identifies 'Learner Continuance' and, 'Learning Outcomes' as the basis of 'Academic Library MOOC Services' (ALMS) success factors. The learner's intention to use the 'Information Systems' services are the main criteria to evaluate the success, but the DeLone and McLean Information System Model (2003) and the Albelbisi's MOOC-Success Scale Model (2020), have identified 'System Quality', 'Information Quality' and, 'Service Quality' as the primary antecedents of MOOC success. These three primary antecedents have been interpreted as 'MOOC Infrastructure Services', 'MOOC Information Services' and, 'MOOC Learner Support Services' respectively. These primary antecedents of 'Learner's Intention to Use' are clearly defined in Table 4. The level of 'Learner Satisfaction' would be measured to estimate the success of the library's MOOC services. According to the DeLone and McLean Information System Model, 'User Satisfaction' is positively influenced by 'Intention to Use'. These relationships form the basis of our research hypotheses and the research model (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4
figure 4
Research Model (based on research gaps in the literature)

Full size image
MOOC infrastructure services are an adaptation of 'System Quality' as described in the D&M ISS Model, which refers to the reliability and functionality of the MOOC services. It includes the quality and the features of the MOOC services offered by the library. Ease of use of the MOOC services, features available, the flexibility of the system, influences the learner's satisfaction (Albelbisi, 2019). Thus, the subsequent hypothesis can be presented as:

H1: The user perception of the library's MOOC infrastructure services determines the learner's intention to use the ALMS.

MOOC learner support refers to the service quality levels provided to the learner in the library's MOOC services. Several studies have indicated how learner support in MOOCs have a significant impact on learner satisfaction (Yakubu & Dasuki, 2018). So, the corresponding hypothesis can be presented as:

H2: The user perception of the library's MOOC learner support services determines the learner's intention to use the ALMS.

Quality and relevance of the learning content (information) refer to accessible, accurate and up to date learning material provided to the learners easily and quickly. Availability of content in an organized manner, relevance and transparency of information determine the MOOC quality (Yepes-Baldó et al., 2016). The quality of information is a determining factor of learner's satisfaction through the use of MOOC services (Albelbisi et al., 2021). Thus, the subsequent hypothesis can be presented as:

H3: The user perception of the library's MOOC information services determines the learner's intention to use the ALMS.

Learner Satisfaction refers to the perception of the MOOC experience and the perceived value of the learning outcomes. The level of learner satisfaction influences the level of motivation. This is the primary criteria to measure the level of ALMS success, as for the learners, satisfaction has a direct influence on the performance and the performance has a similar positive influence on the level of satisfaction (Gameel, 2017). Hence, satisfaction is the key factor in evaluating the success of academic library's MOOC services. So, the relationship between learner's intention to use ALMS and the level of learner's satisfaction can be articulated to form a hypothesis as:

H4: The degree of learner's intention to use the ALMS determines the level of learner's satisfaction.

Empirical study
An empirical study in the form of a questionnaire-based survey has been used for studying the relationship between the latent variables proposed in the research model. The questionnaire used in this survey has been developed by using the ALMS success factors described in Table 4, which are derived from the literature.

The validity of the scale was established by the expert review done by five professors. This ensures that the questionnaire's design, language and scales are suitable for the research objective it intends to analyse. The subject area expertise and personal experience of the experts helps in determining the content validity before its use on the sample frame. The selection of the number of experts is an arbitrary process, as having too many experts reduces the chance of agreement. Generally less than ten experts are used for this purpose, and atleast five experts are recommended to establish chance agreement (Zamanzadeh et al., 2015). Although validation is a continuous process, but the most common method finding the content validity, as it can be administered before the survey’s implementation on the sample frame. A pilot level study was also conducted with a small group of students. The main objective of the pilot study was to ensure the ability of students to understand the questionnaire clearly and to evaluate the appropriateness of the responses, before moving on to any large-scale survey.

Coursera had 9.8 Million registered users in India in 2020, according to the Coursera Impact Report 2020. India stands second highest in MOOC enrolment after the United States. MOOC popularity amongst Indian higher education students is high and is rapidly growing, owing to the cost-effectiveness, association of big brands like Harvard, MIT, Stanford etc., availability of skill-based courses for increasing employability, certification etc. and many other benefits associated with the MOOCs.

Newer platforms entering the Indian market like Udacity, Udemy, Byju's, Futurelearn, Swayam, Upskill etc. have captured the attention of Indian learners rapidly. Moreover, the Government of India, through the University Grants Commission's Credit Framework for online courses on SWAYAM (Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) which is an Indian MOOC platform, allows any higher education institution to grant up to 40% (forty per cent) of the total courses being offered in a particular programme in a given semester through MOOCs for credit recognition. So, the idea of conducting this study with Indian higher education students seems relevant.

Rajasthan being the largest state of India, has already proved its worth in the educational sector by securing 2nd position next to Bangalore in the number of higher educational institutes in the country according to’AISHE 2015–16’ conducted by Department of Higher Education. Jaipur alone has the highest ranking in universities in the country with more than 25 universities (all types) establishing its high preferential rate among students to pursue higher education in the country (TNN, 2018). The survey engaged students (learners) from 10 different universities in the Jaipur and nearby regions of Rajasthan, India, out of more than 25 universities present in the area. Out of the data collected from 300 respondents, 257 forms were considered for inclusion in the current study based on their completeness. So, the survey's response rate was 85.67 per cent. The average age of the respondents was 21.3 years. More male (168), than female (89) respondents participated in this study (selected ones).

Data analysis and results
Psychometric properties of all the measures were determined using Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) using AMOS statistical package. All items were measured on a 5-point Likert Scale (1 = Strongly Disagree to 5 = Strongly Agree). Reliability and the validity of the survey questionnaire constructs were verified in the beginning to analyse the Composite Reliability (CR) of the instrument, the Average Variance Extracted (AVE), and the Fornell-Larcker Ratio (FLR) to estimate the discriminant validity. The results are shown in Table 5.

Table 5 Psychometric Properties of the Scale
Full size table
Assessment of the construct validity signifies that whether the items of the construct are able to measure what they propose to measure (Bagozzi & Yi, 2012). It is generally analysed by determining convergent validity and discriminant validity. Fornell and Larcker (1981) criterion is used to determine the convergent validity. To do this, composite reliability (CR) values were determined. The recommended value is CR > 0.60 (Chin, 1998). The statistical equation used to determine the composite reliability (Netemeyer et al., 2003) can be represented as Eq. 1:

(∑pi=1λi)2(∑pi=1λi)2+∑piV(δ)
(1)
where,

λi = completely standardized loading for the ith indicator,

V(δi) = variance of the error term for the ith indicator,

p = number of indicators

The CR values of the factors were between (0.68 and 0.83), which are acceptable values as per the recommendations. Average Variance Explained (AVE) values are recommended by Chin (1998) as AVE > 0.50. This implies that the variance shown by the construct is more than its measurement error (Sang et al., 2010). The AVE values of the factors under consideration complied to the recommended values. This shows that the model achieved convergent validity. Discriminant validity is considered to be achieved when each construct’s square root of AVE is higher than the values of its correlation with other constructs (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). The result of discriminant validity for this model provided satisfactory evidence of achieving discriminant validity.

Before CFA, Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) was conducted using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with Varimax Rotation using SPSS software. This was done to analyse the underlying factor structure of the research model. Such setups with multiple items to the scale generally have an acceptable standard Factor Loading threshold of 0.60. All the items falling below this threshold need to be dropped from the scale. In the current research, all constructs in consideration had factor loading above 0.60, hence, none of the constructs was dropped from further analysis.

All the local fit measures of the model constructs met the standards required. The standards according to Chin (1998) are CR > 0.60, AVE > 0.50, and FLR < 1.0.

The CFA test was done further to explore the multiple fit indices of the causal model. The chi-square test was not found to be significant for this model. For other indices such as TLI (Tucker Lewis index), GFI (Goodness of Fit Index), IFI (Incremental Fit Index), CFI (Comparative Fit Index) and NFI (Normed Fit Index), the fits were found satisfactory, and the values complied to the standard of greater than or equal to 0.90, and the RMSEA (Root Mean Square Error of Approximation) level standard of less than 0.08. The test results of the current model are shown in Table 6:

Table 6 CFA Results of the Causal Model
Full size table
The CFA test results are shown in Fig. 5. All four hypotheses have been supported by the test results. 'MOOC Infrastructure Services' (Gamma = 0.81), 'MOOC Learner Support Services' (Gamma = 0.85), 'MOOC Information Services' (Gamma = 0.79). Hence, the results show a positive influence on 'Learner Intention to Use ALMS'. Furthermore, 'Learner Intention to Use ALMS' has a positive influence on 'Learner Satisfaction' (Gamma = 0.87).

Fig. 5
figure 5
‘Learner Satisfaction’ Structural Equation Model

Full size image
Discussion
This study is the first attempt to define the Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) and to determine a success scale, that would enable measurement of the effectiveness of the library's MOOC services. The research model described in this research included three success factors namely, 'MOOC Infrastructure Services', 'MOOC Information Services' and, 'MOOC Learner Support Services'. In the following section, their relationships with learner's intention to use the Library's MOOC services, leading to 'Learner Satisfaction' are discussed.

The relationship between ‘MOOC infrastructure services’ and ‘learner satisfaction’.

MOOC infrastructure in this research is derived from the factor named 'System Quality' in the DeLone and McLean ISS Model. It refers to the desired performance characteristics of the systems, equipment and facilities provided to the learners, to facilitate MOOC based learning. The reliability, accessibility and functionality of the infrastructure have a positive effect on the learner's satisfaction from using the system. There are several studies where this relationship has been described in the context of MOOCs or the Information Systems, like Azevedo and Marques (2017); Yakubu and Dasuki (2018); Albelbisi (2020). If the system facilitates the learners to access the MOOC content easily, in a structured format, which is easy to navigate and search, with FAQs for self-help, the learner's satisfaction is high.

This research suggests the use of advanced IT-based technology, embedded content in MOOCs, availability of physical and online space for learning, library's technological infrastructure with high-speed internet, availability of MOOC management software (platform) based on AI and machine learning to host, manage and support MOOCs, and the availability of these services on learner's mobile devices, form the MOOC infrastructure of the Academic Library.

The relationship between ‘MOOC information services’ and ‘learner satisfaction’.

There has been a positive relationship between learner satisfaction and the MOOC information services in the current study. MOOC information services are derived from the principle of 'Information Quality' as described in the DeLone and McLean ISS Model. It refers to the quality, relevance and currency of the MOOC content and resources made available to the learners from the Academic Library. Several researchers have discussed the importance of information resources for MOOC learners. It is one of the major reasons in the developing economies for poor completion rates of MOOCs (Ackerman et al., 2016; Hart, 2012; Shapiro et al., 2017). Moreover, the availability of MOOC content in regional languages has also been emphasized by Gulatee & Nilsook, 2016 and, Chatterjee et al. 2014.

In the MOOCs era, the library is expected to provide Knowledge services, instead of just information services. This can be done by the use of artificial intelligence, cloud computing and other advanced technologies. This would help the library to predict user's learning preferences based on their previous usage records and search preferences (Yang, 2015; Luan, 2015).

The library is expected to provide embedded content in MOOCs which are easy to understand, adequate for the course, updated and relevant to the learners. In the era of information overload, this could be a very challenging task for academic libraries. The library's MOOC information services could include e-learning resources, collection of open educational resources to avoid copyright laws, detailed FAQs on each course for learner's self-service, continuous optimization of MOOC learning resources and content, and availability of the content in an organized manner.

The relationship between ‘MOOC learner support services’ and ‘learner satisfaction’.

The study indicates a positive relationship between the Learner's Satisfaction levels with the library's MOOC support services. This factor represents the factor named 'Service Quality' in the DeLone and McLean ISS Model. The learner support services have received the highest score amongst the three influencing factors taken up for this research, for their effects on learner's intention to use the library's MOOC services. As MOOCs are technology-driven and highly innovative and disruptive, it poses challenges for the learners to adapt to these systems. For a country like India, where the technology diffusion is not uniform, and there is great diversity in the economic and educational levels, the learners find it extremely difficult to continue with the MOOC courses without the support services (Gulatee & Nilsook, 2016; Kaushik, 2020; Lombardo et al., 2018; Pérez-Sanagustín et al., 2017).

Library MOOC support services can take several forms, such as technical assistance for MOOCs, advanced information search, MOOC information literacy programs, technology training, English language training for MOOC users as most of the available content in MOOCs is in English, and it becomes a challenge for learners from non-English speaking nations to understand such content. In addition to these, Information Retrieval training and Inter-Library information search and resource sharing are the specific services suggested in this research through the extant literature.

Hence, based on the above research findings, the Academic Library MOOC Services – Success Model could be suggested in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) – Success Model

Full size image
Academic Library MOOC Services – Success Scale (ALMS-SS)
The Academic Library MOOC Services – Success Scale (ALMS-SS) is based on the current research findings. This scale measures the performance of an academic library's MOOC services based on the perceptions of its users for their intention of continuance and learning outcomes. Here, the learner would rate the library's MOOC services in a 5-point scale, with '1' being the lowest and '5' being the highest level of user satisfaction from the services.

The MOOC services of an academic library are classified into three major aspects, namely 'MOOC Infrastructure Services', 'MOOC Information Services' and, 'MOOC Learner Support Services'.

Features of the Measurement Scale:

Total number of MOOC services: 22

Highest score: 110

Lowest score: 22

Respondents: Learners, preferably each academic department of the library should have equal representation in the survey.

Low Score: 22 – 51 (Approximated Lowest 1/3rd of Score)

Medium Score: 51 – 81 (Approximated Median 1/3rd of Score)

High Score: 81 – 110 (Approximated Highest 1/3rd of Score)

The average cumulative score of the ALMS-SS would be a measure of success. This score is comparable for a time frame, to analyse the trend, or to compare the MOOCs service levels of two or more academic libraries in the same period.

Implications:

Academic Libraries: The academic library will get a clear understanding of the MOOC services offered. The evaluation of the service success would help them to improve in specific areas and plan new services.

Institutions: This scale would help the higher education institutions to decide their budgets and plans for resource allocation and service expansion, based on the evaluation of their Academic Library's performance on the ALMS-Success Scale.

Policymakers: MOOCs have been identified and widely used in higher education to improve quality and reach. Many governments have started implementing their national policies for MOOC integration and use in higher education. This measurement scale would enable performance scaling of Academic Libraries of different institutions. This would help the policymakers to make informed decisions.

Comparison and Differences with Previous Research
Table 1 highlights the research showing the role and importance of library in the MOOC era. The approach of the existing literature on MOOCs and academic library has been to define and explore the role of libraries to offer MOOC services (Agrawal and Singh, 2019; Wang, 2017; Yanxiang, 2016; Gore, 2014). This article has gone a step further to map the existing library services with the possible MOOC services. This strategy proves helpful in assessing the preparedness of any particular library system for adapting the MOOC services for its users in the form of a scale. Library users have been advocated to be the most important stakeholders for evaluating the success and quality of MOOCs (Albelbisi et al., 2018). The approach of the earlier study on MOOC scale has been for the exploration and development of the success factors for MOOC based curriculum in higher education, with a focus on low completion rates (less than 10%) of MOOCs (Albelbisi, 2020). The perception of the learners as the primary stakeholders has been given due importance in this study also, where the MOOC success factors are determined from the perspective of academic libraries for providing MOOC services to the learners.

In the previous study (Albelbisi, 2020), the MOOC success factors were identified to support the MOOC providers, to help them make necessary improvements in their MOOCs in terms of pedagogy, design and content. The identified success factors of the MOOC success scale were (1) system quality, (2) attitude, and (3) course quality. These factors were proposed to have a significant influence on learner’s satisfaction towards MOOCs. All these three factors were based on the perception of the MOOC users, about their desires, beliefs and expectations. So, the focus is on the MOOC users with respect to the MOOC course attributes.

In terms of research experiment and results, this study also makes use of Confirmatory Factor Analysis as has been used in the previous study on MOOC Success Scale, but the implications of result parameters are completely different. The researchers have attempted to explore the success factors to support the academic libraries, to plan and improve their services to support the MOOC learners of the university. The factors influencing for the learner’s satisfaction towards the MOOC services of the academic library according to this study are (1) MOOC infrastructure services, (2) MOOC information services, and (3) MOOC learner support services. Here, all these three factors are based on service attributes and their causal effects on user’s intention to use the services leading to satisfaction. Hence, the focus is the academic library’s MOOC services with respect to the user perception. The current research produces a measurement scale (Table 7), but such a scale is missing in any of the previous research works.

Table 7 Academic Library MOOC Services – Success Scale (ALMS-SS)
Full size table
This study has been conducted in the Indian context. The research outcomes can be generalized for higher education systems of other emerging economies, but further studies in other educational setups in different parts of the world would definitely improve the findings of this study and its applicability. The use of qualitative inputs in the form of interview would also help in supporting this study’s validity and to gather better insights of the library users. The scale validation of ALMS-SS in a longitudinal study would be helpful in determining the implications of the scores generated and for competence mapping. Further studies to explore the organizational challenges and leadership issues (Le, 2015) inherent to adoption of new processes and technology by the academic libraries would definitely add to the understanding on this subject. Another interesting area of exploration and research would be copyright issues for offering embedded content for MOOC based curriculum (Calter, 2013).

Conclusion
Academic libraries have a prominent role to play in the integration of MOOCs into the higher education curricula. Researchers have shown that although the MOOC enrolments have an upward trend over the years, the major issue faced by the MOOCs is a high dropout rate of 90 – 95 per cent (De Coutere, 2014). Luan (2015), and many other contemporary researchers have proposed that, as the academic libraries are a specialised centre of information and technology in a university, it should play an active role in providing MOOC services, due to its advantage of service focus and information access.

The MOOC services of the academic library have not been clearly defined in the literature as discussed earlier in this article. Although, many authors have identified the importance of academic libraries for supporting MOOCs (Table 2), a clear set of academic library MOOC services is not present in the literature. This research has provided a clear set of MOOC services of an academic library, using extant literature analysis. These services have also been mapped with the existing features and services of a typical academic library, to make the understanding of the MOOC services clearer.

Using the D&M ISS Model (2003), this study has attempted to develop an Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) Success Model. This model is based on primary antecedents of the DeLone and McLean model and proposes a classification of academic library MOOC services into three major aspects, namely 'MOOC Infrastructure Services', 'MOOC Information Services' and, 'MOOC Learner Support Services'. Together, these services influence the 'Learner Continuance' and, 'Learning Outcomes'. Both of these parameters are together called 'Learner Intention to Use ALMS'. A positive relationship has been found between 'Learner's Intention to Use ALMS' and the 'Learner Satisfaction'.

Based on the Academic Library MOOC Services (ALMS) Success Model, a 'Success Scale' has also been proposed in the current research. The implications of the 'ALMS – Success Scale' have then been discussed with respect to academic libraries, higher education institutions and policymakers along with discussions on the limitations of this research and scope of future studies.