In this study has examined effects of using Google Earth as a three-dimensional geospatial technology on primary school students’ achievements, spatial thinking skills and cognitive load levels. It also has been determined students’ experiences and teachers’ opinions regarding process. This study has based on mixed research method. Participants has consisted of 60 fourth grade students and three teachers. One-group pre-experimental design has used to compare students’ pre-test and post-test averages of achievement, spatial visualization and mental rotation, and also their weekly cognitive load levels. Moreover, it has employed case study to reveal students’ experiences in relation to learning process and to obtain teachers’ opinions on using Google Earth in social science education. As data collection instruments, has used achievement, spatial visualization, mental rotation tests, cognitive load scale, teacher and student interview guides, and student observation form. Descriptive and inferential statistical methods, paired sample t-test and repeated measures ANOVA, have used to analysis the quantitative data. Qualitative data has analyzed by content analysis. According to results, using Google Earth has significantly effects on students’ achievements and mental rotation skills positively whereas it has not an effect on their spatial visualization skills. Although students have high cognitive load levels in each week, most of them has been able to perform Google Earth tasks successfully. The positive opinions of teachers about Google Earth will encourage primary school teachers to use three-dimensional geospatial technologies in social science education.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
In geographical subjects of the social science course, the students are desired to better understand relationship among themselves and the nature and the environment (Chang & Kidman, 2021). Even so, the geographical subjects section of the primary school social science textbooks include only brief, general information, unattractive audio-visual content, and a few visuals about countries. It presents flags of countries and their locations on two-dimensional (2D) maps. It also stands out the teachers prefer the traditional teaching methods, their inexperience using technological resources and tools, and insufficient technological infrastructures of classrooms (Çelen et al., 2019; Gönenç & Açıkalın, 2017; Ridha & Kamil, 2021; Xiang & Liut, 2017).

Mejía Ávila et al. (2021) have revealed that the lack of knowledge of teachers on geospatial technologies make it difficult the using Google Earth (GE) in social science courses. Moreover, Rane et al. (2020) have observed that the lack of using maps abilities of students on analyzing and comprehending the geographic events. The mentioned factors make it difficult for students to learn the geographical subjects (Çelik, 2021; Taştan, 2021). This situation also hinders the students having the essential geographical skills for business and civic life (Collins, 2018). The social science education should provide digital instructional content as well as textbook to facilitate the students’ achievement of learning objectives (Çelik, 2021; Kopcha et al., 2015; Kulo & Bodzin, 2013; Mercier & Rata, 2017; Willis et al., 2021). It also needs to focus on using techniques to activate students’ higher-order thinking processes such as spatial thinking rather than memorization of events and places (Rane et al., 2020; Ridha et al., 2020).

Using Google Earth as a geospatial technology
Geospatial technologies such as three-dimensional (3D) online maps can utilize to perceive more easily our inhabit environment on earth (Bitting et al., 2018; Patterson, 2007; Tooth, 2015). National Council for the Social Studies (2019) also points out the potential of spatial thinking skills (STS) to increase the social science success of students. Council emphasizes the important of applying the technology-assisted map activities to develop spatial visualization and mental rotation skills of students.

Using digital maps, one of the geospatial technologies become widespread in daily life thanks to ease of access to internet. In this way, it has been secured the equality of opportunities in education (Liao et al., 2017). GE, one of the new generation digital maps, is frequently preferred in recent years. It can be used online/offline. Thanks to GE, it is possible to access much data fast, economically, and free of charge. GE enables to find instantly the most up to date geospatial location of a point in any place of world with 2D maps and 3D satellite imageries, and to get a print out with coordinates. In addition, using GE is possible to see details of land, weather conditions, and traffic information, to obtain route from a point to another, to reach visuals about the destination, to add landmark to a location (Goodchild, 2008; Haslett, 2009; Lisle, 2006; Tooth, 2015). It also provides to see 3D representation of the spatial image of a location in detail by controlling zoom in/out with finger gestures (Chang & Kidman, 2021; Rajani & Dixit, 2021).

When users want to get information about a special destination, they can reach this destination with a click via GE Voyager. They can browse around this destination with direction keys via GE Street View to feel like themselves walking there (Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020). The Keyhole Markup language Zipped (KMZ) file, created by entering various data such as attaching videos, text, and photos to the location can also integrate into GE (Google, 2019; Guertin et al., 2012; Liang et al., 2018). All these features of GE are summarized in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Features of GE

Full size image
GE with advanced features outlined in Fig. 1 helps to break geographical borders. Students take part in active learning process by engaging with dynamic, interactive and authentic learning environment (Bitting et al., 2018; Edstrom, 2013; Hsu et al., 2018; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021; Patterson, 2007). In this way, students by acquiring concrete knowledge can reduce difficulties in perceiving and recalling knowledge. They can get geospatial literacy, geographical thinking, and map skills. They can also build strong connections among their inhabit environment, country, and real world (De Miguel González & De Lázaro Torres, 2020; Esmaeili & Rastegarpour, 2016; Jo et al., 2016; Merç & Ersoy, 2019).

Given that potential of GE to promote students’ motivation and attitude towards the social science course, it is a suitable instrument for using in−/out-of-class (Mejía Ávila et al., 2021; Ratinen & Keinonen, 2011; Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020). In line with recommendation of the New Media Consortium Horizon Report (2013), it has become widespread the using GE as a digital educational material to support the geographical subjects (Liang et al., 2018).

Spatial thinking skills in social science education
An important part of the social science education, a multi-disciplinary field, consists of geographical subjects. The basis geographical knowledge such as “to describe geolocation and directions” and “to move from one place to another” are key concepts related to STS. Therefore, it is crucial to students equip with STS in social science course (Dağ et al., 2021; Dewi et al., 2021; Ridha et al., 2020; Yiğit & Karatekin, 2021). In terms of geospatial literacy, STS is that students spatially determine and visualize their own geolocation while moving in space, find and describe directions by mentally rotating, and create route information of location. Important indicators for STS is that students find coordinates of destination, interpret geolocation according to another destination, and perceive the relations between them spatially (Chang & Kidman, 2021; Dokumacı-Sütçü, 2021; Giorgis, 2015; Jarvis et al., 2017; Otero & Torres, 2017; Purwanto et al., 2021).

STS is also frequently used in any area of daily life such as physically moving from one point to another by following directions when walking on road (Bond & Cawood, 2021; Purwanto et al., 2021), displacing the position of furniture, putting dishes in dishwasher, giving directions to a driver/pedestrian, and map reading (Yıldız, 2009). Therefore, students need STS at any age (Danby et al., 2016; Jarvis et al., 2017; Peters et al., 1995). Such daily activities reinforce the level of (geo)spatial thinking whereas lack of STS is disadvantage while working and travelling in society (Erdmann, 2021). Moreover, disregard for STS in formal and informal education causes the students have mental difficulties to acquire these skills (Bond & Cawood, 2021). However, the student advanced spatial thinking skills is able to read and draw the geospatial imagery and maps, and compare with each other. Thus, the student is able to make sense and explain the relations between geographical concepts, causes, and effects more easily (Purwanto et al., 2021; Yiğit & Karatekin, 2021). For this reason, our study focuses on STS of primary school students.

It can be difficult for primary school children to learn about location and direction because of their young age (Dağ et al., 2021). 3D geospatial technologies such as GE allow students have a mentally visualize of a location by rotating 360 degrees of the earth’s 3D satellite imagery. GE also makes it possible to perceive spatial relations between geolocations, their realistic forms in space (Bond & Cawood, 2021; Chang & Kidman, 2021; Dokumacı-Sütçü, 2021; Giorgis, 2015). In other words, GE can help students make sense the relation between the part and the whole of the earth. In terms of geospatial reasoning and fundamental mapping literacy, GE has a potential to improve students’ STS interactively (Erdmann, 2021; Mercier & Rata, 2017). Thus, it is recommended to use GE in learning environments (Bearman et al., 2016; Collins, 2018; Jo et al., 2016; Metoyer & Bednarz, 2017; Moorman & Crichton, 2018; Xiang & Liut, 2017). However, Giorgis (2015) states that students mentally rotate imagery without the need to use GE and thus, GE has no measurable effect on students’ spatial thinking skills. Considering these contradictory statements in the literature, in this study is examined whether GE tasks have an effect on students’ spatial thinking skills.

Cognitive load in social science education
2D maps are inadequate in perceiving location of a place and its relations with other locations in real world. For this reason, students have difficulty in comprehending the geographical concepts and they exert excessive mental efforts (Bunch & Lloyd, 2006; Huang, 2011; Kopcha et al., 2015; Liao et al., 2017; Rajani & Dixit, 2021; Westgard, 2010). This difficulty may lead to cognitive load (CL) on students, make learning process continue in negative feelings (boring, anxiety, confusion etc.), and students to break away from process (Mayer, 2014; Sweller, 2010). Complicated, unnecessary, distracting knowledge and insufficient time lead to overload on working memory, and influence learning in negative ways (Moreno, 2010; Paas et al., 2004).

According to CL theory, it is important that students keep their mental efforts at optimum level to make sense of knowledge and retention it in memory (Mavilidi & Zhong, 2019). At this point, visualization than text-only promotes to grasp visual and spatial relationships between the instructional materials (Castro-Alonso et al., 2021). Furthermore, it is easier to students build connection among knowledge pieces, thanks to be presented together the interrelated contents. In this way, they make less mental effort to acquire information (Debue & Van de Leemput, 2014), and more retention it in memory (Mayer & Moreno, 2003).

Students walking through the space may not be sure whether perceive spatially accurate representation of landscape. That’s why, getting geospatial thinking skills involves a considerable amount mental effort and time (Rajani & Dixit, 2021). At that point, cognitive studies about geo-visualization and spatial skills have dominant role to utilize 3D geospatial technologies in social science education (Carbonell-Carrera & Hess-Medler, 2019). GE, as a geospatial technology, allows visualization of space and virtual navigation on it. When students see the 3D satellite imageries of many destinations, countries, and locations included in textbooks simultaneously and all together on GE, it will be easier for students to mentally visualize them. In this way, GE helps to reduce the mental effort and cognitive load on students, during comprehending new geographical knowledge (Jo et al., 2016; Lei et al., 2009; Liou et al., 2018; Rajani & Dixit, 2021). On the other hand, Gardony et al. (2021) argue that it may lead to increase cognitive load on students, even if a 3D geo-visualization environment promotes students comprehending the spatial perspective switching. Considering in mentioned literature, in this study is determined whether GE causes the cognitive overload on student by measuring weekly CL levels of students performing GE tasks.

Rationale and significance of the study
Geospatial technology using imagery is an effective platform for improving the students’ spatial thinking skills (Purwanto et al., 2021; Ridha et al., 2020). Thus, the studies on GE conduct with students at different grade levels, and generally focus on geospatial location of destinations (Demirci et al., 2013; De Miguel González & De Lázaro Torres, 2020; Edstrom, 2013; Guertin et al., 2012; Hales, 2010; Harm, 2021; Hsu et al., 2018; Kulo & Bodzin, 2013; Purwanto et al., 2021; Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020; Westgard, 2010; Xiang & Liut, 2017). Although it is important to use GE in in-class activities, especially for young children to acquire geospatial skills, a few teachers take into account this situation (Dağ et al., 2021). A small number of studies focus on primary school students who learning geospatial location knowledge for the first time (Esmaeili & Rastegarpour, 2016; Huang, 2018; Kopcha et al., 2015; Merç & Ersoy, 2019). At that point, this study is based on learning objectives about “Global Connections” theme which included in social science fourth grade course curriculum in Turkey. Accordingly, the study aims to the students acquire about geospatial locations of Turkey and her neighboring countries via GE. It also intends to the students getting know the prominent features of these countries (such as capital cities, flags, borders, critical cultural and architectural properties, people and buildings of historical importance, and so on).

To get geospatial literacy in GE is required the spatial perception and the complex geographic information about space. Thus, STS is one of the important skills in education system (De Miguel González & De Lázaro Torres, 2020; Goodchild, 2008). To reinforce spatial thinking, the students should use 3D geospatial technologies and be encouraged to interact with geographical content (Gardony et al., 2021; Ridha et al., 2020). However, Çelik (2021) has revealed that primary school teachers make rarely use of GE in social studies courses. He has cited this as one of the reasons why students’ low map reading and geospatial skills. Much studies measure these complex skills via achievement tests and interviews, whereas a few study is used different measurement instruments (Collins, 2018; Dokumacı-Sütçü, 2021; Giorgis, 2015; Kopcha et al., 2015; Liao et al., 2017; Metoyer & Bednarz, 2017; Purwanto et al., 2021). In this study is applied not only achievement test but also spatial visualization and mental rotation tests to determine whether GE has contributions to STS.

The map-based activities facilitate to learn the geographic information, thanks to provide textual and visual multimedia materials (Carbonell-Carrera & Hess-Medler, 2019; De Miguel González & De Lázaro Torres, 2020; Rajani & Dixit, 2021; Willis et al., 2021). On the other hand, students using interactive maps like GE try to make sense of cognitive processes all at once (such as seeing, receiving, regulating and directing). This can lead to students make excessive mental efforts, and can hinder to learn by forming CL (Bunch & Lloyd, 2006; Gardony et al., 2021; Goodchild, 2008; Huang, 2011; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021). Students need to run the complex cognitive processes simultaneously to find both geospatial location of a destination, and to perceive its relations with other locations by searching on GE. Therefore, it is important to determine CL on students whether caused by GE (Lei et al., 2009; Liao et al., 2017; Treves & Skarlatidou, 2018). But, it is available a small number of studies analyzing CL. Some other studies just report that students have difficulty in geolocations (Gardony et al., 2021; Kopcha et al., 2015; Merç & Ersoy, 2019; Xiang & Liut, 2017). This study will strength the previous studies in that it finds out whether GE causes cognitive overload on students, determines the factors influencing CL, and makes recommendations to the future studies.

GE offers to students the geographic information, in an unfamiliar way, with a different tool except textbook. Therefore, students can have trouble keeping up rapidly changing GE content, and making sense of the content. These are cons of GE (Hsu et al., 2018; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021), even if many pros of GE are reported in literature (Tooth, 2015). This study obtains students’ and their teachers’ opinions in order to detailed analysis of these situations. It also figures out experiences of students about GE tasks which can affect their geospatial literacy achievement, STS, and CL in positive and in negative ways. Moreover, in this study is made weekly observations on extent to which students can perform assigned GE tasks them. It is also remarkable that most previous studies has obtained students’ views on GE whereas less of them has determined opinions of teachers who conducted process (Blank et al., 2016; Çelik, 2021; Karakuş & Oğuz, 2013; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021; Ratinen & Keinonen, 2011; Ridha & Kamil, 2021). Results of this current study, consulting opinions of teachers as well as students and thus collecting rich data, will guide all stakeholders of Ministry of National Education (MoNE).

Within the framework of this study is examined the effects of using GE in social science education on achievements, spatial thinking skills, and cognitive load levels of primary school students. It is also determined students’ experiences and teachers’ opinions in three-week implementation process. Accordingly research questions of this paper are as follow.

Does use of Google Earth have an effect on social science achievements of primary school students?

Does use of Google Earth have an effect on spatial thinking skills of primary school students?

Does use of Google Earth have an effect on three-week cognitive load levels of primary school students?

What are the experiences of primary school students in three-week Google Earth implementation process?

What are the opinions of primary school teachers about using Google Earth in social science education?

Method
Research design
This study is based on mixed research method. Accordingly, it is used one group pre-experimental design to compare students’ pre-test and post-test averages of achievement, spatial visualization and mental rotation, and their weekly cognitive load levels. This design has not a control group to compare with experimental group. Thus, for a single group is used a pre-test before the intervention, followed a treatment, and post-test. This is the limitation of the study (Creswell, 2013). It is also employed case study (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015) in order to reveal students’ experiences during treatment in detailed, and to obtain teachers’ opinions on using GE in social science education. The considerations for the validity and reliability of the study (Fraenkel et al., 2012) are summarized as follows.

Accordingly, it was expressed the characteristics of participants, how the data collection instruments determined, and analysis results of validity-reliability tests of these instruments. Research process was explained in the sub-titles, “planning, implementation, and evaluation phases”. In planning phase, to ensure the content validity, according to learning objectives of course, weekly subjects and GE tasks were decided by taking the opinions of experts, teachers, and students. The creating process of kmz files which integrated into GE was explained. Pilot tests were carried out to ensure the content validity and reliability of the data collection instruments. In implementation phase, weekly treatments were explained in detail. Prior to implementation was received the ethic committee approval. Probable technical faults which threaten the reliability of the study was eliminated. Participants were informed about the process.

In evaluation phase, to increase the reliability of the data, it was recorded videos, taken photos, and marked the observation form during the treatment. It was also tested the assumptions regarding the data analysis techniques used for each research question. Trustworthiness of the content analysis process (themes, codes, and participants’ statements) was checked by an instructional technology expert. In order to increase the clarity of the results, sub-titles were created according to the research questions, and the findings were presented in tables and graphics. Quantitative and qualitative results were interpreted together, and made quotations from participant statements. The results were discussed with the support of studies which reached similar or opposite results in the literature. Additionally, in following sub-titles are detailed explanations to increase the validity and reliability of the study and also stated the limitations of the study.

Participants
This study was conducted with 60 fourth grade students (31 girls, 29 boys) in three different classes (Classes A, B, and C) of a primary school which determined by convenience sampling (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015). Students had prior knowledge about using smart boards in their classrooms. All students participating our implementation process used GE for the first time and performed the same GE tasks. Accordingly, the equivalence of the students was ensured. Besides, all students were observed throughout research by researchers. At the end of implementation, eight students were chosen randomly from each class, and thus 24 students in total were interviewed. It was also consulted opinions of three teachers who conducted implementation process of each class in this study, on using GE in social science education.

Data collection instruments
Achievement test (AT) was developed by researchers considering learning objectives in fourth grade social science course “Global Connections” theme (MoNE, 2017). The first draft of test contained 37 questions. To ensure the content validity, pilot test was conducted with 240 fifth-grade students who had acquired the learning objectives. According to primary school teachers’ suggestions, some of the questions with low item difficulty and item discrimination were removed from test. The other questions were not removed from test because of their suitability to the learning objectives. Thus, achievement test contained 20-item, and maximum score of test was 100.

Two different tests were used for spatial thinking skills. Spatial visualization test (SVT) was developed by Winter et al. (1989), and mental rotation test (MRT) was developed by Peters et al. (1995). Yıldız (2009) adapted these tests into Turkish, SVT (α = .971) and MRT (α = .712). SVT contains questions on sight of structures made with cubes from front, back, left, and right in addition to their isometric sight. MAT plan questions, which a special coding of sight from a birds’ eye shot for structures composed of cubes, were also included in test. This test contained 15 questions with five choices and only one correct answer. Maximum score receivable from the test was 15. Each question of MTR was about finding new shapes when shapes composed of cubes were rotated in different angles and directions. Each question had four options, two of which were correct. Students received two points for two correct answers and one point for one correct answer in each question. Maximum score receivable from 24-item test was 48.

Cognitive load scale (CLS) was developed by Paas (1992) and also used by Paas and Van Merriënboer (1994) in another study (α = .82). The one-item scale from low to high mental effort had 9-grades. In CLS, low effort indicated student’s high task performance and implementation efficiency. While maximum score receivable from scale was 9, minimum score was 1.

Observation form was prepared by researchers in order to find out whether or not each student were able to perform GE tasks successfully, and the factors influencing this situations in detail. The form included these tasks: “Showing the destination (continent/country/city, etc.) on GE”, “Finding the destination on GE”, “Finding where the location of the destination relative to Turkey on GE” and “Taking street view agent to the destination on GE, and show around”. In this form, it was available “yes”, “partially” and “no” options that observers marked the status of completing these four tasks which assigned to students each week according to subjects. They also noted down why some students were failure to complete these tasks. During observation, video recordings and photos of students were taken.

Interview guides were prepared by researchers to reveal students’ experiences in detail and teachers’ opinions, who conducted implementation process, on using GE in social science education. Semi-structured interviews, each of which contained eight questions were conducted at the end of three-week implementation. During the 6–7-min interviews were voice recorded with permission from participants. Additionally, after weekly GE activities, it was also asked to students whether or not GE activities facilitate learning the subject, contain too much knowledge, confuse their mind, reduce difficulty to understand the subject, and they like these activities. Besides, an instructional technologies expert, three primary school teachers, a language expert, a female and a male student examined the intelligibility of questions in achievement test, interview guides, and observation form.

Research process
The study has been built on the basis of Plan-Implement-Evaluate (PIE) instructional design model which preferred in cases where educational technologies are integrated into the learning process (Newby et al., 2000). This model answers a series of questions about what/when/why/how to teach in relation to such resources as students, teachers and technology. Accordingly, phases of research process are as follow:

Planning phase
A three-week activities plan was prepared by joint decision made with three teachers involved in this study in order to present the content consistently with “Global Connections” theme learning objectives to students and to promote the validity and reliability of implementation process. According to subjects and learning objectives, weekly course schedule was shown in Table 1. In this way, to ensure content validity, it was secured that each class had the same subjects and learning objectives in the same weeks. Data collection instruments were also specified. Some of them were developed by researchers. To determine the suitability of them were obtained the expert and student views, and validity-reliability tests were done.

Table 1 Weekly course schedule
Full size table
According to a three-week activities plan, researchers created .kmz extension files separately for subjects and learning objectives of each week. In this way, the researchers colored borders of continents, marked location of countries with landmarks, drew their borders, and attached their country flags. They also included textual information on the remarkable features of these countries, and on commercial relations, cultural similarities and differences of them with Turkey. After that, they integrated the created three kmz files into GE. Thus, a detailed presentation of content was made on a virtual globe as a 3D digital platform. Moreover, students were given opportunity to interact with world and their environment, to perceive geospatial information and to display their STS.

Besides, the researchers prepared GE tasks in order to enable students to see destinations of touristic and cultural importance which were available in their textbook in 3D. In this way, it was possible to student access to information on any location in the world which they cannot go, see with a click by using GE Voyager, browse around there, and feel as if they were there with direction keys by using Street View agent. Thus, it was aimed to students make mentally visualize of knowledge, which brought to their feet, concrete, compare, interpret, and retention it in memory. The sample screen shots taken from GE learning environment are shown in Fig. 2 below.

Fig. 2
figure 2
kmz files on GE(a), coloring the continents(b), marking landmarks for countries geolocations(c), searching for Ataturk’s House Museum in Salonika(d), 3D satellite imagery for Ataturk’ House Museum in Salonika(e), navigating in Salonika Ataturk’s House Museum with GE Street View as 3D(f), a country’s flag and textual information about her(g).

Full size image
Implementation phase
Before implementation process, the approval was received from the MoNE in Turkey, and from the Ethics Committee of Graduate School of Educational Sciences at that university where researchers currently work. During three lesson hours in one-week, participants were explained the three-week implementation process, introduced the Google Earth, and taken their permissions. It was stated that their names and the collected data were remained confidential. Three primary school teachers conducted implementation process in own classes whereas researchers functioned as the observer and managed all process. Researchers examined smart boards and internet infrastructure so that GE can be used in the classrooms smoothly, and made laptops and mobile modems available to eliminate probable technical faults which threaten the reliability of the study.

According to three weeks course schedule, implementation process was nine hours in total for each class (weekly three hours). In this process, teachers presented knowledge, which was divided into pieces according to sub-learning objectives related to subject of week, by supporting with GE. After that, as is shown activity photos in Fig. 3, they asked students to fulfill GE tasks step by step, prepared according to learning objectives which included in activities plan. They helped students who could not complete GE tasks, and thus they made such students complete activities and take part in process actively. In this way, they tried to eliminate complexity of subjects and keep CL at optimum level. For instance, they asked students to find geolocation of a country and to browse around as 3D by using Street View agent in the destination whose geolocation was given. Yet, due to the fact that there was only one smart board in each classroom, all students could not do activities at the same time; instead, they performed GE tasks by using the smart board in turns. This situation, which stemmed from the fact that MoNE installed a smart board in each class and removed IT classrooms, can be considered as one of limitations of this study.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Activity photos

Full size image
Evaluation phase
SVT, MRT and AT were applied to all students prior to and following implementation. Throughout three-week implementation, it was recorded videos, taken photos and marked the observation form in order to determine the extent to which all students performed GE tasks. At the end of third lesson hour in each week, it was measured all students’ mental efforts with CLS. After whole process, the interviews were made with 3 teachers and 24 students (8 students randomly chosen from each class), and voice recorded. All these were to increase the reliability of the study. Figure 4 below summarizes what was applied in research process based on the PIE instructional design model.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Summary of research process

Full size image
Data analysis
The quantitative data were analyzed on SPSS 20. To increase the reliability of the data, it was tested the assumptions regarding the data analysis techniques used for each research question. The normality analysis of each data set was calculated to attain internal consistency (Field, 2009). Although AT and MRT values had normal distribution, SVT and weekly CLS data did not have normal distribution. It were normalized SVT data by taking its logarithm, and weekly CLS data by squaring its (Pallant, 2016).

For first, second, third research questions; a paired sample t-test was done with AT, SVT and MRT pre-test and post-test data. The variances in the data sets were found to be homogeneous prior to the t-test (p > .05), and t-test assumptions were met. For forth research question; Repeated Measures ANOVA test was done with weekly CLS data. It was found with Mauchly’s Test of Sphericity prior to ANOVA that the variances in the data sets were homogeneous, and Sphericity Assumption was met (p = .629, p > .05). Thus, Sphericity Assumed results were considered.

For fifth research question; the interview voice recordings were transcribed into writing, and the observation data were saved on computer. Content analysis was done via Nvivo 7 to analyze all qualitative data in depth, and tree nodes (themes) and free nodes (codes) were distinguished (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015). After that, the quotations and explanations of students (SX) and teachers (TX) were presented. Trustworthiness of the content analysis process (themes, codes, and participants’ statements) has checked by an instructional technology expert.

Results
Descriptive findings
Firstly, pre-test and post-test achievement, SVS, and MRS averages of all students were determined. Results are presented in Table 2.

Table 2 Descriptive findings for pre-test and post-test achievement, SVS, and MRS averages
Full size table
According to Table 2, post-test achievement and MRS averages were higher than pre-test averages whereas post-test SVS average were lower than pre-test average.

Effect of Google Earth on achievements and spatial thinking skills
Paired sample t-test was conducted in order to compare students’ pre-test and post-test averages of achievement, SVS, and MRS. Results are shown in Table 3.

Table 3 Paired sample t-test results for achievement, SVS, and MRS averages
Full size table
According to Table 3, pre-test and post-test achievement averages were differed significantly in favor of post-test (t(59) = −2.126, p < .05, η2 = .071). Using GE had not significant effect on students’ SVS (t(59) = 1.227, p > 05, η2 = .024), whereas it had significant effect on students’ MRS in favor of post-test (t(59) = −2.307, p < .05, η2 = .082).

Effect of Google Earth on three-week cognitive load levels
Students’ weekly CL levels were determined, and total CL levels of them were found by calculating the average for three weeks. Results are presented in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Students’ weekly and total CL levels

Full size image
According to Fig. 5, students’ CL in total and for each week are high levels (>5). Especially, their CL levels in first week is higher than the others.

Repeated Measures ANOVA test was carried out to find whether using GE had an effect on students’ weekly CL levels. Results are laid out in Table 4.

Table 4 Repeated measures ANOVA results for students’ weekly CL levels
Full size table
According to Table 4, using GE had significant effect on students’ weekly CL levels (F(2,118) = 3.740, p < .05, η2 = .060). Post Hoc Bonferroni test was carried out to find weeks in which differences were available. Results is shown in Table 5.

Table 5 Post Hoc Bonferroni test results for students’ weekly CL levels
Full size table
As is clear from Table 5, first and second week CL levels were differed significantly in favor of second week (M1st week = 7.6, M2nd week = 6.7, p < .05), whereas there was no meaningful difference between the other weeks.

Experiences of students in Google Earth implementation process
Students’ expressions regarding weekly GE activities
In order to determine students’ expressions about weekly GE activities were calculated the averages of three weeks. Percentages of students’ expressions are presented in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Percentages of students’ expressions regarding weekly GE activities

Full size image
It is clear from Fig. 6, students’ expressions regarding weekly GE activities were mostly positive, however, only about half of students stated that GE activities reduced difficulty to understand the subjects.

Students’ performing GE tasks
The extent to each students performed GE tasks were determined by calculating three-week average of weekly observation forms. Results is laid out in Table 6.

Table 6 Students’ performing GE tasks
Full size table
Researchers observed students in general were eager to participate in GE activities. According to Table 6, a great majority of students were able to perform GE tasks. They were able to use GE easily in first and second questions, but one fourth (25%) of students had difficulty in finding location of asked destination relative to Turkey on GE. Reasons for this situation are shown in Table 7.

Table 7 Reasons why students have difficulty in performing GE tasks
Full size table
According to Table 7, the reason for students having difficulty in finding location of any destination relative to Turkey was that they were not being able to follow navigation directions. It was followed by their hesitation to use GE and by not being able to rotate GE on smart board. However, according to observer’s notes, such students were able to use GE easily after the teachers’ feedback.

Students’ views on using GE during the learning process
Students’ views on using GE during the learning process were divided into themes. Themes, codes and frequencies are presented in Table 8.

Table 8 Students’ views on using GE during the learning process
Full size table
According to Table 8, students generally had positive emotions in relation to using GE during the learning process. GE activities made many students excited, surprised, even to enjoyed, and increased interest in social science course whereas made a few students disliked and bored with the lesson. Students’ statements were in the following:

“I thought how much technology had progressed. We could travel to wherever we wanted in minutes even if we couldn’t travel on a tour bus. So, I enjoyed using GE in lessons very much” (S2).

“Actually, I felt very excited using GE for the first time” (S7).

“To be honest, I didn’t like social science course before, but I began to like it and to consider it more important thanks to GE” (S6).

“I didn’t like it when GE continuously refreshed” (S10).

“I had a bit of difficulty in using GE because I cannot use computers very much, and I felt bored” (S11).

Students stated that GE created “sense of reality” and it facilitated learning in this way. While some students was using GE, they felt as if they were tourists, whereas some others thought that GE was not so different from a 2D map. Students’ statements were in the following:

“In fact, GE made it easier for me to envision the destinations in textbook. I used to read them in book but I couldn’t understand much because I hadn’t been to those places. I could enter historical places, museum, and zoo that I wondered thanks to GE. I felt as if I really went to those places and was wandering as a tourist. Because I saw those places in 3D and in their actual form, I can make them in my memory was better retention” (S6).

“I think there are no differences between GE and other maps. We can see countries in both” (S24).

Students also mentioned reasons for their intention to use GE again as following:

“Lessons are both enjoyable and more comprehensive with GE. We go to a different country or city every day; we can also travel round the world. I wish to use GE again” (S19).

“I can see destinations in 3D and understand better are thanks to GE. For this reason, I would like to use GE again.” (S23).

Beside all above mentioned, a few students stated frequent disconnections internet, while using GE and difficulty in rotating the world by using smart board or mouse.

Opinions of primary school teachers about using Google Earth
Teachers’ jointly held opinions on using GE in social science education are shown in Table 9.

Table 9 Teachers’ jointly opinions on using GE in social science education
Full size table
According to Table 9, teachers stated that using GE in social science education hindered loss of time in access to knowledge, it presented a real-like environment, and it concretized knowledge and facilitated retention of knowledge in memory by enabling students to browse around in 3D through the destinations. Teachers’ statements were in the following:

“When I present subjects, students only try to wander in destinations in their mind because they do not have chance to travel to destinations in reality. But wandering in a destination as 3D in GE is a nice feature, because they feel excited as if they were wandering there really. In this way, it ensures better retention of knowledge in memory, and it makes me happy” (T2).

“I am glad that GE is 3D, knowledge sources is varied, and there is no loss of time in access to knowledge.” (T1).

Teachers also mentioned that GE activities attracted students’ interest and increased their engagement in lessons, and it even ensures students to like social science course. Teachers’ statements were in the following:

“In previous years, I used to instruct, and students used to write down them and I used to support my presentation with a couple of visuals and that was all. Therefore, students had low interest in social science course. But they liked the course thanks to GE. It was a change for students. Yes, I also instructed but they were too eager to do by seeing and by experiencing on GE what I had taught them. Even the most silent students said they wanted to do it and wander on GE. Their participation in the lesson increased considerably too” (T2).

“Social science courses used to be inactive and static… But now, lessons arouse students’ interest when supported with GE activities” (T3).

Teachers mentioned that GE was suitable for students’ level and thus, they wanted to use GE in other courses and subjects and introduce a greater number of destinations, but they did not like frequent internet disconnections as it influenced the flow of lessons. Teachers’ statements were in the following:

“Students had not much difficulty in using GE because their enough experience in using computers, Tablet/PCs and internet” (T3).

“GE can be efficient in other subjects appropriate for using it” (T1).

“More places could be browsed around on GE if there was no time limitation” (SÖ2).

“Just thing I don’t like about GE is frequent internet disconnection” (T1).

Discussion
Students’ achievements and spatial thinking skills
It was found that using geospatial technologies such as GE had significant effect on primary school students’ social science achievements. There were available studies obtain parallel results to our study (Bitting et al., 2018; Esmaeili & Rastegarpour, 2016; Huang, 2018; Merç & Ersoy, 2019; Ridha et al., 2020; Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020). Thanks to GE, students participated in the active learning process by engaging with a dynamic, interactive, and authentic learning environment (Hsu et al., 2018; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021). This may have contributed to they remember the knowledge more easily. Willis et al. (2021) recommended that it was provided digital instructional content in geoscience education in order to facilitate the students’ achievement of learning objectives. Yet, in our study, students scored below 45 on post-test average. Demirci et al. (2013) got quantitative results similar to ours. They claimed that “students did not understand or internalize content and GE technology in activities”.

However, qualitative results of our study demonstrated that situation was just opposite. According to observations, majority of students were able to perform GE tasks by rotating 3D world 360 degrees on GE. Studies obtained similar results were also available in literature (Mercier & Rata, 2017; Moorman & Crichton, 2018; Ratinen & Keinonen, 2011; Ridha et al., 2020; Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020). On GE, students can browse around a destination with direction keys (Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020), and see details by controlling zoom in/out with finger gestures (Chang & Kidman, 2021; Rajani & Dixit, 2021). It is thought that this situation makes it easier for students to complete the GE tasks. Considering students’ age group, acquired skills are impressive (Kopcha et al., 2015). Thus, we can state that using weekly process evaluation instruments as well as achievement test for primary school students yield more detailed results.

In this study, students’ STS was measured with two different tests, namely SVS and MRS. Using GE contributed to improve MRS significantly while did not so for SVS. Metoyer and Bednarz (2017) obtained parallel results to our study. Probably, previous studies measured STS without distinguishing between SVS and MRS. That’s why, they generally found out that GE improved students’ STS (Collins, 2018; Jo et al., 2016; Kopcha et al., 2015; Liao et al., 2017; Purwanto et al., 2021; Westgard, 2010). Harm (2021) revealed that GE was an utility platform to enhance pre-service teachers’ STS, even if students taking part in his study were in a different grade level from our participants. That’s why, students need to focus on using techniques to activate their higher-order thinking processes such as spatial thinking rather than memorization of events and places (Rane et al., 2020; Ridha et al., 2020).

On the other hand, all students in our study could not engage activities simultaneously, due to the fact that MoNE devoted three weeks for “Global Connections” theme in curriculum, and there was only one smart board in each classroom. Instead, students performed GE tasks by using smart board in turns in limited time. This was one of limitations of our study. In parallel with this result, Mejía Ávila et al. (2021) stressed that students had poor geographical literacy was due to insufficient lesson hours on a weekly basis for geographic subjects. Thus, it was probably three-week learning process was not enough to improve students’ SVS. Increasing weekly course hours for this learning objectives in primary school social science curriculum by MoNE, it may be contributed to improve of students’ geospatial STS. Furthermore, it is possible to make students engage in GE for longer by keeping computers for each student in classrooms (Ridha & Kamil, 2021). As a matter of fact, it should not be forgotten that STS is a critical skill that students need it at any age, as it is frequently used in daily life (Bond & Cawood, 2021; Danby et al., 2016; Jarvis et al., 2017; Purwanto et al., 2021).

Students’ cognitive load levels
Prior to implementation, students were informed about using GE even so, primary school students who participating our implementation process used GE in this social science course for the first time. It in turn might have caused an “innovation effect”, and led to higher CL level on students in first week than in others. It was natural to students with lower geological knowledge were forced to devote more mental effort to spatial visualization (Giorgis, 2015). Students had also high average of CL levels both for each week and for three weeks. According to Gardony et al. (2021), it might lead to increase cognitive load on students, even if a 3D geo-visualization environment promoted students comprehending the spatial perspective switching. It was probably the reason of this that inherently, it was complex content of geospatial literacy (Goodchild, 2008).

Additionally, it might have caused students make mental difficulty that GE was a multimedia material which involving more than one component, such as 3D platform, and presenting texts and visuals simultaneously in a single interface (Bunch & Lloyd, 2006; Demirci et al., 2013; Huang, 2011; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021). That searching geolocation landmark on GE required a cognitive process, it could also be source of this result (Lei et al., 2009; Metoyer & Bednarz, 2017; Treves & Skarlatidou, 2018). Students who try to make sense of such complex cognitive processes simultaneously and at one time might make more mental efforts (Mavilidi & Zhong, 2019), and thus, have mental difficulty and cognitive overload (Mayer, 2009). Accordingly, as Willis et al. (2021) emphasized, it is important to balance the cognitive load level while using digital instructional content in geoscience education.

Liou et al. (2018) emphasize that digital interactive maps which are designed by considering CL theory can increase students’ performance effectively. Despite taking into account this situation while creating GE learning environment, emergence of this quantitative result in our study was surprising. Although GE was a motivation source helping students to participate actively in learning process according to qualitative results, this situation did not reflect positively on quantitative results regarding CL levels. Ridha et al. (2020) determined that geospatial technologies increased the students’ learning motivation toward geographic subjects by contributing the attractiveness of learning. According to Rajani and Dixit (2021), geospatial technologies provided a new view which decreased amount of time and mental effort for spatial perception and thus, inhibited cognitive load. To perform new studies examining use of GE in primary school in terms of CL and to compare results to ours would be important in offering a road map to MoNE.

Students’ experiences and teachers’ opinions on Google Earth
Almost all of students stated that they could see and wander the destinations, which included in textbook, on GE from multiple perspectives, thanks to GE as a rotatable 3D earth and Street View features. In this way, students emphasized that GE made easier to they had mentally visualization of destinations, and promoted retention to knowledge in their memory. These positive qualitative results demonstrated that GE might be contributed to improve the MRS. Likewise, Bearman et al. (2016) argued that such applications were able to improve geospatial literacy of students. Liao et al. (2017) stated students made better navigation performance since 3D geo-browsers such as GE increased representation of reality. Rane et al. (2020) emphasized that multiple representations on GE can reduce cognitive load, and help to students linking between geographical concepts and understanding its. Harm (2021) revealed that GE was a useful application to enhance pre-service teachers’ spatial thinking skills, and knowledge on geographic concepts. As Erdmann (2021) stressed, it is clear that such online maps reinforce the geospatial reasoning level.

According to students’ views which receiving after implementation in each week, although half of them thought that GE did not make the subject easier to understand, the majority of them stated that using GE did not confuse their minds. Furthermore, interviews after whole implementation process, students expressed that they could use GE easily and did not have mental difficulties in using it. In addition, teachers stated that GE was cognitively suited to students’ levels, and it facilitated to learn because of concretizing knowledge. Accordingly, it was proved that GE, compared to 2D maps, provided the opportunity for more concrete learning (Bond & Cawood, 2021; Collins, 2018; Giorgis, 2015; Taştan, 2021; Xiang & Liut, 2017; Westgard, 2010).

Students stated to navigate the various destinations in the world as free and 3D via GE. They also expressed that this situation created a sense of reality in them, and ensured immersive experience to them. Therefore, they claimed to feel as if they were tourists travelling to those destinations, and develop their imagination. Street View, made all mentioned possible is one of the strongest features of GE (Hsu et al., 2018; Huang, 2018; Tooth, 2015; Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020). For this reason, we recommend that this feature is used more in the social science courses.

Students expressed that GE made lessons more amusing and comprehensible. Teachers mentioned that GE activities attracted students’ attention more and more as the week go by. In this way, the number of students, who liked social science course, and were eager to participate in lessons increased. Teachers who participated in study of Taştan (2021) emphasized that GE activities had potential to attract students’ attention. According to Mejía Ávila et al. (2021), teachers stated that GE activities were very interesting resources to integrate knowledge about geographical subjects into social science courses. Bond and Cawood (2021) revealed that the participants got better perform while using geospatial technology. Considering all mentioned studies as well as the results of our study, it can be said that both students and teachers would like to use GE again in future.

In addition to what were mentioned above, some studies found out that students had positive perception about GE and pleasure to engage with GE depending on effectiveness, flexibility and ease of learning/control of it which a 3D geospatial technology (De Miguel González & De Lázaro Torres, 2020; Esmaeili & Rastegarpour, 2016; Merç & Ersoy, 2019; Xiang & Liut, 2017). For this reason, it is recommended that educators support the social science courses with GE activities (Blank et al., 2016; Demirci et al., 2013; Mejía Ávila et al., 2021; Moorman & Crichton, 2018; Ridha et al., 2020; Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020).

In term of observations, one fourth of students had difficulty in finding geolocation of destinations relative to Turkey. De Miguel González and De Lázaro Torres (2020), Ratinen and Keinonen (2011) also reported that some students had difficulty in finding locations. The observers believed that it stemmed from students’ failure to pursue the navigational directions (right, left, north, south, east, west, up, down, etc.) and timidity in using GE. Merç and Ersoy (2019) also figured out that students experienced the similar problems. From this point, the assumption of students which equipped navigational directions skills is one of limitation in this study. The teachers who intend to apply GE activities need take into consideration these results.

According to interviews, students who managed to complete GE tasks enjoyed lessons, whereas students who had difficulty in completing tasks felt bored. These opposite results demonstrated that STS was a significant predictor of students’ performance (Kopcha et al., 2015). In literature was stressed that GE was used in social science to strengthen the students’ understanding of connections between space and place (Goodchild, 2008; Lisle, 2006; Purwanto et al., 2021). According to Dewi et al. (2021), the teachers agreed that STS were powerful and essential indicators to success in many sub-disciplines of the geography. Çelik (2021) determined that if primary school teachers used GE in social science education, it was more effective way in providing students with spatial thinking skills. Nevertheless, the new studies need to test results of our study, which measures effect of GE on STS by considering SVS and MRS apart from achievement test.

All participants were displeased with cutting-off frequently the internet connection, refreshing continuously GE, and delaying of loading GE. Taştan (2021) also encountered a similar problem in her study. Even if, it is easier to access the internet all over the world, the similar problems have been encountered in recent studies (Mejía Ávila et al., 2021; Merç & Ersoy, 2019). Mobile wi-fi equipment has been also kept ready in our study, but this problem is not fully solved. It is recommended that MoNE need to find alternative solutions so that implementation process can smoothly continue in future studies.

Conclusion, limitation and implication
This study offered a detailed picture in that it analyzed effects of GE on different variables quantitatively, and it found out the rich data qualitatively. It showed that the applying to a user-friendly 3D geospatial technology such as GE could help to engage the primary school students in an authentic learning environment (Huang, 2018). Danby et al. (2016), Moorman and Crichton (2018) also concluded that GE activities would be useful for students of earlier age group in order to make students have positive perceptions and achievements toward the geographic location education in social science course. Metoyer and Bednarz (2017) and Ridha et al. (2020) also stressed that GE had potential to improve students’ STS. According to Mejía Ávila et al. (2021), GE, as a highly user-friendly application, contributed to the students and teachers focus on the analysis of the geographical subjects.

Although De Miguel González and De Lázaro Torres (2020) reported that some students had difficulty to complete GE activities; noticeable behavioral, emotional and cognitive contributions of GE to students should be considered, and it made widespread in primary schools and at other grade levels by stakeholders of MoNE (Türel Heinrichs & Demirkaya, 2020). At this point Ridha and Kamil (2021), Xiang and Liut (2017) emphasized that the teachers should be encouraged to use geospatial technologies such as GE in geographical subjects of social science courses. According to Gardony et al. (2021) and Ridha et al. (2020), this was also necessary to reinforce the students’ spatial thinking by interacting with geographical content.

Finally, we also recommend to consider the probable causes of negative results arising in our study. This is important to contribute in that MoNE improves the primary school social science curriculum. Yet, the absence of a control group in our study was a limitation so that we could not figure out whether the difference between pre-test and post-test averages stemmed from other factors.

Data availability
The datasets generated during this study are not publicly available but data will be provided by the corresponding author upon request