Existing research studying MOOC learner diversity has mainly taken unidimensional approaches, which have led to partial or inconsistent findings. This paper addresses this issue by proposing a multi-dimensional model that helps to identify and build the personas of key learner subgroups in any given MOOC course. By linking learners’ behavioral patterns to their characteristics, and situating them in wider context of learning environments, this multi-dimensional model intends to generate more complicated and dynamic understandings of how different factors interweave, together forging learners experience with MOOCs. The model was piloted with an authentic MOOC, and had helped to identified four learner subgroups who actively participated in the course in certain ways: 1) ‘studying against the clock employees’, who studied whenever and wherever it suited them; 2) ‘catch-up employees and homemakers’ who studied a chunk of content in each visit, but failed to complete the course as they returned too infrequently; 3) ‘certificate-driven students and job seekers’, who skipped engaging with course content, instead guessing their way to high scores in assessments through multiple attempts, and 4) ‘learning-at-work employees’, who learned from MOOCs informally as an integral part of their work. The evidence suggests that compared to unidimensional approaches, the multi-dimensional model, with different perspectives complementing and explaining one another, puts together a more comprehensive picture of learners that reflects their preferences and learning habits, dedication and efforts, as well as underlying constraints and difficulties associated with MOOC learning. These enriched insights inspired new directions for designing tailored course formats and delivery modes that are not currently acknowledged in the discourses regarding MOOCs.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
The flourishing of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) resonates with individuals’ increasing needs for lifelong learning. MOOCs provide training without admission requirements. Underlying this open-access policy is the philosophy of democratizing education by making it available to as many people as possible, especially those who lack the resources to upgrade their skills in conventional education. Nowadays, MOOCs have attracted learners with a wide range of backgrounds and intentions, such as ambitious high school students exploring advanced knowledge, employees seeking to achieve professional growth, curious citizens using MOOCs as public libraries, and a growing number of elderly people optimizing opportunities for health and participation (Nanfito, 2013). The learners bring to their learning different expectations, preferences, prior knowledge, as well as their work and life circumstances that may encourage or constrain their participation (Davis et al., 2017; DeBoer, Ho, Stump, & Breslow, 2014; Henderikx, Kreijns, Muñoz, & Kalz, 2019; Hood, Littlejohn, & Milligan, 2015; Onah, Sinclair, & Boyatt, 2014; Rabin, Henderikx, Yoram, & Kalz, 2020). These together lead to learners’ different learning experience with MOOCs and their varying needs for support (ibid).

Despite learner diversity, MOOCs are normally designed with a single course structure in terms of learning materials, assessments, and certification periods (Davis et al., 2017; Grünewald, Meinel, Totschnig, & Willems, 2013; Onah et al., 2014). An increasing number of studies have reported that the single structure sometimes creates the dilemma that the designs with a good intention to engage one group of learners created barriers or frustrations for another group. For instance, certain courses attempt to keep learners progressing at the same rate by initiating peer assessments, sending assignment completion reminders, or setting deadlines for the availability of online courseware; yet these design elements can frustrate learners who cannot for whatever reasons work in the same timetable but are still keen on completing the course at their own pace (Onah et al., 2014; Veletsianos, Collier, & Schneider, 2015). In addition, inspired by connectivist literature, some MOOCs are designed to promote a student-centered social environment facilitated by collaborative exploration and peer-contributed content. However, learners who cannot set aside much time on studying think that discussions with others are time-consuming (Lin & Cranton, 2015); the extensive postings in forums are even considered superfluous ‘noise’ by learners who value centralized and institutionally endorsed content provided by course instructors (Knox, 2014).

The above issues manifest the irony that MOOCs, which are initiated to promote inclusion through open-access, can actually constrain and even exclude certain learner groups due to a lack of flexibility in the course structure. Researchers contend that how MOOCs are structured cannot match how MOOC learner populations are structured (Onah et al., 2014); given the heterogeneity of the MOOC learning population, it is inappropriate for education providers to make assumptions about which learning pathways and outcomes are more or less valuable for learners (Kizilcec, Piech, & Schneider, 2013). They call for a re-conceptualization of ‘meaningful participations’ in MOOCs according to individual expectations, and for the development of MOOCs with multiple course formats and delivery modes to better support learners taking different learning pathways (Davis et al., 2017; DeBoer et al., 2014; Deng, Benckendorff, & Gannaway, 2020; Kizilcec et al., 2013; Li & Baker, 2018; Onah et al., 2014; Zheng, Rosson, Shih, & Carroll, 2015). A critical first step towards this aim is developing an in-depth understanding of the distant, massive and divergent online learners.

There has been a growing research interest in investigating the diversity of MOOC learners with the purpose of informing tailored course design. Past research has studied learners from different perspectives, such as their behavioral patterns as extracted from clickstream data (Anderson, Huttenlocher, Kleinberg, & Leskovec, 2014; Chen, Håklev, Harrison, Najafi, & Rolheiser, 2015; Kahan, Soffer, & Nachmias, 2017; Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Kizilcec et al., 2013), their motivations, backgrounds, and demographics (Henderikx et al., 2019; Jiang, Schenke, Eccles, Xu, & Warschauer, 2018; Kizilcec & Schneider, 2015; Zheng et al., 2015), as well as their life circumstances and social contexts in which learning is situated (Park & Choi, 2009; Veletsianos et al., 2015). Yet, most studies have taken a unidimensional approach investigating MOOC learners from a single perspective, resulting in limitations in the findings, such as a lack of explanatory power, completeness or consistency (see also, Hood et al., 2015; Veletsianos et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2015). Instructional designs based on partial and inconsistent understandings about learners will be inefficient in, or even counterproductive to, supporting learning. Recently, research adopting a multi-dimensional approach has emerged that investigated MOOC learners from combined perspectives and have provided finer-grained understandings of MOOC learner subgroups (e.g., Deng et al., 2020; Li & Baker, 2018). Yet, research of this type remains scarce.

This paper extends the scope of existing research by introducing a multi-dimensional model that assists in identifying and building the personas of key learner subgroups in any given MOOC course. Building on social learning theory (Bandura, 1963, 1977), this model studies MOOC learners through three mutually-interactive dimensions, namely behavioral pattern, learner characteristics and learning environments. By complementing and explaining one another, the integration of the three dimensions is expected to produce a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding about how different learner subgroups experience MOOCs in their everyday life in terms of who they are, why they enroll in a course, how they engage with course content, when and where they study, and whether they live with their families. This information together implies learners’ preferences and learning habits, efforts and dedication, as well as underlying constraints and difficulties associated with MOOC learning. These enriched insights are expected to inform the design of MOOCs with multiple course formats or delivery modes (i.e., with different learning experiences to prioritize, different formats for presenting course materials, and different technical features for managing learning), so as to better serve the great diversity of online learners.

This paper continues by reviewing the existing research studying MOOC learner diversity. The paper then introduces a multi-dimensional model for studying MOOC learners, with a detailed account of its theoretical foundation, structure and rationale. This is followed by an empirical study piloting the model, identifying and building personas of the key subgroups of the active learners in an authentic MOOC course. This paper concludes by discussing the new insights the multi-dimensional model brings to the current understandings of MOOC learners, and the potential agendas for future research.

Literature review
A review of the literature on MOOC learner diversity discerns three lines of inquiry, each adopting different research perspectives and methodological approaches.

One major line of work studies MOOC learner subgroups according to different engagement patterns extracted from the log data on learning platforms. Applying clustering techniques, Kizilcec and colleagues (2013) identified four learner subgroups based on their engagement with course content and assessments. They are: 1) completing learners who completed the majority of tasks and assessments; 2) auditing learners who did assessments infrequently and were more interested in watching lecture videos; 3) disengaging learners who were only engaged at the beginning of the course; and 4) sampling learners who only briefly explored course materials. Several later studies adopted similar analytical methods and have identified various sets of learner subgroups under different labels (Anderson et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015; Ferguson & Clow, 2015; Gasevic, Jovanovic, Pardo, & Dawson, 2017; Kahan et al., 2017; Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Kovanović et al., 2016). These studies break the binary categorization of learners as either ‘completers’ and ‘non-completers’, advancing understandings of MOOC participation by revealing various patterns of engagement. Nevertheless, although certain studies have attempted to illuminate the reasons behind different engagement patterns by comparing subgroups based on learner demographics and motivations, this body of research, which relies primarily on behavioral data, is strong in revealing how learners engage with MOOCs, but weak in explaining why they come to certain participations (see also, Li & Baker, 2018; Veletsianos et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2015). Researchers of such studies have called for other research methods with different data sources to complement and expand their findings from behavioral data (Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Kizilcec et al., 2013).

Another research thread in the literature takes learner characteristics as a lens of investigation. Drawing on survey and interview data, researchers have investigated how learners’ motivations, intentions, gender, age, educational attainment, previous online learning experience, prior knowledge, and country of origin associate with MOOC completion (Breslow et al., 2013; Henderikx, Kreijns, Muñoz, & Kalz, 2019; Ho et al., 2015; Hone & Said, 2016; Jiang, Schenke, Eccles, Xu, & Warschauer, 2018; Kizilcec & Schneider, 2015; Liu et al., 2016; Phan, McNeil, & Robin, 2016; Zheng, Rosson, Shih, & Carroll, 2015). Yet, a number of inconsistent findings have been identified in this body of research; the factors proven strongly predicting achievement in some studies were less predictive in others. For instance, drawing on survey data from nine HavardX courses, Reich (2014) investigated how learners’ self-reported intentions associate with completion rates, and found that learners who indicated their intention to complete a course did so at higher rates (24%) than those who did not (8%). Conversely, in another large-scale study based on the survey data from 14 MOOCs, Kizilece and Schneider (2015) found that the intention to earn a certificate was not predictive of an increased likelihood of earning one. They infer that this could be because the learners did not deeply engage with the course materials or complete assessments on time (ibid). In addition, drawing on demographic data from 17 MOOCs, Ho and colleagues (2015) found that female learners were less likely to be certificate earners in STEM courses, whereas Hone and Said (2016) found no significant gender effects on overall completion in their study on learners in two STEM MOOCs. In a cross-national comparative study, Jiang and colleagues (2018) also found that although females were less likely than males to enroll in STEM MOOCs, they were equally likely to complete them. Contradictory findings were also identified among studies on learner age and educational attainment (Breslow et al., 2013; Hone & Said, 2016; Rabin, Kalman, & Kalz, 2018). All these inconsistencies suggest that not controlling for variables such as learning behaviors or contexts may bias the estimated relationship between learner characteristics and MOOC completion.

The third line of inquiry explores how environmental factors, such as daily routines and social contexts, shape learners’ participation in MOOCs (Park & Choi, 2009; Veletsianos et al., 2015). Underpinning this line of research is the belief that learning is individually and socially mediated; learners’ off-platform experiences explain why they exhibit certain engagement patterns in on-platform learning (Veletsianos et al., 2015). By interviewing learners on how they experienced MOOCs amid their domestic and professional lives, Veletsinaos and colleagues (2015) found that full-time mothers participated in MOOCs in a concentrated manner; they made bursts of progress by consuming as much content as possible when they taking breaks from childcare. Conversely, participation of employees was more dispersed, as their learning could occur after work or any time they could fit it in during the day. Learners also reported they felt more encouraged to engage in the MOOC if they could discuss MOOC materials and experiences with family or friends outside of the learning platform (ibid). These studies extend the research scope to the learners’ everyday life contexts in which their learning is embedded. Yet, the learners’ self-reported data could be combined with platform-generated log files to reflect a more comprehensive and accurate picture of their MOOC learning experiences.

The studies discussed above have greatly enriched our understandings about the diversity within the MOOC learner population. However, the present review also suggests that due to only relying on a single perspective, each research approach suffers from certain limitations, such as a lack of explanatory power, consistency, or completeness. Instructional designs drawing on partial and inconsistent understandings about learners will be inefficient in, or even counterproductive to, supporting learning. This issue highlights the complexity of investigating the MOOC learning population, and indicates the need for capturing and combining data from multiple viewpoints in order to gain a more coherent and comprehensive understanding of learner subgroups. The inconsistencies in findings across studies also suggest that the particular subgroups in a learner population, along with their engagement patterns, are situational and can change from one course to another. Instead of striving to identify canonical subgroups that are generalizable across the entire MOOC learner population, it would be more constructive and feasible to formulate a model enabling practitioners to generate meaningful insights about their learners in particular contexts, course by course, cohort by cohort.

Very recently, a new trend of research has emerged that investigates MOOC learners using multi-dimensional approaches (Deng et al., 2020; Li & Baker, 2018). Such researchers argue that unidimensional approaches only identify average relationships across an entire population, but mask important heterogeneity among learner subgroups; whereas multi-dimensional approaches offer the advantage of clustering learners into subgroups based on substantive features, providing fine-grained details on these subpopulations (ibid). For instance, by combining features under different dimensions, Li and Baker (2018) found that the relationship between engagement and achievement varies across subgroups with different engagement patterns. Likewise, Deng and colleagues (2020) identified significant differences regarding learner factors, teaching context and learning outcomes across subgroups with different engagement patterns. The present paper seeks to contribute to this small body of research by proposing a multi-dimensional model that helps identify and build the personas of the key learner subgroups in any given MOOC course. Grounded in social learning theory (Bandura, 1963, 1977), this model intends to generate a holistic and dynamic view of how learner characteristics, behavioral patterns and learning environments are interwoven, together forming learners’ experiences with MOOCs.

A multi-dimensional model to build personas of MOOC learners
Persona profiling
Persona profiling is a technique widely used in the design industry to identify and communicate about different types of potential users of a design product (Cooper, Reimann, & Cronin, 2007). A persona is a fictional character representative of a user subgroup. Rather than seeking to be reductive, personas provide a holistic model of users, including their demographics, motivations, activity scenarios, difficulties and needs, aiming to convey a vivid picture of how learners learn in real-world contexts. Personas facilitate the design process by increasing designers’ empathy for the users they are designing for, and helping to channel designers’ efforts in devising products accommodating users’ needs (ibid). Persona profiling is thus a potentially powerful tool for informing and justifying instructors’ designs of MOOCs, as it constrains the multifarious population of learners to a limited number of more narrowly defined groups. Although simple in concept, for persona profiling to be an effective design tool, considerable rigor should be applied to the process of identifying and constructing of learner subgroups such that their depictions are pedagogically meaningful and practically useful to the particular context of MOOC design. We introduce a multi-dimensional model below to assist this process.

A multi-dimensional model
The formulation of the model was informed by social learning theory (SLT) (Bandura, 1963, 1977) which provides a multi-dimensional perspective to account for learning experiences taking place in the actual world. SLT suggests that learning is not purely behavioral, but instead occurs among dynamic interactions between the person, environment and behavior (ibid). Specifically, an individual’s personal characteristics (e.g., expectations, cognitions and background) influence how and why they behave in certain ways. The environment, which comprises the physical and social surroundings around individuals (e.g., venues and people who are present), contains potentially reinforcing stimuli that influence the intensity and frequency of their behaviors. The reinforcement of these behaviors subsequently leads to learning (ibid). In the context of MOOCs, the integration of these three mutually-interactive dimensions helps to build comprehensive learning scenarios for MOOC learner subgroups, that is, who under what circumstances is performing in certain ways. Compared with unidimensional research approaches, this multi-dimensional model provides a holistic and dynamic view of how the three factors interact with one another, together forming learners’ experience with MOOCs.

Building on SLT, the model that we have developed to identify and build the personas of learner subgroups comprises three dimensions, namely behavioral patterns, learner characteristics and learning environments. Each dimension consists of a number of features that the existing literature considers significant to the study of MOOC learners (Fig. 1). The features, together with their rationales for inclusion in the model, are discussed below.

Fig. 1
figure 1
A multi-dimensional model for identifying and building the persona of MOOC learner subgroups

Full size image
Behavioral patterns
Behavioral patterns, as extracted from the clickstream data generated by learners on learning platforms, provide an authentic picture of their engagement with MOOCs. Under this dimension, the model measures learners’ interactions with various course components (e.g., video lectures, discussion forums, and assessments) to identify learner subgroups with different means of participation. Subject to specific course designs, dozens of features could be measured for this purpose. Methodologies used by previous studies include the following:

Assessing learners’ engagement levels by measuring the amount of learning resources accessed, or the density of video-watching behaviors (del Valle & Duffy, 2009; Ferguson & Clow, 2015; Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Kizilcec et al., 2013; Mirriahi, Jovanovic, Dawson, Gašević, & Pardo, 2017);

Identifying learners’ pace of progress during a course by measuring the time interval between when a learning resource is first made available and when the learner first accesses it (Mirriahi et al., 2017; Onah et al., 2014);

Revealing learners’ frequency of studying by measuring the number of days they access a course (del Valle & Duffy, 2009; Halawa, Greene, & Mitchell, 2014);

Detecting learners’ learning strategies by measuring their click sequences (Matcha et al., 2020);

Identifying the focuses of learners’ attentions by measuring the proportions of different types of course components accessed (e.g., videos viewed, handouts collected, or quizzes attempted) (Chen, Fan, Zhang, & Wang, 2017; Kahan et al., 2017; Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Kizilcec et al., 2013); and

Assessing learners’ forum engagement by measuring the number of threads opened and posts written (Ferguson & Clow, 2015; Kahan et al., 2017; Khalil & Ebner, 2017).

Learner characteristics
Learner characteristics, which reveal who learners are and why they enroll in a course, provide a lens for interpreting their behavioral patterns. Under this dimension, the model measures learners’ motivations and demographics, two significant areas of research on MOOCs (Ho et al., 2015; Kizilcec & Schneider, 2015; Reich, 2014; Zheng et al., 2015). Motivations indicate what a learner expects from enrolling in a course, such as satisfying curiosity, fulfilling current needs, earning certificates or meeting new people (Kizilcec & Schneider, 2015; Zheng et al., 2015). Research has found that depending on their motivations, learners may or may not wish to make efforts in certain learning activities (ibid). Understanding learners’ motivations can inform instructors about what they should prioritize when designing learners’ course experience. On the other hand, demographics reflect learners’ underlying preferences and constraints associated with MOOC learning. Different demands are made upon individuals at different ages; for instance, learners in their early (20-35) or middle adulthood (36-50) were most often found experiencing external barriers, such as work or family commitments, that hindered their learning in MOOCs (Henderikx et al., 2019). Likewise, employment status reflects the everyday realities of learners; for instance, employees and full-time mothers reported distinct patterns in interactions with course content as shaped by their daily routines (Veletsianos et al., 2015). Finally, learners with different educational attainments were found to demonstrate different levels of self-regulated learning skills. Those who did not have experience in higher education found themselves ill-equipped for the instructional methods of MOOCs (Davis et al., 2017; Henderikx et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2015).

Learning environment
Unlike full-time, classroom-based students, MOOC learners study amid their ongoing professional, domestic and social lives; which all affect their learning (Naidu, 2019). Incorporating the real-world environments in which their learning is situated contextualizes what we can learn from the other two dimensions. Under this dimension, this model measures learners’ household composition, time of study and place of study. Learners who have families to look after at home found it hard to engage with a course regularly (Onah et al., 2014; Veletsianos et al., 2015). Learners also reported that their families are important sources of encouragement for studying MOOCs (Veletsianos et al., 2015). An understanding of learners’ household composition characterizes their social environment of learning. Online learning supported by mobile technologies can happen anywhere (e.g., home, workplace, while commuting, etc.) and anytime (e.g., during working hours or leisure time) formally and informally (Lin & Cranton, 2015). An understanding of the physical settings and times in which learners engage with MOOCs can reflect their learning habits and the actual life situations in which they acquire knowledge.

Fig. 1 illustrates how the model works. The model first classifies learners into subgroups based on different behavioral patterns. It then characterizes each subgroup using features of learner characteristics and learning environments. Differences in the distribution of particular features across subgroups may indicate that they are prone to influencing learners’ engagement decisions. The combination of these two analytic steps triangulate data for ‘completeness purpose’ (Norusis, 2011), allowing us to build a multi-dimensional understanding of learners and their learning experiences.

Notably, MOOCs vary in terms of disciplines, target audiences, course structures, instructional approaches and platforms. We are very mindful that no model is pedagogically or contextually neutral; convincing clusters of learner subgroups are most likely to emerge when the model is informed by the textures of specific learning contexts (Ferguson & Clow, 2015). The proposed features under the three overarching dimensions are thus neither exhaustive nor fixed, but are expected to be selectively used or expanded in light of specific contexts.

An Empirical study
The model conceptualized above was piloted in a small-scale explorative study on an authentic MOOC course. The purpose of this empirical study was to test the capacity of the model in identifying and building personas of the key learner subgroups in a given course, as well as to explore new insights that the multi-dimensional model could generate about MOOC learners. In particular, the empirical study was driven by two research questions:

1)
What learner subgroups in a MOOC course can be identified through the multi-dimensional model?

2)
What new insights does the multi-dimensional model bring to current understandings of MOOC learners?

Course setting and sampling
This study took place at Shanghai Open University (SOU) in China. SOU currently has around 70, 000 learners enrolled in its degree and non-degree open-access courses across 46 subject areas, who seek different learning goals under various working and living contexts. The university realized that its single-mode course design could no longer cater to its ever-expanding and increasingly diverse learner community. It has thus been exploring ways to provide more tailored educational provisions. The present study is part of the university’s initiative aimed at building learner personas of its diverse learning populations, and making available multiple course formats and delivery modes for individuals to choose according to their needs and expectations.

To conduct this pilot study, we selected a MOOC through convenience sampling, as it allowed us to study easily accessible learners and test whether our proposed model could apply to any arbitrarily selected course. Consequently, the ‘Finance’ course was selected, since the course instructor was interested in learning about his audience to improve future offering of his course. This course introduces key financial concepts, along with principles and applications related to corporate financial activities. Hosted on the SOU in-house learning platform, the course lasted 9 weeks and comprised three main types of learning resources: 1) a set of learning materials, including video lectures and articles uploaded to the course website on a weekly basis; 2) two ‘exam review guides’ that summarized the key knowledge introduced for learners to prepare for assessments; and 3) three summative assessments comprising multiple-choice questions released throughout the course duration. Although the course had a forum, it was mainly used for learners to communicate logistical issues with teaching assistants (TAs) rather than to discuss course content, so it was not considered a major component of the course. Learners could attempt each assessment as many times as they wanted before the deadline. Those who completed all the assessments with an average grade of at least 60% received a certificate. The course materials were no longer accessible to learners after the course ended. A total of 2013 people registered for this course, and 14% of them received a certificate. The certification rate was comparable to the average completion rate for MOOCs (Nanfito, 2013).

As an invitation to participation and as part of the data collection, a survey was sent out to learners during the last week of the course to collect data on various aspects of their learning throughout the course. Of the 2013 registrants, 173 responded with a valid survey and gave consent to participate in the study. This low response rate may be attributed to the timing of the survey, as only learners who remained active until the end of the course tended to complete it. Yet, although the learners who completed the survey were in the minority and cannot represent the entire population, they contributed nearly half (42.9%) of the click stream data. Fig. 2 shows the amount of logged learning activities throughout the course duration by the entire class and the survey participants respectively. The activity amount for the entire class dropped sharply, while that for the survey participants decreased much more smoothly. Therefore, the survey arguably ended up filtering out most of the non-committed registrants (who either never entered the course, or only browsed its content once or twice); the participants were mainly active learners who interacted with the course content in certain ways and generated enough footprints that allowed us to identify the features in their engagement that may inspire new directions for course designs. As such, the survey response of the 173 learners and their logged activities were retained for data analysis. Of these learners, 72% received a statement of accomplishment, 64% were female, 89% were full-time employees, and 96% were post-secondary degree holders. The average learner age was 29 years with a standard deviation of 6 years.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Number of logged activities by the entire class and the survey participants throughout the course duration

Full size image
Instruments
Survey responses and logged data were collected to gather learners’ information indicative of the features under the three dimensions of the model, as defined in Section 3.1. Under the dimension of behavioral pattern and considering the specific course design, five sets of log data were used to identify learners’ engagement patterns. Under the dimension of learner characteristics, five survey questions were employed to gather learners’ demographic information and their motivations for enrolling in the course. Under the dimension of learning environment, two sets of log data and one survey question were used to gather information about learners’ learning environments in terms of their time and place of study, as well as whether they lived with their families. In total, 13 features were collected and computed for each learner to produce an analysis. Table 1 shows the descriptions and data sources for each feature.

Table 1 Features computed for each learner
Full size table
Data analysis
Drawing on the multi-dimensional model, the data analysis aimed to identify and build personas of the learner subgroups in the selected MOOC. This was achieved in two steps. The first step classified the participants based on their behavioral data using k-means clustering algorithm, a technique particularly effective in extracting prototypical patterns from large-scale online learning datasets (Kizilcec et al., 2013; Kovanović et al., 2016). Drawing on the five sets of log data under the behavioral dimension, we used the k-means clustering algorithm to categorize the participants into mutually exclusive clusters so that learners within a cluster were more similar to each other than to those from other clusters. To address the always problematic issue of determining the number of clusters to use for k-means clustering, we performed explorative analyses several times using k values ranging from 3 to 8. A model with four clusters was eventually selected as it achieved the maximum silhouette coefficient (s=0.5) after removing 18 outliers that have a negative silhouette coefficient (Fig. 3). Once distinct clusters were identified, the second step characterized the subgroups by identifying any significant differences among them with regard to the features of learner characteristics and learning environments. Chi-square tests were performed to assess the associations between clusters and variables, which were all categorical.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Optimal number of clusters of the learners.

Full size image
Results
Table 2 presents the means and standard deviations for each feature under the four clusters extracted through clustering analysis. For an easy reference of the relative position of each cluster on each feature, standardized means are graphically represented in Fig. 4. The means were calculated by first converting each learner’s score on a feature to a z-score based on the scores of all learners. The mean z-score for the subset of learners in a particular cluster was then calculated. Fig. 4 shows on average how many standard deviations away from the mean of μ=0 that the learners of a cluster are for each feature.

Table 2 Mean scores and standard deviations for each dependent feature by cluster
Full size table
Fig. 4
figure 4
Standardized means of the four clusters on the five behavioral features

Full size image
Chi-square analyses were performed to assess the associations between learner characteristics, learning environments and the identified behavioral patterns. Table 3 shows that statistically significant differences exist among the four clusters in regards to age (χ2(9) =28.23, p < .01), motivation (χ2(12) =58.47, p < .001), and motivation (χ2(12) =25.54, p < .05); no statistically significant difference was found among the clusters in regards to gender. Table 4 indicates that significant differences also exist among the clusters with respect to household composition (χ2(3) =14.32, p < .01), study venue (χ2(12) =23.66, p < .05), as well as time for studying during the day (χ2(15) =1431.17, p < .001) and throughout the week (χ2(3) =1156.03, p < .001).

Table 3 Cluster differences by learner characteristics
Full size table
Table 4 Cluster differences by learning environment
Full size table
Below we report the features of each learner subgroup based on the results of the two-step analysis, highlighting the differences among the clusters under the three dimensions. We then profile the persona for each subgroup comprising the following elements: 1) a name for the subgroup; 2) a summary of key subgroup features that reflects their needs to be addressed by course designs; 3) a set of charts visualizing key feature information; and 4) a picture of the persona reflecting the learning style of the subgroup. This persona format intends to provide MOOC instructors with a tangible sense of the learner subgroups that they may encounter to inform their course design.

Subgroup 1: studying around the clock employees
Behavioral pattern
This group was the smallest of the four, comprising only 12% of all participants. The group is characterized by high engagement with all activities. Learners in this group accessed learning materials the most regularly across the four groups, averaging 585.13 visits on 12.48 separate days. All learners in this group completed the course successfully, with a certification rate of 100%.

Learner characteristics
This group only had learners in their twenties or thirties. Aside from a few learners whose employment status was ‘looking for jobs’ (4.4%) or ‘other’ (4.3%), the rest were all employed (91.3%). The three major reasons they reported for enrollment, namely earning a certificate (34.8%), fulfilling current job responsibilities (26.1%), and improving career prospects (39.1%), were approximately equally distributed among group members.

Learning environments
Although the most frequently reported study venues among group members were home (40%) and workplace (22.6%), a small but significant proportion of learners reported that they studied on their commute (18.9%), which was remarkably higher than the proportion reported for the other three groups. Regarding study time, this group has large proportions of learners studying off work; the highest proportions of off-work learners studied either during their lunch breaks (11.9%) or in the early mornings before work (7.5%), while others studied in the evening after work (35.9%). Notably, this group accessed a substantial amount of course content during weekends, making it the only group that had a roughly balanced course access pattern between weekdays and weekends (55% to 45%). Interestingly, this group had the least percentage of learners living with their families (17.4%) compared to the other three groups (Fig. 5).

Fig. 5
figure 5
The persona of learner subgroup 1

Full size image
Subgroup 2: catch-up employees and homemakers
Behavioral pattern
This group was the largest of the four, accounting for 34% of all participants. Learners’ behaviors were characterized by a low attendance rate (4.88 days), in addition to a long interval between when learning materials were uploaded and when learners first accessed them (16.39 days); However, they also viewed course content a substantial number of times (207.32 visits), ranking second among the four groups in terms of course access. Nevertheless, despite their dedication, since learners in this group visited the course too infrequently, many of them did not complete the course. The certification rate for this group was 66%.

Learner characteristics
Among all course participants, those in their forties were the most likely to be in this group. Notably, although the group was mostly full-time employees, it also included all learners that identified as homemakers. The two most frequently chosen reasons for enrolment were improving career prospects (52%) and earning a certificate (36%).

Learning environments
Compared with other groups, this group had the highest proportion of learners living with their families (68%). Their primary study venues were their homes (37.7%), public study areas (30.9%), and workplaces (24.5%). Course visits were concentrated in the afternoon and evenings during weekdays, and seldomly occurred during weekends. Learners in this group spent large blocks of time during each visit (e.g. 8 p.m. to 11 p.m.), accessing not only the most recent session but also previous ones (Fig. 6).

Fig. 6
figure 6
The persona of learner subgroup 2

Full size image
Subgroup 3: certificate-driven students and job seekers
Behavioral pattern
This group comprised 28% of all participants. Learners’ behaviors were characterized by a relatively minimal engagement with course content (120.71 visits), but a remarkably high frequency of assessment attempts (28.24 times) ranked second among the four groups, as well as a relatively frequent engagement with the exam review guides (0.53 times). Learners in this group accessed the course the least frequently, averaging only 2.76 days, which accounts for the largest interval between when learning materials were uploaded and when learners first accessed them (28.24 days). Nevertheless, all learners in this group completed the course successfully, with a certification rate of 100%.

Learner characteristics
Although employees still made up the largest population in this group, there were small but significant proportions of learners identifying as ‘student’ (23.5%) or ‘looking for jobs’ (35.3%). Consistent with this finding, those young course participants in their teens and twenties were more likely to be in this group. Notably, this group had the highest proportion of learners who were extrinsically motivated to study the MOOC; 58.8% of learners in this group enrolled to earn a certificate.

Learning environments
The primary study venues of this group were their homes (31.1%) and public study spaces (37.9%). Course visits were concentrated at the end of the day during weekdays, either during evenings (38.4%) or late-night hours (9.8%), the latter proportion ranking the highest across the four groups. 29.4% of the learners were living with their families (Fig. 7).

Fig. 7
figure 7
The persona of learner subgroup 3

Full size image
Subgroup 4: learning-at-work employees
Behavioral pattern
This group comprised 23% of all participants. Learners’ behaviors were characterized by frequent visits to the course site (8.70 days, ranked second among the four groups), but little access to course content (176.20 visits). Learners in this group accessed the exam review guides the least frequently (0.39 times) and made the fewest assessment attempts (11.02 times). A close look at the data indicated that many learners skipped several videos while also repeatedly accessing other videos. Looking further into these video access patterns, we found that the most frequently viewed videos were those introducing key financial concepts and policies (e.g., ‘Government financial regulation polices’), practical guidance on accounting techniques (e.g., ‘Managing financial reports’) and accounting formulas (e.g., ‘Calculating compound interest’). The certification rate for this group was the lowest among the four groups, with only 23% of learners being certified.

Learner characteristics
This group had the highest proportion of learners identifying as being employed (92.6%). In addition to a markedly large percentage of learners in their twenties (35%), this cluster had the highest proportion of learners in their thirties (61%). Learners in this group were the most likely to say that they enrolled to fulfil current job responsibilities (50%).

Learning environment
Although home was the most frequently reported study venue for this group, it also had the highest proportion of learners accessing the course at their workplaces (30%). This group of learners mainly accessed the course during the afternoon and the evening on weekdays (Fig. 8).

Fig. 8
figure 8
The persona of learner subgroup 4

Full size image
Discussion
This paper proposed a multi-dimensional model that helps identify and build the personas of key learner subgroups in a given MOOC course. The model was piloted with an authentic MOOC, and identified four learner subgroups with distinct features under three dimensions. Based on these findings, and to address the second research question, this section discusses the new insights that the multi-dimensional model brings to current understandings of MOOC learners, and subsequently new implications for course design.

Studying against the clock employees
The first subgroup, which comprised employees that capitalized on any windows of time available to them, demonstrated high engagement with all learning activities. This type of highly engaged learner has been identified in almost all past research investigating MOOC learners that draws on log data, being labeled as ‘completing learners’ (Kizilcec et al., 2013), ‘perfect students’ (Khalil & Ebner, 2017), and ‘keen completers’ (Ferguson & Clow, 2015). In those studies, this type of learner was not considered as a cohort requiring attention or support, as the behavioral data showed that they participated in forum discussions, viewed most of the video lessons, and completed every assessment. In the present study, the incorporation of two additional theoretical dimensions has expanded our understanding of these highly engaged learners in terms of who they are and how they experience MOOCs amid their work and personal lives. In this case, most learners in this subgroup were employees who enrolled in the course for various reasons. Yet regardless of their different motivations, they were all committed to their studies; either while commuting or at work, in the early mornings or during lunch breaks, on weekdays or weekends, they studied whenever and wherever it suited them. This observation shows that these learners completed the course not because they had more time than other types of learners, but because they worked diligently to fit the course workload into their schedules. This finding also implies that learners who are on this highly engaged, on-track trajectory could slide into non-completing groups when they cannot spare time to keep up with the course. Consequently, like their less engaged counterparts, highly engaged learners also need support that helps them persist in their learning.

This finding regarding highly engaged learners underscores the necessity of studying MOOC learners from multiple perspectives beyond learning behaviors. It also indicates the need to improve the flexibility of learning for this type of learners, who must constantly adapt to different learning, working, and living contexts. Interventions can include the development of the following: 1) mobile-friendly content that learners on the go can easily consume; 2) short videos focused on small bits of information to accommodate their distributed learning style; and 3) learning progress management tools to help them easily re-enter and resume the course from where they left off.

Catch-up employees and homemakers
Past research found that learners’ stated intentions were an ‘imperfect predictor’ of final outcomes, as a certain number of learners who reported an intention to earn a certificate did not actually complete the course (Ho et al., 2015). Nevertheless, various reasons could result in incompletion, such as unsatisfactory course content, challenging course work, fading enthusiasm, or lack of time, all requiring distinctively different interventions (Onah et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2015); consequently, taking learners’ motivation as a sole lens of investigation blurs the many reasons for incompletion. In the present study, by linking learners’ motivations to their demographics, behaviors, and learning contexts we could account for the observed discrepancy between intention and completion for one identified subgroup, namely those employees and homemakers playing catch-up with the course progress. This is a group of committed learners, as can be reasonably assumed by the large amount of log files they generated; however, many of them failed to complete the course before the deadline as they returned to the course too infrequently. Given the fact that this group has more senior learners and has the highest proportion of learners living with their families, these learners’ course access might be partially constrained by work or domestic responsibilities, causing them to fall behind the course schedule.

This finding highlights the importance of inspecting learners’ intentions in conjunction with other factors (e.g., behaviors, demographics, and learning environments). The finding also endorses Veletsianos and colleagues’ (2015) view that learners’ offline experiences affect their online learning. A precise identification of those learners lagging behind and the reasons they do so provides practical implications for designing precise interventions that can help them persist in their studies. A delivery mode with a slower pace and flexible deadlines could be offered for this type of committed but occupied learners, which leave them enough time to complete the course through their incremental efforts.

Certificate-driven students and job seekers
The certificate-driven students and job seekers were a group of learners who cut corners by mainly studying the exam review materials instead of engaging deeply with course content, along with guessing their way to a high score in assessments through multiple attempts. Past research has also identified learners that exhibited similar behavioral patterns, labeling them as ‘quiz takers’ (Chen et al., 2015; Khalil & Ebner, 2017), ‘solvers’ (Anderson et al., 2014), and ‘performers’ (Arora, Goel, Sabitha, & Mehrotra, 2017). In this case, through mapping learners’ behaviors to their demographics and motivations, we found that many learners who did the bare minimum for certification were students and job seekers that were more extrinsically motivated. How they engaged with the course made their participation less meaningful and reflected the need for remedying the course design. A practical intervention that makes use of their strong will to earn a certificate could be adding hyperlinks to each assessment question that direct learners to study the relevant materials in order to get the right answer; doing so can create external reinforcement to engage with the course content. Additionally, instructors should consider limiting the number of assessment attempts to ensure that students submit prudent answers based on thorough understandings of course content.

Learning-at-work employees
The ‘learning-at-work employees’ identified in this study echoes past research findings drawing on interview data, which found that MOOCs were used by certain learners as resources to satisfy their study and work needs (Zheng et al., 2015). Linking learners’ characteristics to their behavioral patterns and learning environments, the multi-dimensional model helps to build a more solid understanding of this type of learners and their information referencing scenarios. Most of the learners in this group were employed and enrolled in the course to fulfill their current job responsibilities; they tended to selectively and repeatedly engage with certain content introducing key policies and practical guidance, and often accessed the course at their offices or their homes during working hours, or sometimes in the evenings. These indicators reflect that unlike the systematic, deliberate, and explicit learning exhibited by other learner groups; this group’s learning through MOOCs seemed to happen informally and tacitly at work. Such informal learning is not a process to be designed nor managed, but rather one to be supported and enhanced as it occurs naturally within the flow of work (MWL, 2021).

Considering these new insights, course materials could be presented and organized in alternative ways to boost their relevance and accessibility to this group of learners who situated their learning in work. These strategies include: 1) providing straightforward explanations of learners’ most frequently visited topics to allow them to grasp the information they require more easily; 2) providing text document versions of course content that may be friendlier for consumption at the workplace than video lectures; 3) making course content available for download at all times, as well as allowing learners to store the content in a toolbar and access it instantly wherever and whenever they need. These interventions apply to any MOOCs that introduce practical specialized knowledge and are likely to attract learners that enroll with a referencing purpose.

Conclusion
The increasing diversity within the MOOC learner population calls for an in-depth understanding of the needs and preferences of different learner subgroups to inform tailored course designs (Davis et al., 2017; DeBoer et al., 2014; Deng et al., 2020; Kizilcec et al., 2013; Li & Baker, 2018; Onah et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2015). Past research studying MOOC learner diversity has mainly taken unidimensional approaches, which have resulted in partial or inconsistent findings. To address this issue, this paper introduced a multi-dimensional model that helps to identify and build personas of the key learner subgroups in a given MOOC course. Inspired by social learning theory (Bandura, 1963, 1977), this model links learners’ behavioral patterns to their personal characteristics, and situates them in wider contexts of learning environments, intending to generate more complicated and dynamic understandings of how different factors are interwoven, together forging learners’ experience with MOOCs.

The model was piloted with an authentic MOOC course. It identified and built the personas of four learner subgroups that respectively portray their different preferences and learning habits, efforts and motivations, as well as underlying constraints and difficulties associated with MOOC learning. These insights inspired new directions for designing tailored course formats and delivery modes that are not currently acknowledged in the discourse regarding MOOCs. The model, together with the enriched insights it has generated, has two implications for the research and development of MOOCs. First, our findings reflect the multifaceted aspects of learners’ experiences with MOOCs, and highlight the importance of studying learner subgroups through multiple perspectives. With different dimensions complementing and explaining one another, the model puts together a more comprehensive picture that reflects not only how but also why learning experiences differ between groups, thus providing more information to inform design interventions. Second, our findings also suggest that learner subgroups with different preferences and learning environments require markedly different instructional interventions. This finding resonates with the dilemma observed in previous studies that interventions designed to engage one group of learners can create barriers or frustrations for others (DeBoer et al., 2014). Therefore, when designing, implementing, and evaluating the effectiveness of interventions; it is important for MOOC instructors to keep in mind which subgroups they are targeting and the proportions of those subgroups relative to the overall course participants.

Several limitations of this study must be acknowledged. First, the present paper focuses only on the formulation and piloting of a model for studying MOOC learner diversity; its impact on learning has not yet been measured. As part of our ongoing work, we will begin the iterative process of devising tailored interventions based on the generated personas and measure their effectiveness using evidence of learners’ engagement, satisfaction, achievement, and retention. Flexible analysis techniques, such as Latent Class Analysis, will be used to track how learners’ behaviors change in response to interventions. Second, the proposed model has thus far only been piloted on one course; its applicability will be further tested through implementations across different course contexts with different topics, structures, and learning populations of various sizes. It will be interesting to explore different learner personas in different contexts using the same model. Third, one lesson learned is that it is not always easy to collect self-reported data on learners’ experience with a MOOC, which in this pilot study, had resulted in a small sample size that only represent active learners. Disengaged learners contribute equally to understanding the dynamics of MOOCs. To address this issue, in future data collections we will administer the survey a few weeks earlier before many dropouts left the course, so as to obtain a larger sample size that could more comprehensively represent the learning population. Finally, in this humble initial exploration, we incorporated more generic high-level features (i.e., engagement levels, motivations, and demographics) in the model to capture the bigger picture of learner subgroups’ characteristics and engagement patterns. The potential of the multi-dimensional model will be further explored by incorporating more nuanced measures under each dimension. For instance, under behavioral patterns, more subtle patterns in learning sequences could be analyzed to identify subgroups with different ‘thinking styles’ (Sternberg & Zhang, 2005) that inform differentiated instruction; under the dimension of personal characteristics, features worth investigating include learners’ self-efficacy (Margolis & McCabe, 2003), self-regulation (Shea & Bidjerano, 2010), and confidence (Norman & Hyland, 2003) as important psychological factors that affect learning behavior. Nevertheless, even the basic features we have incorporated into the model have generated rich and meaningful insights about the learner subgroups in the MOOC course that was studied. Armed with these insights, we can begin developing tailored course formats to help different learner subgroups reap the full benefits of the MOOC, regardless of their constraints or situations.