The purpose of this concurrent mixed-method research is to examine the negotiation styles of candidate sports coaches in higher education by using a game-based assessment tool called ENACT game. The research was carried out with 3rd and 4th-degree university students who study in coaching education programs in Turkey. Students consist of 221 male (%68,4) and 102 female (%31,6). Furthermore, 12 volunteer students were interviewed as part of the qualitative part of the research. Results indicate that there is a positive significant relationship between conflict-handling styles and negotiations style only among integrating style and avoiding style. On the other hand, there is no significant relationship between the dominating, compromising, obliging styles of conflict handling and the dominating, compromising, and obliging styles of negotiation, respectively. Interviews with students revealed that negotiations in ENACT game-based assessment are very close to their real-life experience. Besides, it can be stated that discussing the aspects of the student’s views on the goal achievement effort, relationship, and social skills according to the framework of the social interdependence can make significant contributions to further improvement of the ENACT game-based assessment tool.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Educational assessment has evolved from traditional pen, and paper-based tests to the use of technology (such as games) and continues to evolve (Verma et al., 2019). There is an increasing interest in game-based assessment in the literature. The study reported that students participating in game-based formative assessment more actively participate in game-based formative assessment than students who participate in regular web-based tests (Wang, 2008). Since then, several studies have focused on research and development of the game-based assessment of students’ different skills. For example, Chang et al. (2012) developed game-based problem-solving modules in a math problem-posing system. Hooshyar et al. (2016) combined a solution-based intelligent tutoring system and an interactive online game-based formative assessment tool. Recently, Song and Sparks (2019) examined students’ argumentation skills through a game-enhanced scenario-based assessment. A recent study introduced the first game-based intelligence assessment implemented in Minecraft, a trendy video game (Peters et al., 2021).

Due to the competitive nature of sports, different conflict situations arise between coaches, managers, and athletes. For this reason, especially coaches need negotiation very intensely because of their leadership and trainer roles. Regardless of their potential advantages, game-based assessments are not used for the assessment of negotiation skills in the field of sports coaching education. Studies acknowledge that sports coaches need to possess interpersonal and intrapersonal skills besides a high level of professional knowledge (Cassidy et al., 2008; Côté & Gilbert, 2009). Considerable attention has been focused on skills and attributes that might be developed within a student’s experience, including negotiation (Sleap & Reed, 2006). Therefore, game-based assessment can be used for students of sports coaching who should develop the foundations of interpersonal knowledge to communicate effectively and appropriately with athletes and other people (Côté & Gilbert, 2009).

Although negotiation skills are an essential interpersonal skills to be developed by sports coaching students during their experience, there is a lack of training opportunities. A previous study conducted with sports coaching students has reported that negotiation skills have not been developed during their studies (Hall et al., 2019). Therefore there is a need for empirical studies involving training and assessment regarding negotiation skills of sports coaching students, which will eventually advance understanding of educational technology in higher education.

The main focus of this study is the use of a game-based assessment tool for negotiation styles which is an essential dimension of improving the negotiation skills of sports coaching education students.

Theoretical framework
The idea of negotiation skills covered in this research is based on appropriate interaction, including awareness of how others perceive us. The strong relationship between negotiation with conflict cannot be denied. Marquis and Huston describe conflict as internal or external discord that results from differences in ideas, values, or feelings between two or more people in an organization (Marquis & Huston, 2009).

Although there is no general definition of the negotiation style in the literature, different researchers frequently use it (Drake, 1995; Lewis, 2010; Pearson & Stephan, 1998). However, there is no valid scientific assessment tool that determines negotiation styles. The tools used in negotiation training are based entirely on conflict handling style models. This vagueness is due to the closeness of conflict management and negotiation concepts, as Johnson and Johnson (2003) defined negotiation as a common form of conflict management when faced with a conflict situation.

A common acceptance emerged in research on conflict management styles, which are five different styles as “Integrating, Dominating, Obliging, Avoiding and Compromising.” These five different styles emerge in the Conflict Handling Styles Model as shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1
figure 1
Conflict Handling Styles Model (Rahim,1983)

Full size image
This model insists on the value of education on using different styles to tackle different situations effectively. Using different styles can provide advantages and disadvantages in different situations (Rahim, 2010). To assess the different styles an individual uses, Rahim (1983) recommends the ROCI-II inventory, consisting of 28 questions. Although a game-based assessment provides lots of opportunities in terms of assessment of skills compared to pen and paper assessment, psychometric properties of the game environment need to be explored. However, exploring the psychometric properties of the game environment is very rare (Peters et al., 2021). Therefore, for the present study, we collected and combined both qualitative and quantitative data simultaneously to determine the criterion validity of a game-based assessment tool and explore the students’ opinions about the game-based assessment in depth.

In this study, we used ENACT serious game to assess negotiation styles among students who study sports coaching. ENACT is the standardized psychometric assessment and training users’ negotiation skills through interaction with virtual artificial agents. The ENACT assessment process includes different scenarios related to real-life situations, investigating user negotiation styles based on Rahim’s conflict-handling styles model (Marocco et al., 2015).

The purpose of this study is to explore the assessment of the negotiation styles of candidate sports coaches using the ENACT serious game as a tool for game-based assessment. In line with this purpose, we determined three research questions.

RQ 1) Is there a significant correlation between integrating, dominating, obliging, avoiding, compromising styles of conflict handling styles and integrating, dominating, avoiding, obliging, and compromising styles of ENACT online game?

RQ 2) What are the similarities and differences of Enact game negotiation scenarios compared to real-life negotiation according to students?

RQ 3) How is the quantitative difference between conflict-handling styles and negotiation styles explained from students’ views?

Method
Research design
In this study, the relationship is examined between the dimensions of ENACT negotiation styles and the Rahim Organizational Conflict Inventory-II (ROCI–II) inventory to discuss the validity of ENACT. At the same time, the experiences of students in using ENACT were examined qualitatively by analyzing individual face-to-face interviews with students studying in the coaching education program. In this study, we collect and combine qualitative and quantitative data simultaneously to determine the criterion validity of ENACT and to learn the opinions of the participants about the tool in depth. In this respect, the study is based on a convergent parallel mixed-method approach. Creswell defines convergent parallel mixed method processes as combining qualitative and quantitative data to provide a comprehensive analysis of the research problem (Creswell, 2013).

In the quantitative part of the study, correlation is examined between the data collected from the 28-item Organizational Conflict Inventory-II (ROCI-II) developed by Rahim (1983) and the ENACT consisting of negotiation scenarios. The correlational design helps to predict important human behaviors or possible outcomes between two or more variables without manipulating them (Fraenkel et al., 1993). Before the correlational study, the researchers carried the adaptation studies of the inventories to the Turkish language and culture. In the qualitative part of the study, the actual negotiation situations and their experiences while using the ENACT negotiation assessment tool were designed as a case study to learn the similarities and differences in terms of goal achievement, relationship, and social skills. The case study can be described as an empirical inquiry that examines a contemporary phenomenon in a real-life context when the barriers between fact and context are not clear (Yin, 2009).

The parallel analysis of qualitative and quantitative data in the convergent parallel mixed method designs and the comparison and interpretation of the data obtained afterward are shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Convergent parallel mixed method design (Creswell, 2013)

Full size image
Research group
We used the convenience sampling method in determining the research group. Convenience sampling is used when participants are ready to participate in the study, and those who agree to participate are included (Fink, 1995). Research participants are 323 students studying from 3rd and 4th-year sports coaching education programs in 6 universities from 3 different provinces in Turkey. 221 of these students participating in the study are male (68.4%) and 102 are female (31.6%). Out of 323 students, 125(38,7%) of the students indicated that they have experience in playing computer games. Besides, 2 students volunteered to participate in interviews from each university within the qualitative part of the research. A total of 12 students were interviewed among the volunteer students.

Data collection tools
The organizational conflict inventory, developed by Rahim (1983) and adapted to Turkish culture by Gümüşeli (1994) and ENACT negotiation assessment tool, is used as data collection tools. Semi-structured interview questions were conducted to get in-depth opinions of the participants about ENACT game. Detailed information about the tools is given below.

Organizational Conflict Inventory (ROCI-II) is a pen and paper-based scale which assesses five different interpersonal conflict-handling styles (Integrating, Obliging, Dominating, Avoiding, Compromising) determined by Rahim (1983). The inventory assesses five independent styles in resolving interpersonal conflict in a 5-point Likert form, consists of 28 items. Among those, seven of the items are for Integrating; five are for Dominating, six are for Avoiding, six are for Obliging, and four are for Compromising. Participants’ conflict-handling style is determined according to the highest score received among five existing styles. In the inventory; items 1, 4, 5, 12, 22, 23, and 28 (Integrating), items 2, 10, 11, 13, 19 and 24 “Obliging”; items 8, 9, 18, 21 and 25 “Dominating”; items 3, 6, 16, 17, 26 and 27 “Avoiding” and items 7, 14, 15 and 20 of “Compromising” reveal to what extent the conflict-handling styles are used. The highest score among the dimensions in the inventory shows the use of that style in conflict handling. The reliability and validity studies of the inventory were carried out by (Rahim, 1983) who developed the inventory, and Gümüşeli (1994), who adapted it to Turkish culture. It has been stated that the inventory is a valid and reliable assessment tool in studies conducted outside of western countries (Ting-Toomey et al., 1991; Van de Vliert & Kabanoff, 1990). Besides, the total Cronbach alpha coefficient of the inventory was found .87 in the reliability analysis performed on the data collected within the scope of this study. The Cronbach alpha coefficient of the Integrating conflict-handling style dimension was .88, the Dominating handling conflict style dimension was .64, the Avoiding conflict-handling style dimension was .72, the Obliging conflict-handling style dimension was .75, and the Compromising conflict-handling style dimension was .78. Within the scope of this study, confirmatory factor analysis was performed with the LISREL program to test the sampling suitability and construct validity of the inventory. In the analysis, x2 = 95 df = 34; x2 / df = 2.78; CFI = 0.94; RMSEA = 0.08 values were obtained. These data show that 0.90 < CFI value according to Maruyama (1997), x2 / df = 2.78 according to Wheaton et al. (1977), RMSEA <0.08 according to Hu and Bentler (1999), it was concluded that the inventory carries the required factor analysis values according to the literature. The values found in the analysis are given in Table 1.

Table 1 The confirmatory factor analysis result
Full size table
ENACT is an online serious game for the standardized psychometric assessment and training of users’ negotiation skills through the interaction with virtual artificial agents (Marocco et al., 2015). It has been created in the context of the European Union funded ENACT project called “Enhancing Negotiation skills through online Assessment of Competencies and interactive mobile Training” which aims to cross the boundaries between educational games and intelligent tutoring systems, merging the importance of an online and dynamical learner assessment with the intrinsic and extrinsic motivating environment of serious games (Dell’Aquila et al., 2017). Similar to the dimensions of organizational conflict Inventory of Rahim (1983), ENACT is based on the five styles of negotiations divided into five scenarios based on real-life situations (Marocco et al., 2015). Both the character and style of the virtual character change in each scenario of ENACT game. Scenario cases include various negotiation cases such as buying CD with a close friend “who will buy CD?”, deciding to choose a restaurant with a close friend “Pizza or Chinese restaurant?”, deciding for driving motorcycle among brothers/sisters “who will drive motorcycle?”, sharing responsibility for designing team logo in a sport club, “who will design logo?”, deciding tv programs to watch among parents “News or Entertainment?”. Sports coaching students are likely to improve negotiation skills as they can practice their communication and relational competencies to experience the value of communicating effectively with different interlocutors in various negotiation scenarios in ENACT. Each scenario starts with a brief introduction, including the title and short text explaining the negotiation context’s case. The negotiation begins with a sentence by the artificial agent, followed by a single answer option appearing on the left side of the screen.

The tool was adapted to Turkish culture within the scope of this study. Literature review about adaptation suggests four different judgment methods to ensure the parity of the inventory adapted with the original inventory. These are one-way translation, reverse translation (Hambleton & Bollwark, 1991), centralization, committee approach (Geisinger, 2003). During the adaptation of the tool in Turkish culture, the steps detailed by Geisinger (1994) were considered.

Another data collection tool is semi-structured interview questions that aim to contribute to understanding the participants’ views in using the ENACT assessment tool. The questions were prepared to examine the similarities and differences between the participant’s experiences in the Organizational Conflict Inventory (ROCI-II) and the ENACT negotiation game regarding goal achievement, relationship, and social skills. Thirteen interview questions were prepared by the researchers, taking into account the social interdependence theory by Johnson and Johnson (2003). The interviews were recorded with an audio recording device with the consent of the participants.

Procedure
The data of the study were collected in the computer laboratory setting during the spring semester of the 2015-2016 academic year. Before data collection, the permission of the ethics commission is obtained from the Rectorate of the Hacettepe University. After getting the ethical approvals, permissions for the use of computer laboratories of the universities are received. For the ENACT game to be played by the participants, the UNITY gaming engine must be installed on the computer with the internet. In addition, common internet browsers such as Firefox, Internet Explorer and Safari must be installed. Therefore, computers in the laboratories are set up for running ENACT game by installing the UNITY game engine plugin in advance. ROCI-II inventory and demographic information questions were distributed before the students interacted with ENACT game. Later on, students are registered to the ENACT game and viewed the first scenario as shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Participant login and introduction of the first scenario in ENACT game

Full size image
After reading the introduction of the scenario, students could negotiate by picking up their choices based on the dialogue with the virtual character in the game, as shown in Fig. 4. Students play the role of the character on the top left of the screen and choose one of five different options in response to the expressions of the virtual character on the right side of the screen. The negotiation style is determined by adding the scores of the participants from the expressions, each of which corresponds to different styles.

Fig. 4
figure 4
The negotiation process in ENACT

Full size image
The process of ENACT gameplay took approximately 15 min. Once the game is ended, students are recruited among the volunteers to participate in qualitative data collection, which took around 30 min.

Analysis of data
To determine how well the measured variables represent the number of constructs of the ROCI-II Inventory for the sample, confirmatory factor analysis was performed using the LISREL program for construct validity. Cronbach Alpha reliability coefficients were examined for the reliability analysis of the inventories. The reliability of the ENACT game was tested with the test-retest method with 33 participants and was examined by calculating the Spearman correlation coefficient between the collected data. Both histograms and Q-Q normal distribution graphs were drawn by checking the kurtosis and skewness values to understand whether the variables fit the normal distribution. As a result of Kolmogorov-Smirnov analysis; it is examined whether ROCI-II (p > 0.05) showed normal distribution. For the criterion validity of the ENACT game-based negotiation assessment tool, using Conflict Management Styles as an independent variable, the relationships between the dependent variables of the ENACT Negotiation Styles were calculated with the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.

Within the scope of the qualitative part of the study, first of all, the audio recordings taken during individual interviews with twelve participants were transcribed as digital data. To explain raw data, identify similarities and differences, and reach conceptual relationships, codes and themes were created by using the content analysis method. The main purpose of content analysis is to reach the concepts and relationships that can explain the collected data (Yıldırım & Şimşek, 2005). In the study, pseudonyms were used to protect the identity of the participants. For the construct validity of the qualitative data, the raw data were shared with the participants and their opinions were received by email. Besides, the raw data was shared with another researcher, who is an expert in technology and physical education, and she was asked to analyze the content. Themes and codes obtained from the content analysis conducted by two different researchers were enriched by comparison.

Results
Within the scope of the research, firstly, the relationship between conflict management styles the ENACT game negotiation styles was examined to explore the criterion validity of the ENACT game. Then ENACT game is evaluated based on the experiences of students. Finally, results presented how qualitative data from students explain any quantitative difference between conflict management and negotiation styles.

Criterion validity of the ENACT online assessment tool according to ROCI-II
We tested the criterion validity across the variables of pen and paper-based ROCI-II inventory and ENACT game. The relationship between Integrating, Dominating, Obliging, Avoiding, Compromising of ROCI-II inventory and the variables of ENACT game is given in Table 2.

Table 2 Results of Spearman Correlation Analysis Test on the relationship between conflict management styles and negotiation styles
Full size table
According to Table 2, a positive and significant relationship was found between the conflict management and negotiation styles only among integrating style (r = .16; p < .01) and avoiding style (r = .12; p < .05). On the other hand, it can be said that there is no significant relationship between the dominating, compromising, obliging styles of conflict handling and the dominating, compromising, and obliging styles of negotiation, respectively.

ENACT game when compared real-life negotiation situations
When students were asked to compare similarities and differences of the negotiation situations in their own lives with the negotiation situations in the ENACT game, analysis of their comments resulted as categories of a) goal achievement effort, b) relationship, and c) social skills. More specifically, based on participants’ comments, Fig. 5. can be drawn to reveal various similarities and differences between the real-life conditions and the negotiation situations in ENACT scenarios. Arrows in Fig. 5 represent the interdependence between goal achievement efforts, relationship, and negotiation skills in the ENACT game, meaning each category influence one another.

Fig. 5
figure 5
Comparing ENACT with real-life conditions in negotiation

Full size image
Goal achievement effort
Since ENACT is an online game, the participants were initially asked to reach specific goals to get them into the role within the scenarios. These goals are determined by considering predefined negotiation styles of five characters in the five scenarios that the participants interact with.

Most participants highlighted that they are more likely to show the same effort in the game environment than in real life. For example, Kemal expressed this similarity of ENACT game comparing to real life as:

"I always have clear goals; let me say so. …After all, my clear goal was something we could do both together; I tried to specify that in the simulation game. There seems to be no difference in terms of effort."

Apart from the opinions about the similarity regarding goal achievement efforts in ENACT game, some participants stated that there are relatively few differences between the goal achievement efforts in their real life and the goal achievement efforts in the ENACT negotiation game. For example, Yunus reveals the difference of ENACT game by drawing attention to missing body language:

"You are only using sentences here to describe something to prove yourself. There are no mutual gestures and facial expressions. In real life, you can better explain what you think and what you want with eye contact. "

Considering the initial goals given within the scope of the role, Yagmur makes an interesting point by stating that the goal achievement is effective when communicating with her friends but not with her family.

"The goals were effective in what happened with my friends because they were also my goals. It didn't affect my family; my only goal was to make them happy."

With this approach, Yağmur shows that protecting family relations comes before his own goals. Therefore, preserving the relationship becomes an essential component of achieving the goal.

Relationship
The similarities and differences between the role-based relationship established by the participants in the virtual environment and their real-life relationships emerge as another important category that we want to learn from the perspective of the participants. In terms of the relationship, there is evident similarities when the real-life situations of the participants are compared with the ENACT game environment. For example, Cumaali stated that he cares enough about the relationship, as he also established in ENACT game:

" I cared enough about the relationship. Because I tried not to hurt another side."

The fact that Cumaali acts by establishing an emotional connection with the character in the ENACT game show that he cares about the relationship in the ENACT game in the same way as in real life.

As a difference in the ENACT game, Meltem emphasized using more constructive strategies to resolve the conflict than real-life during the negotiation process in the game environment. She commented, “there could be harsher reactions in real life. I could have reacted more harshly in real life. Mimics can tell a lot.”

Negotiation skills
In the interviews, we see similarities and differences between the negotiation styles of the participants, whom we think are related to negotiation skills, in real life and while playing the ENACT game. Most of the participants behave similarly to the real lifestyle of negotiation. In contrast, others point out that the scenarios in ENACT differ from real-life situations in some ways. For example, Navruz reveals this similarity and difference with the following statements.

"In real life, a man does not watch cooking programs on TV. However, in the simulation (ENACT), we see that. "

With these statements, Navruz emphasizes that the virtual male character in the ENACT game does not fit the male stereotype, which is considered appropriate in her culture. The fact that the man watches the entertainment program and the woman (participant) prefers the news bulletin is due to roles in the game. These roles in the game attracted the attention of Navruz shows that cultural stereotypes influence participant decisions. As the authors, we think taking these cultural patterns into account will establish stereotypical assumptions that do not have any general validity. However, in ENACT, the aim should be to enable the participant to engage with role play. In this context, Joe’s statements can be considered to understand how the role is understood from the participants’ eyes.

"I had to answer according to the roles, as the information is given about the other person and my role at the beginning. Of course, I did not fully answer myself. The roles were important."

Besides, Kemal draws attention to another difference with the limitation of the answers by telling “In real life, you can keep the answers longer and increase your persuasion ability, but here the answers are a little shorter and more precise”.

Considering that Kemal highlights persuasion ability, he may use his negotiation skills more flexibly in real life.

On the other hand, despite these differences, we see that a significant majority of the participants draw attention to the similarities of ENACT with real life.

Differences between game-based assessment and pen and paper test
The current study aimed to reveal differences between conflict-handling styles and negotiation styles to understand quantitative differences between ROCI-II and ENACT. Analyzing the interviews, the students’ opinions are coded as interaction, realistic, fun-attractive, better self-reflection, and time about comparing the two inventories. For example, Kemal highlights the available interaction in ENACT as a difference to ROCI-II.

"You are reading in the first (ROCI-II), nobody says anything to you. Here, ENACT character is saying something. It is maybe related to human psychology. Something happens to you, you give him feedback, but in the other (ROCI-II), you are just reading. So you have a chance to think after reading it, and you can perceive it differently."

Based on Kemal’s statement, the appearance of the virtual character and the interaction he establishes in the game has a significant influence. Similar to the difference regarding interaction, Leyla explains the difference based on the degree of reality among the two inventories as follows:

"There are grades in the test (ROCI-II). You can choose anyone in the test, but the game is more realistic. The game is more logical, and the game gives you that moment."

ENACT game seems to have an advantage by creating dialogue like interaction which may make it more accurate than the ROCI-II, as Yunus highlights the possibility of reflection through the dialogic feature of ENACT game:

"I think I can reflect on it better during a dialogue. Because you feel like you are in a real-life problem there, it is more realistic as if you are in the game and you think about what you should do. Since it is has animation, the test with dialogue (ENACT) seemed a bit more realistic to me compared to another way, in the form of direct questions and answers."

Moreover, time is another factor as Firuze makes emphasis on time as one of the variables which may influence assessment through the following expressions:

"For those who do not have time, the first test is better (ROCI-II) because the people can be bored in the second test (ENACT) because it is longer. Test (ROCI-II) was shorter and I would have preferred it. Of course, the second one in the form of dialogue reflects me better."

Although Firuze did not prefer ENACT game because of taking more time and not getting used ROCI-II kind of assessment, Meltem favors the fun and attractive aspect of ENACT instrument.

"Everyone gets bored because of the classic test (ROCI-II). It coincided with the answers in the game (ENACT) anyway, the game was more fun, and I did it without getting bored, I think it was better."

Discussion
The purpose of the present study was to explore the assessment of the negotiation styles of students who study sports coaching using the ENACT serious game as a game-based assessment. In line with this purpose, we set out three research questions to understand the use of ENACT game-based assessment in detail.

Within the scope of the first research question, the correlation between sub-dimensions of ENACT game and the ROCI-II pen and paper test is examined for the criterion validity of ENACT. According to the results, a statistically significant but weak relationship was found between the conflict management and negotiation styles only among integrating style and avoiding style. Besides, our data show no significant positive relationship in all styles, including Dominating, Obliging, Compromising styles. Therefore, the criterion validity of ENACT could not be fully achieved based on the ROCI-II inventory of conflict handling styles developed by Rahim (1983). Unlike other research that reported a strong correlation between game-based assessment and paper-based tests (Peters et al., 2021), traditional tests and video games (Foroughi et al., 2016), findings of the present study shows game-based assessments may not measure the same traits as pen and paper tests. Differences in the measurement of traits may be explained by the involvement of different assessment processes and variables when assessing online and pen and paper-based assessments, which might be explored through qualitative research.

The second research question revealed similarities and differences compared to real life and ENACT negotiation situations by students. Similarities and differences of ENACT compared to real-life are essential in understanding how closely ENACT game can assess the negotiation styles of students. Participants have a prevailing opinion about the similarity of ENACT to real life as they mentioned they would behave similarly in real life. This finding suggests that ENACT is suitable for real-life negotiations. Despite the advantages of integrative negotiation and the need for discussion in the literature, Johnson and Johnson (2003) noted the lack of consistent research and clarity of its primary use in real-life situations. A previous study reported that the game provided students with hands-on experience with construction procurement, and negotiation was developed (Dzeng et al., 2014). Similarly, ENACT game can improve negotiation skills as students found it similar to real-life negotiations could express their efforts to achieve their goals.

Despite some differences between ENACT and real-life, students generally found ENACT more realistic than ROCI-II, a classic pen and paper test. When we think about assessment, in ROCI-II, assessment is carried out by ensuring that the participants make a self-report about how they behave about their reaction to an event they encounter in real life. These two different assessment processes can be illustrated as follows:

Participant ➔ Previous Reaction (moment of conflict) ➔ Participant Perception ➔Self-report ➔ Assessment Tool (ROCI-II) ➔ Assessment result.

Participant ➔ Instant Reaction (moment of conflict) ➔ ENACT game assessment (ENACT) ➔ Assessment result.

The shorter process leading to the assessment results in ENACT can be considered as another expression of the reality mentioned by the participants.

Considering the realism of ENACT, it can be accepted that it provides two main advantages. First, it can present a more precise assessment environment by enabling individuals to practice it instead of remembering it. Second, it offers a more attractive assessment environment due to the game format. With these aspects, it is thought that the ENACT game-based assessment can contribute to students learning their styles and be more effective in the relationships they have established in their work environment by evaluating themselves. When considering ICT knowledge and skills based on self-report, the researchers stated that the participants might not reveal the objective situation due to the different use of the scale depending on whether they are optimistic or pessimistic (Vonkova & Hrabak, 2015).

Within the scope of the last research problem, findings showed some advantages of ENACT game-based assessment in terms of interaction, realistic, fun-attractive and better self-reflection. The present study results, similar to studies, reported positive student views regarding enjoyment toward the game-based assessment (Hooshyar et al., 2016; Song & Sparks, 2019). It is striking that one of the participants was surprised that the man character chose the cooking program during his interaction with the virtual character in the male role. Studies show that generalizations can affect negotiation outcomes by creating expectations about how well a negotiator can perform based on gender identity (Beyer & Bowden, 1997; Kray et al., 2001). Participants’ views can be understood as a missing point of ENACT. However, it is thought that taking cultural generalizations into account may lead to reproducing stereotypes. Some studies examining the effect of time constraint (Gelfand et al., 2011) have shown that time constraint leads to less demand and more uncertain goals. The party with less time-constrained has a stronger position and tends to handle the negotiation better as there is no danger of being late (Gelfand et al., 2011). This study concluded that ENACT might cause a difference since it offers more time than ROCI-II and everyday life.

Research reported that individuals negotiating via computers display more avoidant and less oppressive behaviors than those who meet face to face (Dorado et al., 2002). As a summary of our experience with the current study and the existing literature, we understand that several variables might influence the differences between online negotiation and conflict handling styles, as shown in Fig. 6 below. Negotiation styles is determined throughout an interpersonal process among two individual who has their conflict-handling styles. Individual conflict-handling styles are essential for the determination of negotiations styles. Moreover, relationship, virtual environment, and effort for the achievement are crucial variables that influence any difference between negotiation styles in ENACT and conflict handling styles. Besides, it is important to recognize other factors related to these three variables.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Factors affecting the negotiation style

Full size image
Limitations and conclusions
The present study has some limitations in research on game-based negotiation assessment and software development shortcomings of ENACT games. Since the ENACT environment takes place in a virtual environment and offers a structured negotiation environment regarding participant roles and conflict situations, it differs from the results obtained from the ROCI-II Inventory. To examine the validity of ENACT, its relationship with other data collection tools related to negotiation can be investigated.

Both the character and style of the virtual character change in each scenario of ENACT game. However, this allows diversification of scenarios based on a different context. This situation may cause differences in the users’ decisions by unknown variables that we cannot control. For example, it cannot be determined whether the participants chosen by taking into account the virtual character’s style (integrating, dominating, obliging, avoiding, compromising) or the appearance of the virtual character and his relationship with the character mentioned in the scenario. For this reason, scenarios can be further extended in the ENACT game in which each character represents all five different styles.

ENACT game scenarios start with an explanation with text. To enable the user to enter the role more easily and increase the game’s realism, the scenarios’ information can be presented with video before interacting with the virtual character.

The ENACT game is promising in contributing to the user’s self-assessment and self-directed learning as it can more realistically determine the interpersonal process. We have shown for the first time that ENACT can be used as an assessment and training for negotiation in sports coaching education. Present research reveals that students found negotiations in ENACT very close to their real-life experience as a very promising tool for future studies in game-based assessment. Besides, it can be stated that discussing the aspects of the student’s views on the goal achievement effort, relationship, and social skills according to the framework of the social interdependence theory proposed by Johnson and Johnson (2003) can make significant contributions to the development of the next version of ENACT. Hence, student opinions provide valuable information for the research on game-based assessment and further improvement of the ENACT game.