The purpose of this study was to investigate the perceptions of teacher candidates about distance education teacher training classroom environments and to display the relationships among distance education classroom environment variables and course achievement. This study was designed according to relational survey research and employed structural equation modelling. In this sense, 12 hypotheses were constructed and tested. The study included 253 teacher candidates who enrolled in distance educational sciences courses at a state university in Turkey. Data were collected through the implementation of the Distance Education Learning Environments Survey (DELES) and analysed using Analysis of Moment Structures (AMOS) 20 to understand whether the recommended model fits the data. The results of the study revealed that instructor support predicted the achievement, perceived authentic learning and autonomy significantly; however, the other DELES variables were insignificant in predicting the achievement of teacher candidates. Moreover, perceived authentic learning significantly predicted personal relevancy and perceived personal relevancy significantly predicted perceived learner autonomy. Furthermore, perceived learner autonomy significantly predicted perceived active learning. Finally, active learning perceived by teacher candidates had a significant but weak effect on student interaction and collaboration. The results of the study were discussed in detail. The findings of this study might provide useful information for instructors to design distance education courses by sensitizing themselves to the positive and negative properties of distance education classroom environments.

Access provided by University of Auckland Library

Introduction
Learning is a multi-faceted dynamic, and it depends on learners’ characteristics, social, physical and psychosocial classroom environment (Bandura, 1986). The psychosocial classroom environment perceived by learners is reckoned as one of the most important factors affecting learning outcomes (Jegede et al., 1995; Ke & Kwak, 2013; Walker & Fraser, 2005; Woiwode & Baysingar, 2015). It is defined as the common perspectives of students and teachers in a specific setting (Fraser, 1998) and by Doman (2006) as the atmosphere, ambience, tone, or climate that permeates an educational setting. In time, researchers investigated different aspects of the psychosocial classroom environment. The early researchers looked into teacher-centered classrooms (Fraser & Fisher, 1983), later they investigated the perceptions of learners in student-centered classrooms due to acceptance of constructivist learning in different countries and grade levels (Chionh & Fraser, 2009; Dorman et al., 2006; Fraser, 1998; Ozkal et al., 2009; Velayutham & Aldridge, 2013). In this technology era, the classroom environment concept includes a distance education learning environment dimension due to the increased use of technology and the internet. Businesses and educational institutions are discovering the value of technology in reaching large numbers of learners day by day (Herner-Patnode et al., 2008; Jegede et al., 1995; Kaufmann et al., 2016; Milligan & Buckenmeyer, 2008; Trinidad et al., 2005; Walker, 2003).

Phelps and Vlachopoulos (2020) stated that instructional methods and techniques should embrace the ever-changing needs of learners. In this sense, higher education institutions, instructors, and course designers are becoming increasingly more concerned with determining important characteristics of online courses that are significant to foster student achievement and positive distance learning environments (Heron, 2018; Walker & Fraser, 2005). Dorman et al., (2006) stated that without a comprehensive consideration of classroom environments, educational productivity could not be provided. In other words, multiple factors must be considered to construct an overall view of the learner experience, preferably within the same study, so that findings can be considered holistically and utilized to generate more solid discussions for practical application. In the literature, numerous studies have focused on cognitive and environmental factors that can either positively or negatively impact student outcomes, such as satisfaction, motivation, learning goal orientation, task value, self-efficacy, self-regulation, persistence, achievement, etc. in both traditional and online settings (Abdous & Yen, 2010; Alt, 2014; Hartnett, 2015; Jegede et al., 1995; Ke & Kwak, 2013; Mutlu & Yıldırım, 2019; Sahin, 2007; Seiver & Troja, 2014; Velayutham & Aldridge, 2013; Woiwode & Baysingar, 2015). However, Walker and Fraser (2005) stressed some essential factors such as instructor support, student collaborative interaction, personal relevance, authenticity of learning, active learning, and learner autonomy in distance learning environments.

Statement of the problem
Armstrong (2011) stated that instructor support is one of the momentous elements in online settings and the lack of it has been cited as one of the detrimental factors to undergraduate students’ achievement and efficiency in distance learning environments. Cottom (2018) stated that instructors’ timely feedback and answering student questions related to the content contributed to positive online learning experiences of undergraduate students enrolled in an online Introduction to Research Methods course, which is related to instructor support. In an introductory course on technology, students enrolled in the online section portrayed the instructor as the positive aspect of the course in terms of guidance and assistance, prompting communication, and being helpful (Larkin, 2019). Similarly, it was revealed in the literature that interactions between learners and instructors resulted in the prediction of student satisfaction and final grades in online courses (Abdous & Yen, 2010; Deemer & Smith, 2018). Furthermore, Louder (2011) unearthed that instructor support was a significant predictor of students’ perceptions of knowledge acquisition. According to the findings, instructor support should be identified as a vital construct in distance learning environments in order to achieve effective learning, which led to the first hypothesis in the current study.

Researchers investigating distance education environments concerned about the level of interactivity a distance education course could provide for learners is regarded as one of the important components for efficient learning experiences (Beldarrain, 2006). The results of many studies indicated that student interaction and collaboration were effective in terms of improving performance, motivation, interest, decision-making skills, meaningful learning, conceptual learning, retention of learned content, quantitative/qualitative problem-solving skills, metacognitive skills and critical thinking skills in both traditional and distance courses (Beldarrain, 2006; Bian et al., 2018; Chionh & Fraser, 2009; Cohn & Fraser, 2015; Crouch & Mazur, 2001; Gok & Gok, 2017; Keppell et al., 2006; Knight & Brame, 2018; Smith et al., 2009; Snyder, Carter & Wiles, 2015). Keppell et al., (2006) stressed the effect of student interaction and collaboration on student outcomes due to involving the giving and receiving of peer feedback processes. Similarly, Roman et al. (2020) stated the inclusion of peer feedback as an important way of facilitating authentic learning and improving learning outcomes in distance education settings. Jung et al. (2002) stated that communication with instructors and collaborative interaction with peers are important to augment learning and active participation in online discussions, even for adult learners. In the study conducted by Gherasim et al. (2012), the perception of peer support positively predicted the school achievement of 11th-grade students; however, instructor support was not associated with grades. However, Louder (2011) conceded that although faculty believed that social interaction was important to both satisfaction and knowledge acquisition, the reverse was true for student participants, and they reported student interaction and collaboration as one of the poorest predictors of student learning outcomes. It can be seen that there are inconsistent results regarding the student interaction and communication dimensions of distance education environments, which calls for more information and led to the second hypothesis in the current study.

In addition, learners need to have clear, realistic expectations about the contribution of course activities to themselves (Heron, 2018). According to Walker (2003), personal relevance is about learners relating course content to personal experiences and the ability to apply what is learned to their lives outside of the classroom. Similarly, Larkin (2019) discovered that students in the online section valued the opportunity to apply course content to their places of work or social circumstances more than those in the hybrid section. In the literature, it was stated that personal relevance in learning was revealed as a statistically significant predictor of perceived knowledge acquisition (Louder, 2011). Also, it was stated that factors such as authentic learning and personal relevance impact motivation positively and increase students’ desire to pursue more focused studies (Heron, 2018). Therefore, it is thought that personal relevancy is an important property in distance education courses and should also be investigated in teacher training classes, which led to the fourth hypothesis in the current study.

Furthermore, the authentic learning property of the classroom environment is stated to be essential for meaningful learning as it provides an environment to experience real-world problems in a virtual classroom (Kirmizi, 2014; Reeves et al., 2002; Sahin, 2007). Lombardi defined authentic learning as learning that “…focuses on real-world, complex problems and their solutions, using role-playing exercises, problem-based activities, case studies, and participating in virtual communities of practice” (2007, p.2). Authentic learning provides learners with opportunities to think at the level of sophistication of real-world tasks that learners are likely to encounter and contribute to learning (Alt, 2014). It was explained that while many experiments are impossible to conduct in the classroom, such as setting the tectonic plates in motion or travelling back in time and the replay of decisive moments in wars (Lombardi, 2007). However, due to technology inclusion, students might be provided with more authentic learning experiences and real-life problems. These kinds of authentic learning activities are related to the active learning property of distance education learning environments, as learners become active participants rather than being passive receivers of information (Reeves et al., 2002). Hence, it is thought that the authentic learning property of the classroom environment is important and might affect learner outcomes in distance teacher training classes, which led to the third hypothesis in the current study. Also, instructor support through the design of distance education courses might affect the perceived authentic learning in distance teacher training classes, which led to the seventh hypothesis in the current study.

Puzziferro and Shelton (2008) stated that active learning leads to positive results regarding student satisfaction and learning outcomes. Active learning includes learning by doing, exploring, and reflecting, which is in contrast to passive traditional instruction (Reeves et al., 2002). Also, active learning is related to practice, application, feedback, evaluation, or in any other ways just beyond getting information through listening to teachers and reading books (Han & Finkelstein, 2013). It is stated that active learning approaches provide meaningful learning experiences for higher education students, foster their engagement and involvement, encourage effective connections and communication with peers, and increase their learning (Bolliger & Armier, 2013; Han & Finkelstein, 2013). The use of instructional technologies, which have been identified as important in engaging students and fostering learning, is included in active learning approaches (Heron, 2018). Similarly, Chan et al. (2015) revealed that the implemented SRS technologies significantly predicted the use of deep learning approaches, higher-order thinking and learning. As a result, it can be seen that the active learning property of the classroom environment is an essential property to foster student learning and achievement and should be investigated in distance teacher training classes, which led to the fifth hypothesis in the current study. Also, perceived active learning through group tasks and communication with peers, might affect perceived student interaction and collaboration, which led to the twelfth hypothesis in the current study.

In distance education learning environments, learners are expected to have a certain level of control over planning, learning speed, the sequence of learning content, and evaluating their course work (Chou & Liu, 2005; Leong, 2011;Milligan & Buckenmeyer, 2008 ; Roth, 1998). In other words, learner autonomy is about learners’ taking control of their learning by making their own decisions regarding the learning process (Ke & Kwak, 2013). Yen and Liu (2009) stated that learner autonomy is about an individual’s manifestation of intentional behaviours in learning activities, and according to them, those who score high in learner autonomy complete their online courses with higher final grades. Similarly, in the literature, students’ perceptions of autonomy were found predictive of success rates in online courses (Milligan & Buckenmeyer, 2008; Roth, 1998), which led to the sixth hypothesis in the current study. Also, Reeves (1993) matched learner autonomy with the design features of online instruction that enable learners to choose the path, rate, content, and nature of feedback in instruction freely, which led to the ninth hypothesis in the current study. Ural (2007) stated that, since students are on their own during most of the time of the learning process in distance education learning environments, learning to learn by themselves and control the learning process contributes to achievement. In addition, Louder (2011) revealed that, according to both undergraduate and graduate students, being more autonomous in their learning and seeing personal relevance to the subject matter were important to them for cognitive outcomes. Similarly, Heron (2018) found student autonomy among the significant predictors of graduate students’ perceptions of knowledge acquisition. On the other hand, Karich et al. (2014) found in their meta-analysis study near-zero effects of learner control for all instruction components (pacing, time, sequence, practice, review). In other words, giving the learner control over any particular instructional component did not have an advantage. Likewise, Seiver and Troja (2014) showed that the need for autonomy was not a significant factor as measured by willingness to take another online class. It can be seen that there are inconsistent results regarding the autonomy dimension of distance education environments, which calls for further research in distance teacher training classes.

Using a variety of instruments, researchers investigated the qualities of the classroom environment across various grade levels, subjects, and classroom contexts, such as constructivist classroom environments, online learning environments, computer-assisted learning environments, and laboratory learning environments (Fraser, 1998; Fraser et al., 1992; Fraser & Fisher, 1983; Fraser & Treagust, 1986; Trickett & Moos, 1973). However, there is a need for studies to investigate the classroom environment of distance education teacher training classes. Besides, there are many studies conducted in many countries, and especially in Australia, and the USA (Jegede et al., 1995; Trinidad et al., 2005; Walker & Fraser, 2005), but there is a limited study conducted in Turkey to investigate the psychosocial classroom environment perceptions of teacher candidates in distance education teacher training environments. Hence, this study is one of the first studies conducted in Turkey which provides valuable results about the psychosocial aspects of distance education teacher training classroom environments.

While teacher candidates emphasized benefits such as being able to access distance education via phone, being able to watch course content again, and being independent of location and time (Duman, 2020; Hacıomeroglu & Elmalı-Erdem, 2021), Tütüncü (2019) looked at teacher candidates’ perspectives on distance learning environments and found that they had moderately positive views about teacher support, personal relevancy, active learning, authentic learning, and student autonomy dimensions of distance education classes; but, they have negative views on student interaction and cooperation. Duman (2020) revealed that the interaction between teacher candidates and instructors decreased in distance education classes compared to face-to-face education, and they generally communicated via WhatsApp and e-mail. It has been stated that teacher candidates easily lose interest and motivation in distance education classes (Hacıomeroglu & Elmalı-Erdem, 2021). It has been said that distance education programs do not provide enough active learning and authentic learning, that lecture and question-answer methods are mostly employed, and that the evaluation procedure is usually dependent on assignments, with little feedback (Duman, 2020). Using the Distance Education Learning Environment Survey (DELES), Hacıomeroglu and Elmalı-Erdem (2021) evaluated teacher candidates’ impressions of the learning environment. They discovered that teacher candidates had a negative attitude toward distance learning in general, and that the majority of them did not like to take courses online because of the numerous disadvantages of distance learning in mathematics education programs. They had favorable attitudes about instructor support and active learning in the online education learning environment, and they had moderate opinions about student interaction and collaboration, personal relevance, authentic learning, and student autonomy. Similarly, Arık (2021) used the Distance Education Learning Environment Survey (DELES) to investigate the perceptions of Turkish higher education students who participated compulsorily in distance education classes as a result of the pandemic, and found that students were undecided about whether distance education learning environments supported personal relevance and authentic learning dimensions. It is also discovered that teacher candidates had the lowest mean scores in the distance education learning environments’ student interaction and collaboration dimension. In addition, Long et al. (2021) used the What Is Happening In This Class? (WIHIC) scale to investigate changes in student perceptions of learning environments from before to after the switch to distance education due to the pandemic, and found that students perceived a statistically significant decline in student cohesiveness, teacher support, involvement, task orientation, and equity dimensions of the distance education classroom environments, with the magnitude of deterioration being significant for the student cohesiveness dimension. By stressing the importance of the classroom environment, Mutlu and Yıldırım (2019) investigated the perceptions of English classroom learning environment preparatory program students in predicting persistence in EFL learning and found that learning environment characteristics (materials environment, authenticity and congruence with reality, and teacher-supportive behaviors) were highly related to course persistence. Carver (2014) researched high school students’ opinions of the psychosocial learning environment in online and face-to-face classes and revealed that students viewed online education to be more beneficial than face-to-face instruction in terms of active learning and autonomy. Students, on the other hand, regarded student interaction and collaboration, and enjoyment to be lacking in online learning classroom environments, demonstrating the need for online instructors and course designers to seek strategies to encourage students to work in groups and communicate. Given that teacher candidates will be actively involved in teaching-learning processes by practicing the teaching profession in the near future, it is reasonable to conclude that improving the quality and efficiency of distance education teacher training classes is critical to improving teacher quality. In this regard, it is considered to be vital to understand teacher candidates’ perceptions of distance education environments. As a result, this study may provide an opportunity for course instructors to make changes to improve the learning environments in their distance education classes.

The constructs such as instructor support, student collaborative interaction, personal relevance, the authenticity of learning, active learning, and learner autonomy have been investigated in many studies (Arık, 021; Biggs, 2006; Cottom, 2018; Heron, 2018; Ke & Kwak, 2013; Keeney, 2015; Long, 2021; Louder, 2011; Tütüncü, 2019; Woiwode & Baysingar, 2015). Some studies investigated the correlations among various classroom environment constructs and the prediction of affective or cognitive student outcomes (Heron, 2018; Keeney, 2015; Louder, 2011). In addition, some of the studies investigated students’ learning experiences in courses delivered in different formats, such as fully online learning, and hybrid, according to several distance education learning environment constructs (Biggs, 2006; Carver, 2014; Larkin, 2019). The results were descriptive in nature as they explained the current situation by comparing findings obtained from specific scales in different learning environments. It can be seen that, besides simple descriptive analysis, correlation and regression, there is limited complex statistical analysis such as Structural Equation Modelling (SEM), which is more robust than correlation analysis and regression (Hair et al., 2014) to investigate the effect of various constructs on other affective and cognitive learner outcomes thoroughly in distance learning environments.

In the literature, SEM was used to investigate whether the classroom environment perception of learners predicts student motivation, learning goal orientation, task value, self-efficacy and self-regulation (Alt, 2014; Velayutham & Aldridge, 2013). Also, Ke and Kwak (2013) investigated the relationships between the distance education learning environment variables and the learning satisfaction of online undergraduate to doctoral-level students from diverse disciplines of nursing, education, and liberal arts and sciences using structural equation modelling. However, they investigated the effect of distance education variables only on an affective variable, but they did not include a cognitive variable such as learner achievement to evaluate the quality of online distance education programs. Moreover, it was stated that factors such as authentic learning and personal relevance impact motivation positively (Heron, 2018). When learners were able to connect in-class experiences to out-of-class experiences, they were more motivated by stressing the importance of positive relationships between personal relevance and motivation (Biggs, 2006). Moreover, Keeney (2015) showed a strong correlation between personal relevance and student satisfaction. However, there is a lack of studies investigating the possible effects of each distance education construct on others, such as whether perceived authentic learning predicts perceived personal relevancy (Hypothesis 8); personal relevancy predicts learner autonomy (Hypothesis 10), and perceived learner autonomy predicts perceived active learning (Hypothesis 11). For these reasons, the purpose of this study was to investigate the perceptions of teacher candidates about instructor support, student interaction and collaboration, personal relevance, authentic learning, active learning, and learner autonomy dimensions of distance education teacher training classroom environments on achievement, as well as display the best fitting SEM by expressing the strength of relations among them. In this way, it is aimed to provide comprehensive information about the learner and teacher-related variables that affect teacher candidates’ learning. The following research questions guided the current study:

What is the best fitting structural equation model explaining the relationships among instructor support, student interaction and collaboration, personal relevance, authentic learning, active learning, learner autonomy and achievement of teacher candidates?

What is the relative importance of the variables in distance education teacher training classroom learning environments?

Method
This study was designed according to relational survey research (Creswell, 2012) and employed structural equation modelling to display the relationships among variables of distance education teacher training classroom environment according to the perceptions of teacher candidates. In this sense, 12 hypotheses were constructed and tested to investigate the distance education learning environment perceptions of teacher candidates using a scale.

Hypothesis 1: Perceived instructor support predicts achievement.

Hypothesis 2: Perceived student Interaction and collaboration predicts achievement.

Hypothesis 3: Perceived authentic learning predicts achievement.

Hypothesis 4: Perceived personal relevancy predicts achievement.

Hypothesis 4: Perceived active learning predicts achievement.

Hypothesis 6: Perceived learner autonomy predicts achievement.

Hypothesis 7: Perceived instructor support predicts perceived authentic learning.

Hypothesis 8: Perceived authentic learning predicts perceived personal relevancy.

Hypothesis 9: Perceived instructor support predicts perceived learner autonomy.

Hypothesis 10: Perceived personal relevancy predicts perceived learner autonomy.

Hypothesis 11: Perceived learner autonomy predicts perceived active learning.

Hypothesis 12: Perceived active learning predicts perceived student interaction and collaboration.

Participants
The study participants were selected according to the convenience sampling method (Cohen et al., 2007). 310 teacher candidates were invited and 253 of them volunteered to participate in the study. They were enrolled in three different bachelor level courses from six different teacher training programmes (Guidance and Psychological Counselling, Classroom Teaching, Science Teaching, Social Sciences, Elementary School Mathematics Teaching and Turkish Language Teaching) in the Faculty of Education at a state university located in the Aegean Region, Turkey. 136 (53.76%) of them were freshmen, 82 (32.41%) of them were sophomores, and 35 (13.83%) of them were junior teacher candidates. These three courses were distance education-based, full-credit courses. These three courses were distance education-based, full-credit courses. While the Introduction to Education and Principles and Methods of Instruction courses are 3-credit courses (according to the European Kredit Transfer System), Curriculum and Instruction is a 4-credit course. The characteristics of participants were added and shown in Table 1.

Table 1 The characteristics of participants
Full size table
Data collection instruments
Fraser and his colleagues (Fraser, 1980; Fraser, 1998; Fraser et al., 1982; Fraser et al., 1992; Fraser et al., 1996; Fraser & Treagust, 1986; Rentoul & Fraser, 1980; Taylor et al., 1997; Trickett & Moos, 1973) developed the main classroom environment instruments. Aside from the main instruments, researchers created a number of modified versions of these main classroom environment instruments that were used to analyze a specific environment. In this study, the Distance Education Learning Environments Survey (DELES) (Walker & Fraser, 2005) was used to test hypotheses constructed about the distance education learning environment perceptions of teacher candidates. DELES included scales adapted from the Constructivist Learning Environment Survey (CLES) (Taylor et al., 1997), the Constructivist On-Line Learning Environment Survey (COLLES) (Taylor & Maor, 2000), and the Distance and Open Learning Environment Survey (DOLES) (Jegede et al., 1995), as well as items modified from previously validated learning environment instruments. For instance, the CLES included the personal relevance dimension; the COLLES included relevance, tutor support, peer support, etc. dimensions; The DOLES included student cohesiveness, teacher support, etc. The DELES was validated by including 680 graduate and undergraduate students from 13 countries. The final version included 34 items in six scales: Instructor Support included eight items with a sample item ‘The instructor responds promptly to my questions’; Student Interaction and Collaboration dimension included six items with a sample item ‘I collaborate with other students in the class.’; Personal Relevance scale included seven items with a sample item ‘I can relate what I learn to my life outside of university.’; Authentic Learning dimension included five items with a sample item ‘I work on assignments that deal with real-world information.’; Active Learning factor included three items with a sample item ‘I explore my own strategies for learning.’; Learner autonomy included five items with a sample item ‘I play an important role in my learning.’ These dimensions are both variables of the classroom environment and also the scales of different classroom environment instruments. The alpha reliability coefficient of the DELES scales ranged from .75 to .95 (Walker & Fraser, 2005).

The validity of a Turkish version of the Distance Education Learning Environment Survey (DELES) was conducted by Ozkok et al. (2009). Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for each scale ranged from .64 to .84, with an overall reliability estimate of .93 for 34-items. The factorial structure of DELES in the Turkish context was confirmed through exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses. In the current study, Cronbach’s alpha coefficients for each scale ranged from .62 for active learning to .90 for student interaction and collaboration.

In this study, the total achievement of teacher candidates was obtained from the course instructors. The total achievement variable was named ‘Total’ and computed by adding 40% of the midterm exam and 60% of the final exam for all courses.

Data collection process
The distance education learning environment was developed using a Learning Management System (LMS) (i.e., Microsoft Teams) which is an interactive online system. It allowed instructors to record the synchronous courses and supported interaction among learners and instructors through the discussion board and instant messaging facility. The discussion board is ready to post messages by all participants enrolled in courses in LMS. Therefore, all teacher candidates could access and read the information posted about different course topics. The scale was administered through LMS. After obtaining the necessary permission for the research, the DELES link prepared through Google Forms was accessible by the teacher candidates for a week. All participants were volunteers. Then, data was downloaded from the LMS as a Microsoft Excel document and transferred into the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, Version 23.0) software program for further analysis.

Data analysis
The data analysis for the current study began with preliminary analysis. Firstly, data were checked in terms of missing values and outliers. After ensuring the absence of missing values and outliers, data were checked in terms of linearity, skewness, and kurtosis of the variables, univariate and multivariate normality (Field, 2009; Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007).

In this study, before conducting Structural Equation Modelling (SEM), the descriptive statistics, correlations were calculated (Field, 2009), and the measurement model was checked using Analysis of Moment Structures (AMOS) 20 to understand whether the recommended model fits the data. In this way, the factor structure and the relationships between observed variables (indicators) and latent variables (factors) were revealed (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007). In other words, the item-factor and factor-factor relations were specified.

In the current study, the degree of alignment between the theorized model and the collected data was tested through the model fit. The data were analysed with the maximum likelihood method of SEM. The current study employed the chi-square per degree of freedom ratio X2/df; root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), the goodness of fit index (GFI), adjusted goodness-of-fit index (AGFI), comparative fit index (CFI), incremental fit index (IFI), and Tucker-Lewis index (TLI) to examine model fit (Hair et al., 2014).

Results
In the current study, before conducting SEM, the descriptive statistics, including the mean and standard deviation, and the correlations between each scale of DELES were shown in Table 2 to describe teacher candidates’ perceptions about their experiences in various dimensions of online teacher training courses. Higher values (values closer to 5) designated greater quantity of the dimension experienced by the individuals who participated in the study. As shown in Table 2, while the highest mean values were obtained from instructor support (M = 4.49, SD = .52) which was followed by learner autonomy (M = 4.28, SD = .51) scales, the lowest mean of all the scales was received in the student interaction and collaboration (M = 3.51, SD = .95) dimension. Also, the total achievement scores of teacher candidates were calculated as M = 72.19 (SD = 19.63).

Table 2 The Descriptive Statistics and Correlations between DELES Scales
Full size table
According to Table 2, the strongest connection (r = .66) was found between personal relevancy and authentic learning properties of the distance teacher education classroom environment. The more teacher candidates believe instructors have designed authentic activities, the more they believe the education is relevant to them personally. The lowest significant relationship (r = .15) was found between the active learning and student interaction and collaboration components of the distance teacher education classroom environment. It may be inferred that as collaboration and interaction among their peers increase, they become more active, but at low level. Moreover, there is no significant correlation between the learner autonomy and student interaction and collaboration dimensions of the online teacher education classroom environment. It may be deduced that the responsibility of studying when, where and how much is not related to peer interaction, but teacher candidates decide themselves.

The current study used structural equation modelling (SEM) to test the hypotheses. Firstly, the measurement model was tested, as shown in Table 3.

Table 3 The Results Related to the Measurement Model
Full size table
The measurement model included the DELES scales as shown in Table 3. After conducting two modifications between item4 and item8, then conducting a new modification between item 17 and item 21, the chi-square estimate was found to be significant χ2 = 832.50, df = 510, p = .000; χ2/df = 1.63 which might be due to the sample size (Hair et al., 2014; Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007). χ2/df = 1.63 ratio is between 1 and 3 is indicative of a good fit. Also, the goodness of fit of the data to the model yielded to sufficient fit results (GFI = .84; CFI = .91; IFI = .91; TLI = .90; RMSEA = .05). It can be concluded that all fit indices of the revised measurement model exhibited a good fit.

In the second phase of the data analysis, the adequacy of the SEM was assessed by confirming whether the extent of relationships specified by the model was consistent with the available data using AMOS 8.7. SEM tested and the chi-square estimate was found significant χ2 = 939.53, df = 547, p = .000; χ2/df = 1.72. Model fit indices were computed to evaluate the model fit and reported as RMSEA = .053; GFI = .83; CFI = .89; IFI = .89; TLI = .88. The path model (Fig. 1) was constructed among DELES scales and between the achievement scores of teacher candidates, as shown in Table 4.

Fig. 1
figure 1
SEM by including DELES variables and academic achievement

Full size image
Table 4 Structural Equation Modelling
Full size table
The results showed that perceived instructor support predicted the achievement of teacher candidates significantly but at a low level (β = .17, p < .02). The other DELES variables were insignificant in predicting student achievement, as shown in Table 4. Moreover, perceived instructor support predicted perceived authentic learning (β = .30, p < .00), and perceived learner autonomy (β = .25, p < .02). Perceived authentic learning predicted perceived personal relevancy (β = .75, p < .00) and personal relevancy predicted perceived learner autonomy (β = .39, p < .00). Moreover, perceived learner autonomy predicted perceived active learning (β = .93, p < .00). However, perceived active learning predicted perceived student interaction and collaboration with a weak effect (β = .20, p < .01).

As can be seen in Table 4 and Fig. 1, instructor support through responding to the questions of teacher candidates, identifying problem areas in their studies, giving feedback on their assignments, initiating the participation of teacher candidates, and being easily accessible whenever it is required had significant effects on the achievement (Hypothesis 1). Moreover, by designing the curriculum, the instructor affected teacher candidates’ studying real cases and instances about class issues, and working on assignments that were related to real-life situations and issues, the instructor affected the authentic learning perceptions of teacher candidates positively (Hypothesis 7). Besides, instructor support affected the perceived autonomy dimension of the classroom environment positively by fostering teacher candidates’ taking control of their learning process and making decisions about their approach to learning, working times and places (Hypothesis 9). Furthermore, in this distance education learning environment, through the design of authentic learning environments, teacher candidates could relate and apply what they have learned in their lives outside of the university to their class experiences and vice versa, which is related to the personal relevancy property of the classroom environment (Hypothesis 8), which in turn affected perceived learner autonomy (Hypothesis 10). It can be inferred that as teacher candidates perceived more personal relevancy in courses, they took more control of their learning and made decisions about the learning process as congruent with the learner autonomy property of the distance learning environment. Also, as teacher candidates took more control of their learning, they decided when, where and how much to work, explored their strategies for learning, sought answers and solved problems related to the active learning property of the classroom environment (Hypothesis 11). According to β values as shown in Table 4 and Fig. 1, perceived learner autonomy was the strongest dimension in predicting a DELES variable, which is perceived active learning as an answer to the second research question. The active learning property of distance education classroom environments affected teacher candidates’ sharing their knowledge with peers, and discussing their ideas with other teacher candidates, i.e., the student interaction and collaboration dimension, but at a low level (Hypothesis 12).

Discussion
In the current study, DELES was implemented to explore teacher candidates’ perceptions of distance education teacher training classroom environments and the relationship between them and course achievement. The results showed that instructor support predicted achievement (but at a low level), perceived authentic learning and autonomy significantly; however, the other DELES variables were insignificant in predicting the achievement of teacher candidates. Cottom (2018) did not find a statistically significant correlation between the DELES variables and final course grades. Similar to the current study, Heron (2018) revealed that instructor support was a significant predictor of master’s level students’ certification in education programs’ knowledge acquisition perceptions. In the current study, it might be inferred that in these distance education teacher training classroom environments, instructors might have taken the role of a guide and teacher candidates might have been able to consult the instructor about anything they wanted to ask about course topics and whenever they needed. In other words, the instructors of these distance education courses were accessible to teacher candidates via LMS or e-mail as also revealed by Duman (2020). In this way, as also stressed by Deemer and Smith (2018), instructor support might have stimulated intrinsic interest and enthusiasm for learning. Also, positive instructor support might have encouraged learners to choose their problem-solving and decision-making strategies freely, i.e., perceived autonomy dimension, without imposing values and exigencies, as explained by Ural (2007). Likewise, in the study conducted by Reeves (1993), who matched learner autonomy with the design features of online instruction, in the current study instructors might have enabled teacher candidates to choose the path, rate, and content of the instruction freely, which is in line with the literature (Ke & Kwak, 2013; Walker & Fraser, 2005) and this design feature set by instructors might have contributed to the achievement of teacher candidates.

Although in this distance education course, perceived instructor support predicted perceived authentic learning, authentic learning did not predict achievement. On the contrary, Kirmizi (2014) found authentic learning as the only strong predictor of academic achievement of English Language and Literature students. However, by corroborating the results of the current study, Woiwode and Baysingar (2015) did not find a statistically significant correlation between authentic learning and cumulative GPA, final exam grade, and final course grades in a nursing informatics course. In the current study, as perceived instructor support predicted perceived authentic learning, instructors might have achieved some of the characteristics of authentic learning as summarized by Reeves et al. (2002), such as matching the course tasks with real-world issues and cases, including the use of a variety of resources and collaboration in and outside the course to accomplish tasks. However, the assessment of the current distance education courses was in the multiple-choice format, which was not a reflection of real-world scenarios and it is unclear whether teacher candidates separated significant time and commitment to complete course tasks. It can be seen that, besides instructor support, different variables, such as assessment procedures, dedication to course duties, and the separation of time willingly are important for the achievement of teacher candidates in distance education environments.

In this distance learning environment, learner autonomy did not predict achievement. Unlike the current study, Roth (1998) found that the unit test and final examination scores correlated significantly with the autonomy scale. Similarly, in the study conducted by Yen and Liu (2009), students’ perceptions of autonomy were found predictive of success rates in online courses, since autonomy allowed them to take more responsibility for their learning and complete their online courses with higher final grades and at higher rates. Heron (2018) explained that successful online learners are those with higher self-motivation and self-regulation skills. Although it is stated that learner autonomy leads to higher achievement (Milligan & Buckenmeyer, 2008), since individuals differ in their ability and characteristics to make appropriate learning and instructional decisions, in the current study, some teacher candidates might have viewed less material, skipped important instructional components, or they might have attributed value to different dimensions of instruction, which in turn might have resulted in limited achievement. In the study conducted by Louder (2011), while undergraduate students were in need of instructor support or interaction and collaboration much more than other variables, graduate students required autonomy and personal relevance in their distance education courses, which shows different distance education characteristics of undergraduate and graduate students in terms autonomy dimension.

The current study revealed that in this distance education course, authentic learning predicted personal relevancy significantly. Similarly, Pearson and Trinidad (2005) revealed in their study that in-depth reviews, case studies, and journals that were presented in the course helped learners expand their views about the course topics as they were relevant to the learner and reminiscent of real-life situations, which might be the case in the current study and make the instruction relevant to teacher candidates. Also, course instructors might have linked the real classroom events that teacher candidates might encounter in their future professions in schools to course topics to increase personal relevancy and might have used the course discussion boards more effectively by referring to the posts of teacher candidates during synchronous parts of courses rather than including discussion boards as a place where the messages of participants are stored.

Moreover, in this distance education course, perceived personal relevancy predicted perceived learner autonomy. In this sense, it may be inferred that instructors might have contributed to the increase in learner autonomy through the relevancy of instruction by personalizing the instruction in distance education courses through providing individualized study schedules, generating learner-relevant content and assessment, providing individual feedback, and offering greater individualized flexibility in both time and learning experiences, as also stressed in the literature (Arık, 2021; Carver, 2014; Duman, 2020; Hacıomeroglu & Elmalı-Erdem, 2021; Swan, 2003).

Furthermore, the current study found that in this distance education course, perceived learner autonomy predicted perceived active learning. The reason for this result might be related to the tasks and materials included in the process. As teacher candidates increased in autonomy, they might have intentionally chosen to take part in online plays and different tasks or activities (Yen & Liu, 2009) and also decided the time, speed, and sequence of learning content (Chou & Liu, 2005), which might have contributed to perceived active learning. Similarly, in the study conducted by Shroff and Vogel (2009), Bachelor Business Administration students read, responded to, or posted comments on virtual meeting space. They could exit the Blackboard Virtual Classroom and return at will. In such an environment, participants were intrinsically motivated due to the flexibility in making choices. In the current study, it can be said that the increased sense of autonomy, control, and empowerment contributed to teacher candidates’ perception of active learning in distance education teacher training courses. On the other hand, in these distance education courses, active learning did not predict students’ achievement. A potential reason may lie in the fact that active learning requires learners to be cognitively, behaviourally, and emotionally present, engaged in learning material, and take responsibility during the learning process. However, if learners are not self-motivated or accustomed to teacher-centered modes of instruction, they might have experienced problems in active distance learning environments, as also stated by Keeney (2015) and Walker (2003). Moreover, in the current study, some of the teacher candidates might have perceived the course tasks as either very difficult or very easy, which might have affected participation and resulted in less motivation to study and thus might have caused limited achievement.

Although in the current distance education course, perceived active learning predicted perceived student interaction and collaboration at a low level, as well as, student interaction and collaboration did not provide statistical support for course achievement. The reason for this result might be that the designs of distance education courses might not encourage teacher candidates with enough opportunities to interact or do not require collaboration and positive interdependence among participants. Also, teacher candidates might have intentionally avoided interactions in their distance education courses. Although the inclusion of technologies such as e-mails, discussion boards, computer-based plays, peer feedback, etc., is stated to facilitate interaction among learners (Beldarrain, 2006; Gok & Gok, 2017; Han & Finkelstein, 2013; Ke & Kwak, 2013; Keppell et al., 2006; Knight & Brame, 2018; Long, 2021; Smith et al., 2009; Snyder et al., 2015; Roman et al., 2020; Walker, 2003), the extent to which they are applied effectively in the current study by instructors is unknown and should be studied through interviews and observations in future studies. In the study conducted by Heron (2018), perceived student interaction and collaboration was not a significant predictor of either affective or cognitive learning outcomes of master’s level certification in education programs students. Similarly, Arık (2021) and Long et al. (2021) stated that learners had the lowest mean scores in the distance education learning environments’ student interaction and collaboration dimension. Also, Louder (2011) discovered that being more autonomous in their learning and seeing personal relevance to the subject matter were more important to undergraduate or graduate students than the social aspect of the online classroom. By corroborating the previous sentence, Rovai (2002) stated that interaction is not inherently result in learning; rather, interaction should be implanted within a learner community by supporting faith, trust, connection, and the commonality of learning goals and expectations. For this reason, it can be deduced that the design of the courses, including the existence of effective collaborative activities, group tasks, the frequency, and the type of feedback provided by the instructor, along with the distance education class sizes, might have influenced the interaction among learners and course achievement in these distance education courses.

Conclusion
The current study investigated the learning environment perceptions of teacher candidates in distance education courses. Specifically, it merged psychosocial learning environments research and distance education research. Additionally, by revealing how each of the variables influenced one another, it might contribute to developing new online courses and modifying already developed ones.

This study revealed instructor support as a critical variable which contributes to learner achievement through creating an authentic learning environment, learner-relevant content, and offering greater individualized flexibility in both time and learning. It fostered personal relevancy where more relevant courses provide more control about the learning process, i.e., learner autonomy, which in turn affected perceived active learning and student interaction and collaboration. Moreover, the study’s findings revealed that student interaction and collaboration had no significant effect on course achievement in distance education teacher training courses.

The findings of this study might provide useful findings for instructors to design distance education learning environments by sensitizing themselves to the positive and negative properties of distance education classroom environments. For clearer and profound conclusions and educational implications, future research in different contexts, grade levels, and courses is needed.

Implications
In this distance education teacher training environment, personal relevancy and authentic learning are highly related. It is suggested that instructors include topics related to the teaching profession and possible classroom situations in videos or films to pique the interest of learners, including lurkers in distance teacher education courses. In this way, as stated by Carver (2014) and Larkin (2019), teacher candidates can connect course content with the situations that they may encounter during their future professions, which increases the personal relevancy in distance learning environments. Having a sense of relevancy and meaning within the course content may assist learners in developing confidence, allowing them to take responsibility for their education and future success (Carver, 2014). It is also suggested that instructors of distance teacher education should evaluate course activities against the ten characteristics of authentic learning outlined by Reeves et al. (2002) to determine if they provide students with an authentic learning experience to contribute to achievement.

In order to encourage the learner autonomy dimension of distance courses, it is suggested that future research might investigate whether learners have important characteristics such as self-motivation, self-regulation, and the skills to organize their learning process independently by taking responsibility as indicators of learner autonomy. Moreover, it is suggested that alternative-but-equal assignments might be provided by distance education course instructors to support learner autonomy, increase engagement, active learning and interaction among learners. For instance, learners could choose to participate in an online discussion, write a blog, prepare podcasts teaching a topic, wikis, or work on a group project. In this way, teacher candidates who will teach in real classrooms might experience different opportunities to learn and apply what they have learned in their distance education classes in the future.

Furthermore, to contribute to the active learning perceptions of teacher candidates, instructors may design optimally challenging learning activities and tasks which are well-matched to the skills of teacher candidates to encourage feelings of capability and motivation. The inclusion of discussion boards, blogs, podcasts, and other synchronous and asynchronous computer-based applications, peer-led small group online workshops via online meeting platforms such as Zoom as suggested by Crouch and Mazur (2001), Long et al. (2021) and Snyder et al., (2015), the use of clicker technologies as a part of assessment and feedback, as suggested by Han and Finkelstein (2013), and creating and listening to audio files through online collaborative tasks, as applied by Bolliger and Armier (2013), might be suggested to engage learners more deeply in distance education courses and contribute to interactive learning environments. Also, various in-service programs might be organized for instructors to sensitize themselves about different authentic and active learning methods, computer applications, software, and games.

This study revealed that student interaction and collaboration had no significant effect on course achievement in distance education teacher training courses. This finding brings up the question of whether the low level of perceived student interaction and collaboration can be attributed to the course design or the teacher candidates’ decision to avoid those interactions, should be investigated through future research.

Limitations
This study did not include background learner characteristics such as grade levels of teacher candidates, efficacy in the use of information and communication technologies, overall GPA, self-directed learning readiness, etc. to analyse the structural equation modelling. As these properties of teacher candidates may relate to the achievement and their perceptions of distance teacher education learning environments, future research might include them.

Finally, this study is limited to quantitative data collected through the implementation of DELES and the collection of course grades. Future research could also employ qualitative methodology to investigate teacher candidates’ experiences and perceptions of distance education teacher training classes. For instance, they might examine how teacher candidates define instructor support, autonomy, authentic learning, the factors that impact student interaction and collaboration, etc. and what behaviours they consider to be supportive in distance education environments and how each of these variables relates to the others might help design better distance education courses. Also, in the current study, data were collected from teacher candidates who enrolled in educational sciences courses at a small state university. As a result, future studies should look at the distance education learning perceptions of teacher candidates enrolled in various courses at different grade levels at large state universities and foundation universities, with a larger sample size for comparison.

Although the present study provided a better understanding of online learning environments, student perceptions, and learning outcomes, research must continue to explore these topics to strive for continual improvement in distance education learning environments. Future research could aid in determining the potential causes of the insignificant relationships in this structural equation modelling.