In this paper, we introduce a Protected Routing, Modulation, Spectrum, and Core Allocation (RMSCA) algorithms with fluctuating traffic in Space Division Multiplexing-Elastic Optical Networks (SDM-EONs). This RMSCA algorithm is called Traffic Awareness Cross-talk Interference Avoidance (TACIA-RMSCA). We investigate the efficiency of efficient allocation of spectrum resources to minimize the impact of crosstalk (XT), and blocking probability. We first assess the impact inter-core crosstalk in Multi-Core Fiber (MCF) with the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. This is usually caused by signal leaks generated by the adjacent cores. It can occur whenever the transmitted optical signals overlap their spectrum segments. We design the Triangular Iterative Core Assignment (TICA) strategy to overcome XT, and to minimize the blocking probability. We evaluate the performance of TACIA-RMSCA with the benchmark algorithm (GAK-RMSCA). Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can achieve promising performance with the peak load of the fluctuating traffic.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Space Division Multiplexing-Elastic Optical Networks

Fluctuating time-varying traffic rates

Quality of Transmission

1. Introduction
The fluctuating traffic scenarios are commonly evolving in optical transport network (Yin et al., 2019). This is caused by the deployment of content-oriented applications created by Software Defined Networks (SDNs) like google, Microsoft, Baidu, and Facebook (Nag et al., 2011). These applications have generated fluctuating data traffic by attracting many users with different internet needs. The potential threats of the exponential growth of the fluctuating traffic has led to extensive research to increase the capacity, and improve efficiency of the currently deployed Wavelength-Division Multiplexing (WDM) systems. The currently prevailing enhancements in WDM networks do not provide many options for network resilience and tolerance in the phase of high fluctuating flow rates. This is because of its rigid, and coarse arrangement, which limits resource allocation to a certain bound (Yang, 2020). This kind of behavior may not quantify resource allocation based on transmission reach. As a result, it presents no guarantees for resource utilization, and manageable operational costs. This has limited seamless flow of data traffic in SDN data centers.

In order to address the above challenges, the recent research advancements have presented many solutions on Elastic Optical Networks (EONs) with many enhancements to guarantee Network serviceability (Chand Chatterjee et al., 2015). But the capacity limit of the single mode core may soon be overwhelmed by large volumes of the exponential growth of fluctuating traffic. As a result, Space Division Multiplexing (SDM-EONs) was adopted with the use of MCFs to switch multiple parallel cores to transit large volumes of traffic (Fujii et al., 2017).

The proposed SDM-EONs implement the technique of Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM). OFDM allocates spectrum resources flexibly during the resource allocation (Xu and Kim, 2017). In OFDM, the optical signals are transmitted over spectrum segments with fine granularity (Fan et al., 2015). These increases the chance of utilizing the available spectrum resources efficiently. However, due to core-switching, the flexibility of allocating resources in MCF-SDM-EONs presents XT constraints. The XT constraint is caused by overlapping signals from active adjacent cores (Oliveira and da Fonseca, 2017). The XT constraint can become very serious, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic flow rates (Klinkowski and Zalewski, 2019). The detrimental impact of XT may disrupt traffic flow due to signal impairment, raising the risk levels of spectrum fragmentation, which consumes much more spectrum resources, during resource allocation (Yang et al., 2018).

Moreover, fluctuating traffic rates have a very high demand for bandwidth comparatively with stable traffic, and sometimes exceeds the amount of bandwidth required by peak traffic (Zhong et al., 2019). If the spectrum fragmentation rate increases, due to the impact of XT, the cost-effective spectrum allocation becomes difficult to achieve, if fluctuating traffic flow scenarios are projected based on 24-h dimension. This is because the fluctuating traffic rates occur due to the growing diversity of user demands over time. They are usually experienced daily, during different hours of the day. In this case study, the day time traffic is from 6:00AM to 18:00PM, and the night time traffic is from 18:00PM to 06:00AM. These complicates the RMSCA process, during the peak load of fluctuating traffic.

Despite the efficacy of SDM-EONs to accommodate larger volumes of traffic during RMSCA, SDM EONs are vulnerable to link failures. It's estimated in every operational optical transport network, a failure occurs every 4 h. With the RMSCA overwhelmed by exponential traffic flow rates (Zhu et al., 2020a), a link failure can cause spectrum fragmentation. This increases disruption of seamless signal transmission in the optical transport network. In order to maintain reliable resource allocation, p-cycle protection is applied to protect not more than one path during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic (Oliveira and da Fonseca, 2019a).

Furthermore, expanding transmission capacity rates requires MCF-SDM-EONs to aggregate multiple cores to cope with the growing traffic demands, during peak load (Rottondiet al., 2019). As a result, the concept of core allocation is key to the success of MCF. This is due to the dynamic effects of XT generated by optical signals propagating through adjacent cores (Yang et al., 2019). In order to minimize spectrum overlapping of adjacent cores. The TICA policy divides the MCF into two: prioritized cores, and non-prioritized cores. The policy first allocates traffic to the spectrum resources in the prioritized cores. The occupied spectrum resources in the prioritized cores are used to determine the required resources to be allocated in the non-prioritized cores. In comparison, the core prioritization in (Fujii et al., 2014a) allocates spectrum resources based on the cycle of prioritized cores. The potential threat of XT is very high, and the detrimental impact of XT increases with the accumulation of incoming traffic in the cores (epak Sharma and Kummar, 2017). As a result, the looming risks of fragmentation due to XT is high (Takagi et al., 2011). Conversely, TICA policy enhances the core prioritization scheme by implementing spectrum compactness (SC) to reinforce load balancing, during peak load of the fluctuating traffic. TICA policy allocates resources on non-prioritized cores using threshold determined by the SC of the prioritized cores. The objective is to provide enough service time required by the out-going traffic in the prioritized cores before the incoming traffic accumulates in the non-prioritized cores. This can alleviate the detrimental impact of XT over long haul transmission, during peak load of fluctuating traffic (Klinkowski et al., 2018).

In this paper, we relay solutions to enhance networks that are prone to the issues of the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. First, we propose a Fluctuating Traffic Model (FTM) to formulate characteristics that describe fluctuating time-varying traffic flow rates. Secondly, we introduce a protected Routing, Modulation, Spectrum, and Core Allocation (RMSCA) algorithm called Traffic Awareness Cross-talk Interference Avoidance (TACIA-RMSCA). TACIA-RMSCA embraces the Triangular Iterative Core Assignment (TICA) strategy to overcome the impact of XT. Last but not least, we simulate experimental results to evaluate the proposed framework. The performance of the two heuristic algorithms is evaluated with the benchmark algorithm (GAK-RMSCA). The experimental results show that TACIA-RMSCA registered a significant performance than GAK-RMSCA.

1.1. Contribution
In this paper, we propose a protected TACIA-RMSCA, which implements TICA policy to solve RMSCA challenges in MCF-SDM-EON, during peak load of fluctuating traffic. During resource allocation, TACIA-RMSCA is supported by a P-Cycle protection scheme to minimize the disruption of seamless traffic flow, in case of single link failure. In summary, the contributions of this paper are:

•
Formulating TICA policy to allocate spectrum resources, in order to minimize the detrimental impact of XT, during peak load of fluctuating traffic.

•
Spectrum assignment constraint to minimize spectrum overlapping, and support P-cycle protection scheme, during RMSCA.

•
Efficient utilization of spectrum resources, during peak load of fluctuating traffic.

•
Introducing efficient heuristic algorithms, that can be implemented in large scale scenarios of data transmission in Optical transport networks.

•
Evaluation and comparison of the proposed strategies with existing solutions based on simulation experiment.

The proceeding remaining sections of this paper is presented as follows: Section II discusses the related work. Section III introduces the proposed solution. Section IV presents statistical evaluations of experimental results by simulation. Section V discusses, and analyses the experimental results Section.VI concludes the research.

2. Literature review
Due to the increasingly emerging technical challenges in the currently prevailing network system, several researches have been widely investigated in recent years.

The authors in (Manousakis and Ellinas, 2017) proposed appropriate wavelength selective switches (WSSs) placement, and XT-aware RSA algorithms, using integer linear programming (ILP). He designed a heuristic vertex coloring (VC) algorithm to minimize the dynamic effects of XT. The objective is to maintain a low cost of operations. The authors in (Kumar Singh and Jukan, 2018) presented machine learning techniques for aggregating traffic in optical network data centers. The time-varying traffic flow rates were predicted to provide freedom for the efficient re-allocation of spectrum resources to minimize the dynamic effects of XT.

All the above work was done in EONs, which focuses at minimizing the impact of in-band XT interactions between signals passing through the same network nodes.

The author in (Ehsani Moghaddam et al., 2020) proposed RSCA with modulation level (RMCSA) in the form of mixed-ILP (MILP) with a protection scheme. The purpose was to support multi-class traffic, and minimizes the dynamic effects of XT in MCF-SDM-EON. Furthermore, machine learning techniques were implemented to predict XT phases in (yao et al., 2018). The authors designed a novel XT estimation model using a beam propagation methodology to calibrate XT levels. The objective was to monitor XT, when allocating spectrum resources in MCF-SDM-EON. The authors (Zhu and Zhu, 2017) proposed MCF-SDM-EON architectures, where nodes were identified using trust-levels, and introduced an Attack-aware RSCA algorithm. The algorithm prioritizes the reduction of the dynamic effects of XT, and security threats from the physical-layer.

The above work, implemented core prioritization based on the XT levels determined by the circumstantial influence of physical-layer threats, which may not be an ideal strategy. This is because the physical layer may not influence over, and when incoming traffic aggregates in multiple cores, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic.

Reference (Muhammad et al., 2014) first dealt with the study of allocating spectrum resources in MCF-SDM-EON. The authors formulated an ILP, and introduced a heuristic algorithm to address the current RSCA challenges in a flexible grid of MCF-SDM-EON, reducing the impact of XT, and minimizing the rightmost index of the occupied spectrum slot. Following dynamic traffic rates assumptions, the authors in (Tode and Hirota, 2017), (Fujii et al., 2014a), and (Muhammad et al., 2015) presented many heuristic algorithms for the allocation of cores, and spectrum resources in a highly demanding environment. The target was to jointly reduce XT, and fragmentation of the spectrum resources. Reference (Fujii et al., 2014b) extends to (Fujii et al., 2014a) introduced a core prioritization, and classification scheme within the concepts of novel Architecture-on-Demand. The incoming traffic was allocated to non-adjacent cores to prevent spectrum overlapping. The authors in (Yuan et al., 2018a) introduced a bi-directional novel step-index, and trench-assisted MCF to calibrate XT levels, and presented core prioritization schemes to minimize the dynamic effects of XT.

The above work allocated incoming traffic based on the presumptive prioritization of core assignment to minimizing the impact of XT, neglecting circumstantial accumulation of incoming traffic in all the cores, during peak load of fluctuating traffic. The feasible efficacy of the core prioritization to minimize spectrum overlapping diminishes, when the peak load is approached. Today we present TICA policy to improve the weakness of core prioritization mechanism, the policy implements Spectrum Compactness to minimize the impact of XT, during peak load of fluctuating traffic.

3. Proposed solution
3.1. Network topology
The SDM-EONs is modeled in the form of a graph G = (N, L, C) where N, L, and C denote nodes, links, and cores in the network path M. Each incoming traffic is assumed to arrive in different sizes (volume in megabytes), and modulation requirement. The graph consists of a network path with disjointed links. P-Cycle protection scheme is formed by dividing N into two grouped nodes. The grouped nodes constitute two sub graph of G. A random link failure is a setup on every active M of G to disrupt traffic flow. A set of cores C is assumed to be in each link. When incoming traffic is allocated, the XT occurs between active adjacent cores. In case of a link failure, the active path is mapped to a any node in the graph to form a multi-graph (Oliveira and da Fonseca, 2019b). If the mapped nodes contain inactive links, the grouped nodes reconfigure to form sub-graphs to compute a P-cycle protection path. The candidate network path is computed using both Dijkstra and k-Shortest path algorithms, depending on the heuristic algorithm requirement. We first compute a dedicated path, and in case of any link failure, the backup path is computed.

3.1.1. Modulation format
The distance adaptive modulation formats applied are Base Phase Shift keying (BPSK), Quadrature PSK (QPSK), Quadrature Amplitude Shift Keying 8 (QAM-8), QAM-16, QAM-32, and QAM-64. We set up each modulation format with different requirements of spectrum slot consumption according to the link distance. The modulation formats are critical for resource allocation. When incoming traffic arrives, the link distance is used to determine the appropriate modulation metrics.

3.1.2. Parameter description
The following parameters are relevant for the detailed description of the RMSCA algorithms:

•
 is a connection of the incoming traffic. Where 
, 
, , 
 and 
 are the source node, destination node, total spectrum slot number, starting time, and ending time of the connection respectively.

•
 is the periodical prediction.

•
 is the connection in a queue.

•
 is the current traffic distributed on .

•
 is the future traffic distributed on .

•
 is the path from the source node 
 to the destination node 
.

•
 is the weight of the route of the path.

•
 is the set of all 
 according to , and .

3.2. Fluctuating Traffic Model(FTM)
In this section, we generate fluctuating time-varying traffic rates based on 24 h-time dimensions of the day. The fluctuating time-varying traffic is generated in three phases: Busy Day Time Traffic (BDT), Busy Night Time Traffic (BNT), and Normal Time Traffic (NTT).

The BUSY-DAY-TIME (BDT) traffics generated during working hours 6:00–18:00 of the day. This is aggregated with Normal (stable) Time Traffic (NTT) to form a peak load. The BUSY-NIGHT-TIME (BNT) traffic is generated during evening hours, and night hours 18:00–24:00, and 00:00–06:00 respectively. This is also aggregated with NTT to form a night time peak load.

The Traffic generation follows a network Topology G (N, L) consisting of 28 optical nodes, and 52 link fibers, as shown in Fig. 1. The traffic is generated based on sets of different grouped nodes marked with dotted lines. The dotted sky-blue, and black color indicate the BDT, and BNT traffic, respectively. The boundary between them indicates that both traffic occurs asynchronously. The BDT starts at a particular time, and gains momentum. However, no sooner it's traffic momentum starts to fade than the BNT traffic starts to gain momentum.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (397KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Traffic distribution and generation for BDT and BNT.

We divide the network topology G (N, L) into four circles i.e 
, 
, 
, and 
 to generate traffic based on queuing theory. 
 is the origin of the traffic, which carries the heavy traffic load. The four circles represent different traffic loads, as shown below.

•
.

•
.

•
.

•
.

: the number of nodes in N.

: the link between 
, and 
 for .

: the number of circles denoting set of circled nodes.

3.3. Traffic generation
The network traffic load is measured during the busiest hours of the traffic flow to approach a peak traffic load (https://www.cisco.com/c/e, 2007). The traffic generation follows a time dimension of 24 h arrival rates of the day. This is based on a network topology G (N, L) divided into three categories:

1.
The BDT Traffic is generated by combining the arrival rates of 
, 
, 
, 
, represented by the marked circles such that 
, 
, 
, 
. This is aggregated with the NTT traffic to form a peak load of the day, during working hours.

2.
The BNT Traffic is similar to BDT Traffic, but the only difference is that it is generated during evening, and night hours. This is also aggregated with the NTT traffic to form a peak load of the night.

3.
The NTT Traffic is generated by the arrival rate 
 such that 
, to represent the stable traffic. The peak traffic flow is approximated within the range of 15–20 percent of the fluctuating traffic flow rates of the day (https://www.cisco.com/c/e, 2007). In our computations, we estimated it to be 20 percent of the day's total traffic flow rates to approach peak traffic.

The traffic generation follow Poisson process with holding time 
, which is fixed negative exponential. The arrival rates 
 are generated using equation in (Vela et al., 2016) expressed as,(1)
 
 
where, 
 is the starting time of arrivals, 
 is the ending time of the arrivals, and 
 is the time interval between 
, and 
.

3.4. Problem statement
3.4.1. MCF-SDM-based elastic optical network
The detrimental impact of XT depends on the distance between active adjacent cores, the number of adjacent cores, and the transmission reach. Fig. 2 shows a single mode 7-MCF with the detrimental impact of XT between adjacent cores. The larger the distance between cores, the less serious the dynamic effects of XT. During signal propagation in 7-MCF, high XT levels can be generated between the Core-1, and Core-2. Core-6 generates the highest level of XT since it is adjacent to all the other cores. Core-1 is non-adjacent to Core-3, the XT generated between them is less than the XT generated between Core-1, and Core-2. A similar arrangement follows in 19-MCF, with it is the center core being Core-18. As a result, the detrimental impact of each spectrum slot in a frequency domain differs from core to core. However, signals propagating through adjacent cores with different frequency slots of all the adjacent cores allocated on different segments may not have the dynamic effects of XT. The XT constraint, if not dealt with, can complicate the common RMSCA problems (Tang et al., 2019). The XT effects can become very detrimental over long-haul transmission reach. This can derail chances to maintain the quality of transmission (QoT) standards. Furthermore, spectrum-continuity constraint should be maintained during resource allocation. This can be done by allowing continuous allocation of spectrum resources (Zhao et al., 2019). In addition, the whole spectrum resources must be contiguously allocated to the incoming traffic, in order to meet the requirements of spectrum consecutive constraints. This new continuity, and contiguity constraint can increase the complexity of conventional RMSCA problems (Yuan et al., 2019).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (304KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Dynamic eﬀect of the XT in MCF.

The previous works in (Tode and Hirota, 2017), (Fujii et al., 2014a), (Muhammad et al., 2015) extending to (Fujii et al., 2014a), and (Yuan et al., 2018a) implemented a core prioritization scheme to guarantee the continuity, and contiguity constraint, when switching cores. However, during peak load the overwhelming traffic incapacitates the ability of the a core prioritization scheme, igniting a significant impact of XT constraint. This increases the overhead of spectrum resources, due to spectrum fragmentation, and may become very detrimental with long-haul transmissions. As a result, the TICA policy is introduced to implement efficient spectrum allocation, using spectrum compactness during RMSCA. With all the above constraints taken into account, this policy curtails the dynamic effects of XT, as shown in Fig. 3, while continuously monitoring XT interference, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. The XT levels of each active core are always calculated during transmission. The TICA policy applies coupled-power theory in (Zhang et al., 2016), which integrates equation (2) to formulate the statistical mean XT of a homogeneous MCF per unit length expressed in equation (3),(2)
 

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (202KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Core Allocation scheme with XT awareness.

Therefore, using the coupled-power theory, the mean XT can be expressed as shown below,(3)
 

Equation (2) represents the increase in the mean XT per unit fiber length generated by adjacent or neighboring cores. Where r, D, ,  are the fiber variable parameters, indicating the bend radius, core pitch, coupling coefficient, and propagation constant, respectively.  represents the total number of neighboring cores, and L indicates the length of the fiber. Equation (3) is comprehensively applied in this case study to monitor the XT threshold along the routing path, whenever incoming traffic is allocated.

3.5. Traffic awareness cross-talk interference avoidance (TACIA) algorithm
3.5.1. The Triangular Iterative Core Assignment
We define a Triangular Iterative Core Assignment (TICA) Policy as a policy, which first allocates spectrum resources to the prioritized cores (selected cores adjacent to non active cores), and later on allocates on non-prioritize cores (selected cores adjacent to active cores), as the traffic grows. The spectrum slots are allocated on non-prioritized cores based on their XT vulnerability, whenever the traffic demand increases. During spectrum allocation, we assume that the detrimental impact of all the spectrum slots in a frequency domain is the same. The policy creates two priorities of core allocation shown in Fig. 3. During core switching, the Spectrum Compactness of each adjacent active core in non-prioritize cores is calculated (Zhao Huet al., 2018). The target is to measure the vulnerability of the non-prioritize cores to the impact of XT, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic.

Let 
 be the total number of spectrum slots that can be allocated in each core , when the incoming traffic arrive.  is the total number of cores in each link.  represents the total number of spectrum slots in each link 
. 
 be the total number of spectrum slots consumed, when the incoming traffic is allocated in all cores of each link 
 as shown in equation (4),(4)
where, 
 denotes the total number of allocated spectrum slots in each core  of the link 
, when a connection is established. 
 denotes the number of spectrum slots ranging from  to 
 required to establish a connection, whenever the incoming traffic arrive.  is the total number of spectrum resource consumed, when establishing a connection along the routing path as shown in equation (5),(5)

This approach implements the use of the first available spectrum slots. 
 computes the total spectrum resources allocated to accommodate incoming traffic in each core  of the link 
. This policy operates in two ways algorithms: Iterative core selection algorithm, and Triangular Core Assignment algorithms.

3.5.2. Iterative core selection algorithm
During core switching, TICA selects prioritized cores from a given set of cores for spectrum allocation, when the incoming traffic arrives. The spectrum compactness (SC) of each core in the prioritized cores allocated is calculated using equation (6). The spectrum slot allocated is denoted by a binary variable 
 set to 1, if a spectrum slot of core c in a link 
 is occupied; otherwise 0, if 
 is available.(6)
 
 
where, 
, and 
 are the maximum, and minimum occupied spectrum slots in core  respectively. 
, and 
 are the total occupied, and available spectrum slots in core  of the link 
. During the selection of non-prioritized cores, the state of the spectrum resources of the selected core is examined to determine whether they are occupied or available. If the selected core has available resources, the XT level of all the spectrum slots in the selected core is computed based on SC of the adjacent active cores. The same procedure is repeated for all the other remaining non-prioritized cores. The SC of the active cores adjacent to the selected cores is used to determine the threshold level of spectrum resources allocated on the selected core when the incoming traffic arrives.

3.5.3. Triangular Core Assignment algorithm
During resource allocation, the pre-computed resources of the selected path are sorted based on their XT levels. The spectrum resources of the core with the lowest XT levels are selected. In order to maintain the XT levels of the selected core, the SC of active cores in the non-prioritize cores is used to determine the threshold. The traffic is allocated to the non-prioritize cores according to the SC of the active cores. Fig. 4 shows the red-dotted line depicting the threshold of the selected core. The threshold changes with change in the SC of active or busy adjacent cores. The threshold level of the selected core increases when the outgoing traffic is departing. This can provide more space to accommodate the incoming traffic. The blue dotted line shows the movement of the outgoing traffic, which seems to have a direct impact on the threshold of the selected core. The spectrum is allocated using crosstalk protection ratio 
, and the critical ratio described in the preceding section. These ratios allocate spectrum according to the threshold determined by the SC of adjacent active cores. It's important to note that these ratios are also used to ensure that the prioritized cores are completely allocated before any traffic is allocated on the non-prioritize cores. This can help to minimize spectrum fragmentation, which leads to wastage of spectrum resources (Zhu et al., 2020b).

Assumption1

All the spectrum slots are continuously allocated, and conveniently released to prevent spectrum fragmentation based on the concept implemented in (Paira et al., 2020). Therefore, the risk of spectrum fragmentation is negligible.

Example 1

If all cores are set to a fixed number of spectrum slots 100. In addition, each incoming traffic arrives with different volumes and modulation formats. In this case, the incoming traffic requires 20 spectrum slots. If the prioritized cores are occupied, but have some available slots, which may not be enough to accommodate the incoming traffic. The XT protection ratio is used to allocate a portion of the incoming traffic to the remaining available slots of the prioritized cores. The remaining portion of the traffic is then allocated to non-prioritized cores. Whereas the non-prioritized cores, on the other hand, the spectrum allocation is done using both protection, and critical ratio. This is based on the assumption that allocating smaller portions of the incoming traffic in all the available non-prioritized cores may provide enough service time for the active or busy prioritized cores. The objective is to deliver the outgoing traffic to its destination before the incoming traffic accumulates on the non-prioritized cores, as shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (582KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Time-based allocation of spectrum resources to minimize XT.

3.5.4. Resource allocation based on time dimensions in TICA policy
During RMSCA, MCF-SDM-EONs consume high capacity of the bandwidth, the provisioned resources are often constrained resulting into high rate of blocking probability (Yuan Zhuet al., 2019). As a result, the demand for the appropriate allocation of resources may rise, in order to minimize wastage.

The allocation of resources is based on each traffic demand. The incoming traffic arrive in different volumes, and modulation requirements. To determine any future allocation of resources, the currently occupied spectrum slots 
 in the active core are computed. The future required slots 
 in the active core is compared with the currently occupied slots as shown in equation (7). If they satisfy 
, the incoming traffic is allocated. 
 is threshold ratio set due to spectrum compactness of the occupied adjacent cores. 
 is the protection ratio for allocating smaller portions of traffic. 
 is the total number of available non-prioritized cores. 
 is the critical ratio defined as a reciprocal of 
. In order to allocate spectrum on non-prioritized cores, we apply this equation (7)(7)

In order to satisfy 
, the future required spectrum slots 
 of each selected cores in non-prioritized cores are calculated by 
 (Paira et al., 2020). Where  is the total spectrum slot number required by incoming traffic. The remaining portion is allocated to the other remaining non-prioritized cores. If the selected core is occupied, and has remaining available slots to reach the 
 limit, which do not satisfy the slots required by the incoming traffic. We introduce a critical resource allocation equation (8),(8)
 
to calculate the future spectrum slots 
, and the remaining portion is allocated to the other non-prioritized cores. In this case, we first use 
 to compute 
. If 
 is higher than the remaining available slots, the critical ratio is used to further dividing 
 into smaller portions that can be allocated to all the available non-prioritized cores.

Assumptions 2

The reason of allocating a smaller portion of traffic volumes to non-prioritized cores is:

1.
We assume that, allocating a smaller portions of traffic to all non-prioritized cores can reduce the incoming traffic's synchronous accumulation. As a result, XT interference is minimized.

2.
Delayed accumulation of traffic can provide ample service time for the out-going traffic, while accommodating in-coming traffic.

3.
Since the incoming traffic arrives in different volumes, the cores may not wholly get occupied. This usually occurs when the remaining available slots may not satisfy the bandwidth requirement of the incoming traffic. Therefore, dividing the incoming traffic into smaller portions may facilitate efficient utilization of the available slots in the cores. This can help to reduce the risk of fragmentation as illustrated in example 1 in Assumption1.

3.5.5. Network path selection
The available resources entirely influence the selection of the path in the candidate path. The current and future occupied spectrum slots in each link 
, are computed. equation (9) is triggered when the allocated traffic reaches the link threshold as shown in equation (10),(9)
if equation (10),(10)
the new candidate path is updated. Where 
 is link maximum capacity threshold assumed to have a significant reduction of XT, during peak load. 
 is the weight of the route of the path.  is a prediction tool to approximate the required adjustment to accommodate the growing traffic demand. The decision taken during the spectrum, and core assignment is greatly influenced by . The higher the values of , the bigger it impacts resource allocation. The policy computes the currently occupied spectrum slots, and uses them to determine the future resources required to accommodate the growing traffic demand. When incoming traffic arrives, the computed candidate cores  in  of each link are selected based on their XT levels. We evaluate each link distance in the candidate path to determine appropriate modulation metrics required by the candidate network path (Yuan et al., 2018b).

3.5.6. Cross-talk algorithm
The XT calculation is based on the total number of spectrum slots allocated in each link core , whenever a connection is established. Equation (11) computes the total number of occupied spectrum slots, which are overlapping each other between core , and adjacent core 
, whenever a connection is established in both , and 
.(11)
where, 
 is set to 1, if the spectrum slot in adjacent core 
 is occupied. 
 denotes the total number of the affected spectrum slots in active adjacent cores. Therefore the XT generated during resource allocation is,(12)
 
where, 
, denotes the total signals force emanating from all active adjacent cores.

3.6. A brief description and structure TACIA-RMSCA algorithm
Supported by the protection scheme, the structural design of TACIA-RMSCA is in two ways: the one with single path (TACIA-RMSCA), and the one with a multipath (TACIAK-RMSCA), where K denotes the number of shortest path computed. TACIA-RMSCA, and TACIAK-RMSCA are designed to overcome the challenges posed by XT constraint, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. The XT constraint caused by the active neighboring or adjacent cores, and if the allocated traffic is transmitted over long-haul transmissions, bandwidth utilization may rapidly increase, due to spectrum fragmentation in MCF-SDM-EON (). During core allocation, we assume that, the flexible spectrum resources are uniformly allocated with an excellent granular distribution of 12.5 GHz.

Basing on the above shortcomings of conventional RMSCA, TACIA-RMSCA, and TACIAK-RMSCA are designed to allocate incoming traffic in accordance with the spectrum continuity, and contiguity constraints (Talebi et al., 2014). The objective is to monitor the dynamic effects of XT, and sustain the network resilience in case of link failure during peak load.

3.6.1. GAK-RMSCA algorithm
During RMSCA, GAK-RMSCA computes the K-shortest path, and sorts all the link cores using Core Prioritization Policy (CPP) in (Fujii et al., 2014b). GAK-RMSCA is unaware of traffic flow, the selection of the candidate path is based solely on the principle of the shortest path. The principle depends on the available resources in the candidate path, disregarding the demand of the incoming traffic. Moreover the allocation of cores is based on the assumption that, if all the non adjacent cores are allocated first, followed by the adjacent cores, the impact of XT is less like to occur. The resource selection, and allocation criteria are based on the on the available resources in the path, making path selection decisions vital for improving its ability to accommodate the growing traffic. If the available resources satisfy the incoming traffic requirements, the connection is established; otherwise, it's blocked. In an attempt to reduce the rate of blocking probability, the established connections will be forced to find alternative routes to prevent the accumulation of incoming connections in the link. This in fact wastes spectrum resources, especially when the hop-count increases, but less comparative with the spectrum fragmentation. When a link failure occurs, the allocated traffic is backed up, and the spectrum resources are reserved. The reserved spectrum resources are used to compute a protection path for reallocation of traffic.


Algorithm 1. Cross-talk algorithm.




Algorithm 2. TICA [Iterative core selection] algorithm.




Algorithm 3. TICA [Triangular core assignment]-algorithm.



3.6.2. TACIA-RMSCA algorithm
TACIA-RMSCA is designed to overcome the challenges of GAK-RMSCA. Unlike GAK-RMSCA, TACIA-RMSCA is traffic-aware and computes the shortest path based on the demand of the incoming traffic. The resource selection, and allocation criteria are based on the algorithm (2), and (3). When a service connection 
 arrive, a dedicated path  is calculated by Dijkstra algorithm, when k = 1 using 
, and when k  2, K-shortest path algorithm replaces Dijkstra algorithm. This is the shortest route for distributing current and future traffic. In case of a dedicated path fails, the allocated traffic is backed up, and the spectrum resources are reserved. The reserved spectrum resources are used to compute a protection path for reallocation of traffic. The protection path  is calculated by the Dijkstra algorithm, using 
. This is the shortest min-hop route.

3.7. The analysis of the time complexity
The time complexity of any algorithm is always estimated based on how long it takes to execute a specific task. Similarly, with the other algorithms, TACIA-RMSCA is evaluated by computing the time they spend to execute a task.

3.7.1. TACIA-RMSCA time complexity
The time complexity analysis for the algorithm is measured using the time taken to compute the shortest path. The number of cores, and spectrum slots consumed during resource allocation.

TACIA-RMSCA implements Yen's algorithm to compute the K-shortest path (Jin, 1971). Therefore, the time complexity for the K-shortest path algorithm is  for worst-case scenario analysis (Bouillet, 2007). , where , and  denote the total number of cores, and spectrum slots, respectively. Since the spectrum slots,  are always searched in every link, and the path is loopless, its hop count is . Therefore, it's time complexity would be . If k = 1, Dijkstra's algorithm replaces yen's algorithm, and Dijkstra's time complexity is  (Fredman and Tarjan, 1987). Therefore, the time complexity for 
, when k = 1 would be . However, step 5–8 of TACIA algorithm, has a hidden loop used to update , , and 
 on  edges. This loop is always executed, after every time  changes, whenever incoming traffic arrive. Dijkstra's algorithm is executed twice at Step 9–10, the computing time complexity for the TACIA as , when k = 1. When TACIA-RMSCA, Dijkstra's algorithm is used to compute the protection path and KSP algorithm to calculate the path for distributing traffic, amounting to the time complexity of TACIA-RMSCA as .


Algorithm 4. TACIA-RMSCA algorithm.



4. Experiment
The experimental results are simulated using NSFNET topology running on JAVA platforms. The performance of MCF-SDM-EON was evaluated during the peak load of the fluctuating time-varying traffic. The total number of spectrum slots in each link is set to be 700, with each core having 100 spectrum slots. The holding time of the service connection 
, which follows negative exponential. The prediction time  ranges from 30 to 300 min. The traffic is generated using equation (1). The arrival rates are set in a descending sequence of 
, with increasing step index = 10. In order to generate traffic load of four different queues 
 to aggregate on the link. The stable traffic (NTT) is set to be 
 = 140. For each service connection 
, the total number of the spectrum slots  required, is set according to it's modulation format during resource allocation. The traffic is generated from 
 = 6 to 
 = 18. The XT parameters are tabulated below.

The performance evaluation of the MCF-SDM-EONs is based on GAK-RMSCA, and TACIA-RMSCA, during the peak load of the fluctuating time-varying traffic flow rates.

4.1. Performance evaluation of GAK, and TACIA \
Fig. 5 shows the fluctuating flow of BDT traffic at different hours of the day, when the incoming traffic flows through GAK (k = 1,2,3), and TACIA (A = 0.1, k = 1,2,3). The traffic flowing through TACIA (A = 0.1, k = 1,2,3) is predicted after every time T = 30, when arrival rate 
. The blocking rate was measured every 30 min. The traffic flow rates follow the trends of the traffic generation described above. At 06:00, the traffic flow rates are very low, and gradually increase after every 30 min. The peak time is experienced at 12:00, and beyond 12:00, the traffic flow rates start to gradually decrease until it reaches 18:00, as shown with descending, and ascending trends of the blocking rates. These, therefore, validate the hypothesis of a BDT traffic generation. The blocking probability of GAK-RMSCA and TACIA-RMSCA decreases with the increase in k. TACIA-RMSCA delivered a better performance compared with other algorithms. It is also noticeable that, TACIA-RMSCA, when k = 1 performed better than GAK-RMSCA when k = 3. This is because TACIA-RMSCA has the capability to maximize the available resources to accommodate the growing demands of the fluctuating traffic at peak load. Conversely, GAK-RMSCA, on the other hand, triggers a greedy policy, whenever incoming traffic arrive. This limits it's chances to tackle the growing traffic demands at peak load. When incoming traffic accumulates, the blocking probability may increase.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (212KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Time varying blocking probability of the BUSYDAY-TRAFFIC, during working hours.

Fig. 6, Fig. 7 shows performance evaluation of GAK-RMSCA, and TACIA-RMSCA, when using core-7, and core-19 respectively, during the peak load. The trend of the blocking probability increases with an increase in the arrival rates . The blocking trends depicts that GAK-RMSCA (k = 1, 2, 3) performed very poorly comparatively with TACIA-RMSCA(k = 1,2,3). Regardless of the number of routing options, GAK-RMSCA (k = 2, 3) can provide, when compared with TACIA-RMSCA (k = 1). The performance of GAK-RMSCA (k = 2, 3) was lower than that of TACIA-RMSCA (k = 1). The efficacy of TACIA-RMSCA (k = 1) to allocate spectrum resources without wastage increases its chances to efficiently allocate resources. This explains the significance of protective resource allocation to maintain performance reliability. During the peak load, GAK-RMSCA has few routing options. The spectrum resources are much more consumed, when the demand for incoming traffic grows. TAACIA, on the other hand, allocate resources in a manner that reduces the detrimental impact of XT a mid-high traffic demand. The lower the XT, the lesser the rate of fragmentation. Spectrum fragmentation increases the rate of spectrum utilization, and blocking probability. Therefore, in order to maintain network survival, it is essential to protectively assign spectrum resources. Fig. 8 shows the rate at which TACIA perform better than GAK, during peak load. The ratio of GAK (k = 1) Vs TACIA, GAK (k = 2) Vs TACIA (k = 2), and GAK (k = 3) Vs TACIA (k = 3) depicts that, when demand is low, TACIA have very high performance factor than GAK due to redundant resources. However, when the demand grows, the performance factor ratio decreases due to high spectrum consumption, as shown in Fig. 9. The ability to provide alternative routing options decreases with an increase in traffic demand. Fig. 9 shows the consumption of spectrum resources. GAK consumes much more spectrum resources comparatively with TACIA. This is due to the incremental spectrum fragmentation rate caused by the impact of XT, which increases the blocking rates. GAK-RMSCA consumes very high spectrum resources due to their limited routing capabilities to accommodate incoming traffic during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (203KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Total blocking probability of diﬀerent algorithms with diﬀerent routes using Core-7, during peak traﬃc load.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (183KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Total blocking probability of diﬀerent algorithms with diﬀerent routes using Core-19, during peak traﬃc load.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (180KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Comparison of GAK, and TACIA in terms of the ratio of their blocking probability, when T = 30, α = 0.1, during peak traﬃc load.

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (203KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Spectrum Utilization of GAK, and TACIA with different traﬃc loads, when T = 30, α = 0.1, during peak traﬃc load.

Fig. 10, Fig. 11 depicts the influence of the number of cores on the detrimental impact of XT in core-7, and core-19, respectively in each link. The impact of k-values is inversely proportional to the Quality of Transmission (QoT). When k-values increases, the detrimental impact of XT decreases. The increase in k-values increases routing options to accommodate the incoming traffic without accumulating on the link. As a result, the impact of XT is minimized during the peak load. Despite the effect of k-values, it's noticeable that the high dynamic effect of XT occurs in GAK than TACIA. During the peak load, GAK consumes much more spectrum resources to accommodate the increasingly growing demand of the incoming traffic to minimize blocking rates. In addition, dynamic modulation, exposes some incoming traffic with higher modulation formats to XT. Whereas, TACIA on the other hand have a low impact of XT, due to their ability to overcome the overwhelming flow of the incoming traffic. But there is relative increase in the XT impact, when traffic requiring high modulation formats are allocated (see Table 1).

Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (219KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Crosstalk per Link of GAK, and TACIA, using Core-7 with diﬀerent traﬃc loads, when T = 30, α = 0.1, during peak traﬃc load.

Fig. 11
Download : Download high-res image (226KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Crosstalk per Link of GAK, and TACIA, using Core-19 with diﬀerent traﬃc loads, when T = 30, α = 0.1, during peak traﬃc load.

4.2. Running time
This subsection evaluates the time consumed by an algorithm to execute a given task. The running time of each algorithm depends on the process speed of the hardware used, making its accuracy hard to reach. In this case, we neglect hardware speed and concentrate on the relationship between the running time and resources consumed, when allocating each incoming traffic, during RMSCA, precisely, resources in terms of the number of paths (k-values). Table 2 shows the incremental relationship between the k-values, and running time. When the k-values increases, the running time increases by approximately 179989s. The running variation between TACIA-RMSCA(k = 1), and TACIA-RMSCA(k = 2,3) depicts the time complexities.


Table 1. Simulation parameters.

Parameters	Values
Bend radius r	0.05
Core pitch D	
Coupling coefficient 	
Propagation constant	
Fiber length L	
Neighboring cores for Core-7, 	3
For Core-18, 	4
Center Cores, 	6
Modulation format	threshold
BPSK XT	−14 dB
QPSK XT	−18.5 dB
QAM-8 XT	−21 dB
QAM-16 XT	−25 dB
QAM-32 XT	−27 dB
QAM-64 XT	−34 dB

Table 2. Running TIME of TACIA-RMSCA

Algorithm	Running time in seconds(s)
TACIA-RMSCA(k = 1)	144932
TACIA-RMSCA(k = 2)	442561
TACIA-RMSCA(k = 3)	622550
TACIA-RMSCA(k = 4)	802309
TACIA-RMSCA(k = 5)	982104
5. Discussion and analysis
This section discusses the impact different parameters that are instrumental in this experiment, and introduces the comparative analysis our experiment with some previous works.

5.1. The impact of α
Fig. 12 shows the traffic flow of different  values, the trends of the blocking rate follow the BDT traffic generation. These demonstrates that, regardless of what algorithm is introduced, the trends of the blocking probability will always reflect the features of the BDT traffic generation. The blocking probability of TACIA with different values of  was measured, during different hours of the day, when the arrival rates  = 90. The blocking rate varies with different  values. A similar performance can be viewed in Fig. 13, during peak load. The blocking rate of  was better than , but since the cost of spectrum utilization of  = 0.5, 0.7 is higher than . Therefore,  performed better than all other  values, because it efficiently consumes low spectrum resources than all other  values, during RSCA, as shown in Fig. 15. Furthermore, at high demand, the detrimental effect of XT in TACIA (k = 2,3), and  was much lower than all other  values, as shown in Fig. 14. Therefore  delivered the overall performance in this experiment. Fig. 14 shows the influence of different  values on the dynamic effects of XT. The impact of different  values on XT is largely dependent on k-values. Different  values exhibited a low dynamic impact of XT, when k = 1 comparatively to k = 2, and k = 3. This is because, when k = 1,  values consume fewer spectrum resources, during RMSCA than k = 2, and k = 3, as shown in Fig. 15. The impact of XT increases with the increase in k values. When k = 1, the influence of  on XT increases from smaller  values to bigger ones. When k = 2, the influence of  on XT is reversed, with bigger values of  having lower influence than smaller ones. The influence of  increases with an increase in k-values. When k = 3, the influence of  values on the dynamic effects of XT is high. Because at high traffic demand, much more spectrum resources are consumed to sustain lower blocking rates, as shown in Fig. 15. The trends of spectrum utilization increase with an increase in k. Despite different  values sustaining lower blocking rates, their rate of spectrum utilization widely varied. The cost of spectrum utilization of , and 0.7 is very high. Therefore, the influence of different values of  widely varies with demand, and their choices largely depend on the network requirement.

Fig. 12
Download : Download high-res image (491KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. The time varying blocking probability of TACIA with different values of α during diﬀerent hours of the day, when T = 30, λ = 30, during peak traﬃc load.

Fig. 13
Download : Download high-res image (355KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The blocking probability of TACIA, with different arrival rates λ, and α values, when T = 30, during peak traffic load.

Fig. 14
Download : Download high-res image (392KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 14. The XT of diﬀerent traﬃc load at time T with different values of α, when λ = 30, during peak traffic load.

Fig. 15
Download : Download high-res image (352KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 15. The spectrum utilization of diﬀerent prediction time T, and values of α, when λ = 30, during peak traﬃc load.

5.2. The impact of prediction time
During the peak load, the influence of the prediction time can have a significant effect on resource allocation in MCF. The performance's trends of TACIA reflects the decisions taken to allocate resources over time with increasingly growing demand. Fig. 16 shows the performance of TACIA with different prediction time, when , and . The blocking probability varies with different prediction time. During resource allocation, much more spectrum resources are consumed when incoming connections accumulate in the link. When the traffic flow is at the peak, incoming connections will always struggle to utilize already constrained spectrum resources. This can lead to spectrum overlapping, which causes XT, and high blocking rates. The prediction time is very crucial for networks that employ a machine learning approach to allocate resources. Inaccuracies can cause inefficient resource utilization, which may lead to discrepancies in the QoT standards, as shown in Fig. 16 (b). The dynamic effects of XT vary at different times, when traffic accumulates, during resource allocation. Because some incoming traffic will be forced to occupy spectrum slots that can overlap. This can sometimes lead to spectrum fragmentation, which wastes spectrum resources. As a result, spectrum utilization inconsistencies may arise, as shown in Fig. 16(c). Therefore, prediction time can impact the optimization of spectrum resources during high traffic demands.

Fig. 16
Download : Download high-res image (302KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 16. The eﬀect of diﬀerent prediction time T, when α = 0.7, and λ = 90, during peak traﬃc load.

5.3. The impact of MAPE
Fig. 17 shows the influence of Mean Absolute percentage Error (MAPE), during resource allocation, when , and . The error margin in this experiment is estimated using MAPE to approach prediction accuracy. The experimental evaluation is based on the assumption that the expected future traffic demands can be determined using the machine learning algorithm. The error margins arises due to the fact that  prediction accuracy is difficult to achieve. MAPE is implemented to estimate the accuracy of the traffic predictions using equation (13).(13)
 
 

Fig. 17
Download : Download high-res image (289KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 17. The eﬀect of diﬀerent values of MAPE, when arrival rates λ = 90, α = 0.7, and T = 30, during peak traﬃc load.

During the experimental evaluation, we apply uniform distributions  to maintain consistent error bound when predicting traffic flow rates. Uniform error margin can provide freedom for optimization of spectrum resources, during fluctuating traffic flow rates. MAPE is set ranging from  to  achieve prediction accuracy ranging from  to  respectively, using equation (14),(14)
 

In the experiment,  returns uniform discrete values set from , and 
 
 returns uniform random continuous values between 
 
. During traffic prediction, a small error margin can optimize spectrum resources when the demand of fluctuating traffic grows. Conversely, inaccuracies can impact resource allocation, which may affect the performance of MCF, during conventional RMSCA. Fig. 17 shows the influence of MAPE on resource allocation, during high traffic demand. The performance of different MAPE values slightly varies with a narrow error margin, which may influence the efficient allocation of resources. The slight variation of blocking probability, and spectrum utilization with different MAPE values may have influenced slightly normal XT level with different MAPE values. Therefore, the uniform distribution of MAPE may pave freedom for resource allocation. This may render an efficient estimation of the dynamic effects of XT to guarantee QoT standards during RMSCA.

5.4. The experimental limitation
TACIA-RMSCA implements TICA policy to minimize the impact of XT to prevent prolonged challenges over long-haul transmissions, especially during peak load of the fluctuating traffic. Whereas, GAK-RMSCA on the other hand implements the Core Prioritization Policy(CPP) in (Fujii et al., 2014b) to allocate cores with the assumption that, if the incoming coming traffic is first allocated in the non-adjacent cores, and later on the adjacent cores without any computational resource allocation to balance the current load, and the future load, the impact of XT is minimal. This assumption is feasible to a certain extent during fluctuating traffic. But as the traffic flow continues to grow, CPP may be overwhelmed by the accumulation of the incoming traffic, polarizing the impact of XT. This increases the spectrum fragmentation rate, as a result, much incoming traffic may be rejected, due to resource constraints, raising its block rate. Moreover, the experiment shows that TACIA-RMSCA(k = 1) performed better than GAK-RMSCA(k = 2,3) exposing its weakness, when subjected to the peak load fluctuating traffic. The experimental results shows that GAK-RMSCA has a high operational cost, due to high consumption of resources, which is extremely costly for traditional cost-sensitive networks. TACIA-RMSCA applies the use of TICA policy, which is an enhancement of the CPP to efficiently allocate spectrum resources to minimize the impact of XT. The TICA policy balance load distribution in the MCF using Spectrum Compactness (SC) to over the growing demand of the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. This minimizes fragmentation rate, making the TACIA-RMSCA more sustainable than GAK-RMSCA.

6. Conclusion
This paper proposes TACIA-RMSCA with the protection scheme to evaluate the performance of MCF-SDM-EONs, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. TACIA-RMSCA embraces the use of the TICA strategy to overcome the impact of XT. The objective is to optimize resource allocation to sustain Quality of Transmission (QoT) standards with a minimized blocking rate. The performance of TACIA-RMSCA was measured with the benchmark algorithm (GAK-RSCA), which implements a core prioritization scheme. The experimental findings depict that, TACIA-RMSCA performed better than GAK-RMSCA regardless of the incremental k-values of GAK-RMSCA. This portrays the extend MCFs can achieve significant performance with the efficient resource allocation strategy, during peak load of the fluctuating traffic. Therefore, making MCF-SDM-EONs a promising future network infrastructure to substitute the currently overwhelmed single mode fiber network infrastructure.

