Bronchial asthma is one of the most common chronic diseases of childhood and considered as a major health problem globally. The irregularity in meteorological factors has become a primary cause of health severity for the individuals suffering from asthma. In the presented research, a dew-cloud assisted cyber-physical system (CPS) is proposed to analyze the correlation between the meteorological and health parameters of the individuals. The work is primarily focused on determining the health adversity caused by the irregular scale of meteorological factors in real-time. IoT-assisted smart sensors are utilized to capture ubiquitous information from indoor environment that make a vital impact on the health of the individual directly or indirectly. The data is analyzed over the cyber-space to quantify the probable irregular health events by utilizing the data classification efficiency of Weighted-Naïve Bayes modeling technique. Moreover, the relationship between meteorological and health parameters is estimated by utilizing the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) and calculate a unifying factor over the temporal scale. To validate the monitoring performance, the proposed model is implemented in the four schools of Jalandhar, India. The experimental evaluation of the proposed model acknowledges the performance efficiency through several statistical approaches. Furthermore, the comparative analysis is evaluated with state-of-the-art decision-making algorithms that demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed solution for the targeted application.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Dew computing

Internet of things

Smart healthcare

Bronchial asthma

1. Introduction
Effective administration of the patients is considered as a major issue of the smart healthcare domain (Comparative data about respiratory diseases). Bronchial Asthma (BA) is considered as one of the serious health issues and almost 18% of the population is suffering from the same (Global Initiative for Asthma, 2019). From the survey conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), it is analyzed that BA is influencing around 8.3% of the populace (6.1 million individuals) under the age of 18 in the US. Moreover, the yearly budget of the US for dealing with this issue is around 3.2 billion dollars (Zahran et al., 2018; Weiss et al., 2000). The same ratio can be observed from the other nations as well. Even, it is termed as the third-ranking cause of childhood hospitalization and a leading reason for the absentee count in school (The Centers for Disease C, 2015). It is also expected that the effective control of teenage asthma is generally transient and it may develop into stable adult asthma later. Several previous experiments and examinations (D'amato et al., 2015; Newell and Swafford, 1963; da Silva et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020; Yousif and Al Muhyi, 2019; Zhao et al., 2019; Tikkakoski et al., 2019; Eschenbacher et al., 1992; Deng et al., 2020) have revealed the relationship between the meteorological factors such as humidity, temperature, wind speed, barometric pressure and the epidemiology of asthma in children. The analysts in Spain and America (Hervás et al., 2015; Jayawardene et al., 2013) have also designed several artificial models to evaluate the impact of meteorological factors on the health.

1.1. Problem identification
Meteorological factors such as air pollution, tobacco smog, allergies, and airway infections are considered as the most common factors in the eminent of pediatric asthma exacerbations (Mendez and Van den Hof, 2013). The correlation between an individual's physiological responses and the measurement of exposure metrics is also considered as a significant shortcoming in the determination of the cause of asthma (Xu et al., 2018; Rodopoulou et al., 2015; Alhanti et al., 2016). Relationship between the asthma morbidity and meteorological factors are evident to an extent, however, not clearly defined. Amongst meteorological factors, the temperature is considered as one of the most primary factors in time-series studies. After reviewing several proposed studies, it is considered that the solutions for the determination of the health adversity by evaluating the relationship between meteorological and health parameters are limited.

1.2. Motivation
The data acquisition and processing efficiency of the Internet of Things (IoT) can provide an effective solution for the above-discussed issue. Several IoT-cloud based real-time monitoring solutions (Thakar and Pandya, 2017; He et al., 2012) have been developed (He et al., 2012). Though multiple real-time solutions are being developed, the data heterogeneity is considered as the most challenging issue in these solutions. These underlying reasons cause transmission delay and communication overhead (He et al., 2012). To deal with these issues, the dew computing-inspired (Ray, 2017) framework is proposed that helps to maintain scalability. Moreover, dew computing platform provides flexibility, interoperability, and usability. The data processing efficiency of dew computing not only provides the ability to store and retrieve the health information from the cloud, but It also helps the system to process the data in the case of the unavailability of internet connectivity (Rindos and Wang, 2016). In this manner, effective data computation with instant decision-making capability with lesser resource utilization is the most considerable advantages of dew computing over fog computing.

1.3. Research objectives
By considering the advantages of dew computing and cyber-physical platform, a dew computing-inspired real-time monitoring framework is proposed for the early prediction of the symptoms of bronchial asthma. The underlying motive behind this proposed study is to explore the correlation among daily variations in meteorological factors such as average humidity, air quality index, and daily average temperature, with the health factors such as heart rate, respiration rate, and muscle tightness. The conceptual architecture of the proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 1 that is intended for achieving the following objectives:

1.
To develop a novel dew computing-inspired real-time monitoring solution to analyze the impact of meteorological factors on the human body.

2.
To utilize the selected health and meteorological factors for the early identification of the risks on health of the individual suffering from bronchial asthma.

3.
To deliver the predictive outcomes with the cautioning alarms to the concerned caregivers and medical specialists for providing ideal assistive and medical care environment.

4.
To ensure data privacy with respect to the sensitive information of the individual under monitoring.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (346KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The conceptual framework of the proposed methodology.

1.4. Article outline
The article structure is organized as follows: Section 2 investigates some of the imperative proposed studies related to the domain of environment and health monitoring. Section 3 provides the complete detail of the proposed cyber-physical system for real-time health assessment. Section 4 explains the experimental setup of the proposed system with performance evaluation. Finally, the conclusive remarks with possible future aspects are provided in Section 5.

2. Related work
As the capability of data processing makes IoT and dew computing more demanding, it helps to reduce the rate of latency by increasing the response rate. This section provides insight by discussing some imperative work in the domain of IoT-based health and environment monitoring.

2.1. IoT-based environment monitoring
Adiono et al. (2018) proposed a compact sensor system for an indoor environment based on the smartphone user interface. The presented system utilized Zigbee communication module, DHT11 temperature sensor, STM32L100 microcontroller, BL-5C rechargeable battery, and a charger circuit for monitoring temperature and humidity. In article (Cho, 2017), the author proposed a multi-sensor framework for the household environment to determine the irregularities in the air quality. A new system integrated with digital hardware, analog circuits, and a network was developed by describing the communication protocols. Wong et al. (2014) proposed an Integrated Environment Monitoring System (IEMS) constituting three components namely: (i) real-time position determination and data collection with geospatial based environment monitoring; (ii) Android application based on-site data communication and visualization; (iii) a web-server based data analysis. The system testing was done on a construction site and a bus journey demonstrating effective real-time data collection. Pham et al. (2018) measured indoor environment parameters by using smart tags. An EMIfree bidirectional visible light communication (VLC) technology was used in the proposed framework. Additionally, an average voltage tracking algorithm was incorporated for using LED illumination as a lighting system. Nasaruddin et al. (2019) monitored office indoor environments in humid climatic condition. A low-cost single-board microcontroller and sensors were utilized to examine the indoor parameters such as temperature and relative humidity. Salamone et al. (2017) proposed Nano Environmental Monitoring System (nEMoS) that exhibited the amalgamation of two techniques namely additive manufacturing and traditional thermographic technique. These techniques were used to redesign and verifying the accuracy of the system by avoiding instrumental systematic errors.

2.2. IoT-based healthcare systems
Amin et al. (2020) surveyed several limitations of cyber-physical systems on health monitoring and smart homes. Authors have primarily focused on the challenges of data privacy, data heterogeneity, real-time health monitoring, energy consumption and system utility. Shishvan et al. (2018) surveyed machine intelligence solutions for different applications of the healthcare domain. Authors have included a list of most popular machine learning algorithms utilized for real-time health monitoring. Manikandan et al. (Rajasekaran et al., 2019) presented a model based on Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) for providing healthcare facility. The presented Autonomous Monitoring System (AMS) model utilized the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) for the distribution of node energy. Nicholas et al. (Constant et al., 2017) proposed a Smart Fog Gateway (SFG) model. The model was designed to perform the operation of data analytics related to the wearable IoT devices. The authors illustrated the role of SFG for data filtering and analytics. The evaluation of the performance is done by evaluating execution time and energy consumption without considering the parameter of latency. Iman et al. (Azimi et al., 2018) presented Hierarchical Edge-based deep learning (HEDL) based healthcare IoT system. The authors investigated the feasible deployment of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) classification model. Liangzhi et al. (Li et al., 2018) presented a Fog-based Efficient Manufacture Inspection (FEMI) system for the efficient data processing of the data by utilizing deep learning techniques in the smart industry. The CNN model integrated into the fog computing environment enhances computing efficiency and accuracy. Mahmud et al. (2018) proposed an extension upon the traditional healthcare solutions using cloud-based structure. Authors utilized iFogSim simulator to evaluate the execution time and accuracy of the solution. Rabindra and Rojalina (Barik et al., 2019) have proposed a fog-based solution for data analytics. The system application was implemented for Ganga River Basin Management. In article (Korzun, 2017), the author has provided an overview of the different cases of IoT technology for the domain of healthcare to provide smart healthcare services. Furthermore, the author has also discussed different strategies with respect to the development of mHealth systems to provide a real-time assistive environment to the patients. Meigal et al. (2019) proposed a concept named as the fourth brain that surrounds humans in their ambient environments. Moreover, the article has also provided a design of at-home Laboratory (AHL) and deployed in a particular home environment by utilizing everyday devices.

3. Proposed system
3.1. Physical space
The process of data accumulation related to the targeted health and meteorological factors is done at the physical space of the framework. The acquired data is broadly categorized into three datasets; Personal Dataset, Health Dataset, and Meteorological Dataset. Personal data contains information related to the user's identity that is gathered through hand-held mobile devices. On the other hand, health and meteorological data are acquired through smart wearables and environmental sensors. The data is collected by following two data collection modalities:

1.
Manual data collection

2.
Automatic data collection

Manual data collection: To utilize the monitoring services of the framework, the user needs to register with the system by submitting their details at the initial stage. After successful registration, a unique identification number is generated for the user that is further used for data processing and communication among various modules and stakeholders. Table 1 enlisted all the attributes that contain all the personal detail of the user.


Table 1. List of attributes of user data.

Attributes	Acquisition Modality	Sensors
Personal Attributes	UID	Mobile Application and Sensor	GPS Sensor
Name
Age
Current Address
Mobile Number
Health Attributes	Heart Rate	Mobile Application and Sensor	Heart Sensor, Body Sensor, Smart wearable
Respiration Rate
Body Temperature
Muscle Tightness
Automatic data collection: Physical space is directly dependent on the presence of the users for the acquisition of the health attributes. The health values such as heart rate, breath rate, temperature, and muscle tightness are directly concerned with the individual's health (Nishiyama et al., 2005). These targeted health parameters are gathered by utilizing external screens for heart rate, a temperature sensor for fever, nasal sensors for breath rate, and Electrocardiograph (ECG) devices for heart-related issues. On the other hand, meteorological attributes such as temperature, humidity, barometric pressure, and air quality are captured in a continuous manner and stored in the environme ntal dataset Algorithm 1. Table 1 and Table 2 enlisted all the targeted parameters of health and environment.


Table 2. List of attributes of environmental data.

Attributes	Acquisition Modality	Sensors
Environmental Attributes	Room Temperature	Room Sensor	Climate Sensor
Humidity
Barometric Pressure
Air quality
The acquired data is directly forwarded to the cyber space for effective decision making by utilizing the data transmission efficiency of the physical space. A communication interface between the physical and the cyber space is provided by the handheld smart mobile devices via communication technologies such as GPS, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, WLAN, and many others.

3.2. Cyber space
To determine the irregular health and meteorological events, the captured parameters are processed on cyber space. Furthermore, the utility of the proposed framework is increased by evaluating the relationship between meteorological and health factors that helps to determine the effect of meteorological factors on the health of the individual. The complete process of health severity determination and factor relationship evaluation is discussed into two sub-spaces: Dew Space and Cloud Space.

3.2.1. Dew space
The dew space is fundamentally centered around the heart rate parameter to investigate the health state of the individual. The reason behind the selection of the heart rate parameter is, the variability in the rate of breath and the inconstancy in the heartbeat is generally considered as the most common symptom of an asthma attack. The dew space is also responsible to notify the caretakers and medical specialists about the current health status of an individual that helps to provide immediate medical support in an emergency. Fig. 3 represents the complete process of irregularity determination into three modules:

1.
Data preprocessing

2.
Event classification

3.
Alert generation

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (690KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The complete process of event classification and warning generation.

3.2.2. Data preprocessing
As ECG signals are utilized to determine the health state, the process of feature extraction is required that is done by the ECG processor at dew space. The process of feature extraction is done in two phases: data validation and feature extraction.

Data Validation: During the acquisition of the ECG signals, several physiological and non-physiological noising parameters are usually appended with the signals. The noise generated by body movements is considered as physiological noise and the disturbance caused by power, electronic components are considered as non-physiological noise that affects the strength of the ECG signal. To remove the noise from the ECG signals, low pass and band filters are utilized that helps to retain the strength of the signals.

Extraction: After validating ECG signals, relevant features are utilized by the ECG processor for detecting every possible irregularity in the functionality of the heart. Henceforth, the task of feature extraction from the ECG signals is performed in this phase. ECG signals are usually be considered as a combination of five waves such as P, T, Q, R, and S wave. The clock intervals of these waves are considered to evaluate the functionality of the heart. Amongst all waves, the most acceptable waves to evaluate the heart functioning are RR, PR, QT, and QRS. In dew space, the ECG processor employs Fast Walsh Hadamard Transform (FasWHTrans) method (Geadah and Corinthios, 1977) for extracting and highlighting the discriminative features of ECG signals such as RR, PR, QT, and heart rate. Lesser time taken by FasWHTrans makes this method more reliable and the features are extracted by decomposing the ECG signal into a square wave with the value of +1 or minus; 1. In this manner, FasWHTrans method helps to identify the discontinuities from the acquired ECG signals. The number of pulses with the rate of heartbeat is determined by utilizing this method is mathematically represented as Eqn (1):(1)
 

The FasWHTrans of an N-length ECG signal e(t) is represented in Eqn. (2).(2)
 

where, w(n, j) is representing the Walsh function. To make data more stable and to deal with the errors that occurred while performing the operation of feature extraction, the process of normalization performed on the data is represented as Eqn. (3):(3)
 
‥

Where md and sd corresponds to mean deviation and standard deviation.

3.2.3. Event classification
To determine the irregular health and meteorological events, probabilistic classification efficiency of machine learning is utilized in the proposed framework. An index value known as the Scale of Irregularity (SoI) is calculated to determine the current health state of the individual. The purpose of calculating SoI is to determine the irregularity concerning the heart rate of the individual. The value of SoI is defined as a probabilistic value measured in a particular time slot ΔT. In this manner, the probabilistic evaluation of irregularity is determined by Weighted-Naïve Bayes (W-NB) technique (Frank et al., 2002) that empowers the proficiency of data classification and event determination. In this manner, the events are broadly categorized into two pre-defined event classes namely Severe Class and Non-Severe Class.

Severe class: Severe class specifying the health and meteorological events as vulnerable. In simple words, when the rate of the targeted parameters surpassing the pre-specified safe range is categorized into severe class

Non-severe class: Non-severe events determine the normal health condition of an individual over a particular time of monitoring. It is imperative to mention that the range specified for event classification is foreordained by the concerned medical specialist.

Irregular event determination: In this method, the selected data attributes are defined with pre-specified values commonly known as weights for effective data classification. A condition that needs to satisfy is that the number of weights should always be equivalent to the number of lables of the class. The class-based weighted attributes are represented as Eqn. (4):(4)
 

The above-presented matrix defines the value of the selected health parameter in columns and the labels of the class in rows. As the state of the health is classifying into two classes, we are following the concept of probabilistic classification technique. Above presented severe and non-severe class is denoted as SC1 and SC2, respectively. The captured instances are categorized by defining − ve and + ve weights that are further denoted as 0 and 1. As SC1 class is dealing with irregular events, negative weights are represented as SC1 = 0. On the other hand, SC2 class weights are represented as SC2 = 1.

Let Xi = 
 be a set of values related to the selected health parameter that signifies the n-dimensional vectors of the class label. By analyzing the associated weights, the process of classification is represented as Eqns. (5), (6):(5)
 
(6)
 

where SCl defines the probabilistic value of the given input. The process of binary classification is defined with δ function.

Weight Optimization: As the numerical features are extracted from ECG signals, the need for discretization is realized to convert the values into nominal and identical values. To operate discretization, Fayyad and Irani's-based discretization technique (Fayyad and Irani, 1993) is utilized. In this method, the boundaries are selected for the extracted values and discretized by using the minimal entropy-based heuristic scheme.

3.2.4. Two phased prompt for assistive service selection
As notifications are considered as a fundamental part of the healthcare domain, a real-time alert generation module has emerged in the proposed solution. Alert generation module is responsible to transmit notifications related to the current health state of an individual to the respective caregivers. To optimize the performance of the service deliverance, two-phased decision-making solution is proposed that generates a warning and emergency-based alerts. The warning alerts define the less complicated situation that can be tackled by the caretaker of the individual. On the other hand, emergency alerts are generated for a highly complicated health situation. The process of warning-based decision-making is mathematically represented as Eqn. (7):(7)

where Patient_State decides the present condition of the individual. Eventi is classified by W-NB classifier and i is the predicted probability value belongs to Severe_Class. The complete process of event prediction and alert generation is explained in Algorithm 1.


Algorithm 1. Physical state determination with emergency signal generation at dew space.

Initialize:
Begin → ΔT [Time Module]
for(i → 1 to n)
If (Eventi > Threshold_Value)
Health_State = Irregular_class
Signal = Emergency Signal
GOTO Algorithm 2
Else
Health_State = Regular_class
GOTO Initialize Phase
Exit
3.2.5. Cloud space
Cloud space is completing two most imperative objectives of the proposed framework;

1.
Commutative Index Value (CIV) calculation for the relationship determination between the health and meteorological factors.

2.
Providence of security to the requested data log.

As the constraint of limited data processing at dew space makes it less capable of evaluating the relationship between health and environmental factors, the proposed objective is achieved at cloud space. The purpose of evaluating CIV is to determine the scale of the health vulnerability of the individual towards their ambient environment. Furthermore, emergency signals are generated to the doctors in terms of medical emergencies. The advantage of the proposed framework is increased by opting the technique of temporal mining that provide data abstraction during data log transmission from cloud to a client.

3.2.5.1. Commutative Index Value (CIV) calculation
To determine the scale of vulnerability, Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) (Jang, 1993) is consolidated on the cloud that computes the compounded probabilistic value of CIV. ANFIS is considered as one of the most influential algorithms of machine that possess the learning and knowledge representation capabilities of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Fuzzy Logic classifier illustrated in Fig. 4. The value of CIV helps to predict unfavourable events towards the health and environment of the individual. The high value of CIV denotes the high scale of vulnerability. Additionally, CIV signifies the transmission of the data to the concerned specialists for taking appropriate actions towards the health and environment of the individual. Rule-based data analysis is performed by the ANFIS that determines the scale of vulnerability as represented in Table 3.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (552KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Block diagram of ANFIS controller for CIV calculation.


Table 3. CIV Range specification.

Sr. no.	Range specification	Level of vulnerability
1.	<0.3	Normal
2.	0.3–0.6	Low severe
3.	0.6–1.0	Severe
Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS): To deal with the complex and nonlinear problems, a total of five layers with four inputs architecture is depicted in Fig. 4. The fuzzy logic method is one of the best methods that generate multi-value logic input of the single primary input variable (Weiss et al., 2000). The fuzzy system also helps to map the input vectors by following the concept of non-linearity that generate a decisive factor. The Gaussian membership function is utilized to formulate fuzzy sets with respect to the input parameters represented as Eqn. (8):(8)
 

where {σ, c} represents the set of non-linear parameters. Furthermore, the Gaussian membership function is utilized to generated crisp values that are represented in Table 4.


Table 4. Risk evaluation reference.

Considered Parameters	Low	Moderate	Severe
Heart Rate (/minute)	{ < 60}	{60–100}	{ > 100}
Humidity (%)	{ < 40}	{40–50}	{ > 51}
Room Temperature (○F)	{ < 67}	{ 68–76}	{ > 77}
Barometric Pressure(inch)	{ < 26}	{26–31}	{ > 31}
Layer 1 (Fuzzification): In the architecture, the adaptive nodes are represented with square boxes. The first layer of the model takes linguistic inputs represented with node I. In this study, a total of 3 scales such as Low, Moderate, and High are utilized as linguistic labels. The node function 
 (X) helps to determine the level of the input. The primary input parameters are utilized to calculate the output by evaluating Heart rate, Humidity, Room temperature, and Barometric pressure. The primary input parameters-oriented crisp values are calculated by Eqns. (9), (10), (11), (12);(9) 
 (10) 
 (11) 
 (12) 
 

Layer 2 (Product): The fixed rule-based nodes are contained in this network layer. This layer is denoted by 
 and known as a membership layer. The output of every node symbolises the firing strength denoted as Wi. The firing strength is computed by deploying the product rule in the following Eqns. (13):(13) 
 

Here μAi, μBi, μCi, and μDi are membership functions. The above-presented equation is determining the distribution of the input variable in the number of fuzzy sets. Therefore, the determination of every possible vulnerability is calculated by analyzing the combination of 81 fuzzy rules which are calculated as rule = 34 = 81. Table 5 present some examples of the calculated fuzzy rules.


Table 5. Examples of 81 fuzzy rules.

Rule no.	Heart rate	Humidity	Room temperature	Barometric pressure	Adversity scale
1.	Low	Moderate	High	Moderate	Severe
2.	Moderate	Moderate	Moderate	Moderate	Normal
3.	High	Low	Low	Low	Severe
4.	Low	Low	High	Low	Severe
5.	High	High	High	Low	Severe
6.	Moderate	High	Moderate	Moderate	Low severity
7.	High	High	High	Low	Severe
.	.	.	.	.	.
.	.	.	.	.	.
.	.	.	.	.	.
.	.	.	.	.	.
.	.	.	.	.	.
.	.	.	.	.	.
81.	Moderate	High	Moderate	High	Low severity
Layer 3 (Normalization): The fixed nodes are contained in the third layer of the architecture. The ratio of firing strength of the ith rule is calculated in this layer. In simple terms, we can say that this layer is responsible to operate normalization on the values of the firing strength. The operation of normalization is mathematically represented as Eqn. (14):(14)
 
 
Layer 4 (Defuzzification): The operation of defuzzification is performed in this layer by performing the operation of multiplication on the output values generated by the previous layer. Furthermore, it is possible to adjust the nodes of this layer by following the node function represented as Eqn. (15):(15)
 

where Wi represents the previous output and {ai, bi, ri} are fuzzy parameter sets of node i.

Layer 5 (Output layer): The final output layer enumerates the final cumulative value of CIV by performing weighted average summation operation at layer 4. Algorithm 2 explains the complete process of CIV calculation using Eqn. (16) and illustrated in Fig. 5 for better clarification.(16)
 
 
Training of ANFIS: The process of backtracking is followed to train and optimize the weights of the model. At the initial step, the model takes the primary input parameters such as heart rate, humidity, room temperature, and barometric pressure for CIV calculation. The best ANFIS parameters are selected by adopting a test and run strategy. AFNIS model took overall 19 min to perform the task of training. The most influential parameters utilized in the model are enlisted in Table 6.


Algorithm 2. Commutative Index Value (CIV) calculation with emergency and warning signal generation

Initialize:
From Algorithm 1, Determination of irregular health event
For ti → ΔT [Time Module]
If (CIVi > Threshold_Value)
Signal type = Emergency and Warning Signal
Temporal Granule Generation Process
Begin Checkpoint → ΔT
•Delete previous Logs [Releasing Cloud-space]
•Formation of irregular event granules
•Transfer granules of severe health events to medical specialists
Else
GOTO Initialize Phase
Exit
Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (647KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The complete process of event determination.


Table 6. HVI Range specification.

Sr. no.	Model Parameters	Type and Value
1.	Output Member Function	Linear
2.	Optimization method	Hybrid
3.	Member Function type	Gaussian
4.	Number of fuzzy rules	81
5.	Step size increase rate	1.1
6.	No. of outputs	1
7.	No. of inputs	4
8.	Step size decrease rate	0.9
9.	Initial learning rate	0.01
10.	Number of epochs	50
3.3. Data protection
In the domain of healthcare, the health records of an individual are performing an imperative role for future references. In the proposed system, cloud space also utilized to store the information of the individuals with the health records, therefore, providing the remote access to the user and additional authorized entities to fetch desired information. To maintain privacy and to manage security on the data, a private cloud database is maintained. The accessibility of the cloud database is sectioned into two parts for privacy purposes. In the first part, personal and environmental data such as demographic data, medicinal information, and health data of the individual is stored. These data values are accessible by the authorized personals. On the other hand, personal and health data is covered under the second part that can be accessed by the caretakers. To protect the stored data from unauthorized entities, the information protection module work into two phases; Information Fragmentation and KeyShare. Each module of data security is explained as follows:

Information Fragmentation: In the module of information fragmentation, the information of the user is divided into two levels such as Level-1 and Level-2. The purpose of dividing the data into two levels is, it helps to maintain the sensitivity of the data. Level-1 deals with the data that contains extremely confidential information i.e., personal data of the individual such as name, age, contact number, gender, and residential address. On the other hand, Level-2 deals with the data that is least sensitive such as health and environmental attributes. The data is stored on cloud in the form of a table represented as D that contains health and environmental attributes (<H1, E1 >; < H2, E2 >; < H3, E3 >; …; < Hn, En >) represented as Eqn. (17).(17)

where Fi represents the independent fragmented modules. A data table D is a combination of several data modules that contain the information related to current health and environmental state of the individual under monitoring. After operating fragmentation, the KeySharing mechanism is applied to perform the operation of transmission by dividing into ‘m’ parts i.e. v1, v2, v3, …, vm. In this phase, pminus; 1 polynomial coefficients a1, a2, …, ap−1 are selected and assigned with secret key values to the coefficient as shown in Eqn. (18).(18)
‥

This would provide remarkable assistance for clinical specialists to investigate the necessary data for deciding remedial help.

4. Performance evaluation
The experimental setup of the proposed framework with its performance is evaluated in this section by segmenting into five subsections. Each subsection related to the experimental evaluation is discussed as follows:

–
Data collection

–
Irregular event classification analysis

–
Health-Meteorological relationship analysis

–
Real-time alert-based decision-making efficiency

–
Overall performance analysis

4.1. Data collection
It has been analyzed that bronchial asthma affects children right from their childhood. Presently, a child is spending his considerable time in the indoor environment of their educational institutes. Therefore, the different characteristics of schools and children are selected for the acquisition of the targeted parameters and enlisted in Table 7. The school selection was done based on the education levels, locations, sources of air pollutant such as industrial activities, petrol station etc. and construction typologies. For covering every environmental situation, the school buildings are shortlisted based on the high-density (Jalandhar), medium-density (Phagwara), and low-density rural area (Chaheru). The range of construction period lies between 1963 and 2015. The education level in the selected institutes is categorized into two parts: infant (4–6 years old) and primary (6–12 years old). Total four schools and eight classrooms were finalised (2 classrooms per school) for meteorological factor analysis in the classrooms. Further, samples selection was done by determining the orientation, age of students, school schedule and location of the classroom in that particular building. For accumulating the health parameters, a total number of 28 students were selected. It has been noticed that among the selected four schools, only two schools (School 2 and School 3) had installed artificial ventilation systems. However, they were not used due to surplus energy consumption. During the experimental evaluation, every selected classroom was deployed with IoT devices containing WiSense Nodes, RFIDs, and actuators. The data sensing range is considered while installing these devices. Fig. 6 illustrates data acquisition devices utilized for acquisition, processing, and transmission.


Table 7. Characteristics of selected rooms and number of students.

Characteristics	School 1	School 2	School 3	School 4
Room 1	Room 2	Room 3	Room 4	Room 5	Room 6	Room 7	Room 8
Typology	Infant	Infant	Infant	Primary	Primary	Primary	Primary	Infant
Student age	5–6 years	4–5 years	5–6 years	11–12 years	8–9 years	11–12 years	7–8 years	5–6 years
Usable area	51.1 m2	51.3 m2	51.5 m2	46.9 m2	57.0 m2	55.7 m2	49.4 m2	56.7 m2
Volume	140.4 m3	139.9 m3	154.5 m3	141.8 m3	168.7 m3	166.6 m3	149.6 m3 0	165.7 m3
Number of students	22	14	17	24	23	20	26	22
Occupancy	2.32 m2	3.66 m2	3.03 m2	1.96 m2	2.48 m2	2.78 m2	1.90 m2	2.58 m2
Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (707KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. (a) Raspberry Pi V3; (b) ZigBee device for communication; (c) WiSense nodes for air quality parameter acquisition.

The meteorological factors such as Room Temperature, Humidity, Barometric Pressure, and Air quality are retrieved from the indoor environment of the selected classrooms. On the other hand, targetted health attributes such as the scale of Heartbeat, Respiration rate, Muscle tightness, and Skin temperature of the selected 28 students are acquired for seven days. The range specification for the decision making has been done with the consultation of the medical experts. An informal approval for the monitoring of health and the ambient environment has been taken beforehand from the parents and teachers. To generate a sufficient count of instances and to cover every possible event, bootstrapping technique-oriented experimental computation is performed on the dataset. For real-time decision making, the proposed model is connected with Amazon EC2 database using GigBee protocol.

4.2. Irregular event classification analysis
The efficiency of the prediction of irregular health events is directly proportional to the health data analysis efficiency of the model. In the proposed model, irregular health events are concerns with the analysis of the heart rate to determine the severity of the health at dew space as explained in the proposed system. In other words, we can say that the prediction accuracy is determined concerning an individual's health in a particular time module ΔT. To evaluate the prediction efficiency, several statistical evaluation parameters such as Accuracy, Sensitivity, Specificity, and F-measure are selected. As a standard classifier, three state-of-the-art prediction models such as K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Artificial Neural Network (ANN), and Support Vector Machine (SVM) are implemented for comparative analysis. It is imperative to mention that the alteration is done only for the classification techniques and the rest of the model parameters are identical. The calculated classification outcomes are presented in Fig. 7.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (382KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Instance based classification efficiency analysis.

From the calculated outcomes, it can be analyzed that the proposed model achieved higher accuracy by estimating 94.37% for the collected health data. In contrast with this, ANN procured the accuracy specifying to 89.15%, SVM achieved the accuracy of 91.78%, and KNN enlisted 90.24% of the accuracy. In the case of specificity, the proposed model achieved 94.51% of the accuracy contrasting to SVM (91.67%), KNN (91.02%), and ANN (90.47%). To evaluate the performance of the model for sensitivity, the model achieves the high accuracy of 95.14% concerning 90.95% by SVM, 90.14% by KNN, and 89.74% by ANN. Similarly, in the case of F-measure, the proposed model registered 94.69% of the accuracy which is higher as compared to the other selected classifiers.

Instance misclassification analysis: To analyze the classification stability of the model, the errors generated by the systems at the time of event classification are also evaluated by calculating the root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), relative absolute error (RAE), and root relative squared error (RRSE). In addition to this, the outcomes registered for health dataset is represented in Table 8.


Table 8. Classification error-rate analysis.

Error Parameters	SVM (%)	K-NN (%)	ANN (%)	Proposed W-NB (%)
RMSE	5.12 ± 0.07	4.01 ± 0.07	3.89 ± 0.29	1.55 ± 0.07
MAE	7.09 ± 0.06	8.26 ± 0.35	7.98 ± 0.23	5.03 ± 0.14
RAE	6.75 ± 0.19	7.99 ± 0.16	7.98 ± 0.19	5.23 ± 0.22
RRSE	5.97 ± 0.18	5.21 ± 0.08	5.54 ± 0.92	3.29 ± 0.22
The purpose of evaluating the error rate is to determine the predicted total number of false events related to the accurate event class. From the calculated outcomes, it can be analyzed that the proposed model registered minimalist error rate for RMSE (1.55 ± 0.07), MAE (5.03 ± 0.14), RAE (5.23 ± 0.22), and RRSE (3.29 ± 0.22). Therefore, it can be concluded that the proposed model performed effectively for irregular event determination as it has outperformed the selected state-of-the-art classification models in terms of calculating the rate of error.

4.3. Health-meteorological relationship analysis
Data processing principles of neural network and multi-scaled decision-making efficiency of fuzzy logic is incorporated for relationship evaluation using mathematical Equation (16). The inference system of fuzzy logic generates a set of fuzzy IF-THEN rules as represented in Table 5. These rules are having the capability of determining the approximation value of non-linear functions. To comparatively analyze the prediction performance of the proposed model, two primary machine algorithms such as Fuzzy System (FS) and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is also implemented. Several performance assessment metrics such as accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and F-measure are evaluated to determine prediction performance.

As machine learning is considered as a data greedy approach, a total of 63 datasets are formulated from the acquired health and meteorological values. Each dataset contains almost 900 data instances for covering all probable health and meteorological factor combinations. Total 50 dataset are utilized to train the prediction model whereas rest 13 datasets are utilized to validate and test the prediction performance. The complete training and testing performance of the models for decision-making is represented in Table 9.


Table 9. Training and testing performance.

Performance parameters	FS	ANN	ANFIS
Train	Test	Train	Test	Train	Test
Accuracy	94.62%	90.86%	98.32%	91.77%	97.72%	94.85%
Sensitivity	95.14%	92.67%	97.58%	93.38%	98.27%	95.14%
Specificity	94.88%	89.76%	97.31%	91.14%	97.92%	93.25%
F-measure	94.96%	91.45%	96.82%	92.68%	98.02%	94.05%
By analyzing the outcomes of Table 9, it can be concluded that ANFIS has achieved superior performance for the calculation of CIV as compared to FS and ANN. Accuracy of CIV calculation attained by ANFIS model is 94.85% followed by ANN with 91.77% of accuracy and 90.86% for FS. In terms of specificity, the proposed model gained 93.25% of the accuracy whereas FS and ANN gained 89.76% and 91.14%, respectively. A similar surge in sensitivity and F-measure has also been observed. The obtained results represent the efficiency of ANFIS classifier for multi-factor relationship calculation.

Error-rate analysis: The purpose of calculating the scale of error is to justify the prediction stability by evaluating the difference between the expected and predicted outcomes. Several parameters such as R2, variance account for (VAF), Median Absolute Error (MEDAE), and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) are evaluated. All the calculated outcomes are represented in Table 10 and detailed ahead.


Table 10. A summary of the best ANFIS models conditions and their statistical criteria.

Error Parameters	FS	ANN	ANFIS
Train	Test	Train	Test	Train	Test
RMSE	4.19%	3.93%	2.44%	1.78%	1.76%	1.31%
R2	0.90%	0.83%	0.88%	0.85%	0.94%	0.91%
VAF(%)	90.38	81.70	87.7	79.7	93.7	88.9
MEDAE	1.9	1.5	2.45	1.2	1.6	1.2
From the calculated outcomes presented in Table 10, it has been observed that the calculated value of CIV is much closer to the actual observed value. The prediction accuracy of R2 with the value of 0.91 determines the closeness of the predicted value near to the regression line which justifies the stability in the prediction accuracy. The resulted accuracy of R2 for FS is 0.83 and for ANN is 0.85. On the other hand, RMSE, VAF, and MEDAE error calculation parameters validate the low error generation of the model. Thereby, satisfactory prediction performance with less generation of error in the case of ANFIS is observed as compared to the other two selected predictive models. After analyzing the error rates, it is concluded that the ANFIS model shows high selectivity for relationship analysis with an acceptable rate of error.

4.4. Real-time alert-based decision making efficiency
Timely and true generation of alerts concerning the current health state of an individual is considered as one of the most significant success factors of the proposed CPS. The proposed two-phased decision-making performance is validated by calculating the ratio of the false-positive alerts upon the generated total number of true alerts. As the healthcare domain is considered as the most time-sensitive domain, the proficiency of the alerts generation module is assessed in terms of true and timely generation of alerts. This section evaluates the performance of alert generation into two modules:

1.
Dew space-oriented warning alert generation

2.
Cloud space-oriented Emergency alert generation

Rate of latency analysis: The effectiveness of a real-time monitoring solution is highly dependent on the generation of true alerts. The proposed two-phased decision-making mechanism helps the framework to determine the required service that needs to deliver to the individual. In the proposed framework, as dew space is responsible for irregular health event prediction and emergency alert generation, medical services are provided to the individuals in that situation. On the other hand, as cloud space is responsible to evaluate the irregularity by evaluating both health and the ambient environment of the individual, both assistive- and medical services are provided to the individual. The calculated rate of latency based on dew and cloud space is presented in Fig. 8. It can be analyzed that average delay of 2.34 s has been observed in the deliverance of alert at dew space as shown in Fig. 8(a). On the other hand, the average delay of 8.3 s has been observed in the case of cloud space and presented in Fig. 8(b). In addition to this, total 3.04% of false-positive alerts have been recorded that characterized the viability of the proposed framework for irregular health event determination and also for health-meteorological relationship analysis.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (619KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Latency analysis; (a) Dew space-oriented warning alert generation, (b) Cloud space-oriented emergency alert generation.

4.5. Overall performance analysis
Overall performance is concerned with the time taken by the system from data acquisition to Dew-Cloud oriented event analysis with alert-based decision making. To assess the overall performance, the time taken by the physical and cyber space is calculated individually. Therefore, the overall prediction efficacy is evaluated by determining the average time taken by the Data acquisition module, Dew space-oriented event analysis, and Cloud space-assisted CIV analysis. Mathematically, the process of overall prediction performance is calculated as Eqn. (19):(19) 
 

As per following the stages of the framework implementation, numerous outcomes are registered and depicted in Fig. 9. A complete descriptive analysis of the results is provided ahead.

1.
The average temporal delay generated by the physical layer is represented in Fig. 9(a). Physical layer recorded an average of 17.391 s which demonstrates the efficiency of the IoT devices for generating data.

2.
For data classification, the average temporal delay of 12.126 s is recorded and presented in Fig. 9(b).

3.
Furthermore, the average temporal delay generated by the cloud layer for calculating the compound health severity is recorded as 14.868 s which is represented in Fig. 9(c).

4.
The model has recorded an average temporal delay of 44.385 s for the determination of overall health adversity which is further illustrated in Fig. 9(d).

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (507KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Temporal Delay Estimation for overall prediction efficiency.

From the calculated temporal delay on different modules of the framework, it can be observed that the proposed cyber-physical framework is capable to generate automated real-time decisions towards the health and environment by generating minimal delay. The low value of temporal delay determines the high prediction stability of the proposed framework over the large data sets. Therefore, it can be concluded that the proposed cyber-physical framework is highly efficient and effective for health and environment analysis.

5. Conclusion and future scope
The tri-logical technology of IoT-dew-cloud has been able to offer various types of assistance in the medicinal services industry. In this study, dew-cloud inspired cyber physical system is proposed for evaluating the effect of meteorological factors on the health of the individuals experiencing bronchial asthma. All the aspects of health monitoring and early cause prediction of bronchial asthma are organized in the proposed intelligent healthcare system. The framework utilizes dew computing for real-time assurance of irregular health events and produces emergency alarms to the concerned caregivers for providing medical support. At cloud space, the proposed system provides information protection against unauthorized users and ANFIS-based risk assessment by identifying the relationship between the health and meteorological factors. The performance of the proposed framework is evaluated for 7 days to determine the irregular health and meteorological events. The calculated outcomes determine the efficacy of the proposed framework by achieving the highest accuracy of 94.37% as compared to the state-of-the-art classification models. In term of latency, a minimal rate of delay with 2.34 s has been observed for alert deliverance at dew space as compared to 8.30 s of delay at cloud space. Furthermore, ANFIS-based health-meteorological relationship has decided the efficacy and utility of the proposed framework in the domain of healthcare by achieving 94.85% of the accuracy.