Labor intensive visual observation has been used to study the activities of Asian parti-colored (APC) bats in the past. Through an Internet of Things (IoT) platform called BatTalk, we continuously monitor the APC bats population to investigate its compositional changes, life history, and environmental factors. BatTalk achieves the same goals as traditional visual observations with reduced man power and minimal interference to the bat activities. In particular, BatTalk automates the process to understand APC bats' regular annual life cycle history and estimate the percentage of the baby bats born and raised there, who would return to their original habitat in the coming year. This paper proposes an inexpensive manner to identify the bat habitats and bat movement paths by identifying the bat's ultrasonic signal strength and GPS position, and then show the information in a map. Our study indicates that for current BatTalk deployment, the wireless communication delays have small variance, and as long as the observer moves with a constant speed, even if he/she moves fast, the bats still can be accurately located.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Internet of things

IoTtalk

Asian parti-colored bats

1. Introduction
Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland has a “Twinkle Twinkle Little Star” parody saying: “Twinkle, twinkle little bat, How I wonder what you're at! Up above the world you fly, Like a tea-tray in the sky”. Clearly, bats are lovely animals that deserve better attention and study. This paper is an extension version of the conference paper (Lin et al., 2019c), which describes an Internet of Things (IoT) technology for studying Asian Parti-colored (APC) Bats (Vespertilio sinensis). We have simplified and strengthened the analytic modeling of (Lin et al., 2019c), and accurately derived the probability that indicates how our approach can accurately detect the locations of the bats.

Many of these bat species are nevertheless and scientifically described their fundamental ecology and population statuses in Taiwan during the last 20 years (Huang et al., 2020). Mainly distribute in Northeast Asia, the APC bats were first found in 1880. Taiwan was confirmed as the most southern habitat for APC bats by David H. Johnson in 1952 (Peters, 1880). Since Johnson's discovery, APC bats had not been found for more than half a century, and were almost identified as “regional extinctions”. An APC bat was captured by a harp trap in Shei-Pa National Park in 2006, which excitedly inspired the bat researchers of Taiwan (Cheng, 2018). Today, APC bat is considered as vulnerable or data deficient in Japan (Stubbe et al., 2008). Like Formosan Black Bear (Ursus thibetanus formosanus) and Leopard Cats (Prionailurus bengalensis chinensis), APC bat is ranked as an endangered species in Taiwan. Therefore, observation of APC bat behavior is an important bat research topic in Taiwan.

A cluster of 600–700 APC bats was first found in the Imperial Japanese Navy's Sixth Fuel Factory in Hsinchu (Fig. 1 (1)), a World War II industrial relic. From April to September of a year, a herd of bats perched on the seams in the abandon big chimney (Fig. 1 (2)). Although this cluster of APC bats has only inhabited Hsinchu City for about 5 months, the chimney and surrounding environment are very important for their survival and reproduction of baby bats, which also provides a rare opportunity for the researchers to understand and conserve this particular and rare species from the existential crisis. The bat researchers use the traditional approach for bat observation, which requires labor-intensive manual operation. In (Aguiar and Marinho-Filho, 2004), seasonal, monthly and hourly activity patterns of nine bat species were studied based on their capture rates. The sampling was conducted manually through mesh capture. In (Swift, 1980), the activity patterns of Pipistrelle bats were studied from early pregnancy in May until after weaning in August to investigate the activity patterns of the crepuscular and night-flying insects on which the bats feed. Several human observers were positioned outside the roosts for this study. In (Weinbeer et al., 2005), the activity patterns of Macrophyllum macrophyllum were investigated by tracking 5 bats using radio tracking. The study was successful for studying a small number of bats but cannot extend for a large group of bats. In (Phelpset al., 2019), the authors discussed multidisciplinary collaborations to resolve threats that jeopardize bat conservation as well as human and animal health. The techniques for observing bats were not mentioned. In (Aodha et al., 2018), a deep learning tool is developed to detect the bat calls form the noisy recordings. In (Chen et al., 2020), the authors proposed a deep neural network called BatNet to identify the bat calls from 36 Asian bat species. In [18][19], the authors utilize the deep neural networks to classify the animal audio files from various animals including bats. These studies (Aodha et al., 2018)- (Fairbrass et al., 2019) adopt offline learning to train the AI model, which did not conduct AI training in real time.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (454KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The Sixth Fuel Factory and APC bat activities.

Sangaiah et al. (2019) proposed a mechanism called Bat Algorithm to monitor general objects in the sensor networks and select the optimum monitoring sensor nodes and information flow paths to reduce energy consumption. Although (Sangaiah et al., 2019) is not specific for monitoring bats, it is suitable to track the bat movement path through the fixed sensor networks. In this paper, we consider tracking bats through mobile devices. If our solution is deployed with fixed sensor networks, then the mechanism in (Sangaiah et al., 2019) can be directly integrated with BatTalk for bat tracking.

In (Adams, 2013), the authors described how acoustic monitoring is used to access and analyze bat activities. In (Spoelstra et al., 2017), the authors studied the response of bats to three different experimental light spectra in an otherwise dark and undisturbed natural habitat. These studies [8][9] did not indicate that their experiments were conducted automatically.

We develop an IoT platform called BatTalk to support continuous monitoring of the APC bat population, understanding its compositional changes, life history, and environmental factors. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.

•
BatTalk allows automatic APC bat observation, which significantly reduces man power and minimizes interference to the bat activities. Previous approaches require manual observation.

•
Our approach is inexpensive, which uses stand-alone ultrasonic sensors together with a nearby locator (e.g., a smartphone with GPS) to identify the bat habitats and bat movement paths in a map. When the ultrasonic sensor and the GPS receiver are separately connected in BatTalk, both signals may not be synchronized well, and the bats cannot be accurately located. Previous approaches require expensive ultrasonic devices equipped with GPS receivers.

•
We have conducted measurements, simulation and analytic analysis to investigate the time complexity of BatTalk. Previous approaches did not conduct any time complexity analysis for their solutions.

•
BatTalk can be nicely integrated with the AI mechanisms to provide real-time training and prediction. Previous approaches have to conduct AI offline.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background about the APC bats. Section 3 proposes BatTalk and describes the sensors and the actuators for bat observation. Section 4 conducts performance evaluation to investigate how communications delays affect the accuracy of positioning bat locations in BatTalk.

2. Asian Parti-colored bat in the big chimney
The head of an APC bat is about 7 cm long, where the tail length is about 5 cm, the forearm is about 5 cm long, the wingspan is about 35 cm long, and the weight is 15–25 g (Fig. 2). The bat has dark brown hair on the back, mixed white hair, frosty white at the end, and gray belly. The face is black with prominent mouth kiss, recessed side, dull circle at the end of the ear shell, and edgy ear-ball. APC bats are medium-sized insect-eating bats that have a preference for insects with half-winged and fins.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (396KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Asian parti-colored bat (Vespertilio sinensis).

In July 2010, the Hsinchu municipal government planned to develop a cultural park at the former Imperial Japanese Navy's Sixth Fuel Factory and the surrounding village. During the survey, the city officials found a group of about 700 bats perched in the slits of the drainage channel while exploring the abandoned chimney within the fuel factory area, which was later confirmed as APC bats. Researchers from Bat Association of Taiwan and Endemic Species Research Institute have conducted edgy surveys every year including annual population estimation, larvae growth, and so on. Fig. 3 shows a bat cluster in the chimney. Through very tedious visual observation that required heavy manual operation, the study confirmed that APC bat population is almost entirely made up of pregnant female bats.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (448KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. A bat cluster in the chimney.

To reduce manual operation overhead, this paper develops BatTalk to monitor the bat ecosystem in the chimney of the former fuel factory, including temperature, humidity, ultrasonic and video cameras. The ability to monitor in real time the living conditions of APC bats in the big chimney from April to September through the image and non-image signals, BatTalk detects environmental changes caused by climate anomalies in a timely manner. Therefore the bat habitat can be remedied as quickly as possible. In addition to ecological conservation and education, we have created the APC Bat Ecological Education Space (Fig. 1 (3)) that combines the benefits of ecological conservation and sightseeing. This space will not only display the APC bats data produced by BatTalk in real time, but also allow observing the activity of bats through video streaming. Through participating in the educational activities of science, art and technology held at the education space, the audiences can further understand APC bats. Both BatTalk and the APC Bat Ecological Education Space serve the functions of ecological conservation, research and education. For example, the space interacts with the audience with the bat habitats (Fig. 1 (4)) and the bat movement paths (Fig. 1 (5)).

BatTalk effectively avoids human direct interaction with APC bats, but allows people to see bats with their own eyes, to observe bat activities inside the big chimney through the streaming video images shown on the screen. The adoption of BatTalk monitoring is also expected to create a sustainable and automatic operation of ecological model and further applications.

3. The BatTalk platform
BatTalk is a platform derived from an IoT device management system called IoTtalk (Lin et al., 2017). In BatTalk, a sensor or a control switch is called an input device feature (IDF), and an actuator such as the heater is called an output device feature (ODF). An IDF sends sensor/control data to the BatTalk server (Fig. 4 (1)). An ODF receives the instruction data from the BatTalk server. The input (output) device features that share the same communications hardware are grouped as an input (output) device. In the big chimney scenario, we install an input device called micro weather station, which consists of the sensors (Fig. 4 (2)–(6)) for barometric pressure (BARP), temperature (TEMP), relative humidity (RH), luminance (LUM), CO2 and ultra-violet (UV). The physical appearance of the micro weather station is illustrated in Fig. 5. These sensors are connected to the input pins of a control board (Fig. 4 (7)) that can be based on Arduino, ESP8266 ESP-12F, and so on (Lin et al., 2019a). The physical appearance of the control board is illustrated in Fig. 4 (b) and (c).

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (765KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The BatTalk functional block diagram.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (571KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Different models of the micro weather stations.

We may create a comfortable living environment for the APC bats in the big chimney by installing actuators such as the heater, the fan and the dehumidifier (Fig. 4 (8)–(10)). These actuators are connected to the output pins of the control board, and are grouped by an output device called “actuators”. The control board communicates with the BatTalk server through Ethernet (ADSL) or Wi-Fi connections.

Several cameras have been installed in the chimney (Fig. 4 (11)). These cameras are connected to a streaming server through Ethernet, which allow the viewers (i.e., the bat researchers and the general audiences) to observe the bats (Fig. 4 (12)) without interfering their activities. By accessing the streaming server the viewer can use the browser of any smartphone (Fig. 4 (13)) to watch the bat activities in real time. Specifically, the viewer presses the soft control switches (Fig. 4 (14)) of the BatTalk webpage (Fig. 4 (15)) to control the cameras (Fig. 4 (16)) as well as other actuators. All sensor data (Fig. 4 (2)–(6)) are sent to the BatTalk server, and the server will show them in the dashboard (Fig. 4 (17)). Note that Fig. 4 (13) is a smartphone that represents an output device and Fig. 4 (15) is another smartphone representing an input device. In reality, both Fig. 4 (13) and (15) can be the web-based BatTalk browser in the same smartphone as illustrated in Fig. 6, which communicates with the BatTalk server through 4G or NB-IoT (Lin et al., 2019b).

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (286KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. The BatTalk browser.

The BatTalk web-based window is partitioned into four areas: the video (Fig. 6 (1) for Fig. 4 (12)), the camera control (Fig. 6 (2) for Fig. 4 (14)), the actuator control (Fig. 6 (3) for Fig. 4 (14)) and the dashboard (Fig. 6 (4) for Fig. 4 (17)). The videos produced from the cameras can be analyzed to, for example, count the number of bats in the chimney using AI techniques. Then through the “NumberDetect” IDF (Fig. 4 (18)), the number of bats is sent to the BatTalk server. If the change of the bat number is larger than a threshold, the server will send an alert to inform the viewer (Fig. 4 (19)).

The video together with the non-image sensors are used to automatically observe various bat activities. In the past, we conducted 2-days visual observation every month to detect when the first bat leaved the chimney, when the first 50% of the bats leaved the chimney, and when all bats leaved, and see how temperature, humidity, barometric pressure and illumination affect bat behavior. BatTalk automates that the above task. For example, through the TEMP and NumberDetect IDFs, Fig. 7 shows that when temperature decreases from 28 °C to 25 °C, the bat group tends to be more crowed and the bat number is reduced. Most bats fly outside the chimney individually before the sky turns completely dark. Such activity and the exact timing can also be automatically observed by the NumberDetect IDF.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (379KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Potential effect of temperature.

We use the ultrasonic sensor (Fig. 4 (20)) to detect and record bats’ foraging audio in Hsinchu urban areas. By identifying the ultrasonic signal strength and its GPS position (Fig. 4 (21)), we can identify the bat habitats (Fig. 1 (4)) and bat movement paths (Fig. 1 (5)) in a map (Fig. 4 (22)). The ultrasonic sensor and the GPS device can be separated and independently send signals to the BatTalk server. The server then pairs both signals to identify the locations of the ultrasonic signal sources. Since the delays of sending ultrasonic signal and the GPS signal may be different, the “ultrasonic-GPS” pairing may not be accurate. To resolve this issue, we have developed the MorSensor Chip solution (Chen et al., 2019) that plugs the ultrasonic sensor (Fig. 8 (1)) in a smartphone. The ultrasonic data will be automatically shown in the screen of the smartphone (Fig. 8 (2)). Furthermore, the smartphone periodically sends the ultrasonic signal together with the GPS signal to the BatTalk server. In this way, the “ultrasonic-GPS” pairing is guaranteed to be accurate.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (343KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. MoSensor chip solution for bat detection.

We made two reasonable assumptions in this work. In the first assumption, the bats will stay at their habitats for a period of time so that we can use the IoT technologies to continuously monitor their activities. In the second assumption, the bat habitats are located nearby streets or footpaths in a range of 20 m. The only constraint is that our ultrasonic sensor cannot detect bat calls with a distance longer than 20 m (Senix, 2020). To relax this constraint, more expensive ultrasonic sensors are required. Fortunately, the bats often live within the roof void of a house near streets. Therefore, the bat observer can walk or drive a car to locate the bats position by using our inexpensive ultrasonic sensor and the GPS receiver.

4. Accuracy of bat location tracking
Although MorSensor chip solution perfectly synchronizes the ultrasonic and the GPS signals, we may still use inexpensive stand-alone ultrasonic sensor together with a nearby locator (e.g., a smartphone with GPS) to provide GPS information through the IoTtalk location tracking technique developed in (Adams, 2013). In this approach, several bat observers (either pedestrians or cars) are equipped with inexpensive ultrasonic sensors. When the ultrasonic sensors move around, the ultrasonic signals and the GPS signals of the locators are periodically and independently sent from the smartphones of the observers to the BatTalk server. In the current implementation, the signals are sent from the smartphones to the server through the 4G communication technology.

Since the 4G delays are not fixed delays, the ultrasonic signal and the GPS signal measured at the same time (at the sensors) may arrive at the BatTalk server at different times such that the BatTalk server will pair the ultrasonic signal with the wrong GPS coordinates. Suppose that the ultrasonic and the GPS signals are sent out by the smartphone at time . The ultrasonic signal arrives at the BatTalk server at time 
, and the GPS signal arrives at the sever at time 
 where 
and 
 are 4G communication delays. In (Chen et al., 2019) we have obtained the histograms for 
 (
 through 1000 measurements for each of the ADSL (Ethernet used for communication between the control board (Fig. 4 (7)) and the BatTalk server (Fig. 4 (4)) and the 4G transmission scenarios, which are illustrated in Fig. 9. The ADSL delays are the message delays for the fixed sensors and the actuators installed in the big chimney. The 4G delays are 
 (
 for the mobile ultrasonic and GPS signals.

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (151KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The histograms for 
 (

From the measured data illustrated in Fig. 9, we computed the expected value E [
] = 42.638 ms and the variance V [
] = 0.018 E [
]2 for ADSL transmission, and E [
] = 85.958 ms and V [
] = 0.057 E [
]2 for 4G transmission. It is clearly that the delays for 4G are about twice of that for ADSL. Also, the variance for 4G is higher than ADLS, which means that wireless communications is not as stable as wired communications. Therefore 
 may be large. If the observer (particularly in car) moves for a long distance during 
, then the ultrasonic signal may be paired with a GPS location very different from its actual location. For example, if the car moves at 30 Km/h, then it moves 8.3 m in 
1 s. If 
 is less than 1 s, then the moving distance is within the GPS measurement error. Therefore, in the remainder of this section, we assume that the threshold time 
 second, and we see if 
 so that ultrasonic signal positioning will not cause inaccuracy. Specifically, we derive the probability 
 and see if it is sufficiently large.

From the 4G delay histogram illustrated in Fig. 9, 
 (
can be approximated by an Erlang density function 
 with the shape parameter  and the scale parameterλ(1)
 
where(2)

The approximation is validated by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for goodness of fit (Chen et al., 2019). From the above analysis, it is reasonable to let 
and 
be two random variables with the same Erlang density function. Then From Eq. (1), the density function 
 is expressed as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3)
 
 
 

Let 
 be the period that the observer moves for the threshold distance, which is a random variable with the density function 
. Then the bat tracking may not be accurate if 
. From Eq. (3), the probability 
 is expressed as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)
 
 
 
 

Let 
be the Laplace transform for 
. From the frequency-domain general derivative of Laplace transform, we have
 
 
and Eq. (4) is written as
 
 
 
 
(5)
 
 
 
 

Assume that 
is exponentially distributed with the mean 1/β = 1 s, then the Laplace transform 
 is expressed as
 

and Eq. (5) is re-written as
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6)
 
 
 
 
 

Since
 
 

Eq. (6) is simplified as(7)
 
 
 

In Eq. (7), let(8)
 
 

. Then(10)
 
 
(11)
 
 
 
 

Let , then Eq. (11) is rewritten as
 
 

and
 
 
 
(12) 
 
  
 

In Eq. (12), we have 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13)
 

Substitute Eq. (13) into Eq. (12) to yield
 
 
 
 
 
 
(14)
 
 
 

From Eq. (8) we have(15)
 

Substitute Eqs. (14) and (15) into Eq. (7) to yield(16)
 

Therefore, by using Eq. (14) and (15), we can iteratively compute 
 through Eq. (16).

If  Eq. (16) is re-written as(17)
 

We have validated both Eqs. (7), (8) by simulation, and the discrepancies are within 1%. Therefore, the analytic analysis is consistent with the simulation. The simulation model follows the same approach used in (Lin et al., 2017, 2019a, 2019b), and the details are omitted. For the reader's benefit, we sort out the experimental settings as Table 1.


Table 1. The experimental settings.

ADSL communication delays E [t0]	42.638 ms
ADSL communication variance V [t0]	0.018 E [t0]2
4G communication delays E [t0]	85.958 ms
4G communication variance V [t0]	0.057 E [t0]2
Erlang density function f1 ()	n = 17 and λ = 0.198
Fig. 10 (a) plots the probability 
 that the bats cannot be accurately located for various fixed 
 values (constant moving speeds) and 
with different variances V [
] (where V [
]/E [
]2 represents that and λ, the parameters obtained from Fig. 9). The figure shows the intuitive result that 
 decreases as 
 increases. That is, when the observer moves slower, the bats are more accurately located. When V [
]/E [
]2 
 is almost a constant value smaller than 
, and 
 for all 
 values in our observation range. Therefore, 
. That is, in our current deployment, the communication delays 
 have small variance, and even if the observer moves fast, the bats are still accurately located.

Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (418KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Pr[t3<t2] performance". Also, please remove the text "(2.5).

When V [
] increases, there are two effects.

Effect 1. If V [
] decreases, the 
 values are more likely to a region centered at. 

Effect 2. If V [
] increases, V [
] increases, and both large and small 
 increase, and the increasing number of small 
 (those 
) is larger than that of large 
 (those 
), and it is more likely that. 

Based on the above two effects, we observe the following two phenomena in Fig. 10 (a).

Phenomenon 1. When 
 is small (
 second in Fig. 10 (a)), Effect 2 is significant, and 
 decreases as V [
] increases.

Phenomenon 2. When 
 is large (
 in Fig. 10 (a)), Effect 1 says that when V [
] decreases, more 
 values are clustered around 
, which are smaller than 
, and therefore 
 decreases.

Fig. 10 (b) plots 
 against V [
] where V [
]/E [
]2 = 0.057. In this figure, 
 can be considered as a constant, and Effect 2 is also observed for 
; that is, 
 increases as V [
] increases. The figure also indicates that if the moving speed of the observer does not vary much (i.e., V [
]/E [
]2), then the bats can be accurately located either the observer drives a car (E [
] = 1 s) or walks (E [
] = 10 s). Existing schemes (Aodha et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Nanni et al., 2020) did not conducted time complexity analysis as we do for BatTalk, which is one of the major contributions in this paper. We compared these previous schemes with BatTalk and summarized in Table 2.


Table 2. Schemes comparison.

Aodha et al.
Aodha et al. (2018)	Chen et al.
Chen et al. (2020)	Nanni et al. (Nanni et al., 2020)	Fairbrass et al. (Fairbrass et al., 2019)	BatTalk
Detecting bat calls	✓				✓
Identifying bat species		✓			
Classify the animal audio			✓	✓	
Real time video					✓
Continuous environment
monitor					✓
Environment control					✓
Locating bat position					✓
Time complexity analysis					✓
5. Conclusion
Asian parti-colored (APC) bat activities were studied through labor-intensive visual observation in the past. This paper described how the IoT platform BatTalk allows automatic APC bat observation without interfering their activities. This work addresses two research topics in terms of computer science. First, we design and implement BatTalk for automatic APC bat observation using the IoT technologies. Second, we investigate the synchronization issue between the signals from stand-alone ultrasonic sensors and the GPS receiver using the time complexity analysis.

BatTalk automates the process to understand APC bats’ regular annual cycle of life history: every year in late March or early April, sporadic individual APC bats fly to Hsinchu City habitat. The number of gathering gradually increased, and stabilized in May. Most individual female bats are pregnant in late May. Reproductive seedling continued into late June, and July has the largest population of the year (1330 in 2016 was the highest estimate to date). After August, when temperature began to drop significantly, the bats moved out. They flew out of Hsinchu City completely in October. With BatTalk, the above visual observations can be achieved with reduced man power and minimal interference to the bat activities.

When the ultrasonic sensor and the GPS receiver are separately connected in BatTalk, both signals may not be synchronized well, and the bats cannot be accurately located. We have conducted measurements, simulation and analytic analysis to investigate this issue. Our study indicates that for current BatTalk deployment, the communication delays have small variance, and as long as the observer moves with a constant speed, even if he/she moves fast, the bats still can be accurately located.

We would also like to point out that previous approaches have to conduct AI offline (Aodha et al., 2018)- (Fairbrass et al., 2019). BatTalk can be nicely integrated with the AI mechanisms to provide real-time training and prediction. The details are given in (Lin et al., 2019d). We can easily implement the models in (Aodha et al., 2018)- (Fairbrass et al., 2019) in BatTalk, which will be one of our future work.

In the future, we will attach small location sensors to the bats so that BatTalk can exactly track the bat movement. Our observation in the chimney indicates that a female bat can produce two cubs per birth, but young bats in the growth stage will suffer a variety of survival tests, and may not grow up. Therefore, only a few new born bats successfully flew away in the winter. Through BatTalk, the marking study can be automated to estimate the percentage of the baby bats born and raised there would return to their original habitat in the coming year. These bats hibernate in the caves of the mountains in winter, and fly back to the warm Hsinchu city to breed and raise their offspring in the spring.

Through multiple-year monitoring, we suspect that female bats have experienced a variety of survival hardships, including man-made interference, rapid changes in the landscape, potential predators, and changes in the climate (temperature and humidity) conditions inside and outside the main habitat, resulting in a sharp decline in the number of ethnic groups from the tens of thousands in the 1950s to more than a thousand in recent years. Through BatTalk, it was the first time to install the micro weather station in the big chimney, and the bat observer can accurately detect the climate change in the chimney.

