This article investigates the ultra-reliable communication for industrial wireless sensor networks (IWSNs), where frequency diversity, path diversity and cooperative diversity are jointly investigated. We propose a novel IWSN equipped with the full-duplex (FD) relays and carrier aggregation (CA) technique, to improve the reliability of all sensors. We derive a closed-form expression for the reliability characterization based on signal-to-interference-plus-noise (SINR) model for sensors connecting to sink node either via FD relays or direct communications. We formulate a joint resource allocation problem for reliability maximization, considering sub-carrier assignment, relay selection and power control. We propose to apply the distributed decision making (DDM) framework to decouple the problem into two sub-problems and find the joint optimal solution in an iterative manner. We further propose an improved artificial bee colony algorithm to obtain the optimal results for each sub-problem. Our simulation results showcase the reliability increases with increasing the number of FD-relays and sub-carriers. We also show that the FD and CA techniques along with our proposed algorithm can be an effective way for improving the reliability of IWSNs.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Full-duplex relay

Carrier aggregation

Distributed decision making

Artificial bee colony

1. Introduction
Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks (IWSNs), integrated wireless sensor networks and industrial systems, are capable of providing remote monitoring and controlling actuator in machines or alerting users, have drawn increasing research attention recently (Ahrar et al., 2019). Compared with conventional wired monitoring systems, IWSNs have great potential in reducing the deployment costs and enhancing the flexibility for monitoring and closed-loop control (Elhebeary et al., 2018). Additionally, its self-configuring and self-organizing nature makes them as an ideal solution to many complex industrial applications, e.g. industrial process control, high-asset protecting systems, collaborative tracking and monitoring systems (Guangjie et al., 2019).

Unlike conventional human-centric applications, data in IWSNs is automatically exchanged between two machines or between a machine and a server. These machine type communications (MTC) usually have stringent end-to-end latency and high reliability requirements, rather than data rate. Lost or delayed data packets may cause catastrophic consequences. For example, if an extremely high temperature (or pressure) is detected by a sensor in cement applications, an unsuccessful delivery of this critical message may cause an outage of the production line, an explode of the kilns or even the loss of workers’ lives. A more detailed example is the factory automation application in a smart factory, which needs the end-to-end latency within 1 ms and the reliability requirement as at least 99.9999% (6 nines) (Hong et al., 2019). In other words, only one message in 106 data transfers is allowed to be lost or delayed in more than 1 ms. Hence, it is vitally important to provide an ultra high reliability for data communications in IWSNs.

Recently, the diversity and redundancy based approaches have emerged as a promising solution to enhance the reliability of wireless systems. With the help of diversity, multiple wireless links can be exploited between the transmitter and the receiver. With the help of redundancy, transmitted data can be duplicated and parallel communication can thus be enabled simultaneously. Recent communication standards such as Wireless HART (released 2007) and ISA100.11a (released 2009) have suggested to apply time diversity, frequency diversity or path diversity to improve communication reliability in lossy wireless networks (Petersen and Carlsen, 2011). Among them, time diversity concerns with assigning different time slots for interfering communications (Yang et al., 2015), while frequency diversity refers to assign different frequency channel for concurrent transmission to deal with the problems that affect the link quality (Gomes et al., 2019). Whereas the path diversity refers to transmission on a different route in the network to mitigate long outages (Valerio et al., 2019). In this scenario, data packets generated from one sensor are routed via several different paths with increased confidence that at least one packet will reach the sink node even if there are failures in other routes (Sepulcre et al., 2016). By taking the advantage diversity and redundancy techniques, this paper establishes the reliability modeling and optimization for IWSNs.

1.1. Related work
1.1.1. Reliability modeling
According to Pukite and Pukite (1998), the reliability refers to the probability of guaranteed performance under stated conditions within a given time latency. In realistic applications, metrics such as the bit-error rate (BER), mean-square error (MSE), or minimum mean-square error (MMSE) have been widely applied for reliability evaluation (Hongsheng et al., 1998). However, it may consume a long time to analyze the log data and obtain an exact value on the BER, MSE or MMSE metrics. This would harm the acceptance of IWSN services and restrict their usage. Some works have proposed to use the outage probability to model individual link reliability, which is more appropriate especially when the data is delay-sensitive and cannot tolerate the delays associated with coding over the fading channel (Jie et al., 2017a). For example, the reliability of a successful reception can be defined as the likelihood of the received signal-to-noise-ratio (SIR) being above some acceptable threshold (Khandani et al., 2008). Nevertheless, the path loss or interference is neglected in reliability characterization.

Because of the broadcast nature of wireless communication, data transmission in IWSNs is highly affected by interference, which happens when the transmission of a radio signal is contaminated by radios from nodes nearby or faraway. There are basically two types of interference in IWSNs: 1) the broadband interference, which is typically caused by various interference sources at wide frequency, e.g. electric motors, inverts, electric switch contacts, ignition systems, voltage regulators, pulses generators, welding apparatus, frequency converters, metallic friction-induced noise, thermal noise, unintentional signals, etc (Song and Park, 2013); and 2) the narrow-band interference, which is typically caused by equipment using the same frequency of IWSNs, like cellular phones, signal generators, local oscillators, microwave and ultrasonic apparatus, or sensors transmitting at the same time. Besides, the wireless data transmission can also be degraded by path loss or multi-path fading (Nguyen and Oh, 2018). Simply considering the SIR value from the desired transmitter may not accurately capture the reliability characteristics. In our previous work (Jie et al., 2017b), the signal-to-interference-plus-noise-ratio (SINR) model was applied to capture the reliability of coordinated multi-point (CoMP) communications in cellular networks, and an exact closed-form expression for estimating the reliability was derived. Assuming the shadowing fading as a random variable (Oehmann et al., 2016), studied the high reliability in wireless networks with different transmit power at the BS based on SINR model. Due to those heterogeneous network structures and multiple affecting factors, the effective reliability modeling for IWSNs becomes very challenging and extremely important.

1.1.2. Reliability optimization
To fulfill the reliable requirements of IWSNs, some literature have studied the resource allocation by enabling different diversity techniques. By utilizing the potential of time diversity, a joint slot assignment algorithm including fast slot competition and free node conception was proposed to improve the reliability of time-division-multiple-access (TDMA) based multihop IWSNs (Yang et al., 2015). In Cena et al. (2016), the transmission latency and the likelihood that a packet is not delivered to the destination over WiFi links can be reduced by exploiting the path diversity with the Parallel Redundancy Protocol (PRP). In Shi et al. (2019), the routing and time solotted channel hopping was further jointly optimized to achieve a reliable low-power communication, where a distributed graph routing and autonomous scheduling algorithm was proposed.

Additionally, some works have applied the path diversity and frequency diversity to improve the reliability with carrier aggregation (CA) technology. As specified by 3GPP in (3GPP, 2012), CA was originally proposed to increase bit rates and capacity by combining contiguous or non-contiguous spectrum fragments as a virtual wide-band channel. For example, the massive non-continuous carrier aggregation technique can aggregate a large number of (up to 32) continuous and non-continuous sub-carriers (Qimei et al., 2016). By duplicating the same packet to multiple parallel connections and assigning each connection with a different sub-carrier, the reliability can be bootstrapped with CA. In Ohmann et al. (2014), a high reliability was obtained by a joint transmission over multiple links using different sub-carriers over Rayleigh-fading channel. This work was further extended to (Ohmann et al., 2015) by including selection combining and maximal ratio combining over Nakagami-m fading. It is revealed in Ohmann et al. (2014) and Ohmann et al. (2015) that it is more beneficial to utilize multiple links in parallel rather than boosting the power of a single link. In Rui et al. (2013), combined macro- and micro-diverse up-link connections and composite correlated distributions of Nakagami-m fading and log-normal shadowing was investigated.

Even though CA improves the reliability via multiple parallel connections, the single path reliability is still low due to the interference and the path fading factors. Considering the broadcast nature of the wireless medium, neighboring nodes can overhear direct transmissions between source and destination nodes. The cooperative diversity is thus proposed and considered as a promising way (Zhetao et al., 2018). Once the direct transmission fails, a relay node can be selected to retransmit a copy to the destination. Thus to help this type of users to receive signals reliably and achieve a signal diversity at the destination. Some works have already applied relay-based cooperative diversity in WSNs. In Marchenko et al. (2014), the experimental study of selective cooperative relaying for IWSNs was investigated, and their simulation results demonstrated cooperative diversity outperform conventional time diversity transmissions in delivery ratio and re-transmissions. In Yansha et al. (2017), the physical layer security in three-tier WSN was investigated, and novel compact expressions for the average secrecy rate was derived. In Juan et al. (2017), the relay node selection for one-dimensional (1-D) queue WSNs was investigated, and an opportunistic routing algorithm aiming at prolonging network lifetime and reducing energy consumption was proposed. In Cailian et al. (2015), a distributed estimation on the unknown physical parameters for relay-assisted IWSNs was investigated. Different from existing works focus on homogeneous structure, this work consists of both sensing nodes and relay nodes, where the former nodes are capable of sensing and computing, and the latter ones are only responsible for data aggregation. In Girs et al. (2016), the time diversity and cooperative diversity was jointly investigated, and their simulation results demonstrate that applying relay for data aggregation can further improve the network performance. In Khosravirad et al. (2020), the time-frequency diversity is investigated to serve the nodes with weak condition, and a cooperative communication with a two-hop transmission is applied to satisfy its reliability requirements. In Berger et al. (2014), the optimal relay node deployment for IWSNs was investigated, and an optimum theoretical relay node placement for reliable communication was proposed. It was also indicated that selective cooperative relaying outperforms conventional re-transmission scheme to ensure communication reliability (Kapil and Murthy, 2018).

However, most existing works applying cooperative diversity technology are in the half-duplex (HD) model due to its implementation simplicity. This means that receiving and re-transmitting via relays are on different time slots at the same device. Therefore, extra transmission latency is added especially in a multi-hop communication scenario. In order to cope with it, the in-band full-duplex (FD) technology has been proposed with the development of self-interference cancellation technologies (Sabharwal et al., 2013; Bharadia et al., 2013). With FD, radios can receive and transmit at the same frequency band simultaneously, thus to double the spectrum efficiency in the physical layer, and reduce large end-to-end transmission latency (Gang et al., 2015). However, its potential to provide an ultra-reliable and low-latency communications in IWSNs has not been well treated until recently.

Resource allocation is also an important issue in designing the diversity for performance improvement such as enhancing the reliability, throughput or energy efficiency. Since these proposed resource allocation problem usually turn out to be mixed integer non-convex optimization problems, and are inherently NP-hard. Some efforts, such as deterministic algorithms, heuristic algorithms and bio-inspired algorithms, were contributed to solve them. In some scenarios, deterministic algorithms were designed to obtain the optimal solution of optimization problems. However, due to the geometrically increasing computational complexity, they can not deal with a substantial large of resource requests within a limited time (Xianzhi et al., 2019). Heuristic algorithms were thus proposed to reduce the corresponding computational complexity, but they still suffered from unpredictable performance (Guidara et al., 2015). In contrast, by simulating the intelligent behavior of natural system, some bio-inspired algorithms were proposed and were capable of providing a best-so-far solution at any time of request and keeping improving the solution over time (Zilberstein, 1996). For example, by simulating the food searching behavior of ants, and their pheromones updating mechanism, the ant colony optimization was proposed for routing optimization for WSNs (Sun et al., 2017). By simulating humpback whales recognizing the location of preys, a binary version of whale optimization algorithm (WPO) was proposed and applied for the resource allocation of wireless networks (Pham et al., 2020). By simulating the social hierarchy and hunting behaviors of wolves, the gray wolf optimization algorithm was proposed to find the optimal location of underwater acoustic sensor networks (Zhang et al., 2020). By simulating the natural population evolution, the genetic algorithm was applied for the joint optimization on sub-carrier assignment and power allocation for reliability optimization (Jie et al., 2017a). Moreover, inspired by the foraging behavior of honey bees, the artificial bee colony (ABC) optimization was proposed (Karaboga and Basturk, 2008). It has also shown that ABC algorithm is capable of balancing quality of different candidate solutions, and promise to achieve competitive or even better performance while requiring fewer control parameters and simpler steps (Karaboga and Basturk, 2007). However, current bio-inspired algorithm still can not be directly applied to the resource allocation including coupled structure. For example, for joint optimization coupled by sub-carrier assignment and power allocation, how to design an efficient optimization framework to apply these bio-inspired algorithms is still very challenging (Jie et al., 2017b; Pham et al., 2020).

1.2. Motivation and contributions
Different from aforementioned works, the aim of this work is to achieve an ultra-high reliability for IWSNs with the help of full-duplex (FD) relays and CA. We analyze the reliability of IWSNs with both cooperative diversity and frequency diversity. Moreover, we propose an joint optimization algorithm to determine the optimal relay selection, channel assignment, and power allocation. The proposed joint optimization problem turns out to be a mixed integer non-convex optimization problem, and is inherently NP-hard. In order to tackle its coupled structure, we first apply the distributed decision making (DDM) framework to decouple the original optimization problem into two sub-problems. After that, the corresponding ABC algorithms is designed in customize the unique characteristic of each sub-problem. As we known, the most related work to this research is the diversity enabled reliable communication proposed in Khosravirad et al. (2020); Jie et al. (2017a), the main difference between our work and theirs is the diversity optimization. In Khosravirad et al. (2020), the cooperative diversity is based on coordinated multi-point (CoMP) technology. In Jie et al. (2017a), the frequency diversity was proposed to enhance the reliability via parallel connections. While in our paper, the cooperative diversity is based on full-duplex technology. Moreover, the parallel communication based on path diversity and frequency diversity based on carrier aggregation are jointly applied for reliability improvement. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work taking into account the frequency diversity, path diversity and cooperative diversity for reliability analysis and optimization in IWSNs. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

•
We integrate the CA and the FD relays to improve the reliability of IWSNs, where CA improves the reliability of each sensor via multiple parallel connections, and FD relays improve the reliability of a single connection. This approach for reliability improvement is different from previous works only applying path diversity or time diversity.

•
We present an analytic model for reliability based on SINR model and derive an exact closed-form expression for the reliability of an arbitrary sensor connecting sink either with FD relays or directly, which is verified by Monte Carlo simulation. Its numerical results reveal that optimizing the relay selection, sub-carrier assignment and power allocation is very important for reliability enhancement.

•
We formulate an optimization problem aiming at maximizing the reliability of sensors constrained by the transmit power in a multi-relay and multi-sink environment. Due to the complex topology of the proposed model, the optimization problem is NP-hard in nature.

•
We propose the DDM framework to decouple the optimization problem into two sub-problems: the sub-carrier assignment and relay selection sub-problem and power allocation sub-problem. We develop an optimization algorithm based on an improved artificial bee colony algorithm AMABC-NS to solve each sub-problem. We also propose an iterative algorithm to find the joint optimized solution.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the system model, the reliability analysis based on SINR and the problem formulation. Next, in Section III, we formulate the reliability optimization framework based on DDM and our improved ABC algorithm. Section IV presents the numerical results and Section V highlights our conclusions.

2. System model and reliability characterization
2.1. System model
In this paper, we focus on the uplink transmission only, and list all the notations in Table 1. Similar as that in Yansha et al. (2017), a 3-tier IWSN is considered, as shown in Fig. 1. In order to reduce the transmission latency caused by HD relays, we assume that all the relays are decode-and-forward FD relays. Moreover, we assume all applications have very small packets (Hong et al., 2019), and the queuing latency is omitted. Besides, we assume sensor nodes transmit their sensing data to sinks either directly or with the help of FD relays. This assumption is more reasonable for practical use, and is able to obtain a much lower communication latency comparing with conventional multi-hop wireless networks. For example, for sensor nodes transmitting data to sink node nearby and with no obstacle, it is better to choose a direct communication manner, not only for time latency reduction, but also for energy saving. Based on these assumptions, we denote the set of decode-and-forward FD relays as 𝓡, the set of sensor nodes as 𝓢 and the set of sink nodes as 𝓓. To achieve a high reliability via multiple link connections, each sensor is allowed to be connected with multiple disjoint paths simultaneously via CA. We assume the massive non-continuous carrier aggregation (Qimei et al., 2016) is applied, and denote the set of available sub-carriers for all sensors as 𝓜.


Table 1. Notations.

Symbol	Definition
𝓡	Set of all the FD relay nodes in the network
𝓢	Set of all the sensor nodes in the network
𝓓	Set of all the sink nodes in the network
𝓜	Set of available sub-carriers
Binary variable indicates if the sth sensor node connects dth sink directly over the mth sub-carrier or not
Binary variable indicates if the sth sensor node connects dth sink via rth relay over the mth sub-carrier or not
Pi,m	Transmit power of the ith node over the mth sub-carrier (𝓢𝓡)
Hi,j	Channel power gain between node i and j
Ri,j	Distance between i and j, where 𝓢𝓡𝓓
SINR of direct link between the sth sensor and the dth sink at the mth channel
The set of nodes interfering the communication between the sth sensor and the dth sink at the mth channel
SINR of the first cooperative communication hop of the sth sensor and the dth sink via rth relay over channel m
The set of nodes interfering the communication between the sth sensor and the rth relay at the mth channel
SINR of the second cooperative communication hop of the sth sensor and the dth sink via the rth relay over channel m
The set of nodes interfering the communication between the rth relay and the dth sink at the mth channel
Reliability of the sth sensor connecting the dth sink over the mth channel via direct connection
Reliability of the sth sensor connecting the dth sink over the mth channel via the rth relay
Reliability the sth sensor at the mth channel
As	Reliability the sth sensor with FD relays and CA
Γq	Sub-carrier assignment matrix of the q-th bee
Lq	Relay connection matrix of the q-th bee
Pq	power allocation matrix of the q-th employed bee
N0	Noise power
αq	Path loss exponent of the qth band
Cq	Path loss constant of the qth band
μq	Wavelength of the qth band
τ	Predefined SINR threshold
Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (393KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Illustration of a three-tier IWSN.

To specify the channel assignment of the direct communication, we denote 
 as the channel-allocation indicator binary variable between the sth sensor the dth sink over channel m. If 
, it indicates that the mth sub-carrier is allocated to the direct link between the sth sensor 𝓢 and the dth sink 𝓓, and if otherwise 
𝓜. To specify the channel assignment of the cooperative communication, we denote 
 as the channel-allocation indicator binary variable between the sth sensor the dth sink via the rth relay over channel m. If 
, it indicates that the sth sensor communicates the dth sink via the rth 𝓡 relay over the mth channel, and if otherwise 
.

To specify the power allocation, we denote the power allocated to the mth sub-carrier of the ith (𝓢𝓓) node as Pi,m, where(1)
 and 
 is the maximum transmit power of the ith node.

Due to the hardware limitation, the following per-subcarrier assignment constraint and per-node power constraint need to be satisfied:

1)
Each sub-carrier for a sink or a sensor can only be occupied by at most one connection.

2)
Each relay can serve for at most one sensor.

3)
The total transmit power at each sensor over all of its aggregated sub-carriers ∑mPs,m (𝓢) should not exceed its maximum power 
.

2.2. SINR of direct communication
Let us define Ri,j as the distance between i and j, where 𝓢𝓡𝓓, we then formulate the SINR of direct link between the sth sensor and the dth sink at the mth channel as(2)
 
where Hs,d is the channel power gain between node s and d. Similar as (Yansha et al., 2016), we ignore shadowing and only consider independent quasi-static Rayleigh fading with Hi,n ~ exp(1) for simplicity. 
 is the set of nodes interfering the communication between the sth sensor and the dth sink at the mth channel, and is given by(3) 
𝓢𝓓𝓜
𝓢𝓓𝓡𝓜
 where the first term denotes these interfering nodes in 𝓢, and the second one denotes these interfering nodes in 𝓡.

2.3. SINR of cooperative communication
We then formulate the SINR of the first cooperative communication hop of the sth sensor and the dth sink via rth relay over channel m as(4)
 
where 
 is the set of nodes interfering the communication between the sth sensor and the rth relay at the mth channel, and is given by(5) 
𝓢𝓓𝓜
𝓢𝓓𝓡𝓜
 

Here, the second term denotes the residual loop interference due to imperfect interference cancellation, and is given by Pr,mHr,r. Similarly, the SINR of the second cooperative communication hop of the sth sensor and the dth sink via the rth relay over channel m can be formulated as(6)
 
where 
 is the set of nodes interfering the communication between the rth relay and the dth sink at the mth channel, and is given by(7) 
𝓢𝓓𝓜
𝓢𝓓𝓡𝓜
 

Here, the last term denotes the interference of the source node s, due to the simultaneous transmission between the source node and the relay node (Riihonen et al., 2011).

2.4. Reliability analysis
Similar as (Khandani et al., 2008), we take the outage probability formulation to model the reliability of a single connection. For direct communication, the signal cannot be successfully received if the SINR value 
 is below a certain threshold τ. Therefore, the reliability of the sth sensor connecting the dth sink over the mth channel via direct connection is given by(8) 
 

For cooperative communication, the signal cannot be successfully received either the first hop SINR value 
 or the second hop SINR value 
 is below a certain threshold τ. Therefore, the reliability of the sth sensor connecting the dth sink over the mth channel via the rth relay is given by(9) 
 

Note that 
 denotes the reliability of a single connection between sensor s and an arbitrary sink d via relay r over channel m, the reliability between the sth sensor and the dth sink via an arbitrary relay over channel m is derived as 
𝓡
. Due to the fact that channel m can only be used either for a direct connection or a cooperative connection via an arbitrary relay r. The reliability the sth sensor at the mth channel is expressed as(10) 
𝓡
 

The reliability of the sth sensor connecting the sink node is defined by the combination of multiple parallel connections over different channels via CA, which is derived in the following theorem.

Theorem 1

The reliability of the sth sensor with FD relay and CA is derived as(11)
𝓜
𝓝where(12) 
 
𝓡
 
 
 
 and(13)
ξ can be 𝓢 or 𝓡, n can be 𝓡, and 𝓓.

Proof

For 
 and 
 (𝓡), we can directly obtain 
.

For 
 and 
 (𝓡), we employ the change of variables 
 
, 
 
, and 
 to obtain(14) 
 
 where FZ(⋅) is the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of Z, and 
 
 is the complementary cdf of Z, which is(15) 
 
 
 
 
 where fY(y) is the joint probability density function (pdf) of the vector 
, and fS(s) is a pdf of the exponential random variable Hs,d with coefficient 
 
, its pdf is given by(16)
and the outer integral is over 
-dimensional space.

With (16), we obtain the inner integral of (15) as(17) 
 

Substitute (17) into (15), we obtain(18) 
 
 

Since {Yi} are non-negative and independent variables, we derive(19) 
 
 

Taking into account that Yi is a exponential random variable Hi,d with coefficient 
 
, we obtain(20) 
 
 
 

Substituting z with N0, we obtain(21) 
 
 

Similarly, for 
 and 
, we obtain 
 as(22) 
 
 
 

Thus for 
 and 
, we derive 
 as(23) 
𝓡
 
 
 

□

2.5. Latency analysis
Assume the packet size of the s-th sensor as Ds, and the channel bandwidth for each sub-carrier as W. For direct communication, the communication latency of the s-th sensor to the d-th sink over channel m can be given by(24)
 

For cooperative communication, we ignore the processing latency at the full-duplex relay, the communication latency of the s-th sensor to the d-th sink over channel m via the r-th relay can be given by(25)
 
 

Since channel m can only be occupied with a connection, the latency the sth sensor at the mth channel is given as(26) 
𝓡
 

Since sensor s can communicate with the sink via parallel communication over different sub-carrier, its communication latency is set as the maximum latency among its parallel connections, which is given by(27)
𝓜
 

2.6. Problem formulation
The goal of this paper is to maximize the sum reliability subject to the total power constraint, the sub-carrier allocation constraint, and the relay selection constraint. To achieve this, an optimization algorithm is required to perform the optimal channel assignment, relay selection, and power allocation. We thus present the optimization problem as(28) 
 
(29)
𝓢(30)
𝓢𝓜(31)
𝓡(32)
𝓡
𝓑𝓓𝓜(33)
𝓝
𝓑𝓓𝓜(34)
𝓢𝓓𝓡𝓜

In (28), As is given by (11). The constraint in (29) indicates that the maximum power constraint of each sensor, the constraint (32) indicates each sub-carrier can only be occupied by at most one connection, the constraint (33) indicates that each relay serves at most one sensor node, and the constraint (31) indicates the power allocated for any relay r is smaller than its maximum power 
. As can be observed, the optimization problem in (28) contains integer variables 
, 
, continuous variables Ps,m and Pr,m. Moreover, the objective function is non-convex. Instinctively, this optimization problem is in the form of mixed integer non-linear programming (MINLP) problem, which is generally NP-hard and there is no systematic and computational efficient approach to solve this problem optimally.

3. Joint optimization based on DDM
In order to solve the above problem, a problem decomposition framework based on distributed decision making (DDM) (Anandalingam and Friesz, 1992) theory is presented in this section. The original complex problem after decomposition is grouped into two layers: the top layer model and bottom layer model. Generally, the top layer model has a higher priority and provides a top-to-bottom information to guide the optimization process of the bottom layer model. After that, the bottom layer optimizes continuous objective functions and feeds its optimal solution back to the top layer model.

Because the reliability highly relies on the number of parallel connection, it is important to determine the integer variables first. After that, the optimal power allocation for each connection can be determined. Therefore, the actual decomposition framework based on DDM for reliability optimization is illustrated in Fig. 2. In this framework, we denote the top layer model as the sub-carrier assignment and relay selection problem, which is responsible for optimizing the integer variables 
 and 
, and is given by(35) 
 
 We denote the bottom layer model as the power allocation problem, which is responsible for optimizing the continuous variables Ps,m and Pr,m, and is given by(36) 
 
 

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (329KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Joint optimization framework based on DDM.

The formulated problems at each layer are still non-convex due to the existence of objective function. Since the problem size increases exponentially with increasing the number of relays and sub-carriers. It is not feasible to solve them by an exact algorithm with a huge problem space size. By simulating the foraging behavior of honey bees in finding food source, the artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm is capable of providing a best-so-far solution at any time of request and keeping improving the solution over time (Karaboga et al., 2014). We therefore take ABC as the optimizer for both layers. Considering that there are already some improved ABC algorithms proposed to improve the search ability of original ABC algorithms, we thus first invoke four typical ABC algorithms as the optimizer at each layer. These four algorithms are: original ABC, QABC, MABC, and MABC-NS. Due to the fact that these improved ABC algorithms focus on improving the neighborhood search methods of original ABC algorithm at the employed bee phase, we further propose an improved algorithm to integrate the ABC and MABC-NS algorithm. All these algorithms are illustrated in the following sections.

3.1. Optimization based on ABC
ABC algorithm is an optimization method by simulating the foraging behavior of the bee colony in finding the food source (Karaboga et al., 2014). ABC involves two basic concepts: food source and bee colony, where food source is viewed as a potential solution of the problem. The basic structure of the ABC algorithm includes three steps: employed bee phase, onlooker bee phase and scout phase. In the employed bee phrase, each potential solution of the problem is first encoded as an employed bee in ABC. Assume the initial population of the ABC has Q employed bees and Q onlooker bees. For sub-carrier assignment and relay selection sub-problem, each employed bee includes two integer-based matrices Γq and Lq, which are potential solutions to the sub-carrier assignment and relay selection. We represent these two integer-based matrices of the qth (1 ≤ q ≤ Q) employed bee as follows:

1)
Sub-carrier assignment matrix Γq is(37)
 where the matrix element 
𝓡𝓓 indicates the sth sensor node connecting with 
 node over the mth sub-carrier. For instance, 
𝓡 indicates the sth connecting with the rth relay over the mth sub-carrier, and 
𝓓 indicates the sth connecting with the dth sink node directly over the mth sub-carrier. Note that this matrix always satisfies the constraint of (32), where each sub-carrier is occupied by at most one connection.

2)
Relay connection matrix Lq is(38)
 

where the matrix element 
𝓓 indicates the rth relay connecting with 
 sink. Note that the sub-carrier assignment for the relay node can be obtained from 
. For clarify, Fig. 3 illustrates this encoding scheme with 3 sensor nodes, 4 FD relays and 3 sink nodes. For instance, 
 and 
 indicate that the 2nd sensor node connect to the 2nd and 3rd relays simultaneously over the 1st sub-carrier and 2nd sub-carrier via CA. According to Lq, both 2nd and 3rd relays connect to the 2nd sink node. Based on these two matrices, we generate an initial population 𝓠 with Q employed bees. In order to explore diversity, the element of each employed bees is generated with a random value.
Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (245KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The structure of the employed bee for sub-carrier assignment and relay selection.

For power allocation sub-problem, each employed bee is encoded as a matrix Pq, and is given by(39)
 where the matrix element 
 indicates the allocated power of the sth sensor over the mth sub-carrier, and the matrix element 
 indicates the allocated power of the rth Relay.

With these definitions, the food source xi for the employed bee i is randomly initialized as(40)
where j = {1, 2, …, S × M + R}. For the food source of sub-carrier assignment and relay selection, if j equals sm, we thus set lj as 0, and uj as S + D, otherwise we set lj as 0, and uj as 1. For the food source of power allocation, if j equals sm, we set lj as 0, and uj as 
, otherwise we set lj as 0, and uj as 
.

With the food source defined for each employed bee, this employed bee will hunts for a new food source near the food source. For employed bee i, it new food source yi is generated as(41)
where k is a randomly selected employed bee except i, φ is a random real matrix with size 1 × SM + R, and each element φi,j = rand(−1, 1) is a random value. In ABC, the fitness value is defined as the optimization value. With the resource allocation defined the food source of the employed bee, the fitness between the new food source and the existing food source are calculated and compared, and the one with greater fitness is retained.

Besides, the employed bee i has a record triali to memorize the food exhausting degree. Define the fitness value as the optimization value with the resource allocation. By comparing the fitness between the new food source and the existing food source, the food source of the ith employed bee is updated as(42)
 

Moreover, the record triali of the ith employed bee is updated as(43)
 

The second issue of ABC is the onlooker bee phase. In this phase, each onlooker bee makes a selection based on the fitness of the food source, where the selection probability of the food source i is given as(44)
𝓠
 

It is worth pointing our that a food source with a larger fitness value has a higher probability of being chosen by an onlooker bee. If the onlooker bee has selected a food source, a new food source is first generated according to (41). And then, the corresponding record triali and food source of ith employed bee will be updated according to (43) and (42) respectively.

The third issue of ABC is the scout bee phase. In this phase, if a employed bee fails to improve the fitness of a food source within a given number of attempts ε, the corresponding food source is abandoned, and this employed bee is transformed as a scout bee. After that, a novel food source will be generated according to (40).

3.2. Optimization based on QABC
Different from ABC, QABC (Karaboga and Gorkemli, 2014) imports the idea of neighborhood region to generate a new food source for employed bees. Denote Ni as the neighborhood of the food source xi, Ni is given by(45)
 
where di,k is Euclidean distance between food source xi and xk. A food source xk is in the neighborhood region of xi, iffdi,k ≤ rNi, where r is a predefined parameter.

Denote 
 as the food source in the neighborhood region of xi and with the highest fitness value. Based on the 
, the new food source for the ith employed bee in QABC is given by(46)

Besides the generation of new food sources, the initialization, employed bee phase, onlooker bee phase are the same as that in ABC.

3.3. Optimization based on AABC
AABC (Weijie et al., 2018) also modifies the new food source generation for employed bees. Denote 
 as a randomly selected food source from the first t best food sources, the new food source for the ith employed bee in AABC is given by,(47)
where t is predefined parameter. Denote the successful food update times for employed bees as TE and the successful food update times for onlooker bees as TO, t is adjusted in accordance with TE and TO, and is given by(48)
 

Besides, a modified selection probability is designed. In this scheme, food sources are first sorted according to their fitness value. Denote ranki as the sort number of the ith food source, its selection probability is given by(49)
𝓠
 

3.4. Optimization based on MABC-NS
MABC-NS (Xinyu et al., 2017) is a improved version of MABC (Weifeng and Sanyang, 2012). In MABC, the new food source generation for employed bees considering the previous memory. Denote xbest as the best food sources in memory, the new food source for the ith employed bee in MABC is given by,(50)
where p and q are two random selected numbers for [1, Q]. Since using (50) may lead to a local optimum, MABC-NS has modified the new food generation in the following way,(51)
where a, b and c are random values from [0, 1], and a + b + c = 1. In MABC-NS, the new food source generation of (51) is performed after (50). If MABC fails to find a new food source with higher fitness value, (51) is performed. Besides, there is no onlooker bee phase and scout bee phase in MABC-NS.

3.5. Optimization based on AMABC-NS
The global optimal solution of the population is used in MABC-NS algorithm. Besides, the neighborhood search method is applied to strengthen the search ability of conventional ABC algorithm at the employed bee phase. However, MABC-NS has eliminated the onlooker bee and scout bee phase. Due to the fact that ABC is an adaptive system, and the onlooker bees play a role of positive feedback, many more bees can be attracted to generate a better food source with a better the food source. The scout bees play a role of disturbance by randomly introducing some new positions into the search space. It is thus applied to avoid falling into local optimal. Therefore, we propose to integrate the onlooker bee phase and scout bee phase of the conventional ABC algorithm into MABC-NS, and denote this algorithm as the advanced algorithm of MABC-NS (AMABC-NS).


Algorithm 1. Resource allocation based on AMABC-NS

1:/∗Initialization phrase∗/
2: for i = 1 to Q do
3: initialize food source xi use (40), evaluate f(xi) and triali = 0
4: end for
5: memorize the best food source as xbest
6: repeat
7:/∗Employed bees phrase∗/
8: for i = 1 to Q do
9: generate yi use (50) and evaluate f(yi)
10: if f(yi) > f(xi) then
11: replace xi with yi and triali = 0
12: else
13: generate yi use (40) and evaluate f(yi) with probability p1
14: update xi with yi according to (42)
15: update triali with yi according to (43)
16: end if
17: end for
18: for i = 1 to Q do
19: generate yi use (51) and evaluate f(yi) with probability p2
20: update xi with yi according to (42)
21: update triali with yi according to (43)
22: end for
23:/∗Onlooker bees phrase∗/
24: calculate probability pi use (44)
25: t = 0
26: while t < Q do
27: i = 0
28: if rand(0, 1) < pi then
29: generate yi use (50) and evaluate f(yi)
30: if f(yi) > f(xi) then
31: replace xi with yi and triali = 0
32: else
33: generate yi use (40) and evaluate f(yi) with probability p1
34: update xi with yi according to (42)
35: update triali with yi according to (43)
36: end if
37: generate yi use (51) and evaluate f(yi) with probability p2
38: update xi with yi according to (42)
39: update triali with yi according to (43)
40: t = t + 1
41: else
42: i = i + 1
43: if i = = Q then
44: i = 0
45: end if
46: end if
47: end while
48: memorize the best food resource xbest
49:/∗Scout bees phrase∗/
50: if triali > ε then
51: generate xi use (40) and triali = 0
52: end if
53: until Terminal Condition Meets
Algorithm 1 illustrates the AMABC-NS algorithm in detail. It is worth pointing out that there exists difference in fitness evaluation between these two sub-problems. For sub-carrier assignment and relay selection sub-problem, it takes the power allocation from bottom layer as the input, roundups the real values into an integer number, and calculates its fitness value with (35). For power allocation sub-problem, it takes the sub-carrier assignment and relay selection from the upper layer as the input, and calculates its fitness value with (36). Assuming the time complexity of fitness evaluation for each food source as O(A), and the termination condition as a maximum iterations of M. Since it needs to evaluate the fitness twice for each food source in each phase, the time complexity of our algorithm can be derived as O((MQO(A))).

3.6. Joint optimization based on DDM
With these proposed ABC optimization methods, Algorithm 2 illustrates the joint optimization algorithm based on DDM. We denote Ai as the optimization value obtained in the ith iteration. We set the termination condition as the difference of the optimization value between two adjacent iterations lower than a predefined value Tth. The first step is power initialization, where sensor and relay allocate a fixed and feasible power allocation for itself. In the second step, the ABC based sub-carrier assignment and relay selection is performed based on the current power allocation. Subsequently, the ABC based power allocation algorithm is executed based on the sub-channel assignment and relay selection solution. This process is repeated until a maximum number of imax iterations or meets the termination conditions, where the joint solution is obtained.


Algorithm 2. Joint optimization on sub-carrier assignment, relay selection and power allocation

1:/∗Initialization∗/
2: Initialize a random power allocation for all sensors and relays according to (40)
3: set i = 0
4:/∗Joint Optimization∗/
5: while i ≤ imax and convergence = False do
6: Applying ABC-based sub-carrier assignment and relay selection to update v with current P
7: Applying ABC-based power allocation to update P with current v
8: if 
𝓝
 then
9: convergence = False
10: else
11: convergence = True
12: end if
13: i = i + 1
14: end while
Theorem 2

The proposed joint optimization algorithm is guaranteed to converge.

Proof

Each iteration of the joint optimization algorithm contains two main procedures: ABC based sub-carrier assignment and relay selection, and ABC based power allocation. Since the obtained reliability is guaranteed to not decrease in each iteration, and the upper bound of the reliability exists due to the limited resources. We conclude that the joint optimization converges within limited number of iterations. □

4. Numerical results
In this section, we first run Monte Carlo simulation to validate our analytical expressions of the reliability. Then, the optimized reliability are plotted using our proposed joint optimization algorithm based on ABC algorithms.

4.1. Reliability validation
To verify the derived analytical results, we plot the analytical curves for the reliability with FD relays and multiple connection using Monte Carlo simulation. In these simulations, Ex. denotes the exact results from (11) and Sim. denotes the results from Monte Carlo Simulation.

Assuming the maximum power for each sensor and relay node is ranged from 0dBm to 30 dBm, and the communication distance between the sensor and sink node as 200 m, Fig. 4 plots the reliability versus different power allocation. As expected, the reliability of sensor connected to the sink increases with increasing the transmit power. We also observe that increasing the number of sub-carriers can greatly improve the reliability. For relay based communication with a maximum allocated power of 30 dBm, a maximum of 1 nine reliability can be obtained. Whereas the reliability increased to 3 nines with CA over 3 different sub-carriers, which reveals the potential of applying parallel communications. We also observe that, with a distance of 200 m, reliability obtained by direct communication outperforms that by relay based communication.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (266KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Reliability analysis with different power allocation.

To further analyze the relationship between the distance and the reliability, we set the power for each node as 0 dBm, and plot the reliability versus various communication distances in Fig. 5. As expected, the reliability of direct communication decreases with increasing the distance. However, the reliability of relay based communication increases with increasing the communication distance. For example, when the communication distance is larger than 350 m, the reliability with relay based communication outperforms that with direct communication.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (289KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Reliability analysis with different communication distance.

By setting the communication distance between the sensor and the sink node as 400 and number of sub-carriers as 2, Fig. 6 plots the reliability versus different α. As can be observed from the figure, the reliability increases with decreasing the α. We also observe that the reliability with relay based communication outperforms that with direct communication for α equals to 4 or 5. However, the reliability with direct communication outperforms that with relay based communication for α equals to 2. This showcases that direct communication and relay based communication should be jointly optimized to improve the whole network performance. It is worth pointing out that all the figures demonstrate the well match between the derived analytical results and the simulation, which proves the accuracy of our derived results.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (283KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Reliability analysis with different α

4.2. Reliability optimization
We further consider a network consisting of 3 sink nodes, no more than 12 sensor nodes and no more than 18 relay nodes. The set-up is a circle area with size π5002 m2, where all nodes are randomly distributed in this circle area. We therefore provide numerical results to illustrate the performance of our proposed optimization algorithm. All results are obtained by averaging 50 random simulations.

First, we assume there are 12 sensors, 9 relays, the 16 sub-carriers, and 
 is 16W. Fig. 7 plots the statistical results for all our 50 random simulations. There are five solid lines for each algorithm, including the maximum value, quarter digit, median, quarter digit and minimum value point, respectively, from top to bottom. From the simulation results, we observe that the maximum values of all these algorithms are almost the same, indicating that all these algorithms have the ability to find the optimal solution. As for median value, we observe that the MABC-NS algorithm has the worst performance comparing with the other four algorithms, indicating that the onlooker bee phase and scout bee phase are important in finding the optimal solution. By integrating these two phases into MABC-NS, our proposed algorithm AMABC-NS algorithm obtains better performance than MABC-NS. It is also observed that the results obtained by ABC algorithm and AMABC-NS algorithm are much more aggregated than that with the other three algorithms, which showcase that ABC and AMABC-NS algorithm are more stable and robust for optimization.

Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (225KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Statistical results of the proposed 5 algorithms.

Fig. 8(a) further plots the convergence behaviors of these algorithms, it can be observed that QABC, AABC and AMBC-NS algorithm converge more fast than ABC algorithm, which is mainly because the phase of the employed bee in these algorithms are much more simple than that in ABC algorithm. Due to that the onlooker bee and scout bee phases are deleted in MABC-NS algorithm, it takes the longest iterations to converge to the optimal solution. Fig. 8(b) plots number of nines versus different number of iterations. it can be observed the average performance of the AMABC-NS and ABC algorithms are much higher than with the other three algorithms. It is also observed that ABC algorithm obtains the best reliability comparing with the other four algorithms. Comparing with ABC, AMABC-NS achieves near the same reliability but a much faster convergence ratio, which testifies the effective of our proposed algorithm.

Fig. 8
Download : Download high-res image (424KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Performance comparison with different algorithms.

We further set the number of relay as 6, the number of sub-carriers as 8, and the maximum power for each sensor node as 8W and apply the AMABC-NS as our optimization algorithm. Fig. 9 compares the optimized reliability with different number of sensors. We observe that the reliability decreases with increasing the number of sensors. This can be explained by the fact that the interference increases the increasing the number of sensors, thus reduce the network reliability. Another observation is that our algorithm with 6 sensors converges much faster than that with other sensors, this can be explained by the fact that network with 6 sensors has the smallest solution space.

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (279KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Comparison with different number of sensors.

Fig. 10 plots the optimized reliability with 6 sensors and 6 relays, where the number of sub-carriers is ranged from 4 to 8. It is observed that the reliability increases with increasing the number of sub-carriers. This is due to the fact that the interference decreases with increasing the number of sub-carriers, thus the single connection reliability is improved. This can also be explained by the fact that increasing the number sub-carriers also increases the potential gain from the spectral diversity, where many more parallel connections can be applied.

Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (297KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Comparison with different number of sub-carriers.

Fig. 11 plots the reliability versus different number of sub-carriers and different number sensors, where the number of relay is 6 and the maximum power of each sensor is 14W. Fig. 11(a) plots the actual reliability, and Fig. 11(b) plots the corresponding number of nines respectively. We further compare our work with the algorithm proposed in Jie et al. (2017a). Since this algorithm only focus on the frequency diversity, we set the number of relay as 0. From the simulations, it is shown that the reliability increases with increasing the number of sub-carriers from 2 to 9 with no more than 12 sensors. However further increasing the number of sub-carriers can not achieve much improvement. This indicates that increasing the number of sub-carriers may not guarantee substantial improvement of network reliability. It is also observed that algorithm with the help of FD-relays achieves a better performance than that without relays, which reveals that adopting full-duplex relays is an effective way for reliability improvement. By setting the number of relays as 0, it is noticed that our algorithm still outperforms the algorithm in Jie et al. (2017a), which is mainly because that we apply the DDM framework to decouple the algorithm into two sub-problems, and each sub-problem can be efficiently optimized with the designed optimization schemes.

Fig. 11
Download : Download high-res image (477KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Reliability comparison versus different number of sub-carriers.

Since the latency is also very important for the URLLC communications, we thus provide the latency simulation results and compare it with the frequency based approach in Jie et al. (2017a). We set the packet size for each sensor as D = 2K, the bandwidth for each sub-carrier as W = 20 MHz, and define the latency as the maximum latency among all sensors. Fig. 12 plots the latency versus different number of sub-carriers and different number sensors. It can be observed that the transmission latency increases with increasing the number of sub-carriers. For example, the maximum transmission latency with 2 sub-carriers is 12.03 ms. However, the transmission latency is increased to 59.34 ms with 14 sub-carriers. The reason for this phenomena is that the latency is not included in our optimization approach, some weak links with longer transmission latency will be utilized for parallel communication when there is a sufficiently large number of sub-carriers available. It also can be observed that our algorithm obtains a much shorter transmission latency comparing with the GA approach without relays. For example, the maximum transmission latency with 12 sub-carriers of our algorithm is 104.03 ms. While the maximum transmission latency for the GA based algorithm without relay is increased to 575.14 ms. This can be explained that the transmission distance without relays is much longer than that with relays, resulting a much smaller link capacity.

Fig. 12
Download : Download high-res image (237KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Latency comparison versus different number of sub-carriers.

5. Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented the theoretical model and optimization algorithm to achieve an ultra-high reliability in IWSNs with the aid of FD relays and parallel connections. We have derived a closed-form expression for the reliability of random sensors in a IWSN communicating the sink nodes with CA and FD technology. We have formulated an optimization problem to maximize the minimum reliability joint with sub-carrier assignment, relay selection and power allocation. We have applied DDM framework to decouple the problem into two sub-problems. We have proposed an improved ABC algorithm to find the optimized solutions for each sub-problem. Numerical results showcased that AMABC-NS algorithm converges much faster than ABC. Numerical results also showed that our proposed algorithms was an effective way in achieving ultra-high reliability for IWSNs.

