EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 (RFID Generation-2) is a wireless communication system in Internet of Things. The models and analyses of RFID Generation-2 are important and have been reported. However, for usefulness and validity, existing models and analyses are mainly based on the assumptions that RFID runs in ideal wireless channels (no packet loss, no error code, and no capture effect). However, there are three co-existing these bad results (packet loss, error code, and capture effect) in the realistic channels, which means that the channels are unreliable. For obtaining comprehensive understanding of RFID Generation-2 performance to conduct relevant important researches, some models are developed for RFID Generation-2 under the unreliable channels. Meanwhile, four feasible methods for calculating the probabilities of those bad results (as models parameters) are given. After validating accuracy of the models through extensive simulation experiments and their fitness for an instance, these models are used to analyze impacts of the parameters on time efficiency, and obtain some key sensitivity factors promoting efficiency. Furthermore, analytical results demonstrate that the analyses considering those co-existing bad results are basis for the researches of some fields such as the general tag identification, the blocked tags identification, the missing tag identification, and the effective hardware design.

Previous
Next 
Index Terms
RFID Generation-2

Unreliable channels

Performance modeling

Performance analyses

1. Introduction
The RFID Generation-2 (shortly, Generation-2) system has emerged as a promising important technique for provisioning of the automatic identification to support Internet of Things such as the delivery system (Purio et al., 2016) and the logistics (Jakkhupan et al., 2011), (Wang et al., 2020), the indoor locations (Papapostolou and Chaouchi, 2011), etc. The wireless channel between the reader (namely, interrogator) and tags is a key for the Generation-2 system to achieve high performance. Therefore, for obtaining the more optimal tag identification and designing the effective RFID hardware (Shi et al., 2018), the design of the communication algorithm between reader and tags should be based on the fact that the realistic channels are unreliable (Zhang and Soong, 2005). Fig. 1 depicts the link timing between reader and tags in the Generation-2 (EPC, 2008), and the timing is based on the unreliable channels. There are four slots (the Single Tag Reply, the Collided Reply, the No Reply, and the Invalid Reply), instead of the three slots (the success slot, the collision slot, and the empty slot) in the existing literatures mainly regarding the ideal channels (Zhu and Yum, 2010a).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (197KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Link timing between a reader and tags.

In the Internet of Things, there exist some factors affecting the reader-tag communication under the unreliable channel, for example, the multi-path fading effect, the spectrum constraint, the energy restriction, the mobility, the noise, and the difference distance between the reader and tags (Molisch, 2011). These factors of the RFID Generation-2 will cause some bad results such as the packet loss (Goyal and Kumar, 2015), the error code (Shi et al., 2018), (Altamirano and Almeida, 2013), and the capture effect (Jun et al., 2016), like ones of other wireless communications. These caused bad results can lead to performance degradation, for example, the multi-path effect causes more time spent than the ideal environment (Jeon and Cho, 2009a). It is noteworthy that these bad results should be used to research the RFID generation-2 under unreliable channel for reflecting the real situations to obtain the identification performance better than the one without considering usage of them.

In terms of the tag identification, although the current DFSA protocols can simply drop and re-transmit when the packets are missing or collided, the determination of the optimal frame length affecting the tag identification efficiency should fully consider those bad results (the packet loss, the error code, and the capture effect). In the unknown tag detection of large-scale RFID systems with unreliable channels (LiuLi and Min, 2014), it is very important to minimize the detection and recognition time of unknown tag. As a result, under certain detection accuracy, the choice of the optimal frame length of the unknown tag detection protocol also requires those bad results to be fully considered. When those bad results (the packet loss, the error code, and the capture effect) are adopted in the models, they can be considered as parameters of the models. Of course, the parameters are also important for other aspects, such as the miss tag detection and recognition (Xie et al., 2014), the blocked RFID tags identification (Liu et al., 2018). Although some commercial RFID devices (e,g., Impinj R420,Alien) use the re-transmission, the spread spectrum frequency hopping and other modes to improve the reliability of the communication, the identification efficiency of anti-collision algorithm can not be optimized without the consideration of these parameters (the packet loss, the error code, and the capture effect). So, it is very important to model the RFID Generation-2 using those parameters for obtaining the best performance, for example, the tag identification efficiency, the time minimization of the unknown tag detection and recognition, etc. Moreover, the influences of these parameters on performance can be different, and the costs of changing these parameters by circuit design also can be variant. Thus, the high performance price ratio can be obtained by analyzing the sensitivities influence of those parameters on the performance using the builded models.

In summary, the performance modeling and analysis of the RFID Generation-2 considering those parameters in unreliable channel are the basis of the related research. Based on the performance modeling and analysis, we can further study high-performance tag inventory algorithms (such as tag anti-collision algorithm, miss tag detection algorithm, etc.) and effective RFID hardware design. For the applications of the inventory algorithms, the algorithms can be implemented in the readers with no tag change or less tag change. In the next section, we will analyze the situation of modeling the RFID Generation-2 using these parameters.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II presents related works, Section III lists our contributions, Section IV gives the analysis of tag identification that helps to understand subsequent sections. Section V derives models. The effectivenesses of the proposed models are verified by comparing the simulation results and the numerical ones in Section VI. Section VII gives performance analyses of the Generation-2 using these models. Finally, Section VIII concludes the research.

2. Related works
E. Vahedi et al. analyze the performance of the Generation-2 system using the proposed Markov chain in the assumption of the reliable channels (Vahedi et al., 2014). L. Zhu et al. model the reading process as a Markov Chain and derive the optimal reading strategy through first-passage-time analysis under ideal channels (Zhu and Yum, 2010b). A. Ferdous et al. analyze the gains in efficiency when the tag estimation algorithms are used in conjunction with the Generation-2 at different points in the protocol considering the ideal channels (Ferdous et al., 2017). C. Wang et al. establish a Discrete-Time Markov Chain (DTMC) model for the Generation-2 system and accordingly obtain quantitative results of the Query success rate and the tag identification speed (Wang et al., 2009). C. J. Satyavolu et al. propose a scalable bound-based solution to study the delay performance of Q-adaptive protocol, and derive the delay bound (J Satyavolu et al., 2014). C. Jin et al. conduct the experimental evaluation of the Generation-2 anti-collision algorithm in an AWGN noise environment (Jin et al., 2007). F. Marino et al. present the OPNET model and performance simulation of the Generation-2 system (Marino et al., 2013). H. Landaluce et al. analyze the performance of a slot counter algorithm by comparing with the realistic performance of a commercial Generation-2 reader (Landaluce et al., 2012). F. Hessar et al. conduct the performance evaluation energy-based of the passive Generation-2 system considering error code of RN16 (Hessar and Roy, 2013). K. Y. Jeon et al. focus on the multi-path fading effect and the noise in investigating and analyzing their influences on the multiply-tag identification performance (Jeon and Cho, 2009b). M. Mohaisen et al. analyze the performance of the encoding and the modulation processes in the downlink and uplink of the Generation-2 system through the analysis and simulation considering error code (Mohaisen et al., 2008). L. Xie et al. propose a probabilistic model of tag identification considering the condition of the packet loss and the moving conveyor for the Generation-2 (Xie et al., 2010). Referring to some parameters of the RFID generation-2, M. Chen et al. propose an iterative tag search protocol for large-scale RFID systems with the packet loss and error code in noisy channel (Chen et al., 2016). J. Liu et al. propose a fast and reliable method for probabilistic unknown tag detection under the unreliable channels without referring to the RFID generation-2 protocol (Liu et al., 2019). Therefore, the performance analyses of the Generation-2 system have been widely reported. A summary of these analyses are as follows:

•
A lot of performance analyses are done based on the assumptions that the Generation-2 system runs in the ideal wireless channels (Vahedi et al., 2014), (Zhu and Yum, 2010b), (Ferdous et al., 2017), (Wang et al., 2009), (J Satyavolu et al., 2014). In the unreliable channels, the validity of these models can't be guaranteed.

•
Some works analyze impact factors by experimental way but no mathematical models (Jin et al., 2007), (Marino et al., 2013), (Landaluce et al., 2012). These analysis results are affected by the selection of channel parameters, thus the results of these analyses have some practical difficulties in terms of the quantitative analysis and the Generation-2 system hardware design.

•
In some studies, the error code caused by interference in the unreliable channel is used to analyze the performance (Hessar and Roy, 2013), (Jeon and Cho, 2009b), (Mohaisen et al., 2008), (Xie et al., 2010). The packet loss has be taken into account in the performance models (Xie et al., 2010),(Chen et al., 2016), (Liu et al., 2019). However, only individual parameter is considered.

In short, as far as we know, there is no comprehensive consideration of the unreliable channels (the packet loss, error code, capture effect) to establish some mathematical models for quantitatively studying the performance of the Generation-2 system, so these mathematical models are unable to capture the all parameters impacting performance in the realistic unreliable channels, resulting the problem that the usefulness and the validity of these models can not be guaranteed.

Therefore, although the existing studies have done preliminary exploration for the analysis of the RFID Generation-2 system, we still need further study performance modeling and analysis of the system.

In order to obtain comprehensive understanding of the Generation-2 performance in the unreliable channels, and provide the basis for high performance identification researches in important RFID fields such as (Zhu et al., 2014), (Yu et al., 2020).

3. Our contributions
•
Comprehensively considering these key parameters of the unreliable channel, we get the detailed and realistic analyses of the tag identification in the Generation-2 system, which lays a solid foundation for the performance modeling and analysis of the system.

•
The new reasonable mathematical models are proposed to study the performance of the Generation-2 system under the realistic unreliable channels. The packet loss and error code express in the models of the Single Tag Reply, Collided Reply, No Reply, and Invalid Reply. The capture effect presents in the model of the Single Tag Reply and Collided Reply.

•
Four feasible and cost-effective methods are developed to calculate the parameters (the packet loss, error code, capture effect) that are for the application of the proposed models.

•
The validity of the proposed models is demonstrated by comparing the numerical analytical results to ones obtained through extensive simulation experiments and their fitness for a instance. The comparisons show that the models have a good accuracy under the realistic unreliable channels.

•
These models are applied to analyze the impacts of the parameters on performance of the Generation-2 system, and play core role to the tag identification and the Generation-2 hardware design. The performance analyses of tag identification considering unreliable channel will be able to be applied to some fields such as the effective hardware design (Shi et al., 2018), the missing RFID tag identification (Xie et al., 2014), the blocked RFID tags identification (Liu et al., 2018), and the general RFID identification (Zhang et al., 2018).

We provide Table 1, which gives a summary of notations and their definitions in the paper.


Table 1. Summary of main notations and definitions.

Notation	Definition
time of No Reply slot
time of Collided Reply slot
time of Invalid Reply slot
time of Single Tag Reply slot
probability that reader command signal arrives at tag (expressing reader packet loss)
probability that tag response signal arrives at a reader (expressing tag packet loss)
probability of a bit error (expressing error code)
α	capture effect factor
n	the number of tags left unread
f	frame length
the expected number of tags successfully obtaining a slot inside a frame
p(s)	probability that there are s tags obtaining the same slot inside a frame
probability of No Reply
probability of Single Tag Reply
probability of Collided Reply
probability of Invalid Reply
identification time efficiency with a variable k
transmit power of reader
receive power of reader
4. Analyses of tag identification procedure under unreliable channels
This section will analyze the tag identification procedure of the Generation-2 under the unreliable channels, including steps and anti-collision algorithm of the tag identification. Although some literatures have described them, they do not consider those bad results of the unreliable channel to carry out a systematic analysis of the tag identification process. In order to provide the corresponding basis for the later performance modeling, we take into account the bad results for doing the systematic analysis of the process.

4.1. Analysis of tag identification steps
According to the specifications of the Generation-2 system (Zhang and Soong, 2005), tag identification process consists of a series of frames, and a frame includes a certain number of slots.

Step 1: Reader to Tags.

The reader sends a ‘Select’ command in order to inform tags that qualified ones take part in the current frame. Sequentially, it issues a ‘Query’ or ‘QueryAdjust’ command with a parameter Q to the qualified tags for starting a new frame and the first slot (its Slot Number is zero) of the frame. After receiving the command, these tags separately select Slot Number (SN) from [0, 2Q-1] and store the SNs to their Slot Counters (SC). One by one, the other slots (1≤SN ≤ 2Q-1) are triggered by the ‘QueryRep’. The reader uses the Q algorithm (shown in Fig. 2) to calculate a new Q value after each slot ends. If the new Q value is different from old Q value, the reader will stop the current frame and open a new frame using the ‘QueryAdjust’ with the instruction of modifying Q.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (150KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Q algorithm.

Notes: the probability that the reader's command arrives at each tag is defined as 
, thus probability that all k tags receive a command is 
. In fact, the arrival processes of a reader command are relatively independent among different tags, although there may be interference between them. As a result, it's very likely that these commands will only reach some tags in inventory zone of the reader.

Step 2: Tags to Reader.

As soon as these qualified tags receive the ‘QueryRep’, they independently decrement own SC by 1. Whether they receives ‘Query’ or ‘QueryRep’, these tags with SC equal to zero will generate their own 16-bit random number (RN16) and respond these RN16 to the reader. However, the triggering of slots and the modification of SCs are on the conditions of the successful reception of the ‘QueryRep’ under the unreliable channel, that is, there is no packet loss and no error code in the channel. In terms of tag response in a slot, there are four possibilities as follows:

a)
No Reply: After waiting a special time (T1+T3) without reception of RN16, the reader thinks that there will be no response in the current slot. Therefore, it subtracts Qfp by the constant c using the Q algorithm, and then goes to Step 1. In Fig. 1, time of the slot with No Reply (namely, No Reply slot) is(1)

b)
Collided Reply: When the reader receives multiple RN16s, it adds c to Qfp adopting the Q algorithm, and then goes to Step 1. In Fig. 1, time of the slot with Collided Reply (namely, Collided Reply slot) is(2)

c)
One Arrival Reply: When only a RN16 arrives to the reader, it goes to Step 3 after the time T2. In this case, there is no modification of Qfp.

Notes: the probability that a tag response signal arrives at a reader is defined as 
. Similarly to the arrival process of reader command, the arrival processes of tag response signals are also relatively independent among different tags, although there may be interference between them.

Step 3: Reader to Tags.

After receiving a RN16 from tags, the reader issues a command ‘ACK’ with the RN16 to tags. If there is a tag that successfully receives the ‘ACK’ and the RN16 in the command is equal to the one generated by it, the tag replies to the reader with its EPC (go to Step 4). Otherwise, no tag responses. After waiting a special time (T1+T3), the reader thinks that there exists an Invalid Reply in the slot and sends a next ‘QueryRep’ for a new slot (go to Step 1). In Fig. 1, time of the slot with the Invalid Reply (namely, Invalid Reply slot) is(3)

Step 4: Tag to Reader.

Although all qualified tags may receive the ‘ACK’, but only a tag can respond its EPC code to the reader in the current slot, and then the reader sends the ‘QueryRep’ (go to Step 1) for a new slot. In Fig. 1, time of the slot with Single Tag Reply (namely, Single Tag Reply slot) is(4)

Notes: During these intervals(T1, T2, T3), the reader continues to send out electromagnetic waves to supply the tag with power PB, while the reader uses special transmit power PT and receive power PR to send commands and receive tag information.

4.2. Q algorithm
The reader sends ‘Query/QueryAdjust’ to open a new frame and the first slot in the new frame, or ‘QueryRep’ to trigger other slots in the current frame. In each slot, the Q algorithm workflow is as follows:

Firstly, the reader modifies Qfp according to the number of tag responses (RN16, not EPC) in the previous Step 2: the reader increments and decrements Qfp by c when RN16's number > 1 (in the Collided Reply slot) and when RN16's number = 0 (in the No Reply slot), respectively, whereas it does not modify Qfp when RN16's number = 1 (in the Invalid Reply slot and the Sing Tag Reply slot).

Secondly, the reader adjusts Qfp: if Qfp exceeds 15, let Qfp = 15, whereas if Qfp is negative, let Qfp = 0. Further, the reader takes the integer of Qfp using the function ‘round( )’.

Thirdly, the reader determines whether the taken integer is different from the current Q value: if yes, the reader sets Q to the taken integer, and sends ‘QueryAdjust’ with the new value of Q for opening a new frame and its first slot, otherwise, it sends the ‘QueryRep’ for triggering a new slot in the current frame. When all slots of a frame are triggered, the reader sends “Query” for opening a new frame.

5. Mathematical models
On the basis of considering the unreliable channels, we analyze the various possible occurrence causes of the four slots (No Reply slot, Single Tag Reply slot, Invalid Reply slot and Collision Reply slot) in the Generation-2 system. Further, we comprehensively take occurrence causes into account in the model of the four slots.

5.1. Preliminaries
In the unreliable channel, due to the influence of communication distance between the reader and tags, the interference, the multi-path propagation and the transceiver circuit, etc., there may exist the data packets loss (Gong et al., 2017), that is, the packet reaches destination with a certain probability. So, we define pi and pt as the probabilities that the reader command and the tag response reach destinations, respectively. Moreover, there may exist the error codes after packets reach destinations, we use pe to represent the probability of a bit error code.

The command code lengths of the ‘QueryRep’ and ‘Query’ are four and twenty two, respectively. The ‘ACK’ includes 2-bits command code and 16-bits RN16.

For the reader-to-tag communication, besides the command codes themselves, the reader also needs to transmit the preamble codes, such as ‘Query’ with 3-bit preamble codes, ‘QueryRep’ with 2-bit preamble codes, and ‘ACK’ with 2-bit preamble codes (Zhang and Soong, 2005). It might take more time to transmit than just command code. The transmission of these preambles and command codes have a certain probability of error code.

Affected by the inequality among the distances from tags to the reader and other interference, the signal strengths of RN16s reaching the same reader are different, resulting that the reader can receive one of the RN16s, whereas the other RN16s are considered as the interferences based on the mechanism of the signal-to-interference, which is the capture effect. Referring to (Bueno-Delgado and Vales-Alonso, 2011), we use αn (α is the capture effect factor, 0≤α ≤ 1) to indicate the capture success probability considering the number n of arrival RN16s.

Due to the packet loss or error code of ‘QueryRep’, the tag actually may have to wait for more slots after the exact slot it selects. Given the number n of unread tags, Lei Xie et al. give the expected number n'(= n × pi2) of tags successfully obtaining a slot inside a frame based on the assumption of the packet loss (Xie et al., 2010). The probability that there is not error code of ‘QueryRep’ is (1pe)12. Thus, considering both the packet loss and the error code, we get the expected number n' of tags successfully obtaining a slot inside a frame(5)

Length of frame is f, and the probability that there are s tags obtaining the same slot inside a frame is calculated as p(s) = 
 
 
.

In the paper, we propose the linear model between f and n', that is, let f = k × n' = k × n × pi2 × (1˗pe)12 = K × n, {K = k × pi2 × (1-pe)12}. Moreover, we apply  
 
 
 
 to derivation of the following formulas.

5.2. Probability of No reply
In the No Reply slot, the reader has not received RN16 from tags, there exists four cases as follows:

Case 1

‘QueryRep’ misses in a slot, and the probability of the loss is(6)

Case 2

‘QueryRep’ arrives at the tag but with error code, and the probability of the case is calculated as(7)

Case 3

‘QueryRep’ arrives at the tag without error code and with no tag selection of the current slot, and the probability of the case is calculated as(8)

Case 4

‘QueryRep’ arrives at the tag without error code and s tags obtaining the same slot but all RN16 missing, and the probability of the case is calculated as.

(9)
Therefore, the probability of No Reply is calculated as(10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5.3. Probability of Single Tag Reply
In terms of the Single Tag Reply slot, the communication between the reader and tags need satisfy several conditions as follows: (a) the reader receives a RN16 from tags with no error code. (b) the tag receives ‘ACK’ with no error code. (c) the reader receives EPC from the tag. Considering the parameters in the unreliable channel, we combine these conditions with slot obtainment of tags, and get three cases as follows:

Case 1

only one tag obtains a slot, so the probability of the case is calculated as(11)
 
 
 
 

Case 2

multiple tags (s ≥ 2) obtain the same slot, but only one RN16 arrives at the reader, whereas other RN16 packets is missing. Therefore, the probability of the case is calculated as(12)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Case 3

multiple tags (s ≥ 2) obtain the same slot, and j (2≤j ≤ s) RN16s from them arrive at the reader with no error code. In the j arrival RN16s, the reader receives one because of the capture effect. The probability of the case is calculated as

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let 
 
 
we get
 
 
 
 

Let 
 
,

so 
 
, we have(13)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Therefore, the probability of the Single Tag Reply is calculated as(14)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
＝
 
 
 
 
 

5.4. Probability of Invalid Reply
In terms of the Invalid Reply slot, given the precondition that the reader receives one RN16 regardless of the error code, the communication between the reader and tags need satisfy at least one of four additional conditions: (a) ‘ACK’ packet loss. (b) the tag receives an invalid function code of ‘ACK’ (error code). (c) the tag receives an valid function code of ‘ACK’ with invalid RN16 (error code). (d) EPC packet loss of the tag. The probabilities that these conditions hold are as follows:

The probability that the precondition hold is calculated as(15)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The probability of ‘ACK’ packet loss is calculated as(16)

The probability that the tag receives an invalid function code of ‘ACK’ is calculated as(17)

The probability that the tag receives a valid function code of ‘ACK’ with error RN16 is calculated as(18)

The probability of EPC packet loss is calculated as(19)

Therefore, the probability of Invalid Reply is calculated as(20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5.5. Probability of Collided Reply
Multiple tags (s ≥ 2) obtain the same slot, and j (2≤j ≤ s) RN16s from them arrive at the reader. However, there is no capture effect among j RN16s resulting in the Collision Reply. The probability of the Collision Reply is calculated as(21)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5.6. Time efficiency of tag identification
Because of the inequality among slots (the No Reply slot, Single Tag Reply slot, Invalid Reply slot, and Collided Reply slot), we adopt the time-based tag identification efficiency for performance analysis, that is the ratio of the slot time of Single Tag Reply to total time in a frame. So, the time efficiency of tag identification is calculated as(22)
 
 

Notes: in the formulas {(10), (14), (20), and (21)}, when these parameters (
) are known, whereas k as an independent variable is unknown, the time efficiency of tag identification is a function of a variable k, that is 
 Otherwise, it is a multi-parameter function 
.

5.7. Energy efficiency of tag identification
The RFID reader is usually powered by battery, so the energy efficiency of tag identification needs to be considered. PB represents the power of the reader when no transmitted packet between the reader and tags. Energy efficiency of tag identification is calculated as(23)
 

Notes: the above probability models contain those key parameters (packet loss, error code, and capture effect) of the unreliable channel, thus, these probability models can reflect the real situations of the channel.

5.8. Calculation of parameters in models
The calculations of the parameters in the models are important basis for application of these models. In the paper, combining the Monte Carto test and probability modeling, we propose four feasible and cost-effective methods for the calculations.

For the calculations of pi, pt, and pe, we conduct two Monte Carto tests adopting one reader and one tag. In the first test, we set frame length to 1, and let the reader issues m ‘Query’ commands to the tag. In each round, the reader sequentially accumulates the number n1 of arrival RN16s and the number n2 of arrival EPCs, respectively. Thus, we get two read ratios 
 = n1/m and 
 = n2/m. Probability that the reader receives an RN16 and an EPC from the tag are calculated as 
and 
, respectively. We let 
 and 
. In the second test, let frame length to 100, and the reader issues m ‘Query’ round. In each round, the reader accumulates the number n3 of arrival EPCs, and we get the read ratio 
 = n3/m. The probabilities that the reader receives an EPC from the tag are calculated as 
 based on L. Xie works (Xie et al., 2010). In the same way, let 
 Therefore, the calculations of pi, pt, and pe are as follows:(24)
 
(25)
 
(26)
 

Calculation of the capture effect factor α: set the frame length f = 1 and set the number of tags n = k. On the one hand, the reader sends m ‘Query’ commands and record the number n4 of arrival RN16s, thus the capture rate of tag RN16 code is 
 = n4/m. On the other hand, probability of the capture effect is calculated as 
 = 
. Let 
, we have(27)
 

We can use a look up algorithm with low complexity O(n) to calculate the value of α based on this formula.

In different application scenarios (e,g., the good stocktaking in hospitals, the library, and the warehouse), the probabilities (pi, pt, pe and α) may differ with each other, because each tag may be located at different positions and has a different orientation to the reader antenna. Therefore, the reader runs these parameter calculation methods in each application scenario to get the corresponding parameter values. When these parameter calculation methods are implemented in an RFID Generation-2 reader, the reader can use a pattern such as initialization to calculate those parameters.

Because the tag inventory algorithms mainly face the situation of large number of tags, it is reasonable to study those tag inventory algorithms by using the average probability applicable to the whole tag group. In order to obtain these average probabilities, we can take into account the combination of the positions and the directions to test and calculate these probabilities, and then get these average probabilities respectively.

6. Validation of models
It is very important whether these models effectively express the tag identification procedure of the Generation-2 system under the unreliable channels, because the effectiveness of the models determines their applicability to the practice. In this paper, the effectivenesses of the proposed models are verified by comparing the simulation results and the numerical ones and also by their fitness for a instance. Similar model validation method has been used to validate the model of the communication networks in multi-cluster systems under spatio-temporal bursty traffic (Wu et al., 2012). These validated models can also be applied to other RFID systems, such as the augmented RFID system (Sanchez and Ramos, 2015).

6.1. Fitness for a instance
In the classical DFSA under the ideal channels, there exists single tag slots (success slots), multiple tags slots (collision slots), and no tag slots (empty slots) in a frame. For these slots, these are some computation results of the existing models based on the ideal channel: when the frame length is equal to the number of tags, the DFSA has the most optimal identification efficiency. In the optimum, the single tag slots and multiple tags slots account for about 36.8% and about 26.4% of the total slots in a frame, respectively, whereas, the no tag slots are about 36.8% of the total slots (Chen and Feng, 2014).

In the proposed models, pi = 1 and pt = 1 mean no packet loss, pe = 0 represents no error code, whereas α = 0 denotes no capture effect. Therefore, the channel (pi = 1, pt = 1, pe = 0, α = 0) is ideal. In this ideal channel, we calculate the probabilities of four slots (No Reply, Single Tag Reply, Invalid Reply, Collided Reply) by using formulas { (10), (14), (20), (21) }, respectively. Moreover, according to the optimum of DFSA, the tag identification efficiency is highest when f = n, that is, k = 1. Now, we use these known parameters (pi, pt, pe, α, k) to do the calculations as follows:

•
Probability of the No Reply is computed as 
 
 

Notes: the No Reply slot is also no tag one.

•
Probability of the Single Tag Reply is computed as
 
 
 
 
 

Notes: the Single Tag Reply slot is also single tag one.

•
Probability of the Invalid Reply is computed as
 
 
 
 
 

Notes: this shows that there is no Invalid Reply slot, which is reasonable for the ideal channel.

•
Probability of the Collided Reply is computed as

 
 
 
Notes: Collided Reply slot is also multiple tags one.

In summary, under the condition of the ideal channel, the results calculated by the proposed models are consistent with the ones by the existing models, so the existing models is a special instance of the proposed models in this paper, that is, the fitness of the proposed models is for the existing models (a special instance).

6.2. Numerical results compared with simulations
For the numerical results compared with simulation ones, the extensive simulation experiments have been conducted to validate the accuracy of the proposed mathematical models considering the combination of the packet loss, the error code, and the capture effect of the unreliable channels in MATLAB2016.

In the simulation setting, considering the range of probable values for the parameters in a real system, the parameters of the system are set as follows:

•
Probability that reader command signal arrives at tag: pi = 0.90 and 0.99.

•
Probability that tag response signal arrives at a reader: pt = 0.90 and 0.99.

•
Probability of a bit error: pe = 0.001, 0.002, and 0.005.

•
Capture effect factor: α = 0.3, 0.6, and 0.9.

In each numerical calculation, we obtain the variable k value considering the optimal time efficiency based on (22), and then accordingly calculate the performance values using the k value under the same parameters. Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6 show numerical results calculated by these models against simulation ones obtained from the experiment based on the unreliable channels. In these figures, the horizontal axis denotes the number of tags, while the vertical axes respectively represents the probabilities of the No Reply, Single Tag Reply, Invalid Reply, and Collided Reply. To a considerable extent, these figures testify that the numerical analytical results obtained from the proposed models match those coming from the simulation. So, the accuracy of these mathematical models make it a practical and effective tool to get insights to the comprehensive understanding of the RFID Generation-2 performance under the unreliable channels.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (813KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. No Reply probabilities obtained by the model and simulation.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (1023KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Single Tag Reply probabilities obtained by the model and simulation.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (862KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Invalid Reply probabilities obtained.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (863KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Collided Reply probabilities obtained by the model and simulation.

We have used the formula  
 
 
 
 to simplify the proposed models, so the accuracies of these models are good when the number n of tags is large, while there is a certain disparity when small, resulting that there exists a certain gap between the numerical value obtained by the model and the simulation value when the number of tags is small in the above figures. The problems caused by the large-scale tags scenario are always paid more attention, while those by the small-scale tags are relatively easy to solve, so the simplification of those models is reasonable and acceptable.

7. Performance analyses
After validating the accuracy of these models, we use these models to investigate the impacts of their parameters on the tag identification performance. Especially, we use the parameter sensitivity analysis method to find the key factors that affect the tag identification performance. Because the four parameters can reflect the real situation of unreliable channel objectively, which is mentioned in the introduction, the performance analysis through these models considering the four parameters is credible.

7.1. Impact of parameters on time efficiency
Fig. 7, Fig. 8 show that the time efficiency of tag identification increases rapidly with the increase of transceiver success rate under certain capture effect (0.3, 0.6, 0.9) or certain bit error rate (0.001, 0.002, 0.005). Fig. 9 shows that the time efficiency decreases rapidly with the increase of the bit error rate under certain transceiver success rate (0.6, 0.8, 0.9). Therefore, the bit error rate has a great negative impact on the time efficiency, but the transceiver success rate has a good positive effect on it. Moreover, when the bit error rate (BER) is less than 0.01, the variation range of the time efficiency is about 0.1, otherwise, the time efficiency will quickly drop to zero. Thus, under certain signal noise condition, it is very important to study the transceiver circuit with the certain low error bit rate for RFID hardware development, while too low bit error rate does not significantly improve identification performance, but bring a high implement cost.

7.2. Impact of parameters on k
k describes the relationship between the number of tags and the frame length. Therefore, the influence of each parameter on k value is very important for tag identification algorithm in the unreliable channel. Fig. 10 depict the influence. In the figure, when (pi, pe)  { (0.90, 0.005), (0.90, 0.002), (0.99, 0.005), (0.99, 0.002) }, this pair of parameters (pt, α) have similar positive effect on k value. The figure shows that k values are determined primarily by pt and α, while pi and pe have minimal effect on the determination. This finding indicates that the tag identification performance of the RFID Generation-2 system is less disturbed by the tag circuit and the channel.

Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (959KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Impacts of Parameters on k.

7.3. Key sensitivity factors promoting time efficiency
It can improve the time efficiency that the data transceiver success rate and capture effect factor increase while the data error rate reduces in the transceiver circuit of the reader. However, the costs of the increases and the decreases are different, so it is necessary to find some more key factors promoting the time efficiency aiming to design high performance-price-ratio transceiver.

We use the parameter sensitivity analysis method to find the more key factors promoting the time efficiency. These key factors can be used as a basis of hardware scheme selection to obtain high performance-price ratio. The parameter sensitivity analysis method is based on the partial derivatives of the time efficiency to the parameters. The partial derivative of the time efficiency to the bit error rate is negative, so there is no its sensitivity in Fig. 11. The figure shows that the sensitivity of pi and pt is higher than that of α, that is to say, the time efficiency of tag identification can be more easily improved by transceiver success rate of packets than the capture effect.

Fig. 11
Download : Download high-res image (737KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Parameter sensitivity analyses.

8. Conclusions
Driven by the importance of evaluating and optimizing the generation-2 system using more realistic factors, this paper has presented new performance models with the four feasible calculation methods of parameters, and calculation of the time efficiency and the energy efficiency in the presence of the unreliable channels, which are captured by the packet loss, error code, and capture effect. The extensive simulation and the fitness for a instance have been conducted to validate the accuracy of these models. The accuracy of the models makes them practical and cost-effective tools to obtain insights into the behavior of the Generation-2 system under the unreliable channels. The analytical results have shown: (1) the time efficiency increases rapidly with the decrease of packet loss (pi and pt). (2) a certain low code error rate (α) can achieve high performance price ratio of tag identification, which is important for designing the effective RFID hardware system, that is, the reference of hardware design scheme selection. (3) k values are determined primarily by tag packet loss (pt) and capture effect, while reader packet loss (pi) and capture effect (α) have minimal effect on the determination. (4) the sensitivities of packet loss (pi and pt) are higher than that of capture effect (α) in terms of time efficiency promotion. The determination of k and the sensitivities are important for obtaining more optimal tag identification.

These models can be as the basis for high performance identification researches in some important RFID systems, such as the augmented RFID system, the mobile RFID system, and the COTS RFID Systems in industrial Internet of Things. In the future, for these RFID systems, we will carry out relevant research related works in the Internet of Things.

