Risk management is a necessary consideration in any decision-making activity. In global supply chains that are increasingly becoming internetworked and data-centric, risk management assists risk managers in making smart decisions to achieve their desired outcomes. Because of its importance, there are many studies in the literature on supply chain risk management. However, most of these are from a managerial perspective, and very few provide a technical perspective by surveying the techniques that have been used for risk management and their effectiveness. In this paper, we focus on the activity of risk identification and assess the suitability of the techniques used for this process to be effective in the current networked supply chain environment. We do this by first surveying the domain-independent risk identification techniques proposed between 1980 and 2020 and study the type of technique they use, classifying them according to the proposed taxonomy and then evaluating them to determine whether they meet the requirements of identifying risks in the networked environment. We then survey the techniques used for supply chain risk identification between 1980 and 2020 and determine their suitability along with their limitations in meeting the requirements of identifying risks in the networked supply chain environment. Based on the identified gaps, we then present different solution considerations to inform supply chain risk managers of the improvements needed to be made in the process of risk identification to meet the requirements of networked global supply chains.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Networked environment

External events

Techniques for risk identification

1. The motivation of this paper
Risk is a measure of the probability and severity of a deviation in the occurrence of an outcome. Decision-makers in domains that range from computing, operations management, and supply chains use such an analysis of risk to avoid failures and undesired outcomes. Due to these benefits, risk management has become an innate part of any activity for organisations as it assists them in reaching their goals (Haimes, 1991). As a composite activity, risk management starts with a review of the organisation's objectives, followed by the phases of risk identification, risk assessment (or analysis) and risk evaluation. This leads to the development of risk management strategies to address the risks which are then recorded (Purdy, 2010). Our focus in this paper is on the phase of risk identification which is responsible for identifying risk events and using them as input in the succeeding phases of risk management (Purdy, 2010), (Tchankova, 2002). For effective risk management, the importance of risk identification cannot be underestimated because if risk events are not identified, they are not assessed; and if they are not assessed, they cannot be managed. The importance of risk management is very relevant to how business is carried out in the current global economy. The recent advent of technology and computing paradigms, coupled with globalisation, has created a networked economy, and has made the world a local marketplace. While this has significantly benefitted businesses in enabling them to expand their operations and provide better service to their customers, it has also increased the different ways by which a business in a particular part of the world will experience failure because of events that may happen in another part of the world, as evidenced in the current COVID-19 pandemic.

To avoid such failures, the literature emphasizes the importance and need for proactive supply chain risk management (SCRM) in the operations of a business. Many SCRM methods consider the supply chain in a closed-loop form, where the assumption is that the events in which an organisation is assessing risks are not impacted by drivers from the external environment. Though risk analysis in this form will enable organisations to develop critical risk management plans, it does not capture the dynamic and uncertain environment in which businesses currently operate. This can be done if the supply chain is considered in an open-loop form, where risk events are also impacted by drivers from the external environment. Failure to consider such a form does not enable organisations to capture risks and realise the benefits of risk management correctly. Recent efforts have started to consider such an open-loop perspective of supply chains during their risk management. However, to achieve this requires a combination of different techniques from the domains of data science, information retrieval, knowledge management, decision-making, and operations management. Our objective in this paper is to survey the existing literature from a technique-based perspective and determine if the current approaches are suitable to assist risk managers in proactively identifying the risks to their supply chain operations in the current data-centric networked environment. Specifically, our objective is to answer the following research objective:

In the current networked business world, are the existing risk identification techniques suitable to proactively assist the risk manager in identifying the risks to their supply chain operations?

To answer the research objective, we first identified the requirements which proactive risk identification techniques in the current data-centric networked environment should meet. These requirements are the criteria on which we analyse the literature. The three requirements that we identify are as follows:

Requirement 1 (R1): Ability to consider the external risk drivers and the risk events arising from them: Apart from merely focusing on the internal environment, risk identification approaches should also consider the risk drivers arising from the external environment. This was mentioned as one of the critical requirements in a 2012 Harvard Business Review report (KaplanAnette Mikes).

Requirement 2 (R2): Ability to identify new uncertain events apart from just the known past events. In addition to considering the known uncertain events from the past, risk identification approaches should also identify new uncertain events when the external risk drivers are considered (Jüttner, 2005).

Requirement 3 (R3): Ability to process a high volume of data related to both internal (such as operational) and external sources (for example news) using artificial intelligence or data analytics. As a result of this processing, the risk identification techniques should be smart enough to continuously learn to be proactive (Grötsch et al., 2013). In the context of risk identification, they should (a) determine if any of the studied data is important to follow up, and (b) if yes, flag it to the risk manager for further attention. This maintains the human in the loop but with minimal intervention, where the insights are primarily given by techniques that are confirmed by the human (Proactive risk management - identifying and avoiding risks).

Based on our analysis of the literature against R1-R3, we then identify and present the open gaps in the literature that need to be addressed in the domain of supply chains to assist the risk manager to proactively identify the risks in the current internetworked economy. Due to its importance, there have been many systematic literature reviews and applications of risk management in the applied computing domains (Chaudhuri et al., 2013) (Diabat et al., 2012). However, as shown from a comparison of existing systematic literature review papers focusing on risk management in Table 1, very few approaches focus on surveying the techniques used for risk identification to achieve R1-R3. While some researchers such as (Araz et al., 2020), (Baryannis et al., 2019), (Ho et al., 2015) explore such areas, their focus is more on the broad aspect of risk management and not risk identification per se. Even for those approaches that focus on risk management, not all of them focus on R1-R3 together from a technique-based perspective nor do they identify their suitability to meet the challenges of proactive risk identification in the current networked economy. This is the area in which our contribution fills the gap in the literature.


Table 1. Comparison of the existing surveys on risk management.

Paper	Year of publication	Is their focus on the techniques?	Is their focus on risk identification?	Is their focus on these requirements?
R1	R2	R3
Jüttner (2005)	2005	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Altay and Green (2006)	2006	✕	✕	✕	✕	✕
Zou et al. (2007)	2007	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Tang and Musa (2011)	2011	✕	✕	✕	✕	✕
Bisias et al. (2012)	2012	✕	✕	✕	✕	✕
Ho et al. (2015)	2014	✓	✕	✕	✕	✕
Kauppi et al. (2016)	2016	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Gong and Cullinane (2018)	2018	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Fan and Stevenson (2018)	2018	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Baryannis et al. (2019)	2019	✓	✕	✓	✓	✕
Wan et al. (2019)	2019	✕	✓	✓	✕	✕
Rosales et al. (2019)	2019	✓	✓	✓	✕	✕
Bier et al. (2020)	2019	✓	✕	✕	✕	✕
Araz et al. (2020)	2020	✓	✕	✓	✓	✕
Al-Balushi and Durugbo (2020)	2020	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Fischer-Preßler et al. (2020)	2020	✕	✓	✓	✕	✕
Samson	2020	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Norrman and Wieland (2020)	2020	✕	✕	✓	✕	✕
Xu et al. (2020)	2020	✕	✕	✕	✕	✕
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we break down the research objective of this paper into four research questions. We then detail the adopted process to shortlist the papers to be surveyed along with the inclusion and exclusion criteria used. Finally, we define the taxonomy according to which we classify the shortlisted papers according to their capability to identify risk. In Sections 3 Reactive techniques for risk identification, 4 Predictive techniques for risk identification, 5 Proactive techniques for risk identification, we perform a survey of the shortlisted papers and identify the techniques which they use to identify risks. We also evaluate the capability of the techniques in addressing R1-R3, which are the requirements needed from a proactive approach for risk identification. In Section 6, we answer the research questions, identify the gaps in the current approaches for proactive risk identification in supply chains, and present solution considerations that will improve the intelligence of supply chain risk identification techniques to make them more proactive. In Section 7, we conclude the paper.

2. Process of selecting papers from the literature
As mentioned in the previous section, we undertake a systematic literature review (SLR) on risk identification to answer the research objective. An SLR of a topic is a process undertaken by researchers to understand the current state of the art and the progress undertaken in the literature specific to this. For example (Cocchia, 2014), used SLR to explore the concepts of smart city and digital city (Parris and Peachey, 2013). investigated experimental studies about servant leadership theory by using SLR (Gimenez and Tachizawa, 2012). used SLR to measure mechanisms that improve supplier sustainability. In this study, we perform a systematic literature review to analyse methods used for risk identification in different domains (areas of applications) and from a technical perspective determine the existing deficiencies in the techniques used for risk identification to provide a platform for future research in our research objective. For the SLR to make sense, we have to adapt the process which we do as mentioned below based on the guidelines provided by (Guidelines for Performing Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering).

2.1. Defining the context
Risk identification is the primary stage of risk management, whose next stages are based on the risks identified in this stage (Tchankova, 2002). A wide range of techniques for risk identification exists in the literature. The purpose of this study is to identify these techniques and their outcomes and drawbacks in their ability to recognize new risks in the networked economy and identify areas of improvement.

2.2. Defining the research objective and questions
The research objective (RO) of this study is divided into different research questions (RQs) as presented in Table 2. The RO is confined to the domain of supply chains as we investigate the suitability of risk identification techniques in this area. However, to make an informed judgement on the RO, we need to investigate how the existing risk identification techniques work in all the domains. We do this by addressing RQ1 and RQ2 whose scope is not confined to any specific domain. We confine RQ3 to the domain of supply chains where we utilise the inferred knowledge from the previous research questions to ascertain if the techniques currently used in supply chains assist in the proactive identification of risk in that domain. Based on our analysis of RQ3, in RQ4, we identify the areas of future work in the smart identification of risks in supply chains.


Table 2. Research objective and questions.

Ref.	Research question	Domain
RO	In the current networked business world, are the existing Supply chains identification techniques suitable to proactively assist the risk manager in identifying the risks to their supply chain operations?	Supply chains
RQ1	How have risk identification techniques evolved over time?	All
RQ2	How do the techniques identified in RQ1 work?	All
RQ3	Do the current supply chain risk identification techniques used by supply chain risk managers assist them to proactively identify the risks in supply chains?	Supply chains
RQ4	How can the gaps identified in RQ3 be addressed for the proactive identification of risks in supply chains?	Supply chains
2.3. Form a dataset of relevant papers from the literature
The next step in the process is to form a dataset of relevant papers from the literature. Google Scholar was selected as the source to search for papers due to its broad database of publications on the topic area. We used the strings of “Risk Identification” OR “Hazard Identification” to search for relevant papers from the source. These two words have been used interchangeably in the literature to refer to undesired events. This returned a matched result of 18,500 papers. We then applied the exclusion and inclusion criteria, as shown in Table 3 to form the dataset of papers that will be used for further analysis. Fig. 1 shows the remaining articles that are presented after applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria.


Table 3. Inclusions and Exclusions criteria applied to the initial results from Google Scholar.

Ref.	Description
Inclusion criteria
I1	Search strings should only be in title
I2	Written in English
I3	Published in a journal, conference, or a workshop
I4	Books
I5	Full paper
Exclusion criteria
E1	Patents which do not discuss how to identify risks and implement methods
E2	Citations
E3	Studies that are irrelevant to the research questions (i.e., which do not focus on explaining how risk identification is done)
Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (162KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Filtering process by applying the inclusions and exclusions.

2.4. Taxonomy to classify the results
The final step is to categorize the results from the evaluated articles and answer the research questions. To do this, we classified the results based on the taxonomy proposed in Fig. 2. Given the importance of risk, various taxonomies for classifying it has been proposed in the literature. For example (Rangel et al., 2015), propose a taxonomy for classifying risks according to the activity it refers to (Blos et al., 2016). extends the classification by Rangel et al. (2015) and categorize risks according to the ISO31000 standard. However, such classifications were not suitable for our work, as the focus of this paper is on the techniques that assist in risk identification rather than the type of risks which they identify. So, we defined our own taxonomy as shown in Fig. 2. The root node of the taxonomy is ‘Operational Risk Identification’ which represents the purpose or aim for which the literature is classified. The nodes in Level 1 of the taxonomy represent the three broad techniques by which risk is identified in the literature, namely reactive, predictive, and proactive. Reactive techniques are those techniques that aim to identify risk events after they have occurred. Predictive techniques are those that aim to forecast the occurrence of risk events at a point of time in the future. Proactive techniques are those that aim to avoid the occurrence of risk events before they occur (Britton, 2019). To evaluate how the techniques for risk identification have evolved over the years, in Level 2 of the taxonomy, we classify the techniques according to the year group in which they fall from 1980 to 1989, 1990–1999, 2000–2009, and 2009–2020. From Level 3 onwards, we list and categorize the techniques that fall under each type according to the year group in which they have been proposed. While classifying techniques in such a taxonomy, we came across instances where a technique was used for reactive risk identification in a particular year group and for proactive risk identification in a different year group. For consistency sake, we have represented such techniques in both these categories.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (277KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Proposed taxonomy for classifying techniques according to their capability in risk identification.

In Sections 3 Reactive techniques for risk identification, 4 Predictive techniques for risk identification, 5 Proactive techniques for risk identification, we classify the shortlisted papers according to the defined taxonomy and assess them against requirements R1-R3 defined in Section 1.

3. Reactive techniques for risk identification
The use of reactive techniques for risk identification has been widely employed by researchers in the literature. Initial efforts focussed on engineering domains, such as machines or plant maintenance. However, once the models became mature, researchers in later years made use of these techniques in applied computing domains such as studying epidemic outbreaks. In the next sub-sections, we explain the evolution of such techniques in the literature in the different decades since the 1980s.

3.1. Techniques used in the literature between 1980 and 1989
Given the importance of managing risk in any activity, initial reactive efforts by researchers focussed on investigating the causes which led to an activity's failure. As shown in Fig. 3, this was primarily done by using descriptive models, whose objective was to arrange and present the observed information of the activity failure in such a way so that meaningful information could be extracted for future decision making. An example of a technique that comes under this category is graphical and tabular presentation. This approach was used in chemical plants to display the guidelines in graphical and tabular form to limit fire damage (Price, 1980). Due to the advantage of this technique in determining the reasons for failures, researchers also applied it to study the reasons which led to the spill of oil and chemicals at sea. They proposed SEABEL, which utilised a comprehensive checklist to collect relevant data on the spillage incident when reporting it to responsible authorities (Heidebrink, 1988). This analysis enabled relevant stakeholders to implement plans to avoid a repeat of the same incident in the future. Other well-known techniques that come under this model are root cause analysis and HAZOP. Root cause analysis involves the five-whys interrogative technique, which requires risk managers to answer a ‘why’ question five times until the leading cause of the problem is identified. The identified information is then presented in a systematic way to develop checklists so that similar risks in future activities are avoided. HAZOP focusses on the risk managers identifying why a system would go beyond its normal operating parameters. This analysis is then used to develop plans to reduce the likelihood of these exceptions occurring. Fault propagation models are another set of techniques that were used during this period for risk identification (Parmar and Lees, 1987). The objective of this model is to complement HAZOP and determine how an identified hazard propagated through the system. This analysis was used to develop a computer program that determined the impact of hazards, their causes, and consequences.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (542KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Classification of the reactive approaches for risk identification according to the proposed taxonomy.

3.2. Techniques used in the literature between 1990 and 1999
During this decade, researchers extended the use of computer systems to descriptive models. As shown in Fig. 3, they developed computer codes that enabled the quick completion of the HAZOP process. For example, HAZID and AutoHAZID are two techniques that adapted HAZOP for computer use and a rule-based approach (Larkin et al., 1997), (McCoyet al., 1999). Other techniques extended fault propagation models to use the results of their analysis and derived a set of questions to develop a methodology to prevent reoccurrence (Broomfield and Chung, 1994). The developed methodology usually involved changing the working guidelines to make the system foolproof, so a similar failure did not occur in the future. The analysis from fault propagation models was then used by researchers to develop hazard ranking models. The objective of those models was to develop indices and scales that could be used for swift hazard identification and ranking. An example of such models is Hazard Identification and Ranking (HIRA), which identifies fire and explosion hazards and ranks the likelihood of the release of toxic chemicals. Other researchers utilised a simulation-based approach to automate the process of identifying hazards. For example (Graf and Schmidt-Traub, 1999), developed a simulation of HAZOP-consequences in chemical plants to verify that a scenario leading to a hazard had not been overlooked by an integrated breadth/depth-search algorithm or a symbolic checking algorithm. Systems thinking models were another type of model used during this period for risk identification. These models are a combination of techniques such as soft system analysis, influence diagrams and system maps. Using these techniques, the rationale of this model is to identify the risks that were difficult to identify otherwise. Researchers have used systems thinking models in project management and have demonstrated how these better assist scoping by considering their interdependencies on other factors (Stewart and Fortune, 1995).

3.3. Techniques used in the literature between 2000 and 2009
Techniques used by researchers in this decade focussed on extending the models from the previous years. For example (Adhitya et al., 2009), applied descriptive models, such as HAZOP to identify deviations and their causes and consequences in supply chains. Other researchers extended the use of computer systems to descriptive models. For example (Graf and Schmidt-Traub, 2000), developed a model-based hazard identification using simulations in the area of chemical plants. The proposed method addresses a drawback in the manual process that suffers from a lack of information in the initial stages of the design. An extension of HIRA, namely the Safety Weighted Hazard Index (SWeHI), was proposed by Khan et al. (2001). In presenting its analysis, SWeHI takes the safety measures currently in place to rank the hazards accordingly, which enables the risk manager to correctly identify the most critical risk factors to address. Logic diagrams are another type of model that were used by researchers in this period (Duarte and Pires, 2001). The rationale for using such models was for risk managers to visualize the system's working by considering the impact of newly gained knowledge. This models the system's working according to its dependence on other factors. These models were applied to identify the different modes of failure in process industries. In this decade, researchers also started to use interdisciplinary models to identify the sources of hazards in events that have occurred. For example (Wen et al., 2006), used spatial mapping to investigate the reasons for the spread of an epidemic. By combining space with time, they studied the origin of epidemic outbreaks by which high-risk areas were shortlisted as in the 2002 case of dengue in Taiwan. Such analysis is being used in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic by authorities for contact tracing.

3.4. Techniques used in the literature between 2010 and 2020
Reactive techniques used for risk identification in this decade were mostly an extension or improvement of models from the previous years. For example, HAZOP, which is a descriptive model technique, was applied for hazard identification in chemical mixing plants (Gallop et al., 2016) and the high-speed public transportation hyperloop system (Fischer-Preßler et al., 2020). In the category of logic diagrams, researchers applied fault tree analysis (FTA) to investigate the reasons why an outcome deviated from its expected pattern. The events that lead to a deviation are identified as events of risks. FTA has been applied as a risk identification method in domains such as water treatment, highway construction, and engineering change in contract management (Yang et al., 2012, Beauchamp et al., 2010, Yin and Xie, 2010). FTA has been integrated with another variant of a logic diagram model, namely event tree analysis (ETA). Using the risk events identified by FTA, ETA studies the impact of these events on systems along with the chance of their occurrence. Such an approach has been applied to determine the sequence of possible events in the industrial gas system (Ignac-Nowicka, 2018). Of the interdisciplinary models, researchers combined FTA with fuzzy logic, which is a technique from many-valued logic. For example (Hu et al., 2011), a combination of fuzzy logic and fault trees was used to identify risk events that were responsible for water pollution in the Beibu-Gulf economic zone. Other researchers such as (Comfort et al., 2011) used parallel coordinate plotting on the available data to visualize the captured information and then utilised the plant operators' perceptual capability to identify the hazards if the plant worked beyond its normal conditions. This information was then employed to develop mitigation strategies for the plant to return to normal operating conditions.

3.5. Comparing the techniques against the requirements needed to proactively identify risks in a networked economy
From the above analysis, irrespective of the domain in which they are applied, reactive techniques are primarily exploratory in nature. In other words, such techniques aim to model scenarios that have already occurred. These analyses then enable risk managers or decision-makers to study what happened, identify the reasons why it happened, determine which events are responsible for the occurrence of the failure and use this information to formulate new steps to avoid future failures. In a closed-loop environment, the repeated application of such techniques will eventually lead to better risk management. However, the same cannot be said about their effectiveness in an open-loop environment, as they do not consider the external risk drivers and the risk events arising from them (R1). As shown in Table 4, while some techniques such as systematic thinking, consider the importance of the environment (external events) when scoping the project, no approach was proposed by which these external events can be identified. Much of the focus of these techniques was on using the opinions of the risk managers to identify risk events in the open-loop environment. When it comes to R2, most of the reactive techniques do not identify new risk events which may lead to failure apart from those which have already occurred. While some techniques such as HAZOP identify new and different ways by which a system can fail, such analysis is not done in an open-loop environment. So, even though such techniques may help the risk manager to identify new uncertain events apart from only the known past events, their effectiveness in an open-loop system is reduced. Furthermore, as shown in Table 4, some reactive approaches identify new events that may be related to the risk event being studied and flag it to the risk manager for further attention, but they do not have the automated capacity to do that.


Table 4. Comparison of the reactive techniques against the requirements needed to proactively identify risks in a networked economy.

Technique	R1	R2	R3
Graphical and tabular presentation (Price, 1980)	✕	✕	✕
Fault propagation model (Parmar and Lees, 1987)	✕	✕	✕
Decision support system (Heidebrink, 1988)	✕	✕	✕
Hazard identification in programmable systems (Broomfield, Chung)	✕	✕	✕
Systematic thinking (Stewart and Fortune, 1995)	✓	✕	✕
Computer-aided hazard identification (HAZID) (Larkin et al., 1997)	✕	✕	✓
Hazard identification and ranking (HIRA) (Khan and Abbasi, 1998)	✕	✓	✕
Auto HAZID (McCoyet al., 1999)	✕	✕	✓
Hazard identification by simulation and reachability examinations (Graf and Schmidt-Traub, 1999)	✕	✕	✓
Model-based hazard identification by simulation and analysis (Graf and Schmidt-Traub, 2000)	✕	✕	✓
Safety weighted hazard index (SWeHI) (Khan et al., 2001)	✕	✓	✕
Logic diagrams and descriptors (Duarte and Pires, 2001)	✓	✓	✕
Spatial mapping (Wen et al., 2006)	✕	✓	✕
Hazard and operability (HAZOP) (Adhitya et al., 2009), (DaTian et al., 2015), (Ora et al., 2015)	✕	✕	✕
Fault tree analysis (Yang et al., 2012)– (Yin and Xie, 2010)	✕	✓	✕
Parallel coordinate plotting (Comfort et al., 2011)	✕	✓	✓
Fuzzy fault tree analysis (Hu et al., 2011)	✕	✓	✕
Fuzzy-failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) (Lu et al., 2018)	✕	✕	✕
Integration of fault tree analysis (FTA) and event tree analysis (ETA) (Ignac-Nowicka, 2018)	✕	✓	✕
4. Predictive techniques for risk identification
Predictive techniques leverage the information and knowledge of past events to predict the pattern of their future occurrences. Such techniques build on the exploratory knowledge gained from reactive techniques to forecast the future occurrences of risk events. As the maturity of the reactive techniques improved, predictive techniques have been applied in many different domains in the literature. Predictive techniques are based on advanced mathematical and computer algorithms such as statistics, machine learning, artificial intelligence. In the next sub-sections, we explain the evolution of such techniques in the literature in the different decades since the 1980s.

4.1. Techniques used in the literature between 1980 and 1989
As the maturity of reactive approaches was being developed at this time, there were very few techniques in this decade that used predictive techniques for risk identification. The available approaches, though, can be broadly divided under mathematical and computer algorithm models, as shown in Fig. 4. Under the mathematical models, probability techniques to determine the future occurrence of hazards were developed. For example (Morris et al., 1987), identified the threshold values of the different factors using the guidelines from the European Economic Community (EEC), International Labour Organisation (ILO), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the World Bank. Probabilistic techniques were then utilised to determine the future values of the factors that would lead to better decisions in the management and control of hazards. Under the computer algorithm models, expert systems, which is an artificial intelligence technique that aims to simulate the behaviour of a system by using the domain expert's knowledge, were developed. For example (Goidsborough, 1988), developed an expert system that uses the factual domain knowledge of experts and integrates it in the decision-making process using heuristic rules to detect hazards in soil sanitation. The objective of researchers in using such techniques is to predict the occurrence of future risk events based on current knowledge.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Classification of the predictive approaches for risk identification according to the proposed taxonomy.

4.2. Techniques used in the literature between 1990 and 1999
During this decade, researchers used many other approaches that come under the mathematical and computer algorithm models to predictively identify hazards. As shown in Fig. 4, in the category of mathematical models, researchers used the Bayesian technique to determine the changes in the risk events occurring at a future period. The Bayesian technique is based on statistical inferences that use the underlying information, which is regularly updated, to ascertain the probability of the occurrence of a hypothesis. For example (Ahlbom and Feychting, 1999), utilised the Bayesian technique to determine the weight to be given to the three types of data to solve the uncertainty in hazards identification in the case of electromagnetic fields and cancer (Boucaut et al., 1994). emphasized the use of probability models to analyse the history of injury statistics and identify which risk events are more likely to occur when manually handling goods. From the category of computer algorithm models, researchers extended the use of expert systems to define principles that can be used to identify hazards in the field of developmental toxicology (Jelovsek et al., 1990). As applications for expert systems for risk identification started to become mature, researchers such as (Hillmer et al., 1992) developed the Risk Identification Tool for Expert Systems (RITES). This system has helped risk managers, who have little understanding of this approach to use it and ensure that the risk factors arising from its incorrect use are minimized. Brainstorming, whose objective is to use personal opinions and determine the occurrence of events in the future is another type of model used for hazard identification. For example (Chapman, 1998), compared the effectiveness of the nominal group technique, Delphi and brainstorming techniques for risk identification in the domain of the construction industry. Descriptive models, whose objective is to arrange and present the observed information of the activity failure, were also used to predict future risk events. For example, Reeves et al. (1990) proposed the Goal-Oriented Failure Analysis (GOFA) approach. GOFA, which is an improvement on HAZOP, uses a structured top-down approach to analyse the different modes of failure systematically. Haimes et al. (1995) proposed Hierarchical Holographic Modelling (HHM) to identify the risks in the acquisition of large-scale systems. This is done by identifying the gaps in project managers' understanding which is collected from interviews and program documents.

4.3. Techniques used in the literature between 2000 and 2009
Techniques used by researchers during this decade are both an extension of the models used in the previous period and new ones. For example, under descriptive models, as shown in Fig. 4, researchers applied a combination of literature review and social systems theory to identify the risks in the procurement of iron and steel goods (Nan and Jia, 2008). Under mathematical models, as shown in Fig. 4, researchers applied state-based modelling on a signed directed graph to model the discrete components of a system according to the connections between them. This relationship is then used to model their behaviour over time (McCoy et al., 2003), (McCoy et al., 2006). Other researchers such as (Narang and Abdelhamid, 2006) utilised fuzzy techniques, which are from the family of many-valued techniques, to capture the fuzziness of the workers' responses and by using them, determine the existence of a hazard in construction projects. Ahmad and Liu (2007) proposed KeyGraph, which aims to identify the risks by graphically representing the problem. The proposed approach was applied in the domain of software project risk management. By using the co-occurrence network, links between the nodes were formed, and the most significant hubs were then identified as software project risks (Yang et al., 2008).employed factor analysis to determine if there is a link in the observed variability between two correlated values to the ones that are currently unobserved. Using this approach, the authors identified the risk factors in the outsourcing of container logistics (Mojtahedi et al., 2008a). utilised the Multi-Attribute Group Decision-Making (MAGDM) model in a fuzzy environment to identify the criteria in project risk identification and assessment. Using TOPSIS, the risk factors were categorized in different groups that range from rare to almost certain, which assisted the project risk manager to decide on which events to focus. Similar work has been applied in the domain of gas refinery plant construction (Mojtahedi et al., 2008b). Al-Rousan et al. (2008), Al-Rousan et al. (2009) proposed the Risk Identification Architecture Pattern model (RIAP) which modelled the relationships of direct influence between different dimensions of web projects and the attendant risk factors using a Bayesian network graph. Regression is another statistical method that has been used for risk identification. The aim of this method is to determine the relationship between one variable and a set of other variables. For example, Julienet al. (2008) proposed the Classification and Regression Tree (CART) to assist in identifying which houses a likely to have a high level of pesticide residue. Another type of regression is logistic regression which models the probability of a certain event happening. Using logistic regression (Harb et al., 2008), identified the risk factors that are more likely to lead to a crash in a freeway work zone. Multi-Attribute Utility Theory (MAUT) is another approach that has been used to identify risks. MAUT identifies which are the most important by considering the attributes of the different alternatives (Kang and Feng, 2009). applied MAUT while assessing the risk state of each ambiguity to identify whether it is a risk factor from the negotiator group's point of view in build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects.

Under the computer algorithm models, researchers have integrated case-based reasoning with rule-based reasoning to ensure that the determined future risks avoid the subjectivity that arises by considering personal expert opinions (Tan et al., 2003). Case-based reasoning is a branch of artificial intelligence that aims to solve new problems using the underlying information of past ones. Such techniques have been applied to hazard identification in the domain of construction projects (Giannini et al., 2005). explored the use of computer-aided models that can go through computer-aided design (CAD) documents and enable the user to identify hazards through a HAZOP-like process. This process takes the underlying project data during its analysis to assist in the detection of possible threats in plant design data. Xu et al. (2007) proposed an integrated interface framework that is a three-dimensional model consisting of an information interface, management interface, and logistic interface. The rationale of the authors was to identify logistics outsourcing risks using information from such different types of interfaces. Denger et al. (2008) proposed SafeSpection, which combines safety engineering approaches such as FMEA, FTA, and HAZOP to apply on software-intensive systems. The proposed approach aims to provide users with a customization framework that enables risk managers to apply these techniques to identify project-specific risk issues. Bugayenko (2009) proposed an online chat game-based approach to identify the risks that exist when a team is multi-lingual and distributed. The authors applied the model in the domain of project management to identify the most severe risk.

Under the brainstorming models, researchers have used graphical representation techniques to facilitate and represent the information gathered through the systematic brainstorming of experts. For example (Hogganvik and Stølen, 2006), proposed a graphical approach to integrate system modelling and risk modelling techniques to implement a graphical plan for documenting and explaining security risks (Hanning et al., 2007). proposed an approach that combines multiple methods such as Delphi and AHP to identify the risk factors from the templates of past e−commerce projects. Scenario analysis is another approach that comes under the brainstorming model. This approach aims to determine a future state by considering various alternatives to scenarios in the current state (Gao and Wang, 2009). proposed a scenario analysis method that involves brainstorming and scene development to identify vulnerabilities. Such an approach has been shown to be beneficial to integrated risk assessment in the field of real estate supply chain risk identification. Under the logic diagram models (Neiger et al., 2009), proposed the Value- Focused Process Engineering (VFPE) approach. This approach integrates the process and the objective of the business model and using the relationships between them in the form of logic ascertains the risks holistically. The authors applied this model in the domain of supply chains. The Hierarchy Gaps Method (HGM) is another approach that has been used in this model. HGM arranges the tasks in a graded order that assists in the identification of risks (Li et al., 2010). applied HGM to arrange the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) and Property Breakdown Structure (PBS) of the tasks which enabled risk managers to identify the gap between expected and practical indices from which risk events are identified.

4.4. Techniques used in the literature between 2010 and 2020
During this decade, there was a steady increase in researchers combining different models to identify the hazards in activities. These techniques integrate different methods to combine their working style and achieve the output or goal more efficiently. We group such techniques under interdisciplinary mathematical models, as shown in Fig. 4. For example (Ebrahimnejad et al., 2010), integrated valued-logic techniques such as fuzzy systems and multi-criteria decision-making approaches. They proposed F-MADM to rank the risks in BOT projects. The authors achieve this by combining the Fuzzy Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to the Ideal Solution (F-TOPSIS) and the Fuzzy Linear Programming Technique for Multidimensional Analysis of Preference (F-LINMAP) (Makui et al., 2010). applied a similar model in the domain of the oil and gas industries. By using Fuzzy group TOPSIS, a priority value for each decision factor is set, which is then used to identify the various potential risks. Other researchers such as (Li et al., 2013a), (Guan et al., 2011a) used the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (F-AHP) to rank the potential risks in the domain of supply chains and modular construction. Li and Zou (2012) integrated F-AHP with the project's life-cycle methodology to classify and evaluate the risks. Zhang et al. (2013) proposed Interval AHP (IAHP) which merges the working of the AHP with TOPSIS methods in the domain of hydro-power projects. The proposed approach determines the criteria and decision-makers' weights under the interval-valued fuzzy environment to obtain the final ranking of the potential risk factors. Hu et al. (2015) proposed Rough Set-TOPSIS (RS-TOPSIS) as an approach to identify hazards. The proposed model determined the weights of the indices by calculating the rough dependability between evaluation indices and results in rough set theory. TOPSIS was then used as a ranking approach to predict the hazard degree of goaf. Zheng et al. (2015) used the integration of F-AHP and the cross-entropy of interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy sets to identify risks. By transforming the problem into a fuzzy one and a multi-criteria decision-making one, the authors determined the weight of each risk criteria and then ranked them. The proposed approach has been applied in the domain of earth-rock dams (Xiao, 2018). combined the two methods of AHP and entropy to ascertain the weight values of the risk factors. Based on the minimum deviation between the factors and using sensitivity analysis, their weights are determined. The proposed approach is applied in the domain of managing technology innovation risks (Dong et al., 2019). integrated fuzzy FMEA and TOPSIS- Grey Relational Projection Method (TOPSIS-GRPM) in their approach. In the domain of the electric power market, FMEA was used to analyse the causes and consequences of the potential risks. The weights of these risks were then determined using an integration of subjective and objective weighting methods via intuitionistic fuzzy set FMEA. TOPSIS-GRPM was then used to determine the grey correlation project closeness and the final weights of the risk elements (Yang et al., 2020). integrated FMEA, interaction matrix, and task analysis techniques to identify risks for hazard identification in aquaculture operations. In the domain of coastal fish farms, the authors focused on five dimensions of risks, namely risks to personnel, risks to material assets, risks to fish welfare, risks to the environment, and risks to food safety. By considering the interdependencies between them, the authors proposed an approach was able to identify the risks in a more detailed way.

In the category of mathematical models, researchers used the Analytic Network Process (ANP) to rank risks to a hydropower project (Gu and Wang, 2010). (Mohammad et al., 2010) extended the use of MAGDM techniques in the domain of gas refinery plant construction projects and proposed an approach which identifies the potential risks by combining the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) and Nominal Group Technique (NGT) (Li et al., 2013b). proposed the Improved AHP (IAHP), which enhances the accuracy of the comparison matrix achieved in the AHP process, enabling risk managers to accurately identify risks. In the domain of medical diagnosis (Satarkar and Ali, 2014), proposed the use of a fuzzy expert system to identify cancer. The proposed approach collects the input variables and using the Mamdani interface in MATLAB, determines the chance of the occurrence of cancer (Li et al., 2016). extended the use of the Bayesian network to quantify the probability of the occurrence of risk factors at a future time. Using these factors, the authors made an essential risk checklist that can be used to control the software processes risks (Jianget al., 2018). integrated Hierarchical Holographic Modelling (HHM) and Risk Filtering, Ranking, and Management (RFRM) to identify the possible risk scenarios that occur in the domain of managing water resources. The probability of the occurrence of these scenarios is then determined, which will enable risk managers to determine the highest ranked risk scenarios.

In the category of logic-diagram models (Sääskilahti and Särelä, 2010), proposed a risk identification method based on the Value Chain Dynamics Toolkit (VCDT) approach. The proposed approach applied system dynamic modelling to identify new risks. It does this by defining the target of risk analysis and then uses propagation to identify the possible new risks. Such a representation assisted in tasks such as the visualization of the value chain and the transfer of knowledge to other stakeholders (Cheng et al., 2010). integrated business objectives and activities from different stakeholders using Value-Focused Process Engineering methods to identify the process risks (Eller et al., 2016). utilised a multi-dimensional risk identification approach by breaking down the complex networks of cause-and-effect relationships into linear casual chains and documenting them in a risk database. The authors applied their model on water systems which enabled them to identify risks in a better way in that are cross-linked across different areas (Sunaryo and Hamka, 2017). proposed an integration of FTA and HIRA to identify the safety risks in a container terminal. HIRA is used to ascertain the risk event, its type, cause, and effect. FTA is then used to identify the reason for the occurrence of risk events, which will then enable the risk manager to develop plans to manage them. In similar work (Suhardi et al., 2018), proposed the integration of HIRA and HAZOP. The authors applied HIRA to understand the sequence of production and identify the potential risks and their severity, then created HAZOP worksheets based on HIRA findings to manage them (Lin et al., 2018). proposed the DEMATEL method, which is an integration of the D numbers theory in the decision-making process. The proposed approach obtains information from experts and creates a direct relation matrix to identify the risk factors. The cause and effect relationship between the different risk factors is then used to manage risks (Zhang et al., 2019). extended the DEMATEL method in the domain of electric vehicle charging infrastructure projects. The authors created a risk factor criterion set in the five aspects of political, economic, social, technical, and managing risks. They then used the 2-tuple model to obtain the decision-makers' evaluation information in a linguistic environment and using the cause and effect relations given by the DEMATEL method to identify the risks (Zhao et al., 2014). attempted to forecast the risks in supply chains by using state space-based approach. The state-based approach identifies the gaps that need to be filled to reduce the risk (desired state) from the current state.

Under computer-aided models (Hassall et al., 2011), developed Human Factor Hazard Identification (HumHID), which is a software tool that integrates Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA) techniques and human factors/error taxonomy information to identify human-related threats. In the domain of construction industry (Chun et al., 2012), highlighted the benefit of prototyping to identify the risks. The authors proposed a Construction Virtual Prototyping (CVP) tool that implements multidimensional modelling and the simulation of worker behaviour to pre-determine the risk events (Wuet al., 2013). proposed an enhanced version of HAZOP that has reasoning capabilities using the Multilevel Flow Modelling (MFM) method. Using such an analysis, the authors automated the process of conducting HAZOP studies (Janošovský et al., 2017). proposed Aspen HYSYS, which is an integration of HAZOP principles and computer simulations. The automated process has been applied to identify the security of safety systems in chemical industries for undertaking HAZOP-like analysis.

Under the brainstorming models (Lund et al., 2011), presented a structured brainstorming process that is applied in the CORAS method. The observed analysis is presented as a threat diagram, and the incidents that lead to that threat are identified as risk issues (Sivapirakasham et al., 2014). proposed the use of what-if analysis in the domain of Electrical Discharge Machining (EDM) processes (Kiral et al., 2014). extended the use of Delphi to aggregate the responses of experts to a questionnaire and anonymizing them before sharing with others. The authors applied this process in construction projects over several rounds to identify potential risks. SWOT analysis is another brainstorming technique that assists risk managers in identifying strengths and weaknesses (Zahav and Hazzan, 2017). applied SWOT for risk identification in the education area (Mihić, 2020). proposed the use of classification models to identify hazards in construction projects. The authors aimed to identify the risks that are caused by different types of hazards, such as self-induced, peer-induced, or global hazards using this approach.

Under the computer algorithm models (Daramola et al., 2011), presented Reuse-oriented HAZOP in the development of safety-critical embedded systems. The authors’ objective was to reuse previous experience in conducting HAZOP by using ontologies (Rojrattanakorn and Vatanawood, 2017). extended the use of ontologies to automatedly identify risk events. In the domain of project management, the authors employed a risk taxonomy and CMMI project planning guidelines to identify the rules and relations between the project factors and best practice. This analysis was used to identify software development risks (Xing et al., 2019). proposed a Safety Risk Identification Ontology (SRI-Onto). The proposed approach categorized metro construction safety risk knowledge into two main parts (risk context and risk) and seven classes (projects, construction activity, risk factor, risk, risk grade, risk consequence, and risk prevention measure). The correlated properties were coded using the Protégé platform. This provides risk managers with the knowledge and information needed to identify risks by considering the knowledge across different platforms. (Osorio et al., 2018), in the domain of supply chain risk management, developed an ontology-based approach to identify the operational risks in 3 PL communication. Using the proposed approach, the authors improved communication between different partners, thereby leading to an overall improvement in the process of risk identification. In the domain of project management (Lamersdorf et al., 2012), utilised a rule-based model to identify risks from past projects. This was done by interviewing experts and considering under which circumstances specific problems that happened in the past may occur again in distributed software development projects (Ruan, 2013). proposed set pair analysis which is a soft computing approach to forecast either the certainty or uncertainty of an event. Using known information, an approach to determine the influence of different risk variables in different environments is proposed. This information was then used to determine the possibility of different risk events occurring (Chun et al., 2017). extended the use of Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) to identify risks in projects using information from other similar software projects.

Under the descriptive models (Su, 2012), utilised a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) to categorize the project into four stages; namely initiation, design and planning, implementation and finishing stage. Then risks in each of these stages were identified and applied to a real-estate project. (Stosic et al., 2017), (Stosic et al., 2013) proposed the Risk Breakdown Matrix (RBM) that uses WBS to identify risks in innovation projects (Juan et al., 2016). extended such use further and developed a 3D risk matrix to better understand consumer behaviour and perception of failures to identify risks in food safety. To determine risks in Cloud Computing (Masky et al., 2016), presented the Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE) framework. The framework requires risk managers to first study the specifics of the information in terms of how it is stored, how it is processed and how it is transported. This knowledge is then used to identify the threats (Gallop et al., 2016). proposed the premortem technique to identify the possible risks by which the project may fail. The authors argue that such a technique is suitable to determine black swan events. In the premortem technique, the assumption is that the project has failed. The objective is now to deduce the causes of failure and make changes to the project plan to address the cause of failure (Jensen and Aven, 2017). proposed a combination of the Anticipatory Failure Determination and Functional Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM) to identify the potential hazards and threats in complex systems creatively. The authors’ proposed model is applied in systems in which prediction based on the past model is not possible. FRAM captures the variability in the occurrence of variables and determines their impact on the output. In complex systems, this enables risk managers to consider scenarios apart from the ones that happened in the past (Glantz and Ritter, 2017). explored the use of ethnography and structured analytics of past events in determining future events (Li et al., 2017). proposed a taxonomy that will assist risk managers in identifying risks in the domain of chemical supply chains. The proposed taxonomy categorizes risks from different perspectives such as supply, operational, demand, security, political, policy, macroeconomic and the natural environment. Having such a representation provides risk managers with a complete portfolio of risks in an industrial perspective that assists them in the risk identification process (Zhu et al., 2019). used the process modelling method, whose aim is to understand the working of a process using different techniques such as position diagram and process flows. The rationale of the authors was to identify the risks from a high level and not from a micro level, as is common in the current scientific approaches. The authors claimed that such a micro level is not effective in comprehensive risk identification. Using the understanding of the flow of the processes, a Supply-Chain Operations Reference (SCOR) model and Value-Focused Process Engineering (VFPE) were used to establish a multidimensional decision-making model of supply chain risks (Ríos et al., 2019). also utilised the SCOR model and scenario analysis to formally identify risks and connect them to the KPIs of the business process (Luan et al., 2009).– (Tama et al., 2019) also used the SCOR model for supply chain risk identification. It should be noted that SCOR is not an explicit process for identifying risks but more of an approach for mapping supply chain operations that can then facilitate in the identification of risks.

4.5. Comparing the techniques against the requirements needed to proactively identify risks in a networked economy
As previously discussed, the focus of predictive techniques, irrespective of the domain in which they are applied, is to forecast the occurrence of risk events. Thus, it is not surprising to see from Fig. 4 that the focus of the techniques is mainly on mathematical or computer algorithms models that provide insights about the future occurrence of events. In these models, many different techniques that have a high level of maturity have been proposed and applied in different domains. Researchers have also integrated the use of two or more techniques (such as Fuzzy MCDM) to gain better insights into the future occurrence of events. However, one drawback of these techniques is that they forecast based on an observed scenario or knowledge of the past. In a closed-loop environment, the application of such techniques will eventually lead to better risk management. Nevertheless, in an open-loop environment, these techniques may not represent actual uncertainties as they do not consider external risk factors (R1). As shown in Table 5, while some techniques such as (Hogganvik and Stølen, 2006) and (Chapman, 1998) satisfy R1, risk factors are identified from personal sources rather than utilising a systematic approach that captures a holistic view of the external environment. When it comes to R2 and R3, predictive approaches using computer models such as ontologies have some capability in identifying new risk events. However, this requires all the relationships between the different business processes to be manually defined. So, even though such techniques may help the risk manager identify new uncertain events apart from merely the known past events, their effectiveness in an open-loop system is diminished.


Table 5. Comparison of the existing predictive techniques for risk identification.

Technique	R1	R2	R3
Guidelines (Morris et al., 1987)	✕	✕	✕
Expert system (Goidsborough, 1988)	✕	✕	✓
Goal-oriented failure analysis (GOFA) (Reeves et al., 1990)	✕	✓	✕
Expert system (Jelovsek et al., 1990)	✕	✓	✕
Risk identification tool for expert systems (RITES) (Hillmer et al., 1992)	✕	✕	✓
Checklist (Boucaut et al., 1994)	✕	✕	✕
Hierarchical holographic modelling (Haimes et al., 1995)	✓	✓	✕
Working group risk identification techniques (Chapman, 1998)	✓	✕	✕
Bayesian approach (Ahlbom and Feychting, 1999)	✕	✕	✕
State-based modelling (McCoy et al., 2003), (McCoy et al., 2006)	✕	✕	✓
Intelligent reasoning (Tan et al., 2003)	✕	✕	✓
Integration of computer-aided design (CAD) systems and product life-cycle management (PLM) (Giannini et al., 2005)	✕	✕	✓
A graphical approach to risk identification (Hogganvik and Stølen, 2006)	✓	✕	✕
Fuzzy signal detection theory (FSDT) (Narang and Abdelhamid, 2006)	✕	✕	✕
Cloud-control (Hanning et al., 2007)	✕	✕	✕
KeyGraph (Ahmad and Liu, 2007)	✕	✓	✕
An integrated interface framework (Xu et al., 2007)	✕	✓	✕
Factor analysis (Yang et al., 2008)	✕	✕	✕
Fuzzy multi-attribute group decision-making (Mojtahedi et al., 2008a)	✕	✓	✕
Integration of literature review and social system theory (Nan and Jia, 2008)	✓	✓	✕
Bayesian network (Al-Rousan et al., 2008)	✕	✓	✕
Classification and regression tree (CART) (Julienet al., 2008)	✕	✕	✕
Multiple and conditional logistic regression (Harb et al., 2008)	✕	✓	✕
Multi-attribute group decision-making (MAGDM) (Mojtahedi et al., 2008b)	✕	✓	✕
SafeSpection (Denger et al., 2008)	✕	✓	✓
Value-focused process engineering (VFPE) (Neiger et al., 2009), (Cheng et al., 2010)	✓	✓	✕
Competitive risk identification (Bugayenko, 2009)	✕	✓	✕
Multi-attribute utility (Kang and Feng, 2009)	✕	✓	✕
Scenario analysis method (Gao and Wang, 2009)	✓	✕	✕
Risk identification architecture pattern (RIAP) (Al-Rousan et al., 2009)	✕	✕	✓
Supply-chain operations reference (SCOR) model (Ríos et al., 2019)– (Tama et al., 2019)	✕	✕	✕
Hierarchy gap method (HGM) (Li et al., 2010)	✕	✓	✕
Fuzzy multi-attribute decision-making (FMADM) (Ebrahimnejad et al., 2010)	✕	✓	✕
Fuzzy group TOPSIS (Makui et al., 2010)	✕	✓	✕
Analytic network process (ANP) (Gu and Wang, 2010)	✕	✕	✕
Integration of nominal group technique (NGT) and potential risk breakdown structure (PRBS) (Mohammad et al., 2010)	✕	✓	✕
Value chain and system dynamic modelling (Sääskilahti and Särelä, 2010)	✓	✓	✕
Human factor hazard identification (HumHID) (Hassall et al., 2011)	✕	✓	✓
Threat diagram (Lund et al., 2011)	✓	✕	✕
Reuse-oriented HAZOP (Daramola et al., 2011)	✕	✕	✓
Fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (F-AHP) (Li et al., 2013a), (Guan et al., 2011a)	✕	✕	✕
Integration of F-AHP and life-cycle methodology (Li, Zou)	✕	✕	✕
Rule-based model (Lamersdorf et al., 2012)	✕	✕	✓
Work breakdown structure (WBS) (Su, 2012)	✕	✕	✕
Construction virtual prototyping (CVP) (Chun et al., 2012)	✕	✓	✓
HAZOP based on multilevel flow modelling (Wuet al., 2013)	✕	✕	✓
Improved AHP (IAHP) (Li et al., 2013b)	✕	✕	✕
Set pair analysis (Ruan, 2013)	✕	✕	✕
Risk breakdown matrix (RBM) (Stosic et al., 2017), (Stosic et al., 2013)	✓	✕	✕
Interval AHP (IAHP) (Zhang et al., 2013)	✕	✓	✕
State space (Zhao et al., 2014)	✕	✓	✕
What-if analysis (Sivapirakasham et al., 2014)	✓	✕	✕
Fuzzy expert system (Satarkar and Ali, 2014)	✕	✕	✕
Delphi (Kiral et al., 2014)	✓	✕	✕
Rough set-TOPSIS (Hu et al. , 2015)	✕	✕	✕
F-AHP and the cross-entropy of interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy sets (Zheng et al., 2015)	✕	✓	✕
Multi-dimensional risk identification (Eller et al., 2016)	✓	✓	✕
Three-dimensional risk matrix (Juan et al., 2016)	✕	✓	✕
Bayesian network (Li et al., 2016)	✕	✕	✕
The operationally critical threat, asset, and vulnerability evaluation (OCTAVE) (Masky et al., 2016)	✕	✓	✕
Premortem (Gallop et al., 2016)	✓	✕	✕
Integration of functional resonance analysis method (FRAM) and anticipatory failure determination (Jensen and Aven, 2017)	✕	✓	✕
Integration of literature review, ethnography, and structured analytics (Glantz and Ritter, 2017)	✓	✓	✕
Integration of HIRA and FTA (Sunaryo and Hamka, 2017)	✕	✓	✕
SWOT analysis (Zahav and Hazzan, 2017)	✓	✓	✕
Case-based reasoning (CBR) (Chun et al., 2017)	✕	✕	✓
Automated risk identification using ontology (Rojrattanakorn and Vatanawood, 2017)	✕	✕	✓
Risk identification taxonomy (Li et al., 2017)	✓	✕	✕
Model-based HAZOP (Janošovský et al., 2017)	✕	✕	✓
Matter-element model (Xiao, 2018)	✕	✓	✕
Integration of hierarchical holographic modelling (HHM) and Risk filtering, ranking, and management (RFRM) (Jianget al., 2018)	✓	✓	✕
Integration of D numbers theory and decision-making trial and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) method (Lin et al., 2018)	✕	✓	✕
Integration of HIRA and HAZOP (Suhardi et al., 2018)	✕	✓	✕
ontology-based approach (Osorio et al., 2018)	✕	✕	✓
Safety risk identification ontology (SRI-Onto) (Xing et al., 2019)	✕	✓	✓
Integration of 2-tuple linguistic representation model and the decision-making trial and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) model (Zhang et al., 2019)	✓	✓	✕
Integration of the supply-chain operations reference (SCOR) model and value-focused process engineering (VFPE) (Zhu et al., 2019)	✕	✓	✕
Integration of fuzzy FMEA and TOPSIS-grey relational projection method (TOPSIS-GRPM) (Dong et al., 2019)	✕	✕	✕
Classification (Mihić, 2020)	✕	✓	✕
Integration of FMEA, interaction matrix, and task analysis techniques (Yang et al., 2020)	✓	✓	✕
5. Proactive techniques for risk identification
Proactive techniques are those that aim to prevent risk events before they occur. For these techniques to work, they need to build on the exploratory and predictive knowledge obtained from reactive and predictive techniques. Furthermore, these techniques also must invent new possible risk events that may not have occurred in the past but may occur in the future. This requires them to capture the open-loop nature of the environment rather than just focusing on the closed-loop nature as done by reactive and some predictive approaches. In the era of big data, this became possible, and researchers utilised data-focused approaches from artificial intelligence along with mathematical-focused approaches to develop insights from the underlying knowledge. In the next sub-sections, we explain the evolution of such techniques in the literature in different decades since the 1980s.

5.1. Techniques used in the literature between 1980 and 1989
The focus during this decade was primarily on reactive techniques for risk identification. We were not able to determine techniques that adopted a proactive-based approach to identifying risks.

5.2. Techniques used in the literature between 1990 and 1999
During this decade, researchers started focusing on proactive techniques for risk identification. Their focus was on using descriptive techniques and automating their implementation for the analysis of risks. For example, under the use of computer-aided models for risk identification, as shown in Fig. 5 (Heino et al., 1992), reviewed documentation tools for hazard identification which utilise text processing and spreadsheet calculation techniques (CAFOS, SAnDoc, and HAZOP-PC), automatic hazard identification, and knowledge-based support for hazard identification which are research prototype expert systems with HAZOP rules (HAZOPEX, piping and instrumentation diagram (PID)) (Catino and Ungar, 1995). proposed a Qualitative Hazard Identifier (QHI), which is a qualitative process model for simulating and finding the hazards in chemical plants (Mekenyan et al., 1997). proposed a Common Reactivity Pattern (COREPA) model, which is an integration of computational and toxicological techniques. The proposed model defines the training set of chemicals, assessing stereo electronic parameters, and recognizing their common reactivity pattern to identify the risks. In the category of logic-diagram models, (Pullum and Bechta Dugan, 1998) proposed SHADETree, which is an integration of static and dynamic Fault Tree Analysis. The proposed approach identified risks related to software design using a binary decision diagram for static subtrees and a Markov chain solution for dynamic subtrees. In the category of computer algorithm models, Kang et al. (1999) proposed the Automatic Hazard Analyser (AHA), which is an expert system based on a new process knowledge multimodel consisting of a unit knowledge base, an organisational knowledge base, and a material knowledge base. Using the information from these models, three hazard analysis algorithms were used to identify the risks in a chemical plant.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (930KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Classification of the proactive approaches for risk identification using the proposed taxonomy.

5.3. Techniques used in the literature between 2000 and 2009
During this decade, the focus of the researchers was on different models, as shown in Fig. 5. In the category of computer algorithm models, researchers applied Support Vector Machines (SVMs) which are a type of machine learning model which can be used for either regression or classification (Lai et al., 2006, Chen and Li, 2009, Zhu et al., 2010) applied different SVM models with different parameters (training sets) to create different base models and an SVM-based metamodel (i.e., meta classifier) to forecast risks. This approach has been applied to credit risk identification in small-and-medium enterprises and bank clients (Yu et al., 2008). proposed the Evolutionary Programming- Based Knowledge Ensemble Model. The proposed approach identifies the hidden risks in business data by employing data mining and knowledge discovery algorithms and then aggregates the generated knowledge into ensemble output utilising Evolutionary Programming (EP). In the category of logic-diagram models (Wang and Chang, 2003), used Sequential operations using Petri nets to represent discrete-event systems. The developed model is then used to propagate the faults in subsequent processes (Xiao et al., 2009). utilised the Conjugate analysis theory which is a comprehensive identification of risk elements and the relationships between them by assessing the inner structure of matter (material nature, dynamic nature, antithetical nature, and systematic nature) in the information security area. In the category of mathematical models (Feng and Xie, 2009), applied the Genetic Algorithm to investigate the rules of risk identification based on historical data in the domain of software projects.

5.4. Techniques used in the literature between 2010 and 2020
During this decade, consistent with the era of big data, as shown in Fig. 5, there was a steady increase in researchers focusing on data-based models to gather insights to enable them to better identify risks. For example, in the category of computer algorithm models, researchers used many machine learning models to predict the occurrence of future patterns (Yu et al., 2010). applied SVM on customer data to capture the patterns and pre-determine customers that are at risk of churning. In the data domain of green logistics (Morreale et al., 2011), applied data analysis and a visualization method on environmental data gathered by sensors for monitoring vehicle-related air pollution and fire rescue applications. The data analysed is gathered from the integration of WSN and GIS models. Data mining which is a process of turning raw information into useful knowledge was applied by researchers to identify risks. For example (Wang et al., 2018),used the equivalence class information algorithm, the change mining algorithm, and data visualization to extract rules from historical risk data and predict other associated hazard information to enhance workplace risk identification. Text mining is another form of AI technique that has been applied in risk identification. Text mining is the process of transforming unstructured data into data that gives insights (Lucas Luijckx et al., 2017). utilised text mining to identify the semantic relationships in databases using an ontology that contains certain concepts, keywords, and rules. The analysis was applied to identify potential emerging chemical risks in seawater (Subramanian et al., 2017). applied techniques of text analysis, knowledge extraction, and machine learning to retrieve information that could be used to identify risks in economic systems. Association Rule Mining (ARM) is another approach used for risk identification (Salamai et al., 2018). ARM aims to determine interesting relations between different variables of a database and was used to determine the correlation between risk events and their attributes based on support and confidence measures in supply chain risk management. Another type of approach under computer algorithm models that has been commonly applied by researchers is the Natural Language Processing (NLP) technique. NLP is a type of artificial intelligence that enables computers to read text or audio and understand and utilise the information for decision making. For example (Imanara et al., 2012),applied NLP in the domain of project management to automatically identify risks by reading project plan documents. The authors collected risk expressions by utilising the frequency of appearance in the sentence and comparing them against a risk checklist to identify risk in document plans (Daramola et al., 2013). worked on the Knowledge Reuse- Oriented Safety Analysis (KROSA) approach which combines techniques such as ontology, Case-Based Reasoning, and NLP to reuse past analysis and knowledge from HAZOP projects rather than undertaking this analysis again. (Yang and Garibaldi, 2015), (Wasser and Lincoln, 2016) extended the use of NLP in identifying risk domains related to health, governance and risk compliance models (Kim et al., 2015). applied automated information retrieval to detect the occurrence of similar patterns from past construction disasters as prevalent features. The proposed system extracts modelling objects from building information systems and composes a query set by combining them with the project management information system. This information assists risk managers to keep past projects in mind in relation to the occurrence of risk in the future (Qu, 2017). developed a technique that used the part-of-speech and syntax-tree algorithm to understand the meaning of texts, classify them, and reduce them to more relevant data to identify risks in the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) life cycle. (Lai et al., 2019), (Mangorteyet al., 2020) extended the use of Machine Learning to collect data and detect deviations using techniques such as K-Nearest Neighbour, Decision Tree, Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines, and Random Forest. These techniques were applied in domains such as determining sudden cardiac death and flight risk identification. Deep learning is another AI technique that emerged in this period. It involves learning without supervision and mimics the working of the human brain to detect objects, images, and text (Zhu and Cheng, 2018). applied Deep learning in the domain of geological disaster identification by improving the images by intelligent reconnaissance technology and employs artificial neural network identification technology to undertake intelligent surveys (Aziz et al., 2019). extended the use of ontologies to determine information on uneven events. The proposed approach collected information using a Web Ontology Language (OWL), and then transformed it to a probabilistic- OWL based Multi-Entity Bayesian Network (MEBN). For any query, MEBNs generate situation-specific Bayesian networks to identify risks and their probabilities. The proposed model was applied in the area of process safety (Machado, 2012). extended the use of expert systems for automatic risk identification based on inductive learning. In the domain of software projects, the authors constructed an expert system that used the checklist method to identify risks through lessons learned from similar operations (Xiao, 2016). extended the use of Sequential Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) to identify risk event sequences and calculate the similarity of cases by employing weighted event sequence pattern mining to technology innovation. In the domain of robotic strolling systems, (Zhou et al., 2017) extended the use of ontologies to hazard identification. The proposed model assists in understanding the system and its environment to find possible mishap victims and identify potentially hazardous situations (Zhang et al., 2016). developed the BIM-based Risk Identification Expert System (B-RIES). In the domain of tunnel construction, the proposed approach undertakes multiple tasks such as extracting engineering parameter information, systematising knowledge (fact, rule, and case bases) for communication between experts and improving system reasoning by integrating Case-based Reasoning and Rule-based Reasoning to identify hazards. To capture the real state of the uncertainties in an open-loop world, researchers developed methods which were able to process complex events. Complex Event Processing (CEP) techniques take real-time information and extract interesting events. Such an approach was applied by Ma et al. (2019) in the domain of online shopping. The proposed approach analyses the user's risk behaviours in online shopping which was used to manage risks arising from them better.

In the category of mathematical models (Rieger and Rahimi, 2011), extended the use of Bayesian algorithms to proactively identify risks in designing interfaces for medical devices. The proposed approach, termed the Bayesian Risk Identification Model (BRIM) integrates user performance to quantifiably predict the issues that may be arisen and then mitigate them in terms of the design. Other works such as (Xin et al., 2017, Ghasemi et al., 2018, Guo et al., 2018) applied Bayesian network analysis in the domains of the project portfolio, third-party damage on pipelines, and process safety risk identification, respectively. Dynamic Programming is another technique that was used by researchers under this model to solve complex problems by breaking them into different sub-problems, solving them first, storing their analysis in the memory, and using the solved sub-problems to address the main complex problem. In the domain of driving assistance systems (Yu and Wang, 2011), used dynamic programming to better identify the targets and the risks in complex driving conditions. A digraph model is a graph-based technique that models the flow of control using vertices and edges (Guan et al., 2011b). applied a digraph model in Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems to manage cybersecurity risks. The authors mentioned that the digraph model enables them to model the complex interactions of a SCADA system which are not possible by probabilistic assumptions (Labovská et al., 2014). applied steady-state analysis and dynamic simulations which are a nonlinear type of analysis to determine the consequences of deviations in operating parameters in chemical reactors (Sajjadian, 2018). used simulations in their DesignBuilder Software to detect total cooling and heating loads to keep the operative temperature within the comfort zone in residential buildings.

Under the interdisciplinary mathematical models as shown in Fig. 5, researchers such as (Mohammadian, 2011) applied a combination of an integrated attack graph and Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM) to capture the complex relationships in IT network systems. What-if analysis scenarios were then performed to recognize the vulnerabilities of the system. This analysis was then used to develop plans to overcome them (Zhou et al., 2020). integrated Stepwise Regression Analysis (SRA) and Support Vector Machines to select the principal risk factors and SVM to detect hazards in the electrical systems of aircraft.

In computer-aided models (Janošovský et al., 2019), simulated HAZOP-based analysis by employing Aspen HYSYS to examine the process safety of the chemical industry (Miciuła and Wojtaszek, 2019). developed an Automatic Hazard Identification Information System (AHIIS) that constructs a decision support system based on the combination of the deterministic mathematical model and the fuzzy logic expert system to identify hazards of inland waterway navigation (Zhang and Verma, 2019). integrated threshold-based rules and deep neural networks to categorize low-risk and high-risk areas on an image dataset from collected videos for roadside fire hazard identification (Bo, 2019). developed a method of dynamic risk identification. The proposed approach extended the biological immune mechanism to risk identification to cope with the dynamic characteristics of enterprise risk. It first stored the enterprise historical data into a library that led to the automatic detection of risks by utilising a dynamic memory automatic identifier and the variable fuzzy automatic identifier.

In the category of logic-diagram models (Yao et al., 2013), applied the Unified Modelling Language (UML) sequence diagram to hazard identification. The proposed approach is applied in the domain of railway system risk identification to analyse the risk factors and the interaction between them through HAZOP (Kumasaki and Shoji, 2013). proposed a logical hazard identification method based on object-oriented energy analysis. The proposed approach consists of three rules which describe the nature of energy and one rule that is related to the nature of the trigger. Using such an analysis, the chance of risks occurring is determined. Other researchers such as (Saud et al., 2014), (Ravankhah et al., 2017) extended the use of the bow-tie diagram to determine the risks that may occur. The authors integrated Fault Tree Analysis (left side of the bow-tie) and Event Tree Analysis (right side of the bow-tie) for real-time risk identification. Other researchers also applied Petri nets, which are directed graphs, in which modes represent the transitions of events (Wang et al., 2016). applied a hierarchical coloured Petri net-based model to identify the risks in Chinese railway systems. The authors noted that such an approach has advantages over traditional hazard identification approaches such as HAZOP. Similar approaches were applied by Paltrinieri et al. (2016) to develop the Dynamic Procedure for Atypical Scenarios Identification (DyPASI) approach, which continuously categorizes information into the five main hazard identification principles, which is used by risk managers to predetermine changes of risk events happening (Zhu et al., 2018). applied the Control Logical Petri Net (CLPN) to identify component-interaction related hazards for computer-controlled systems (Li et al., 2019). integrated the Functional Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM) and the Accident Causation Analysis and Taxonomy (ACAT) to create risk scenarios from successful operations instead of failures. The authors argued that the proposed approach disclosed the relationship between different functions and the contributing relations between them to identify risk factors.

In the category of descriptive models, (Cong et al., 2016), (Danko et al., 2019) integrated Layer of Protection Analysis (LOPA) with HAZOP. The proposed approach evaluates process design and process control on different HAZOP deviations to detect equipment corrosion and identify the risks in chemical processes (Jounget al., 2018). integrated HAZID and Systems Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA) to identify risks. HAZID was used for the structural part and STPA for the control system to identify dynamic positioning hazards.

5.5. Comparing the techniques against the requirements needed to proactively identify risks in a networked economy
As mentioned earlier, proactive techniques are those that aim to prevent risk events before they occur. In the era of big data and with the maturity of methods which can capture and make sense of such data, this objective has been achieved by researchers. As these techniques are sophisticated, it is not surprising to see from Fig. 5 that most are from computer algorithm models that use artificial intelligence and data mining techniques to gather insights. Another set of models are mathematical models, such as (Xiao et al., 2009) and (Geden et al., 2020) which have the ability to consider the external environment and to undertake exploration to identify new events of risks apart from the past ones as they build on the intelligence from different underlying business processes. These satisfy R1 and R2. R3 is also satisfied by many techniques. Data-driven models such as deep learning also have the potential to achieve these requirements, but this has not been attempted yet in the literature on the risk identification domain in an open-loop system.

6. Answering the research objective RO and research questions RQ1-RQ4: discussion, open issues and solution considerations
In Section 2, we define the paper's research objective as ‘In the current networked business world, are the existing supply chains identification techniques suitable to proactively assist the risk manager in identifying the risks to their supply chain operations?’. Based on the analysis done in Sections 3 Reactive techniques for risk identification, 4 Predictive techniques for risk identification, 5 Proactive techniques for risk identification, in the next sub-sections we answer the research questions RQ1-RQ4 that will lead us in answering the RO.

6.1. Answering RQ1 and RQ2 - discussion
Fig. 6 plots the evolution of different types of risk identification techniques in the literature in response to RQ1. The discussion in Sections 3 Reactive techniques for risk identification, 4 Predictive techniques for risk identification, 5 Proactive techniques for risk identification explains the working of the techniques in each category, answering RQ2. Consistent with the above analysis, during the 1980–89 period, the reactive models dominated how risk was identified in different domains. But as the knowledge from such techniques was built, researchers started to focus on predictive models for risk identification. Such models enabled risk managers to pre-determine which events many occur along with either R1 or R2, and manage them accordingly. Due to their importance, such models are still prevalent in the current era. The adaptation of proactive approaches started late due to their need for high and sophisticated computing requirements. But due to their importance and benefits of achieving R1 – R3, they are being widely adapted in the current era in different domains such as medical diagnosis, online shopping, etc. This shows a clear shift in trend in the use of techniques that enable risk managers to move from reacting to risk events to predetermine and prepare for them.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (224KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Evolution of risk identification methods.

This is because of their superior ability to identify R1-R3 needed for smart risk identification in the networked environment. To support our observation, we performed a statistical test analysis on the literature review that we present in Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 and tested two hypotheses by using two-sample Welch's t-test. The test adapts the Student's t-test to investigate two samples with unequal sample sizes and/or unequal variances. In the t-test, the statistic  and degrees of freedom () are defined as follows (Welch, 1947):(1)
 
 
 
(2)
 
Where 
 and 
 are the samples sizes, 
 
 and 
 
 are the samples means, and 
 and 
 are the samples variances.


Table 6. Comparison of the existing proactive techniques for risk identification.

Technique	R1	R2	R3
Computer tools for risk identification (Heino et al., 1992)	✕	✓	✓
Qualitative hazard identifier (QHI) (Catino and Ungar, 1995)	✕	✕	✓
Common reactivity pattern (COREPA) (Mekenyan et al., 1997)	✕	✓	✓
SHADETree (Pullum and Bechta Dugan, 1998)	✕	✓	✓
Automatic hazard analyser (AHA) (Kang et al., 1999)	✕	✕	✓
Sequential operations using Petri nets (PN) (Wang and Chang, 2003)	✕	✕	✓
Support vector machine (SVM) (Lai et al., 2006)– (Zhu et al., 2010)	✕	✕	✓
Evolutionary programming-based knowledge ensemble (Yu et al., 2008)	✕	✕	✓
Genetic Algorithm (Feng and Xie, 2009)	✕	✕	✓
Conjugate analysis theory (Xiao et al., 2009)	✓	✓	✕
Bayesian-based support vector machine (Yu et al., 2010)	✕	✕	✓
Bayesian risk identification model (BRIM) (Rieger and Rahimi, 2011)	✕	✓	✕
Dynamic programming (Yu and Wang, 2011)	✕	✓	✓
Digraph model for supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) (Guan et al., 2011b)	✕	✓	✓
Wireless sensor network (WSN) (Morreale et al., 2011)	✕	✕	✓
Intelligent risk identification (Mohammadian, 2011)	✕	✓	✓
Automatic risk acquisition of risk expression (Imanara et al., 2012)	✕	✓	✓
Automatic risk identification based on inductive learning (Machado, 2012)	✕	✕	✓
Knowledge reuse-oriented safety analysis (KROSA) (Daramola et al., 2013)	✕	✕	✓
Unified modelling language (UML) sequence diagram (Yao et al., 2013)	✕	✓	✕
Logical hazard identification (Kumasaki and Shoji, 2013)	✕	✓	✕
Bow-tie diagram (Saud et al., 2014), (Ravankhah et al., 2017)	✕	✓	✕
Steady-state analysis and dynamic simulation (Labovská et al., 2014)	✕	✕	✓
Natural language processing (NLP) (Yang and Garibaldi, 2015), (Wasser and Lincoln, 2016)	✕	✓	✓
Automatic information retrieval (Kim et al., 2015)	✕	✕	✓
HAZOP-layer of protection analysis (LOPA) (Cong et al., 2016), (Danko et al., 2019)	✕	✓	✓
System-theoretic process analysis based on the formalisation model (Wang et al., 2016)	✕	✓	✕
Sequential case-based reasoning (CBR) (Xiao, 2016)	✕	✕	✓
Dynamic procedure for atypical scenarios identification (DyPASI) (Paltrinieri et al., 2016)	✕	✓	✓
BIM-based risk identification expert system (B-RIES) (Zhang et al., 2016)	✕	✓	✓
An ontological approach to hazard identification (OHI) (Zhou, Hanninen, Lundqvist, Provenzano)	✓	✕	✓
Text mining (Lucas Luijckx et al., 2017)	✕	✕	✓
Cognitive assistant (Subramanian et al., 2017)	✓	✓	✓
Computer-assisted content analysis (Qu, 2017)	✓	✓	✓
Bayesian network analysis (Xin et al., 2017)– (Guo et al., 2018)	✕	✓	✓
Integration of HAZID and Systems Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA) (Jounget al., 2018)	✕	✕	✓
Deep learning (Zhu and Cheng, 2018)	✕	✓	✓
IoT and non-destructive testing (NDT) (Agarwal et al., 2018)	✕	✕	✓
Simulation (Sajjadian, 2018)	✕	✕	✓
Control logical Petri net (CLPN) (Zhu et al., 2018)	✕	✓	✕
Data mining (Wang et al., 2018)	✕	✕	✓
Association rule mining (ARM) (Salamai et al., 2018)	✓	✕	✓
An ontology-based methodology (Aziz et al., 2019)	✓	✓	✓
Machine Learning (Lai et al., 2019), (Mangorteyet al., 2020)	✕	✕	✓
Complex event process (CEP) (Ma et al., 2019)	✕	✓	✓
Integration of FRAM and the accident causation analysis and taxonomy (Li et al., 2019)	✕	✓	✕
Simulation-based HAZOP (Janošovský et al., 2019)	✕	✕	✓
Automatic hazard identification information system (AHIIS) (Miciuła and Wojtaszek, 2019)	✕	✓	✓
Integration of threshold-based rules and deep neural networks (Zhang and Verma, 2019)	✕	✓	✓
Dynamic risk identification (Bo, 2019)	✓	✓	✓
Anticipatory thinking metrics (Geden et al., 2020)	✓	✓	✕
Integration of stepwise regression analysis (SRA) and SVM (Zhou et al., 2020)	✕	✕	✓
The two hypotheses that we test are as follows:

1st hypothesis: proactive techniques perform better than reactive techniques in addressing R1, R2, and R3.

2nd hypothesis: proactive techniques perform better than predictive techniques in addressing R1, R2, and R3.

The data set for these tests are the analysis presented in Table 4, Table 5, Table 6. For each requirement (R1, R2, or R3) addressed by a technique, a score of 1 is assigned if it addresses it, and a score of 0 is assigned if it does not address it. In other words, we replaced ✓ with 1, and ✕ with 0 for each technique. Then we calculated the average of these values for each technique. After that, the hypotheses are investigated.

The first hypothesis is tested at the 0.05 significance level () with the null hypothesis (H0) and the alternative hypothesis (H1) as follows:

H0: There is no difference between reactive techniques and proactive techniques in addressing R1-R3 (μ
μ
).

H1: Proactive techniques perform better than reactive techniques in addressing R1-R3 (μ
μ
).

The summary of statistics for each technique are shown in Table 7:


Table 7. Summary of statistics for reactive and proactive techniques.

Reactive	Proactive
 
 
Using Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) the  and  values are calculated as: ; .

The lower-tailed test critical value for this case is 
. Therefore, based on the value of statistic  that is lower than the critical value, 
, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the proactive techniques perform better than reactive techniques in addressing R1, R2, and R3 at the 0.05 significance level.

The second hypothesis is tested at the 0.05 significance level as follows:

H0

There is no difference between predictive techniques and proactive techniques in addressing R1-R3 (μ
μ
).

H1

Proactive techniques perform better than predictive techniques in addressing R1-R3 (μ
μ
).

The summary of statistics for each technique are shown in Table 8:


Table 8. Summary of statistics for predictive and proactive techniques.

Predictive	Proactive
 
 
Using Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), the  and  values are obtained as follows: ; .

The lower-tailed test critical value for this case is 
. So, based on the value of statistic  that is lower than the critical value, 
, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the proactive techniques perform better than predictive techniques in addressing R1, R2, and R3 at the 0.05 significance level.

The statistical test confirms the reason being the spike in the use of proactive techniques more than reactive and predictive techniques in Fig. 6 as they have the potential to achieve R1-R3 that are the key factors to be achieved while Risk Identification in the networked economy.

6.2. Answering RQ3 – open issues
To answer RQ3, using the term ‘supply chain risk identification’, we searched the literature and found 24 papers with this focus, as shown in Table 9. It should be pointed out that a search using the term SCRM would return many more papers, but as our focus in this paper is only on risk identification, we consider only those papers that contain the terms risk identification and supply chains in their title. We analyse the selected papers by their year of publication, their focus, and whether they address R1, R2 and R3 together. By doing so, our objective is to see if risk managers in the supply chain domain keep up with the evolution of risk identification as seen in other domains.


Table 9. Focus of the techniques on supply chain risk identification.

Paper	Year of publication	The focus of the paper	Do they address R1, R2 and R3 together
Nan and Jia (2008)	2008	Based on the literature review and social systems theory, identifies the risks in the procurement of iron and steel goods.	✕
Gao and Wang (2009)	2009	Uses scenario analysis to determine the risks in supply chains. The analysis was used to develop an early warning mechanism that will enable companies to better respond to risks.	✕
Neiger et al. (2009)	2009	Uses value focussed engineering to effectively address and identify the challenges that arise when an enterprise moves from a silo-based approach to a process-based view of the supply chain.	✕
Luan et al. (2009)	2009	Utilises a questionnaire-based approach to identify the risk factors in the OEM business in China.	✕
Adhitya et al. (2009)	2009	Uses process flow diagrams and HAZOP analysis to determine the possible deviations in the supply chain parameters.	✕
Huo and Zhang (2011)	2011	Uses the SCOR process to categorize the risk factors into the five phases of supply chain operations, namely planning, purchasing, sales, delivery, and return.	✕
Mody (2012)	2012	Emphasizes the need for supply chain visibility to identify the potential risks that could impact a firm in getting the required components/goods.	✕
Wang et al. (2013)	2013	Proposes a risk identification hierarchy structure that enables the identification of risks in the medicine supply chain.	✕
Zhao et al. (2014)	2014	Uses a state space-based approach to determine and forecast the risks in supply chains.	✕
Yeboah et al. (2014)	2014	Specific to the Ghana agricultural supply chain, the paper identifies the specific supply chain-related risks that can arise in that industry.	✕
Aghapour et al. (2015)	2015	Uses a questionnaire-based approach to identify the supply chain risks in the electrical and electronics industry in Malaysia.	✕
Yu and Huatuco (2016)	2016	Identifies the risks in the dairy supply chain in China using semi-structured interviews.	✕
Juan et al. (2016)	2016	Develops an approach for food supply chain hazard identification. Proposes a 3D risk matrix to better characterize consumer behaviour and the perception of failure. This analysis enabled risk managers to develop a new method of food safety assessment risk evaluation.	✕
Mburu (2017)	2017	Determines the importance of the different types of risks on the performance of manufacturing supply chains in Kenya.	✕
Salamai et al. (2018)	2018	Utilises association rule mining to identify the risks from the historical data of a supply chain's performance.	✕
Kwak et al. (2018)	2018	Emphasizes the need to consider the failures in international logistics processes. Investigates the interactions between international logistics risks within the prevailing structures of international supply chains and highlights how these risks may be inter-connected and amplified.	✕
Bo and Han-Meng (2018)	2018	Reviews the risk factors present in multinational agricultural product supply chains. Develops a theoretical framework that can be used to identify the risks in such chains.	✕
Lu et al. (2018)	2018	Identifies risks in supply chain risk management using FMEA.	✕
Zare-Garizy et al. (2018)	2018	Develops a privacy-enabled approach to assist global firms share the same supplier by preserving the confidentiality of the information among them.	✕
Sugiarto et al. (2018)	2018	Uses Pareto analysis to identify the different sources of risk that may impact the rice supply chains of Indonesia.	✕
Kang and Zhang (2019)	2019	Conceptual paper that identifies the characteristics of the networked economy and identifies the risks that need to be considered.	✕
Ríos et al. (2019)	2019	Prioritizes the operational risk factors that need to be addressed in the supply chain. The risks are identified using the KPIs of the activities and the SCOR model.	✕
Tama et al. (2019)	2019	Aims to create a reliable supply chain flow against various kinds of risk disruptions using the SCOR model.	✕
Zhu et al. (2019)	2019	Uses the SCOR model to identify the different factors that are responsible for the risk event occurring at a macro level.	✕
Table 9 provides an overview of the techniques used from 2008 to 2019. From Fig. 6, it can be seen that during this period, the primary focus of the risk identification techniques was on predictive and proactive approaches. But the techniques used for risk identification in supply chains do not follow the rigour and sophistication of the techniques used by risk managers in other domains. For example (Gao and Wang, 2009), develops an early warning mechanism that will enable supply chain companies to respond better and manage their risks and they do not consider techniques that do not have the capability to incorporate the supply chain as an open-loop system. This would have enabled them to develop an early warning system that captures and responds to the uncertainties of the real world as they occur. Even though (Neiger et al., 2009) acknowledges the challenges that arise when a process-based view of the supply chain is considered, a shortcoming of their approach is that they do not consider the impact of outside uncertainties on the supply chain (Luan et al., 2009). utilised a questionnaire-based approach to identify the risk factors in the OEM business in China. While such an approach is beneficial to identify which risk factors to look for in the external environment, further work needs to be done to capture these events and identify the risks arising from them. This is similar to the drawback in Adhitya et al. (2009), Lu et al. (2018) which use a HAZOP or FMEA approach to identify risk factors. While such approaches may determine how a system may fail, further data-driven monitoring approaches are needed when the system fails due to the identified risks. Huo and Zhang (2011), Yeboah et al. (2014), Aghapour et al. (2015), Yu and Huatuco (2016) focus on identifying the risks, however, in contrast to the approaches used in other domains during this decade, they do not focus on actually determining when these events will occur and how to manage them effectively. Mody (2012), Ríos et al. (2019) and Tama et al. (2019) emphasized the need for visibility in the supply chain to systematically ascertain the potential risks that could impact a supply chain's operations. While this represents the view that firms should consider the open-loop system, the proposed approach does not consider the data-driven techniques which were prevalent at that time (Oussous et al., 2018). Such techniques could capture the events that can impact a supply chain's operations on a real-time basis, and an analysis of this could have been used to make more informed decisions on risk identification. Similar is the approach adopted by Kwak et al. (2018), Zhu et al. (2019) which acknowledge the importance of considering the failures caused by international logistics processes or macro processes, but they do not propose a method to determine and quantify them. This does not take into consideration the open-loop nature of the supply chain. Several techniques, such as those in Zhao et al. (2014), Juan et al. (2016), Salamai et al. (2018) predictively determine the risks, but without considering the open-loop nature of the uncertain environment. Advanced techniques such as association rule mining and a 3D matrix are used by researchers (Juan et al., 2016). Still, their consideration of a supply chain as a closed-loop model does not enable their practical application in the uncertain real-world environment. Other researchers such as (Wang et al., 2013), (Mburu, 2017), (Bo and Han-Meng, 2018), (Kang and Zhang, 2019) propose different methods at a conceptual level that enable the better identification of risks in a supply chain. But no practical approach is proposed by them to enable the efficient identification of risks by considering the open-loop characteristics of the supply chain. To summarize, the focus of supply chain researchers in relation to risk identification is primarily to identify the risk factors that may occur using the knowledge of the past, but not to regularly monitor the external environment to actually determine when they may happen and to take action to prevent them from happening. This comes under the broad domain of being proactive in risk identification which the current approaches to supply chains clearly lack, as opposed to the risk identification techniques in the other domains. Thus, to answer RQ3, when it comes to Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM), there is a clear trend in that there is a lack of focus on the use of the sophisticated techniques which are implemented by risk managers in other domains for smart risk identification in an open-loop network.

6.3. Answering RQ4 - solution considerations
In this section, we answer RQ4 by proposing solutions or ways by which supply chain risk managers can use the intelligence of existing techniques from other domains for the proactive identification of supply chain risks. Our solutions are based on the outcome of our survey which indicate that while there have been various advancements in enabling proactive risk identification in different domains, the research effort to achieve this aim in the domain of supply chains is hugely lacking. While issues such as mapping supply chains, determining organisational dependence and identifying the risk factors are important considerations which need to be addressed in relation to supply chains, future work in supply chain risk identification should consider a more data-focussed approach that captures the real-time value of such variables and uses them to identify the risks. While the importance and the need to have such approaches has been widely mentioned by supply chain researchers (Norrman and Wieland, 2020), there is a severe dearth of techniques to achieve this. From Table 9, it can be seen that the risk identification approaches proposed in the recent years of 2017–2019 utilise fundamental approaches such as questionnaires, HAZOP and FMEA to identify risks. These techniques are from the 1980s era and are not the most suitable to identify risks in today's current uncertain data-driven environment. Researchers from other domains have been utilising the current sophisticated and state-of-the-art techniques to develop insights into risk identification. We believe that supply chain risk managers should use these applications as possible considerations for better risk identification. Researchers have observed improvements in other related area such as manufacturing through the application of big data analytics (Gunasekaran et al., 2018). In the next sub-sections, we briefly mention some techniques from the data-driven models that have been applied in other domains along with their output. This should provide supply chain risk managers with possible directions for future work which they can utilise for smarter and better risk identification.

6.3.1. Reinforcement learning
An advancement of the machine learning family of algorithms, reinforcement learning (RL) is an advanced artificial intelligence algorithm that determines whether an action will lead to a reward or penalty (Osiński and Budek). This technique can process massive input data and determine whether a record from that data is relevant or interesting depending on the aim that is to be achieved. RL is a type of zero-shot learning, where a machine without any training dataset learns to classify the data (Alibaba Tech, ). Based on the feedback it receives, it learns so that it can improve its performance over time. RL has been applied in various domains such as news recommendations (Zheng et al., 2018), medicine (Jonsson, 2019), robotics (Solowjow and Aparicio) etc. Specific to the area of supply chains, RL in risk identification will have huge benefits by processing input data, from, for example, news sources and then recommend to the risk manager if it is worthy of investigation. Over time, the algorithm will benefit risk managers in the smart identification of risks.

6.3.2. Transfer learning
Transfer learning is another field of machine learning that has been applied in many domains. Transfer learning aims to transfer the learned knowledge in one domain or application to another domain for which no data exist (Lu et al., 2015). Transfer learning has been applied in the domains of new product development (Mirtalaie et al., 2017) and medicine (Understanding transfer learning for medical applications). Using these techniques, decision-makers infer knowledge and then utilise this with some certainty which provides them with a starting point which they can explore further in their analysis. Transfer learning will have significant applications for risk managers in supply chains. As previously mentioned, supply chains are an amalgamation of different firms, and multiple such chains exist. If no information for a particular firm or chain exists, then current approaches fail to analyse the risks present in them. By using transfer learning, this issue can be addressed, and the patterns seen in one supply chain can be used to infer knowledge in other supply chains with some confidence, thereby facilitating the process of risk identification.

6.3.3. Explainable Artificial intelligence (XAI)
Explainable AI (XAI) is one of the emerging fields in the area of machine learning. It evolved due to the need to ensure that the black box decisions made by the machine learning model are ethical. XAI aims to show the decision-maker the logic on which it has reached particular conclusions (Explainable artificial intelligence). This enables the user to build trust in the results it is achieving from the model. With the massive growth in information, combined with the development of cyber-physical systems (CPS) and the Internet of Things (IoT) devices, the supply chain is generating a massive amount of information. As AI models will be built over time, XAI needs to be applied to the results given by these models to ensure risk managers can trust the analysis. This will benefit risk managers by giving them confidence in what can be trusted and acted upon as opposed to what needs to be considered with caution.

6.3.4. Natural Language Processing for social collaborative intelligence
Natural language processing (NLP) is another technique from the field of artificial intelligence that has been widely used by researchers in different domains. These techniques enable computers to understand text which gives them the ability to think and make decisions like humans. Such techniques have been widely applied in the domain of customer relationship management (CRM) (Valmohammadi, 2017), new product development (NPD) (Mirtalaie et al., 2018) etc. By taking into consideration what the customers think about their products and services, organisations can adapt their operations to ensure success. An example of how NLP has been applied to social collaborative intelligence is Twitris (Sheth et al., 2014), an application which can, for example, identify people who have depression after reading their posts, and it was also used to predict the outcome of the 2016 US elections. In relation to supply chain risk identification, NLP will have huge benefits as it enables the consideration of external events in the processing. Newsfeeds which represent the environment are text-based. Using such textual information, supply chain risk managers can determine if any uncertainties are present across the geographical environment in which they operate. Such analysis helps them to pre-identify any outcomes which they think can negatively impact their operations and develop plans to monitor and manage them.

6.3.5. Complex event processing
As discussed in Section 5.4, complex event processing (CEP) techniques take real-time information and extract events of interest. This approach was applied by Ma et al. (2019) in the domain of online shopping. In the Cloud of Things environment, approaches such as that used in Nawaz et al. (2019) have been applied to complex event processing to determine how the occurrence of an event propagates through the different components of the service level agreement (SLA). This approach builds on the NLP knowledge from social collaborative intelligence and enables the risk manager to determine which service-level objectives (SLOs) of the SLA have a possibility of being violated. In the domain of supply chains, this approach will have broad applications. As supply chains are an amalgamation of different partners, the SLAs formed will have the commitment to be achieved from each of them. For the supply chain firm to achieve the overall goal of the SLA, it needs to proactively monitor the impact of each SLO on the SLA's goal not being achieved. This analysis will assist in the smart risk identification of events that need to be monitored. Current techniques for risk identification used in supply chains do not have the necessary sophistication and maturity to consider this level of analysis.

6.3.6. Knowledge graph
Knowledge graphs are one of the techniques that assist in CEP. A knowledge graph links the newly acquired knowledge in the form of an ontology. This representation enables risk managers to see for which aspects in the knowledge are present, how one aspect is related or linked to other aspects and how information on an unknown aspect can be determined from reasoning it from a known aspect (Fenselet al., 2020). A knowledge graph has led to the creation of linked data that can be understood by machines, and knowledge can be inferred from it. In the domain of supply chains, using a knowledge graph to link the data across the business process of one enterprise and across multiple enterprises will result in creating linked data. This will enable risk managers to save a lot of time in data collection and will automate the process of inferring knowledge across different supply chains.

We emphasize that the above list is not exhaustive, and there are many other data-driven methods which can be adapted from other domains and applied to supply chains. We believe that these are some directions which need to be taken by risk managers in supply chains from the area of data-driven analytics to improve the effectiveness of risk identification in supply chains. But as previously mentioned, the current approaches to risk identification are more from an operational management perspective. While such an approach is essential to understand the working of supply chains, they do so by considering it in a closed-loop form. If the goal of the risk manager is to be proactive and given the dependence of the supply chain on the external environment, these approaches fail in achieving this goal. In the current era of big data, supply chain risk managers have the luxury of adapting the data focussed techniques from other domains and applying them to identify risks proactively. For this, they need to consider the field of risk identification as an interdisciplinary one that combines data analytics with operational management. Without this, the real benefits of risk identification in supply chains will not be achieved which has been emphasized by the researchers to build resilience in supply chain operations.

7. Conclusion
Proactive risk identification has increasingly become necessary in different domains for the success of the activity being carried out. With the constant growth of data and tools that now have the ability to understand this data, we have now reached a stage where the knowledge risk managers have learned from the reactive identification of risks needs to be transferred for its proactive identification. This, however, is not simple and requires a complete paradigm shift that ranges from the techniques being used to the ability of the personnel working with these techniques. In this paper, we identified the current gaps in achieving this aim in the domain of supply chains. We do this by first surveying the existing domain agnostic approaches for risk identification from a technical perspective. We defined a taxonomy that divides the techniques into the years of 1980–1989, 1990–1999, 2000–2009 and 2010–2020 and according to their working style, namely reactive, predictive, or proactive. From the analysis, it was not surprising to see that there is a clear shift in the use of techniques for risk identification from a reactive focussed approach in the 1980s to a proactive focussed approach in the 2010s. We then analysed the risk identification techniques used in supply chains in the period from 1980 to 2020. Surprisingly, we found that the current focus of such techniques is still primarily to use reactive-as opposed to proactive-based approaches. This is despite the importance and need to have a proactive-based approach for risk identification as discussed by supply chain researchers. To address the gaps in the current data-driven networked world, we highlighted several solution considerations or research opportunities which need to be adapted to supply chain risk identification for it to proactively identify risks. Such solutions have already been applied in other domains with huge benefits and thus have a huge potential to provide benefits in the supply chain domain. However, implementing these solutions requires a significant interdisciplinary effort between data scientists and operational managers. We recommend future research in the domain of supply chain risk identification and management to adopt such an approach to move towards the proactive management of supply chain risks in a networked and data-centric world.

