Abstract
Human behaviours that are motivated by and indicative of personal interests can be utilised to personalise behavioural recommendations used to promote health and well-being. Behavioural and psychological studies show that (1) personal interests are demonstrated differently in individuals’ daily activities; and (2) drawbacks of self-reporting methods, such as forgetfulness and providing socially accepted answers rather than actual ones, may negatively impact the reliability and validity of the recognition process. To address these two challenges, we propose an adaptive approach that infers personal interests from continuously- and passively-sensed smartphones location data. We evaluate our approach based on two longitudinal datasets gathered by human participants going about their normal daily activities. Our results indicate that our approach successfully identifies interests consistent with those reported by participants, matching or outperforming alternative approaches. We also see high inter-personal variation, suggesting a future role for personalisation in our approach.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Digital phenotype

Self-determination theory

Maslow’s hierarchy

Smartphones

Interest recognition

behavioural recommendations

1. Introduction
Motivation is important for almost every aspect of human behaviour – every human action is shaped by, and indicative of some aspects of motivation. These motivations may be driven by external rewards or obligations (extrinsic motivation) or by personal interests and curiosity (intrinsic motivation) (Ryan and Deci, 2017). Identifying motivation in this latter case, in particular recognising an individual’s personal interests, has value not only in understanding the individual, but also in shaping their future behaviour.

Assessing interests has been the concern of multiple inventories across different psychological sub-disciplines and applications (e.g.  Amabile, Hill, Hennessey, Tighe, 1994, Amabile, Hill, Hennessey, Tighe, 1994, Ryan, Tyler-Wood, Knezek, Christensen, 2010). However, inventories of this form require individuals to respond to specific prompts (e.g.  “I enjoyed doing this activity very much”) despite the fact that in most cases, intrinsic interests are demonstrated in an individual’s daily activity.

A close neighbour, to this desire to derive intrinsic interests from individuals’ behaviour, can be seen in many of our everyday interactions with technology. Recommender systems gather data about an individual’s behaviours as part of a process intended to predict what an individual might like (or dislike) in the future (Raza, Ding, 2019, Zhang, Yao, Sun, Tay, 2019). Such systems are heavily used in a variety of technology platforms including e-commerce (Lu, Chen, Li, Lakshmanan, 2014, Schafer, Konstan, Riedl, 2001, Zhou, Ding, Tang, Yin, 2018) and digital media consumption (Beam, 2014, Gomez-Uribe, Hunt, 2016). However, recommender systems typically have two features that differentiate them from the problem at hand: (i) data capture relates to a highly constrained set of behaviours taking place on a specified platform (e.g.  all interactions with the website Amazon.com); and (ii) prior behaviours are used to make future predictions rather than to understand the underlying motivations that led to those behaviour. Therefore, while most recommender systems focus on figuring out the behaviours and making predictions based on those behaviours; we want to go one step further and go from the behaviours to the underlying motivation. Then given that motivation; future behavioural recommendations can be personalised.

In so doing, we propose to leverage individuals’ smartphones for continuous, unobtrusive data collection that reflects behaviours undertaken in daily life. In particular, this article focuses on location behaviours as described by readings of smartphone positioning (GPS) captured at frequent and regular intervals. Behavioural events, such as visiting a cafe place or going to a movie theatre, are then extracted from these raw GPS data. Next, we identify specific measures that can be used to operationalise properties of two psychological models of human motivation: Self-Determination Theory (Ryan and Deci, 2017) and Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow, 1943). We apply those measures on the behavioural events extracted from GPS traces to understand the underlying motivations and rank the prior behaviours accordingly. For example, if the extracted event is shopping, the rating produced from applying the measures of motivation properties would indicate how much a person is motivated by shopping. Higher ratings imply more internalised actions and therefore a better chance of the person being intrinsically motivated.

This distinction of internally motivated behaviours from externally motivated ones such as obligations is essential for applications of personalised behavioural change. Such applications aim to promote health and well-being by targeting actions that are motivated by and indicative of personal interests (i.e. intrinsically motivated). This is in contrast to other applications (e.g. e-commerce) where both personal interest and obligations would be considered as long as they serve the underlying goal (e.g. increasing revenues).

Our Motivation-based Interest Recognition (MIR1) model, summarised in Table 2, is derived based on a formative dataset (\raise.17ex2.8 million datapoints collected over one year from seven participants) and then evaluated through a summative evaluation using data from a further seven participants (\raise.17ex0.2 million datapoints collected over three months). Although two different populations have been used for formative and summative evaluations, our results suggest that the MIR approach can be used to detect interest for both groups of participants – despite the potential differences in the type of interests and how they are realised by each group.


Table 1. Acronyms frequently used in this article.

Acronym	Description
IMB	Intrinsically Motivated Behaviour
IMI	Intrinsic Motivation Inventory questionnaire
MIR	Motivation-based Interest Recognitiona
SDT	Self-Determination Theory
a
Our approach.


Table 2. Motivation properties used in our approach, together with their corresponding behavioural measures. Integration of these measures to a single MIR value is discussed in Section 6.3.

Property	Description	Measurements	Base Theory	Details
Needs	Categorisation of internal needs	Needs level	Maslow	Section 6.1
Competence	Perceived ability to perform	Intensity	SDT	Section 6.2.1
Autonomy	Voluntarily performance of actions	Sustainability	SDT	Section 6.2.2
Novelty	Exploring of new behaviour	Recency	SDT	Section 6.2.3
To summarise, our contributions are threefold:

•
An approach for computationally modelling motivational properties. We identify a set of behavioural measurements that reflect aspects of previously-articulated models of human motivation. These measurements have the potential to be captured unobtrusively over an extended time period using smartphone-based passive sensing.

•
An algorithm for Motivation-based Interest Recognition (MIR) that aggregates the identified behavioural measures into a ranked set of Intrinsically Motivated Behaviours (IMBs) (i.e.  where the top-ranked item is the one for which the user has the strongest interest).

•
An evaluation based on two distinct real world datasets that validates ranked IMBs against participant ground truth and two alternative ranking approaches.

Our results provide a strong indication that our approach produces ranked interests that align closely with those elicited from participants through self-reports. Over the two evaluations we achieve higher precision and at-least-comparable recall when compared to alternative approaches.

2. Human Motivation
Theories of human motivation attempt to describe why humans do what they do (McClelland, 1987, Ryan, Deci, 2000, Weiner, 1992). Biological approaches focus on physiological state and processes (Cofer, Appley, 1964, Petri, Govern, 2013), and examples include Yerkes-Dodson (Yerkes and Dodson, 1908), drive reduction (Hull, 1943, Hull, 1952) and operant-conditioning (Cooper, Heron, Heward, 1987, Skinner, Burrhus, 1953). For the purposes of understanding and leveraging individual differences, however, these may be considered overly reductive (Eccles, Wigfield, 2002, Strombach, Strang, Park, Kenning, 2016).

Psychological mappings from human behaviour to motivation typically take one of two approaches. Static approaches use a fairly rigid classification to match behaviour to underlying physiological or psychological needs. Examples include Maslow’s (1943) hierarchy and Murray’s (1938) need theory. By contrast, Dynamic approaches quantify motivation based on the subjective impression of a participant toward a performed behaviour; factors such as contexts and rewards may impact the participant’s attitude toward an activity (Fogg, Ryan, Deci, 2017). Examples include Self-Determination Theory (Ryan and Deci, 2017) and Fogg’s (2012) motivational waves.

For the purposes of this work, we draw on two dominant psychological explanations: Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow, 1943) and Self-Determination Theory (Ryan and Deci, 2017). In particular, this work focuses on determining an individual’s intrinsic motivation (Ryan and Deci, 2000) – activities that inherently bring satisfaction to an individual (commonly referred to as interests; Renninger and Hidi, 2016). Key concepts extracted from these theories, and used in this work, can be found in Table 2.

2.1. Maslow’s Hierarchy
Maslow (1943) discusses motivation in terms of five needs, the lowest of which must be fulfilled before the next comes into focus. These five needs (presented lowest to highest) are as follows: physiological, safety, belongingness, self-esteem and self-actualisation need. Physiological needs relate to survival at an individual and species level, such as food, drink, sleep and sex. Safety needs include stability, security and protection from fear. Belongingness needs are driven by the desire for interpersonal relationships, and feelings such as love, friendship and acceptance. Self-esteem needs drive our desire for respect, dignity and independence. Finally, self-actualisation needs drive our ambition and desire for personal growth (Maslow, 1943, McLeod, 2007).

Critics of Maslow (e.g.  Neher, 1991) suggest that experiencing these needs in the proposed order is contrary to evidence in the real world. For instance, lack of security in some communities - due to war, civil unrest or similar - does not prevent their inhabitants from developing social ties and pursue the fulfilment of belongingness needs. Despite this, Maslow’s hierarchy continues to be highly influential (including, for example, in recent attempts to understand technology: Houghton, Pressey, Istanbulluoglu, 2020, Kang, Jung, 2014). In light of the identified limitation, in this article, we focus on mapping behaviours to needs as nominal categories rather than concerning ourselves with an ordinal progression between the levels.

2.2. Self-Determination Theory
SDT (Ryan and Deci, 2017) is one of a number of contemporary theories that build on the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. However, in contrast to others, SDT treats these concepts not as a dichotemy, but instead as a continuum that ranges from amotivation, through a set of extrinsic motivation states, to a fully internalised intrinsic motivation (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (162KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The motivation continuum proposed in SDT runs from amotivation through to intrinsic motivation.

SDT identifies competence, autonomy and relatedness as the three basic psychological needs that differentiate and represent motivation states: the need for competence (also called self-efficacy), the need for autonomy, and the need for social relatedness (Ryan and Deci, 2017):

1.
The need for competence refers to one’s belief in their ability to perform (Bandura, 1971). Self-perceived success, satisfaction or efficiency when engaging in tasks helps to satisfy the need for competence (Ryan, Deci, 2017, White, 1959, White, 1963).

2.
The need for autonomy relates to the extent to which a person controls a behaviour (Ryan and Deci, 2017), and self-regulates goals and the process of attaining them (Schunk et al., 2008).

3.
The need for relatedness is concerned with feelings of connection with others and is an essential driver for social behaviour (Ryan and Deci, 2017).

In addition to these three basic needs, proponents of SDT have noted the importance of novelty in motivating individuals to pursue and possibly change personal interests (González-Cutre, Sicilia, Sierra, Ferriz, Hagger, 2016, Ryan, Deci, 2000, Ryan, Deci, 2017, Silvia, 2007). This has in turn led some to propose the need for novelty as a futher innate psychological need (González-Cutre et al., 2016).

As a popular and “living“ theory (Vansteenkiste et al., 2010), SDT has been applied in a wide variety of domains, including many related to technology. For example, SDT can be used to guide the interface design of mobile apps (e.g.  Rooksby, Rost, Morrison, Chalmers, 2015, Zuckerman, Gal-Oz, 2014), encourage the use of health apps (e.g.  Saksono et al., 2020), or propose behavioural intervention (e.g.  Gustafson et al., 2014). Unlike these applications, we employ SDT to classify behaviours, that are passively sensed, as either extrinsically or intrinsically motivated.

3. Passive Sensing, Digital Phenotyping and Mobility Traces
Smartphones have transformed personal data collection. The majority of the population near-continuously carries a device featuring multiple specialised sensors such as: accelerometer, gyroscope, ambient light sensor, proximity sensing (e.g.  Bluetooth, NFC); these are in addition to the microphone and camera that are considered critical to the devices’ functionality (Lane et al., 2010). These sensors allow for passive data collection (i.e.  without intervention from a user) that can be considered highly indicative of the user’s environment and behavior. This data has a multitude of applications (Khan et al., 2013), including extensive use for health and well-being (Cornet and Holden, 2018). It is in this context that Jain et al. (2015) coined the term digital phenotyping to refer to the process of using an individual’s interaction with digital technologies to derive indicative markers for human health and wellbeing (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (85KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The use of passive smartphone sensors for digital phenotyping. Adapted from Insel (2017).

In this paper, we focus specifically on the use of passively-sensed location, one of the most popular approaches applied in health and well-being to date (Cornet and Holden, 2018). Most commonly, this will take the form of a set of time-location pairs captured using the GPS sensor on a smartphone. From this spatiotemporal data, a series of features are typically extracted. For example, ”distance travelled” and ”time spent at home” are mobility features that have been used as indicators of fatigue and social anxiety (Andrienko, Andrienko, Fuchs, Raimond, Symanzik, Ziemlicki, 2013, Vega, 2019), while ”fraction of the day spent stationary” and ”maximum distance from home” have been used as indicators for relapse behaviours in schizophrenia (Barnett et al., 2018).

A core part of the feature extraction process is the segmentation of a trace into a set of episodes and trajectories:

•
An episode is the abstraction over a set of data points that represent a stationary or motion period based on some specific criteria. The term stay-point can be used to refer to a stationary episode.

•
A trajectory is a sequence of episodes that represent an individual’s movement through geographic space over a period of time.

Once extracted, episodes can be semantically annotated using external data sources (Nogueira et al., 2018). For example, services such as Foursquare2 can allow a collection of proximate GPS readings (a stay-point) to recognised as a public park, residential area, or even a specific shop or restaurant.

4. Recommender Systems
Recommender systems are software applications that aim to make predictions about the items or behaviours that might be of interest to a specific individual (Raza, Ding, 2019, Zhang, Yao, Sun, Tay, 2019). Recommender systems draw on a variety of computer science techniques including data mining, user modelling and machine learning. However, the fundamental concept centres on the use of existing indicators of a target user’s interest (e.g.  ratings, purchases, frequency of interaction), together with knowledge about all of the items that could be recommended (e.g.  object classifications, features, other users’ ratings or interactions) to derive a rating for each item in a set of possible recommendations. Based on this rating, the top n items can be presented to the target user (or user group) (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005). There are two principal approaches to recommender systems. Content-based systems suggest items based on the user’s profile, while collaborative systems considers information of similar users to predict the recommended items (Adomavicius, Tuzhilin, 2005, Villegas, Sánchez, Díaz-Cely, Tamura, 2018).

Although they are most prominently used in e-commerce (Lu, Chen, Li, Lakshmanan, 2014, Schafer, Konstan, Riedl, 2001, Zhou, Ding, Tang, Yin, 2018) and digital media consumption (Beam, 2014, Gomez-Uribe, Hunt, 2016), recommender systems can be used to encourage broader behavioural change. For example, Rabbi et al.’s (2015) smartphone application MyBehavior used a combination of passive sensing and manual logging to record physical activity and food intake. Statistical machine learning was then used to identify and recommend high calorie loss behaviours similar to the user’s existing behaviors, resulting in a statistically significant increase in physical activity and corresponding decrease in calorie intake compared to a control condition.

Context-aware recommender systems employ contextual information to improve the predictability of recommendations (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2015). For behavioural recommender systems, such as that described above, this contextual information is especially critical to disambiguate users’ activities. Villegas and Müller (2010) classified contexts into five categories: individual, location, time, activity, and social/relational. Contexts, such as time of the day or the activity performed at specific locations, are used as indicators that facilitate the extraction of behaviours or locations of interest; the first step toward building high quality recommendations (Raza and Ding, 2019). Of greatest relevance to this paper, are those recommender systems that leverage location and time.

Existing recommender systems that make use of location typically consider the frequency of visitation (Li, Cong, Li, Pham, Krishnaswamy, 2015, Musto, Semeraro, Lovascio, de Gemmis, Lops, 2018, Yu, Chen, 2015), duration of visit, (Boytsov et al., 2012) or combination of both (Do, Gatica-Perez, 2014, Li, Zheng, Xie, Chen, Liu, Ma, 2008). Annotations of the form described in Section 3 can be used to help generalise from one specific location to similar places (Do, Gatica-Perez, 2014, Karatzoglou, Koehler, Beigl, 2018). When combined with time, a recommender system can also deliver recommendations based on the both frequency and duration of visits at a specified time of day (Li, Jiang, Hong, Liao, 2017, Natal, Correia, Garcia, Fernandes, 2019, Yuan, Cong, Ma, Sun, Thalmann, 2013), or based on recency of visit (Li, Xu, Chen, Zong, 2015, Logesh, Subramaniyaswamy, 2017).

Despite their complexity, the majority of recommender systems (including context-based and behavioural systems) fail to consider the underlying motivation that led to the user behaviours used as indicators. Whilst many of these indicators may reflect personal interests, others will be the result of obligations (e.g.  buying a gift for others, visiting a workplace). In this article, we set out to identify Intrinsically Motivated Behaviours (IMBs) – behaviours that reflect intrinsic motivation (Ryan and Deci, 2000). In so doing, we aim to enable future recommendations that align with the individuals’ interests and values and can facilitate sustained behaviour change (Michie et al., 2011).

5. Inferring Motivation from Smartphone Sensor Data
In this article, we set out to measure aspects of human motivation, continuously and unobtrusively, by using the location data that is captured by smartphones as individuals go about their daily activities. We focus specifically on trying to identify behaviours that are internally motivated. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach to capturing personal interests that integrates psychoanalytical and data-driven techniques to rank behaviour based on motivation properties.

We identify three specific subprocesses necessary to enable our approach: indicator identification, item identification, and interest determination. At their most abstract, these subprocesses align with those of conventional recommender systems, but each requires substantial rethinking to address the unique challenges that come from both (a) operating over human mobility behaviour, and (b) attempting to extract intrinsic motivation from a set of intrinsically- and extrinsically-motivated behaviours.

Indicator identification A set of common indicators (e.g.  item features, user interaction, and user ratings) have widespread applicability in conventional recommender systems (Raza, Ding, 2019, Zhang, Yao, Sun, Tay, 2019) but are of limited relevance to the motivation needs described in Section 2). Further, unlike other behavioural indicators, concepts such as competence, autonomy, and novelty are not immediately captured in smartphone-observable measurements. Therefore, for each property, we need to identify indicators that are behaviourally observable and, at the same time, strongly indicative of that underlying property.

Item identification Unlike traditional computer systems that deal with ‘interest’ (i.e.  recommender systems), our approach must operate over a diverse set of behaviours rather than predefined ‘items’ (e.g.  products or online movies/TV). These behavioural items are encoded into streams of low-level data (for location this is typically a GPS trace). Therefore, an initial step is the identification of individual behaviour ‘items’ from this low-level data. Within the context of this paper, stay-points are the ‘items’ that we extract from the raw GPS data and on which our approach would operate.

Interest determination Traditional recommender systems seek only to identify patterns of behaviour, and then to use this information to rank potential future behaviours. By contrast, we seek to differentiate within those patterns of behaviour, to specifically identify behaviours that reflect underlying personal interest (i.e.  intrinsic motivation). Therefore, we apply indicators, that are amenable to computations, on the items extracted from digital phenotyping. An indicator is amenable to computation if there exists a behavioural measure that strongly correlates with the underlying cognitive indicator. As a result, we encode smartphone GPS data as cognitive traits within our behavioural model and then aggregate these traits to rank and personalise behaviour.

5.1. Indicator Identification
As noted in the previous section, we first concern ourselves with the identification of appropriate indicators and items, before utilising these to identify the likely underlying interests.

To identify indicators, we conducted a review of the literature to identify behavioural measures for human motivation. Specifically, we sought out any measure that was considered to be strongly indicative (i.e.  the majority of existing literature supports an indicative relationship) of any of the underlying cognitive needs identified in Section 2.2, namely competence, autonomy and novelty. We then consider each of these in terms of their applicability to location data, and determine the final set of indicators accordingly. Note that we deliberately exclude relatedness due its inherently social nature – although smartphone sensor data may be indicative of social behaviours, it is unlikely that location data alone will provide a meaningful measure of this construct.

Table 2 lists the identified behavioural measures together with the motivation concepts to which they are associated. High levels of perceived competence are associated with completing an action more often (Rabbi, Aung, Zhang, Choudhury, 2015, Ryan, Deci, 2017), and the time required to complete the action (Fishbach, Hofmann, 2015, Nicholls, 1984). Thus, we combine frequency and duration into a measure of intensity (Wolf and Hopko, 2008). Voluntary performance of action (i.e.  autonomy) is associated with action sustainability over time (Pelletier, Fortier, Vallerand, Briere, 2001, Seguin, Pelletier, Hunsley, 1999), whereas the propensity to seek out novelty is manifested in the exploration of new behaviours and gaining new interests (i.e.  recency) (Ryan, Deci, 2013, Ryan, Deci, 2017).

5.2. Item Identification
Next, we use event segmentation to decompose location traces into distinct visitation events (i.e.  item identification). Specifically, we apply sequential processing of GPS data to extract stay-points based on predefined time  and distance  thresholds (appropriate values for  and  may be implementation specific and are explored in Section 8.1). The resulting stay-points are places where an individual has lingered for a period greater than  minutes within a boundary of  meters. Note that for the purposes of this work, we do not consider the intermediate periods (i.e.  periods of motion)3.

Once extracted, stay-points are semantically labelled using a location annotation service. Google Places, Foursquare, and other platforms each provide reverse geocoding services that can be used to annotate stay-points (e.g.  converting a location reading of 51.5194
 N, 0.1270
W to The British Museum) and then appropriately categorising that as a history museum. In this work we use Foursquare as our location annotation service due to its richer categorisation (950 categories) than other services (e.g.  Google provides 96 categories).

5.3. Interest Determination
For interest determination, we build on our prior contrast of Maslow (1943) and SDT (Ryan and Deci, 2017) as static and dynamic approaches respectively (Section 2), and develop a solution that engages both mechanisms in parallel. A static modelling step (Section 6.1) builds on Maslow’s heirachy, whilst our dynamic modelling (Section 6.2) is based on SDT. Computed values from both dynamic and static measures are combined to form the motivation score (referred to as the MIR score).

6. Modelling
Interest determination is achieved by generating a measurement, the MIR score, for each participant behaviour over a given time period. This measure can be used to classify actions as intrinsically or extrinsically motivated, based on the SDT continuum depicted in Fig. 1. Specifically, higher ratings imply more internalised actions and therefore a better chance of the person being intrinsically motivated. In this section, we provide a detailed description of how the MIR score is assembled through use of two modelling steps; both steps are grounded in the literature, targeting patterns of behaviour that are considered positive indicators of IMB. Measures emerging from the modelling steps are combined to form the overall MIR score (Section 6.3). This integration process may be generalised (i.e.  all elements are weighted identically for each individual), or adapted to reflect individual differences (i.e.  weighting is determined based on differences in an individual’s need satisfaction: Deci and Ryan, 2000).

6.1. Static Modelling
Our static modelling is a participant-independent mapping   between   location   episodes  and  motivation  based   on  Maslow’s hierarchy. We assign an ordinal value to each of Maslow’s five need levels, based on the degree to which the level reflects intrinsic motivation. Behaviours that serve needs at the top of the hierarchy are considered to display more  intrinsic   and  autonomous  behaviour (McClelland, 1987) and are scored more highly than those at the base. Specifically, we assign a value of one for physiological needs and two for safety needs. The remaining three levels relate to belongingness, esteem and self-actualisation needs; since all three represent intrinsic and self-determined actions (Barbuto Jr, Scholl, 1998, McClelland, 1987), we score each equally with respect to intrinsic motivation. We assign behaviours associated with these levels a value of four (i.e.  a mean derived from the values three, four and five if one simply incremented the score as one progresses up the hierarchy).

To identify behaviours that correspond to these levels, we use a popular location annotation provider (Foursquare) to identify different semantic classes of location (e.g.  art gallery, casino, mosque). Then, guided by motivation-based taxonomies of behaviour (Barbuto Jr, Scholl, 1998, Talevich, Read, Walsh, Iyer, Chopra, 2017, Tinsley, Eldredge, 1995) - we match semantic classes to a corresponding generalised category (e.g.  art, games/gambling, spiritual) and locate the category within Maslow’s hierarchy. Each location stay-point captured in a participant’s dataset can then be mapped from specific location to semantic class (as determined by Foursquare), and then from semantic class to category. The resulting category determines hierarchy level and associated intrinsic motivation score. Table 3 lists the categories identified, together with examples of semantic classes within those categories, and the intrinsic motivation score as derived from Maslow’s hierarchy.


Table 3. Categories used in static modelling. Each category is allocated to a level within Maslow’s hierarchy and scored appropriately. Values of one and two denote physiological and safety needs respectively; all other levels suggest some intrinsic motivation and are scored with the value four.

Motivation Category	Exemplar Locations	Maslow Score
Art	art gallery, public arts	Intrinsic - 4
Culture and History	museum, historic site	Intrinsic - 4
Dance	dance studio, salsa club	Intrinsic - 4
Dining out	fine dining, family style dining	Physiological - 1
Education	School, university	Safety - 2
Entertainment	aquarium, circus	Intrinsic - 4
Games and gambling	casino, gaming cafe	Intrinsic - 4
Health and Fitness	gym, weight loss center	Safety - 2
Movies	movie theater, indie theater	Intrinsic - 4
Music	concert hall, jazz club	Intrinsic - 4
Outdoors and Recreation	national park, mountain	Intrinsic - 4
Profession	bank, day care	Safety - 2
Reading	bookstore, library	Intrinsic - 4
Residence	home, hotel	Physiological - 1
Shopping	shopping mall, auto dealership.	Safety - 2
Socializing and Drinking	pub, lounge	Intrinsic - 4
Spiritual	church, mosque	Safety - 2
Sport	hockey arena, stadium	Intrinsic - 4
Travel and Transport	airport, train station	Physiological - 1
The described classification should accurately distinguish between intrinsically- and extrinsically-motivated activities in the majority of cases (Barbuto Jr, Scholl, 1998, Talevich, Read, Walsh, Iyer, Chopra, 2017, Tinsley, Eldredge, 1995). However, visits to locations that would score highly for intrinsic motivation may occur for reasons other than personal interest (e.g.  to accompany a friend). This limitation is addressed through the addition of dynamic modelling.

6.2. Dynamic Modelling
Dynamic modelling is used to determine the degree to which an exhibited behaviour aligns with concepts associated with intrinsic motivation (competence, autonomy and novelty) and to capture naturally-occurring variation in motivation (Fogg, 2012). Unlike static modelling, these measurements are instantiated from the participants’ data and hence actual values vary according to the behaviour exhibited by each individual. Each participant’s data is subdivided into week-long analysis windows (Monday-Sunday), reflecting this naturally-emerging determinant of human behaviour (i.e.  most people exhibit consistent patterns of behaviour on weekdays vs.  weekends: (Cho, Myers, Leskovec, 2011, Sarker, Colman, Han, 2019).

Within each analysis window, we then identify instances of the indicators summarised in Table 2. To overcome limitations associated with any one motivation property, and/or it’s associated indicator, our dynamic modelling integrates all of the identified properties and indicators. Existing literature shows each to be positively correlated with others, and with intrinsic motivation, at an individual and aggregated level (Ryan and Deci, 2017). However, we do not consider this indicator set to be exhaustive; future work may demonstrate the utility of alternative or additional measures. For example, an experiment may use the diversity and flexibility in times of a behaviour as a measure of autonomy (Ryan and Deci, 2017) along with sustainability. Similarly, we envisage future integration of a measure for relatedness (omitted from this work due to its focus on location behaviour), through indicators derived from proximity or other sensors.

6.2.1. Competence
Feelings of competence arise from self-perceived achievement rather than the activity itself (Oudeyer and Kaplan, 2009) and are predicted by both frequency and duration of engagement in the activity (Fishbach, Hofmann, 2015, Nicholls, 1984, Rabbi, Aung, Zhang, Choudhury, 2015, Ryan, Deci, 2017, Wolf, Hopko, 2008). To integrate duration and frequency into a measure of intensity, we count, for each stay-point, the total number of visits and multiply that by the average duration per day.

Formally, if 
 is the weekly frequency of a behaviour  and 
 is the weekly average duration for the same behaviour, then the intensity of  up to the current last week of an ongoing study  is computed as:(1)

6.2.2. Autonomy
Autonomous actions are characterised as being volitional and self-initiated and are demonstrated through repeated and continuing engagement in the activity Ryan and Deci (2017). We express this as the sustainability of behaviours. To generate a measure of sustainability, we assign a Boolean value that indicates whether a specific behaviour occurs within the analysis window. We then count the number of subsequent windows (i.e.  weeks) in which a behaviour is observed and divide that by the total number of subsequent analysis windows. The closer is the result to 1, the more sustained the behaviour.

Formally, if 
 denotes the existence of a behaviour  in week  and 
 represents the current number of weeks in a study, then the sustainability score of a behaviour  is computed as:(2)
where  represents the current last week of an ongoing study. Next, we see the impact of novelty on shaping the current period.

6.2.3. Novelty
Individuals’ interests and behaviours change periodically, previous behaviours and interests are abandoned and new ones adopted (Ryan, Deci, 2017, Sarker, Colman, Han, 2019). To ensure that IMBs reflect current interests, we therefore consider novelty through a measure of the recency of observed behaviours. Thus, we segment the entire study duration into periods (these periods are distinct from the previously mentioned week-long analysis windows and may vary in duration either statically or dynamically4; in this work we adopt a static approach based on findings reported in Zhao et al., 2013 and Srinivasan et al., 2014). We then weight each behaviour according to its occurrence within each period, with the most recent period accumulating the highest value; values associated with prior periods gradually decline as their distance from the present period increases. This gradual retrospective degradation ensures currency whilst also accounting for the fact that individuals typically revisit previous behaviours rather than entirely abandoning them (Zhao et al., 2013). This is in direct contrast with prior work that has considered only the most recent period (e.g.  Sarker et al., 2019)

6.3. Integration
We bring together our static and dynamic models to compute an overall score for any given behaviour. The resulting MIR Score indicates the degree to which the specified behaviour is intrinsically motivated (for a given individual). The MIR Score takes into account the needs level derived from Maslow’s hierarchy (Section 6.1) and the three SDT indicators (Section 6.2).

To the best of our knowledge, prior computational models of these properties have not been realised. Thus, we suggest a straightforward approach that uses linear summation as the aggregation function and weights each feature equally (i.e.  coefficients = 1 for all properties). The resulting formalisation operates over a set of periods  such that  ranges from 1 to  where 1 designates the most recent period, and  represents the outmoded interval.(3)
 
where    is  determined  as  specified  in  Table 3, and  and  are determined in accordance with equations (1) and (2) respectively, before being adjusted to account for . Thus, both  and  are calculated for each period before being weighted and summed as described in Section 6.2.3.

Note that Equation 3 is just one potential combination of the submeasures to form the MIR Score, and assumes a single generalised approach is applicable to all. SDT literature suggests that differences in individual’s need satisfaction may shape their pursuit of a given need (Deci and Ryan, 2000), such that weighting sub-measures identically for different individuals may not be appropriate. Thus, we suggest a role for personalisation in the integration phase (as shown in Fig. 3).

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (372KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The overall process of extracting and ranking IMBs from phenotyped GPS raw data.

Finally, the resulting MIR score for each behaviour can be used to assemble a ranked list of IMBs as follows:(4)where the ratings for each user is predicted as a function of the motivation properties and the performed actions. For example, if the behaviour is related to football, then the rating score would indicate the degree to which a football-related behaviour is intrinsically motivated (for a given individual).

7. Implementation: The MIR algorithm
Fig. 3 and Algorithm 1 provide an end-to-end view of our approach, whereby raw GPS data is ultimately transformed into a ranked list of IMBs. Passively-sensed location data is semantically enriched to produce a set of stay-points that correspond to life events such as dining out, and shopping. Extracted stay-points are used as input to the aforementioned models of motivation properties (determined based on the indicator identification) to rank the behavioural events based on the underlying motivation properties. As a result, we produce a ranked list of motivated behaviour that represents the behaviour’s place on the proposed motivation continuum.

Algorithm 1
Download : Download high-res image (210KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Algorithm 1. Algorithmic implementation of the proposed approach that uses a combination of static and dynamic models of motivation to derive a set of ranked interest behaviours (IMBs).

Data input takes the form of raw GPS data collected continuously and longitudinally (locationData), which is then subdivided into periods (updateRecencyPeriod). The most recent data form period  which is preceded by . Data is then collected into stay-points and semantically annotated (enrichData), resulting in a collection of behavioural items (behaviourList). Together, these steps form the item identification process (Section 5.2).

Our indicators are embedded in a pair of motivation modelling steps (applyMotivationModels), which are applied to behavioural items (computeMotivationScore) in a given period (getPeriodBehaviour). Specifically, computeMotivationScore computes the motivation properties,  and  by iterating over each behaviour in the period and applying both the static and dynamic models (applyMotivationModels). Weekly  and  scores for each behaviour observed in the period are stored as a key-value  (behaviour-score) pair (updateBehaviourScore). For each period, the associated periodBehaviourScore pairs are themselves stored as key-value (period-score) pair (updateTotalRating). Finally, aggregateTotalRatings applies the recency value on the motivation properties of each period to get the MIR score. Accordingly, each behaviour is valued based on its period such that recent, sustained, intense and intrinsically needed behaviours are at the top of our ranking.

8. Experimentation
Given a lack of existing mobile sensing approaches that use motivation to inform interest recognition, we first conduct a formative evaluation that allows us to examine our modelling and design decisions, contrasting the output with that from popular interest measurement approaches; this evaluation also helps to suggest appropriate measures for tuneable parameters. Guided by insights from this first study, we then conduct a further (summative) evaluation. Our evaluation includes longitudinal mobile data from fourteen participants going about their normal daily activities (seven participants in each phase). Procedures for both studies were reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Department  of  Computer Science Ethics Committee at ANON University (Reference: 2019-7817-12726).

8.1. Formative evaluation
For our formative evaluation, we conduct secondary analysis on a dataset previously captured from seven adults using the AWARE mobile sensing framework5 (Ferreira et al., 2015); this dataset was collected from seven older adults with Parkinson’s disease (age  median age 65, mean 65.71), over a period of one year. The participants had mild motor symptoms and none to slight involuntary movements (a.k.a. Dyskinesias) (Vega, 2019). The dataset, collected over one year, contains over 1000 million passively-sensed datapoints from two Android and five iOS devices (Vega, 2019). Of these datapoints, 2.8 million are measures of location (tuples comprised of latitude, longitude and timestamp). GPS sampling took place at an interval of one minute, although factors like battery outage and signal loss reduce the number of collected samples.

In addition to the location data, we use extracts from interviews with three of the seven participants, in which they describe their strongest interests and the frequency with which they engage in activities relating to those interests (Table 4). The “Reported interests” column represents the ground truth that are collected from the participants. The annotated interests (represented by the “Annotation” column in Table 4) are the results of mapping the ground truth data to our proposed taxonomy. This data was unfortunately not available for all seven participants, but should provide an indicative groundtruth nonetheless.


Table 4. Annotated interests for three participants in the formative dataset. Note that activities that would largely take place at home are not annotated, as these would not be detected by our approach (location data for home is discarded).

Participant	Reported interests	Annotation
P3f	Reading	Reading
Gardening	-
Walking	Outdoor and Recreation
Music	Music
Television	-
P4f	Gardening	-
Spending time with family and friends	Socialising and drinking
Singing	Music
Dancing	Dance
Walking	Outdoor and Recreation
Reading	Reading
P7f	Bird watching	Outdoor and Recreation
Playing bridge	Outdoor and Recreation
Helping out local charity	Profession
Learning Microsoft Access	-
Walking	Outdoor and Recreation
Reading novels	Reading
Dancing	Dance
Visiting National Trust properties	Culture and History
Drinking craft beers	Socialising and drinking
Learning bass guitar	Music
Listen to music	Music
We use the algorithm proposed in Li et al. (2008) to extract stay-points: data points are processed sequentially, with stay-points determined in accordance with predefined time and distance thresholds. Guided by Boytsov et al. (2012), we set our time threshold at 15 minutes. We fix our distance threshold at 100 meters (Solomon et al., 2018), meaning that GPS readings within a 100-meter circumference are considered to be the same stay-point.

Staypoints and interview responses were then annotated using a common category set based on a semantic grouping of Foursquare annotations. We then follow the approach described in Sections 5 and 7 to determine a ranked set of IMBs. Guided by studies and findings on mobility behaviour (Song, Koren, Wang, Barabási, 2010, Srinivasan, Moghaddam, Mukherji, Rachuri, Xu, Tapia, 2014, Zhao, Yang, Zhang, Zhou, Huang, Lai, 2013), we use three months as the recency threshold that segments the study duration into periods and apply equation (3) accordingly.

Finally, since IMBs conducted inside the home are impossible to identify using location alone, we seek to exclude the participant’s likely residence from our analysis. Early exploration of the data using semantic annotation for this purpose (i.e. looking for places in a residences category) was often inconclusive. Thus, we instead identify the single location in which the participant spent the most time in any given week and exclude it as the participant’s likely place of residence. Excluding locations on a weekly basis should account for temporary accommodation such as vacation or business trips.

8.1.1. Results
Fig. 4 shows an ordered (left-to-right) set of the top five ranked IMBs for each of our seven participants (the three bottom-most participants are those for which we also have interview ground truth data). We also plot comparison results from two alternative algorithms: one frequency-based (used in e.g. Musto et al., 2018 and Liu et al., 2016) and one duration-based  (used  in  e.g. Lim et al., 2015 and Gaonkar et al., 2018). MIR selects the same top-rated interest as both other algorithms for just over half of the participants (P3f, P4f, P5f, P7f). In other cases, the top two IMBs are transposed compared to one (P2f) or both (P1f, P6f) other algorithms. However agreement on the top three IMBs for MIR and at least one of the two comparison algorithms (ignoring ordering) occurs only in one case (the two comparison algorithms themselves agree on the top three in five of the seven cases). Similarly, agreement on the top five IMBs for MIR and at least one of the two comparison algorithms (ignoring ordering) occurs only in one (different) case whereas the two comparison algorithms themselves agree on the top five in four of the seven cases.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (660KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. IMBs for each participant as determined by our MIR algorithm and by frequency-based and duration-based approaches for comparison. Participants in the bottom row (P3f, P4f, P7f) are those for whom we also have ground truth.

Our original intention was to consider only the top three IMBs, but having calculated strength of interest using each method it was evident that clear differences in the strengths of consecutively ranked IMBs naturally emerged at different points for each participant. We therefore additionally establish a cut-off point based on the largest difference between consecutive behaviours (Fig. 5), and in subsequent analysis compare the validity of this dynamic N (shown in Table 5) with fixed values. In many case the dynamic N value is equal to one, suggesting that the participant’s behaviour reflects a single interest much more strongly than any others (this is especially true when considering frequency or duration alone). Whilst in some applications, identifying the strongest intrinsic motivator would be sufficient, we suggest that in many cases a broader understanding of IMB would be beneficial. Thus, for each case where the dynamic N would be 1, we also identify the next largest dynamic N using the approach previously described (Table 5). The resultant value, Dyn’, is used in subsequent analyses.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (381KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. An example for the determination of the top interests based on the largest difference.


Table 5. Number of top IMBs determined dynamically (Dyn) for each participant (P1f-P7f) based on largest difference between interest score for consecutively ranked behaviours. Where Dyn is 1, the column Alt indicates the top  IMBs based on the next largest difference between ranked behaviours. Shaded values are those used as Dyn’ in subsequent analyses.

MIR	Frequency	Duration
NDyn	NAlt	NDyn	NAlt	NDyn	NAlt
P1f	2	-	1	4	3	-
P2f	2	-	1	3	3	-
P3f	1	13	3	-	1	3
P4f	2	-	1	2	1	2
P5f	1	3	1	2	1	2
P6f	2	-	3	-	1	3
P7f	8	-	1	2	1	2
Examining  the  top-ranked  interests  themselves  (using Dyn’), we find that over half (min:  max:  mean: ) match a Maslow needs level of four (intrinsic). However, a significant minority correspond to Maslow’s physiological (mean: ) and safety needs (mean: ). Whilst one could interpret this as indicating that a location-based approach may struggle to filter out extrinsically-motivated behaviours, we note that in reality many of these kinds of activity can be intrinsically motivated (e.g. choosing to engage in shopping or fitness activities because they are enjoyable or align with personal values rather than out of necessity).

From the raw data reported in Fig. 4 and Table 4, we calculate precision and recall for each of the three algorithms. For instance, the top three interests retrieved by the MIR approach when N = 3 for P3f are: ‘Outdoor and Recreation’; ‘Socialising and Drinking’; and ‘Culture and History’. Since only ‘Outdoor and Recreation’ is retrieved and P3f reported ‘Reading’; ‘Outdoor and Recreation’; and ‘Music’ as interests (see Table 4), then both precision and recall are equal to . Similarly, we compute the values for other participants and the results are summarised in Table 6. MIR outperforms both alternative algorithms, with a mean precision of  and mean recall of . The dynamic N performs best on recall, but this is not true for either frequency or duration. By contrast, use of a dynamic N produces the best precision values for both frequency and duration, but not for MIR. MIR’s precision is heavily impacted by the very large alternate N used for P3f. Excluding P3f, the mean precision increases to 0.62, higher than both fixed N values. For instance, the top three interests retrieved by the MIR approach when N = 3 for P3f are: ‘Outdoor and Recreation‘; ‘Socialising and Drinking‘; and ‘Culture and History‘. Since only ‘Outdoor and Recreation‘ is retrieved and P3f reported ‘Reading‘; ‘Outdoor and Recreation‘; and ‘Music‘ as interests (see Table 4), then both precision and recall are equal to .


Table 6. Precision (P) and Recall (R) values for the MIR, Frequency-, and Duration-based algorithms. Values calculated based on each participant ground truths, together with the sample mean (
).

MIR	Frequency	Duration
N=3	N=5	NDyn’	N=3	N=5	NDyn’	N=3	N=5	NDyn’
P	R	P	R	P	R	P	R	P	R	P	R	P	R	P	R	P	R
P3f	0.33	0.33	0.20	0.33	0.23	1.00	0.33	0.33	0.20	0.33	0.33	0.33	0.33	0.33	0.20	0.33	0.33	0.33
P4f	0.67	0.60	0.80	0.80	0.50	0.20	0.33	0.20	0.20	0.20	0.50	0.20	0.33	0.20	0.20	0.20	0.50	0.20
P7f	0.67	0.29	0.80	0.57	0.75	0.86	0.67	0.29	0.80	0.57	0.50	0.14	0.67	0.29	0.80	0.57	0.50	0.14
To better understand the impact of study duration on our results, we consider both temporal stability of our identified IMBs. We consider a behaviour ”stable” if its weekly MIR scores fluctuation stays within  for three consecutive weeks. Table 7 reports the mean number of weeks between an IMB’s first appearance in the participant’s data and the point at which that IMB begins to stablilise (based on Dyn’), demonstrating that it takes between two and fourteen weeks for measurement of an IMB to stabilise. Overall, it takes less time for IMBs to reach stability with MIR than comparative algorithms (mean 7.26 compared to 8.01 and 8.19 for frequency- and duration-based algorithms respectively). However, this varies across the sample (e.g. for P4f and P7f IMBs stabilise slower with MIR than the other two algorithms).


Table 7. Mean number of weeks taken for before IMBs enter a period of stability for each participant and algorithm (using Dyn’ in all cases), together with overall mean (
) and median (
).

Method	P1f	P2f	P3f	P4f	P5f	P6f	P7f	
MIR	7.50	6.50	4.92	10.50	2.00	9.00	10.38		7.50
Frequency	10.25	8.33	8.00	4.00	7.00	14.00	4.50		8.00
Duration	9.33	12.00	9.67	3.50	8.00	10.33	4.50		9.33
Similarly, to help inform the sample size for a summative evaluation, we calculate the correlation amongst the individual behavioural measurements that form our dynamic (intensity, sustainability) and static models: (needs) of motivation. A Fisher transformation was applied to average the correlation coefficients, and the results are given in Table 8. The two dynamic measures are have a strong positive correlation with each other (0.88) but weak negative relationships with the static measure ( and  for intensity and sustainability respectively). We see stronger positive correlation between MIR and dynamic (SDT-derived) motivation measures (0.75 and 0.66 for intensity and sustainability respectively), than with our static (Maslow-derived) measure (0.39). Interestingly, we see variation in the degree to which these correlation trends hold for individual participants – for example, for P4f it is only intensity that correlates strongly with MIR, and for P5f it is sustainability.


Table 8. Correlations amongst the measurements that form our dynamic (intensity, sustainability) and static models: (needs) of motivation (top); and between each measurement and the final MIR score (bottom).

P1f	P2f	P3f	P4f	P5f	P6f	P7f	
Intensity/Sustainability	0.91	0.75	0.71	0.64	1.00	0.85	0.80	
Intensity/Needs								
Needs/Sustainability								
Intensity/MIR	0.71	0.74	0.87	0.67	0.83	0.75	0.59	
Sustainability/MIR	0.73	0.59	0.52	0.38	0.84	0.69	0.71	
Needs/MIR	0.51		0.39	0.23	0.52	0.46	0.56	
8.1.2. Initial insights
As reported in Section 8.1.1, both MIR and the two comparison algorithms agree on the top-ranked IMB in the majority (57%) of cases, but they agree on the top three and top five IMBs in only one case. Given that MIR outperforms both alternative algorithms on precision and recall, we suggest that MIR is better able to identify postliminary IMBs than either alternative algorithm.

Our dynamic N values vary considerably (min 1, max 8) Table 5), and differ by algorithm. For example, for P1f Dyn’ is 2, 1, and 3 for MIR, frequency- and duration-based methods respectively. The propensity for Dyn to be one (true for 12 of our 21 calculations) is reflective of the fact that for many of our participants there was a stand out primary IMB (as indicated both by Dyn and the much higher algorithmic agreement on this IMB). However, as previously noted, identifying a single IMB is unlikely to be sufficient for many applications.

Considering Dyn’, we still see differences in values by algorithm in almost all cases. However, the values themselves are now almost all between two and four, with just two outliers (P3f MIR: 13, and P7f MIR: 8). Of these two, we note that P7f does report considerably more interests than other participants (11 reported interests mapping to 7 distinct annotation categories); this is not true for P3f, whose 13 interests emerge only as a result of considering Alt. The overall consistency in Dyn’ suggests that whilst there are naturally occurring cut offs in the ranking of IMBs, in practice a fixed  of four would be equivalent in the majority of cases. However, since both cases with a higher Dyn’ occur amongst our participants with ground truth, we are able to see that this increased  does yield better recall in both cases. Precision is reduced, but only mimimally for P7f (compared to N=5, we add two reported IMBs and one non-reported, potentially erroneous IMB). For P3f recall reaches 100%, but at a significant cost for precision (100% recall is reached with an N of 9 using this algorithm). Nonetheless, there may still be application-specific needs that prompt further minimum and maximum bounds on a dynamic N.

Based on the stability measurements, we suggest that studies of IMB should use a minimum duration of around eight weeks (the largest mean reported in Table 7). Studies of longer duration are likely to be more informative (e.g. our highest time to stability is fourteen weeks) and will capture a richer picture of the natural changes in the pursuit of IMBs over time (including, e.g. seasonal change).

Combining an understanding of the correlations between behavioural measurements, with the knowledge that SDT proposes a linear aggregation between motivation properties (Ryan and Deci, 2017), we suggest that a linear regression can provide an indicative sample size for future experimentation. Thus, we use the linear regression of GPower6 with parameters determined based on the initial correlations reported in Table 8. On that basis, we suggest that seven participants would be needed to evaluate MIR at 80% power and 95% confidence level. This aligns with the suggestion from Barnett et al. (2020) that ten participants are needed to get 84% power in a longitudinal study lasting for 90 days.

Finally, we note a general trend for strong positive correlations observed between MIR and both intensity and sustainability, suggesting that MIR is successfully reflecting these measures of intrinsic motivation. We see a weak positive correlation between MIR and needs. Extremes and variations from this general trend for individual participants suggest that some participants (e.g. P1f, P5f-7f) exhibit more behaviours that are considered to be more intrinsic by Maslow’s hierarchy whilst others may be intrinsically motivated to engage in behaviours that could be interpreted as extrinsic when considering Maslow’s need level alone (P2f-4f). This suggests that personalisation with regard to the weightings of different motivation properties may be valuable, and warrants further exploration in the summative evaluation.

8.2. Summative evaluation
Our formative evaluation suggests that MIR has potential to identify IMBs not captured by other approaches, and thus there is a need for further evaluation.

While the formative evaluation relied on secondary data analysis,  in our summative evaluation we collect a novel dataset from new participants. We mirror the method used by Vega (2019), using AWARE (Ferreira et al., 2015) to collect location readings at one minute intervals. To maximise the probability of correctly identifying participant locations, and thus the derived motivators, we provide participants with a plugin to examine and correct their annotated locations (Fig. 6a). Each time a visit to new place is detected, the participant receives a notification inviting them to confirm or correct the detected place. To support collection of ground truth, we add a further plugin within the AWARE app (Fig. 6b). This plugin presents an adaptation of the Interest/Enjoyment subscale of the widely-used Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI). IMI is a multidimensional scale developed by Ryan (2018) and is widely used to assess intrinsic motivation associated with a given activity (Monteiro, Mata, Peixoto, 2015, Ryan). All data captured within the app was sent to a secure server at ANON University.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (426KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Interfaces for the two developed AWARE plugins: (a) the Places plugin allows participants to examine and correct their annotated locations; (b) the IMI plugin presents participants with a set of validated questions that can be used as ground truth.

8.2.1. Study Duration and Participants
Based on the study duration recommendations reported in Section 8.1.2, we select a study duration of three months. This exceeds the minimum period of eight weeks, and is approximately equal to the largest participant mean in Table 7. Also, the participants of the formative study may have reduced mobility as they had reasonably mild symptoms. Therefore, if they do have reduced mobility then the final parameters that we use for our summative study will be conservative. This is because the reduced amount of mobility means it is going to take longer to reach stability and thus we are going to overestimate the duration needed rather than underestimate it.

Similarly, we use the method described in Section 8.1.2 to determine an appropriate sample size. We recruit seven participants to achieve 80% power and 95% confidence level. We further note the previously noted arguments in support of smaller samples given an appropriately long study duration, shifting the focus towards data corpus that reflects real-world behaviour and spans over a long period of time. Upon conclusion, our study data consists of \raise.17ex3.8 million, which is sufficient for meaningful analyses.

Participants were recruited using poster advertisements displayed in public areas of ANON University and surrounding buildings, and on social media. A total of seven participants ultimately agreed to participate, all but one of whom were students at ANON University (three undergraduates, three postgraduates). Participants were supplied with an information sheet prior to participation and had the opportunity to ask further questions prior to consent. Participants were rewarded for their participation with a total of € 30 gift cards (approximate value 39 USD, 33 EUR) distributed across the experiment period.

Participants enrolled on the study over a staggered period based on when they chose to respond to recruitment advertisements, but each completed a full twelve weeks of data collection. The first participant (P1s) began data collection on January 22, 2020, all but one had begun by February 10, 2020, and the final participant (P7s) began on March 4, 2020. Unfortunately, due to COVID-19 restrictions enforced in ANON Country in early 2020, all of our participants’ mobility patterns significantly changed for at least some of their data collection period. From ANON Lockdown, non-essential stores and services (e.g. gyms, cafés, bars, theatres) were closed, as were schools and other places of education. This mostly strongly impacts data from P7s, but even P1s was only able to supply us with location data from 8.5 weeks of unrestricted mobility.

8.2.2. Method
All participants provided written consent before being guided to install the AWARE app on their personal mobile device. Participants were asked to keep the installed application running and to carry their phones as they normally do; they were advised that the application would automatically send their data to our backend server, but only when connected via WiFi, and that we anticipated no noticeable negative effects on battery life.

During the initial session, participants also engaged in a short audio-recorded interview in which they were asked a set of general questions designed to act as a supplementary source of ground truth. For example: what are the places they visit because they want to rather than they have to? What motivates them to practice their behaviours? How often do they practice them?

As noted in Section 8.2.1, participants were asked to run the AWARE app for three months, during which all data was synced to our backend server for offline analysis. This includes both the raw locations, post-correction annotations, and participants’ IMI responses. Using the corrected locations, we exclude participants’ place of residence using the method described in Section 8.1.

Seven IMI prompts (the complete Interest/Enjoyment subscale) were delivered monthly; each takes the form of a statement with an associated seven-point Likert-like scale (1=not very true, 7=very true). Statements were adapted from the original IMI (Ryan, 2018) in order to incorporate a specific IMB into the phrasing, e.g. from “I enjoyed doing this activity very much” to “I enjoy shopping very much” (Fig. 6b)7. All seven statements reference the same IMB, which is selected randomly from the pool of top ranked Dyn IMBs for the previous month8. The resultant data is used as a ground truth for the target IMB.

At the end of the study, participants again participated in a short audio-recorded interview. Participants were asked about all specific IMBs recognised in their the dataset, and were additionally asked to identify personal interests that they felt had been omitted.

8.2.3. Results
In addition to participant interview and IMI ground truth, we again compare the output of our MIR algorithm with the baselines reported in Section 8.1. We begin by mirroring our formative evaluation, considering the final set of ranked IMBs derived from the full three months of collected data. MIR selects the same top-rated IMB as at least one other algorithms in all cases, agreeing with both other algorithms for just under half the participants (P2s, P4s, P6s). Agreement on the top three IMBs for MIR and at least one of the two comparison algorithms (ignoring ordering) occurs for just over half the participants (P1s, P5s, P6s, P7s) as does agreement amongst the two comparison algorithms themselves (P1s, P2s, P4s, P5s). However, agreement on the top five IMBs for MIR and at least one comparison algorithm (ignoring ordering) occurs only in one case (P6s), whereas the two comparison algorithms themselves agree on the top five in just over half of the seven cases (P1s, P2s, P4s, P6s). Overall, we see higher agreement between MIR and other algorithms in the summative study.

Selecting IMBs dynamically results in a Dyn of between 1 and 4 for MIR (mean: 2.00, median: 2.00, std: 1.07, iqr: ) with slightly lower Dyn values for the two alternate algorithms (frequency mean: 1.14, median: 1.00, std: 0.35, iqr: ; duration mean: 1.57, median: 1.00, std: 0.73, iqr: ). Note that in this case, we maintain the original Dyn to preserve only the strongest interests (although we again see a substantial number of cases in which 
: MIR 3; frequency 6; duration 4). By so doing, we aim to constrain the maximum number of interests. The mean size of the difference used as a cut off for Dyn is 0.34 (MIR), 0.54 (frequency), 0.50 (duration). Overall intersection of dynamic ranked list of participant IMBs (Dyn) is  for MIR/frequency,  for MIR/duration, and  for frequency/duration.

Compared to the formative data set, we see a lower proportion of IMBs corresponding to a Maslow needs level of 4 (intrinsic):  (mean), and a much higher proportion of safety (mean ) needs. However, this considerably more variable across the sample when compared to the formative study.

Our summative experiment provides a much richer ground truth for the final set of IMBs, with an IMI score generated for each ranked IMB (N=1... Dyn). These scores can range from 1 (no interest/enjoyment) to 7 (very high interest/enjoyment) and are an aggregation of participants responses to the seven scale items listed in Appendix Appendix A. The resulting values are detailed in Table 9. If the IMI score falls below four (denoted with red shading in Table 9), then the behaviour is considered to be a false positive. Two such values occur, the final ranked interest for P1s, and the only ranked interest for P7s. In this latter case, collected data was extremely sparse (27 missing days; and mean daily GPS readings is 91.63 compared to 357.81 for other participants) due to mobility restrictions incurred as a result of COVID-19 (as noted in Section 8.2.1, only nineteen days, 23%, of this participant’s collection period occurred outside of a COVID-19 lockdown). Participants also reported interests that they felt were not listed: P1s added watching movies, P2s added sports, and P4s added music (others did not add to the recognised interests). All three participants noted that they had not practised these interests during the study period.


Table 9. Participant IMI responses (from the final interview) for each of the interests identified by the MIR algorithm. False positives (i.e. IMI scores below 4) are shaded.

Reported interests	MIR	IMI
P1s	Education	1.00	5.29
Dining out	0.87	6.00
Socialising and Drinking	0.83	5.14
Shopping	0.83	2.43
P2s	Education	1.00	5.00
P3s	Education	1.00	7.00
Dining out	0.94	6.17
Socialising and Drinking	0.90	4.83
P4s	Education	1.00	5.83
Socialising and Drinking	0.80	5.67
P5s	Education	1.00	6.43
Dining out	0.87	5.83
P6s	Outdoor and Recreation	1.00	6.23
P7s	Socialising and Drinking	1.00	2.43
We determine the final ground truth where true interests include those items with an IMI score greater than or equal to four plus any identified as missing in the closing interviews. We also expand our top-ranked interest set to include any missed IMBs (this adds one interest to P1s, P2s and P4s). Based on this, we calculate the precision and recall values reported in Table 10. MIR substantially outperforms both other algorithms on recall, however  a  Friedman  test  shows  no  significant  difference ( ). For precision, MIR is surpassed by the frequency-based approach, and a Friedman test again shows  no  significant  difference  between  the  algorithms (    ),    or     precision    ( ). MIR’s recall is consistent with results from the formative study (formative: 0.69, summative: 0.70), but both alternative algorithms perform more strongly this time around (formative: 0.23 in both cases, summative: 0.49 and 0.57 for frequency and duration respectively). All approaches perform considerably better on precision than in our formative study (values  compared to ), although this is likely to be impacted both by our decision to use Dyn rather than Dyn’.


Table 10. Precision (P) and Recall (R) values for the MIR, Frequency-based, and Duration-based algorithms based on the set of ranked interests (Dyn) generated by each at the end of the summative data collection period. Values are calculated based on IMI participant ground truths collected in the closing interview. Note that P7s started two weeks before COVID-19 lockdown which making it impossible to determine IMB. Best and worst performers are highlighted.

MIR	Frequency	Duration
P	R	P	R	P	R
P1s	0.75	0.75	1.00	0.25	0.67	0.50
P2s	1.00	0.50	1.00	0.50	1.00	0.50
P3s	1.00	1.00	1.00	0.33	1.00	0.67
P4s	1.00	0.67	1.00	0.33	1.00	0.33
P5s	1.00	1.00	1.00	1.00	1.00	1.00
P6s	1.00	1.00	1.00	1.00	1.00	1.00
P7s	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00	0.00
Compared to the formative data set, we find that IMBs are quicker to enter a period of stability. Excluding P7s (because the participant did not consider the recognised behaviours as interests), the mean weeks elapsed prior to stability is 5.92 for MIR, 3.92 for frequency, and 6.11 for duration (medians 6.13, 3.50 and 6.75 for MIR, frequency and duration respectively). However, in four cases, the recognised interests do not stabilize at all over the study period (i.e. fluctuation in strength of interest exceeds  in all consecutive 3-week periods). Removing these behaviours from our calculations (P3s dining out MIR and duration, P3s MIR socialising and drinking, and P5s dining out duration) reduces the means further (4.85 weeks MIR, 5.28 weeks; median 5.50 in both cases)9.

We again calculate the correlation amongst the individual behavioural measurements that form our models with the overall MIR score. A Fisher transformation was applied to average the correlation coefficients, and the results are given in Table 11. Mirroring our formative results, we see strong positive correlation between MIR and dynamic (SDT-derived) motivation measures (0.67 and 0.73 for intensity and sustainability respectively), and moderate positive correlation with our static (Maslow-derived) measure (0.54). This difference, however, is smaller than the one seen in our formative data. Correlations from both formative and summative analysis suggest that a sample size of seven participants can achieve 80% power and 95% confidence level.


Table 11. Correlation between overall MIR scores and the measurements that form our dynamic (intensity, sustainability) and static models: (needs).

MIR Score/Feature	P1s	P2s	P3s	P4s	P5s	P6s	P7s	
MIR/Intensity	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.79	0.89	0.42	
MIR/Sustainability	0.62	0.45	0.47	0.23	0.80	0.93	0.95	
MIR/Needs	0.32	0.53	0.48	0.59	0.20	0.73	0.76	
In addition to IMIs collected at the end of the study, participants each completed an IMI for one top-ranked interest each month. Availability of some participants was impacted by COVID-19, such that five monthly IMIs () were not returned; P7s returned zero IMIs, and two other participants also failed to return an IMI response in month two. Monthly IMI scores for participants improve as the quantity of collected data increases (month one: 5.31, month two: 5.78, month three: 5.93). However, a Kendall’s tau-b correlation coefficient indicates that this increase is not statistically significant ( ).

8.2.4. Discussion
Interest selection is consistent with the formative study – all three algorithms typically agree on the top-ranked IMB, but vary in their selection of lower ranked interests. We see more agreement in this study than the formative data analysis. MIR performs strongest of the three for recall, and comparably on precision. However, differences between the algorithms were not statistically significant ( for recall). Given considerable disruption to participants’ mobility caused by COVID-19 (impacting  of the summative dataset), and a clear trend for strong precision/recall in both the formative and summative studies, we suggest that on balance MIR does outperform other algorithms, particularly in identifying postliminary IMBs. Future work (when mobility is less constrained) would be helpful to provide further evidence.

MIR selects between one and four top-ranked interests for our participants (mean and median both 2). We again see a high incidence of cases in which a dynamic cut off generates a single top-ranked IMB, although this is lower for MIR than other algorithms. Whilst this may not be ideal for some applications, our closing interviews suggest that some participants may genuinely consider themselves to have only a very limited set of intrinsic motivations. For example, when interviewed, P2s reported that they did not consider themselves to have any interest outside of their studies. However, we do see a noticeable difference in the size of the difference used as a cut off for participants where a single IMB is selected (MIR mean 0.27) compared to those where multiple IMBs are selected (MIR mean 0.55). Our summative rankings show no outliers in terms of list length (max is 4), but we acknowledge the likelihood for COVID-19 mobility restrictions to have artificially limited the number of locations and thus, potentially, identified IMBs. Overall, the formative and summative data suggests that for most individuals, a list of between one and four ranked items would encompass the dominant IMBs. Thus, for applications requiring a static  value, we propose that three to four is likely to be most appropriate.

Our results show more locations annotated as being related to safety and physiological needs according to Maslow’s hierarchy when compared to the formative data ( compared to ); broken down, we see a greater proportion of safety () needs than physiological (), another reversal of the pattern seen in the formative dataset. Restrictions on mobility likely reduced visits to locations associated with higher level needs (since these overlap near completely with those considered non-essential by many societies). However, we also note that significant differences in age between the two participant sets may well have influenced this result – prior literature documents that fact that older participants (such as those in our formative dataset) are more likely to pursue intrinsic interests than younger (as in our summative data) (Gomez, Allemand, Grob, 2012, Sheldon, Kasser, 2001). Further, during interviews our participants reported pursuit of these supposedly extrinsically-motivate behaviours for both intrinsic and extrinsic reasons – thus, the combination of needs with our other measures is important to appropriately produce an accurate MIR score. Unsurprisingly, both of our SDT measures positively correlate with the MIR score (Table 11).

Both the formative and summative data show considerable individual variation – for example P5s and P1s demonstrate a very high proportion of safety and physiological needs (combined these amount for 100% and 75% of top-ranked interests for P1s and P5s respectively), whilst P6s and P7s demonstrate no safety or physiological needs. This pattern is also evident in our correlations, where P6s and P7s’s propensity  to  exhibit  IMBs  that  are  meant  primarily  to  satisfy Maslow’s intrinsic needs manifests as a stronger correlation between MIR and the needs measurement (Table 11). We suggest that this variation does indicate that personalised weighting of individual elements could further improve the performance of MIR. Comparison with other single-measure approaches lends credence to our approach. For instance, the IMBs of P4s relate to education, socialising and drinking, and music (Table 9). Considering frequency alone successfully identifies education as the strongest interests, places socialising and drinking fourth, but ranks music-related activities only ninth in the behaviour list. Similarly, duration alone ranks education first, socialising and drinking fourth, and musical activities eighth. The persistence of behaviours (an autonomy indicator under SDT) associated with to music, and with socialising and drinking, combined with their higher needs level (compared to, e.g., travel and transport which ranks third using both single-measure approaches), positively impact their rankings under our approach. The IMI score and participant’s interview confirm our findings.

In addition to evaluating the final set of IMBs (i.e. those identified by the end of the study period), our summative experiment provides interim measures using the adapted IMI subscale to evaluate one (randomly-selected) top-ranked interest. Improvements in IMI scores for participants over time suggest that MIR does select more accurate IMBs later in the study. However, the limited scale of the data points involved suggests that further work is needed to confirm this trend.

Finally, we note that the one major area of difference in results from our two studies relates to the period of time before the calculated strength of an IMB stabilises. Specifically, we see that whilst on average behaviours stabilise more quickly, some behaviours fail to stabilise within the study period. The longer duration of the formative experiment maximised the potential for identifying behaviours that took a relatively large number of weeks to stabilise (e.g. MIR for P7f required 10.38 weeks to stabilise and frequency and duration for P6f required 14.00 and 10.33 weeks respectively). Further, we suggest that both patterns are potentially the result of COVID-19 restrictions – reduced mobility will mean that some behaviours could be pursued more consistently, at the expense of other behaviours that could not be pursued.

However, we acknowledge that such variation could be due to the demographic differences between the two groups. Conditions such as age, health condition and work may impact the type of interests and how they are realised by each group. Nevertheless, our results suggest that the MIR approach can be used to detect interest regardless of how the two groups may differ in the type and realisation of those interests. This is in line with the findings from the literature that do not relate the indicators of motivation properties - used in this work - to a specific type of interests or group of people (Ryan and Deci, 2017). Instead, these indicators are generic and describe behaviours that are motivated by personal interests. Comparison that shows how various aspects; such as the interests type and how they are realised; may differ across demographic groups can be further explored by future work.

9. Limitations and Future Work
In this article we proposed a generalisable set of static and dynamic motivation properties that are grounded in established psychology literature (needs, competence, autonomy and novelty). We then establish a set of behavioural measures  for  those  properties, using smartphone location traces as the foundation for a proof-of-concept realisation. Results from two evaluative experiments indicate that our approach successfully generates a ranked list of IMBs, and that the generated list more closely aligns with participant self-reports  than  two  comparative  single-measure  approaches.

Although our motivation properties and behavioural measures should be applicable beyond location, our formative study showed that the semantic annotation upon which our location measures are based has considerable impact on the results. Thus, in our summative evaluation, we provided a means by which participants could correct the annotation of their extracted stay-points (i.e. item identification). All but one participant in the summative study applied corrections to at least one annotation (Table 12), with a total of 124 corrections made overall (impacting  of all locations). Enhancing the accuracy of smartphone-based location detection, and the associated semantic annotation, is beyond the scope of this work. However, we do note a specific challenge with regards to the use of location semantics as an indicator for IMBs. Our present approach assumes each location serves a single purpose and that purpose is consistent over time, but in practice some users will visit the same location multiple times, each with very different intentions. For example, one user may visit a coffee shop with the primary purpose of eating lunch (a physiological need), to engage in work or quiet study (a safety need), or to engage in a hobby (e.g. reading, knitting) alone or with others (intrinsic). Thus, the one-to-one mapping reported in this article may limit the recognition of the performed interest at these places; approaches to overcome this challenge are left for future work, but will likely involve the integration of additional contextual data. Also, details of the performed interests can sometimes be difficult to recognise by relying only on location data and Foursquare annotations. For instance, being at a place related to football, by itself, may express a potential interest in football regardless of how that interest is being actualised (either through watching or playing). Future work can benefit from additional sensors and contextual data to improve the granularity of the detected interests.


Table 12. Number of Stay-Points (SP) for each participant based on foursquare results and the participant corrections. Foursquare results are categorised as either residence SP (SPRes) or non-residence SP (SP!Res). Likewise the correction are either from non-residence SP to residence SP (SP
) or from non-residence SP to another non-residence SP (SP
).

Foursquare results	Participant corrections
SPRes	SP!Res	SP!Res
Res	SP!Res
!Res
P1s	31	186	23	15
P2s	27	73	6	2
P3s	8	93	6	15
P4s	11	91	10	1
P5s	6	119	16	13
P6s	6	53	0	0
P7s	3	44	15	2
 of annotation corrections relate to the participants’ home locations (i.e. incorrect identification of, or failure to correctly identify), a reflection of our decision to allow correction prior to establishing the home location using the method described in Section 8.1; when detecting home, the percent of correctly annotated places has raised from 83.49% to 93.61%. Our rolling weekly window was intended to manage temporary changes in residence, but to reduce the correction burden on users we could easily modify our study to do some residential annotation on the device (e.g. showing the location considered to be prior week’s residence, or the location at which the user had spent most time thus far in the present week). We also observe a high proportion of “education” IMBs appearing in our summative dataset, raising the question of whether frequently occurring places of work/study should be excluded. Our interviews suggest that participants were intrinsically (as well as extrinsically) motivated to visit places of education, and we also acknowledge that many individuals will pursue a career that relates to their hobbies and interests. Thus, we argue that omitting work and study locations completely may be problematic. Further studies at scale should help to validate if MIR is successfully differentiating between participants whose workplace/education visits are intrinsically motivated compared to those whose visits are made purely out of necessity.

We saw significant problems caused by mobility restrictions as a result of COVID-19, suggesting that there is still value in further longitudinal study (as restrictions ease) to provide confirmatory evidence for our approach. Such studies could also attempt to replicate some of the more novel findings from our summative dataset, for example whether trends for IMI scores to improve as the study progresses. Additional IMI prompts could also be used to confirm the accuracy of low-ranked IMBs (i.e. asking participants about a low ranked IMB results in a low IMI). We also note that fixed study parameters (although based on prior literature) may warrant further exploration, for example using alternate or dynamically determined values for time/distance when extracting staypoints, or as a recency threshold.

Mobility restrictions also demonstrate the vulnerability of relying on a single sensor stream. However, the overall motivation properties and behavioural measures were intended to be applicable beyond location, meaning that other sensor data could replace or supplement that collected in this proof-of-concept. Monitoring engagement with phone apps or websites could be used to determine the same measures of needs (e.g. recipe app corresponds to a physiological need to eat while visits to a sports website suggests fulfilling an intrinsic need), intensity (e.g. frequent high-duration use of the same app or multiple semantically similar apps), sustainability (e.g. sustained visits to a website over time) and recency. Further, some sensor streams may open up opportunities for alternative or additional behavioural measures that correspond to the identified motivation properties (e.g. diversity and flexibility in behaviour patterns as alternative measures of autonomy: Ryan and Deci, 2017), and provide opportunities to integrate measures for relatedness (a key need in SDT that was omitted from this work due to its focus on location behaviour). Thus, we propose a key area for future work centers on (a) establishing new sensor streams for which the identified behavioural measures can be used to derive motivation properties, (b) considering novel behavioural measures that correspond to both those same motivation properties or to relatedness, and (c) determining how best to combine multiple sensor streams (and any novel measures) into a more robust MIR.

Our experiments both demonstrate considerable individual variation, particularly with regard to execution of activities that correspond to the lower levels of Maslow’s hierarchy. This was predicted by prior literature that suggests that while all individuals share the same fundamental needs, their pursuit of them may vary (e.g. based on the degree to which they have previously had that need fulfilled) (Deci and Ryan, 2000)). Thus, our overall approach (Fig. 3) incorporated a personalisation step that is not realised in our proof of concept. Future work should consider the degree to which coefficients within MIR can be personalised to deliver a more tailored IMB calculation.

Lastly, there are two interesting ways of generating the top  results and we explore both of them. In the first study, we explore the difference between a dynamic  and static  in a formative and detailed manner. In the second study, we focus on a dynamic  with one cut-off point to preserve only the strongest interests and avoid asking participants about too many and possibly irrelevant interests. However, we do not suggest at this point that either the dynamic or static approach is better than the other or a specific approach works best for a particular population. Instead, these deeper investigations are still worthy of further exploration.

10. Conclusion
In this study, we present a novel approach to technology-based identification of behaviours that reflect underlying personal interest (IMBs). Specifically, we build on current psychology theory to identify a set of core set of static and dynamic motivation properties (needs, competence, autonomy and novelty). From these properties, we use the literature to establish a set of behavioural measures that can be derived from passively-sensed smartphone location traces. We combine these measures in a single MIR score whose value (0-1) represents the strength of intrinsic motivation associated with a behaviour.

Through a combination of formative and summative evalution, we show how our approach can facilitate personalised understanding of IMB compared to frequency- and duration-based approaches. Our results indicate that our approach successfully identifies IMBs that are consistent with those reported by participants, matching or outperforming alternatives. Results also suggest that most IMBs can be detected over fairly short time periods (within 2 months) and adapts quickly to variations in mobility patterns as users’ motivation changes.

Our proposed approach allows for unobtrusive detection of individual user’s IMBs based on a standardised weighting of each motivation properties. To further improve personalisation, we suggest that variation in the weighting of different motivation properties could allow the model to better reflect difference in individuals’ need satisfaction (i.e. the degree to which they pursue a particular need).

Personalised IMB identification of the kind enabled by our work has the potential to facilitate new applications that capitalise on individuals’ intrinsic motivation. This could be particularly valuable for behaviour change, where existing evidence indicates leveraging intrinsic motivation leads to more effective and sustained change (Ryan and Deci, 2017). For example, we envisage fitness applications that prompt users to take a slightly longer journey home by plotting a route that is consistent with personal interests (e.g. passing by a local soccer club for a user for whom soccer is considered an IMB).

Relying on a single data indicator in behavioural analysis is inherently risky, and mobility restrictions imposed in response to COVID-19 have provided a clear demonstration of this vulnerability. Our discussion of future work highlights a set of promising smartphone data sources that could be used as measures of our fundamental motivation properties. Adoption of these data sources would see them used as alternative or complementary indicators of the identified motivation properties and associated behavioural measures. Thus, the overall approach taken in this paper is easily applicable irrespective of the underlying sensor set.

