In this paper, we propose a metric and performance-based mode switching procedure for 5G and beyond mobile fog networks. The network interchange mode of communication between network-centric and device-centric modes, the mode switching procedure is subject to the network’s quality of service (QoS) and quality of experience (QoE) parameters. If the quality parameters are less than the pre-set threshold value, the network selects a relay node as intermediate nodes to avail the device-centric mode of communication. During the communication, the network information’s are retrieved from the nearby fog nodes and the process by intelligent base stations. Our next contribution is a relay node assisted mobility management procedure. As the mobile nodes change the position frequently within the network service area, an efficient mobility management procedure is required to improve the network’s performance. We propose a unique mobility management procedure, it follows the movement prediction procedure and helps the mobile nodes to avail the device-centric communication in dynamic fog networks, we classify it for dynamic and static mobile users. To check the effectiveness, efficiency, and parameterized dependency of the proposed work, we formulate the process with respect to several dependent factors and comparing our results with the latest state-of-the-art networks technologies subject to communication delay and latency, energy consumption, without any compromise in node mobility and call to mobility ratio. Finally, we achieve better performance to gain the QoS and QoE.


Keywords
Delay
Device-centric
Energy-efficient
Mobility management
Network-centric
QoE
5G and beyond networks


1. Introduction
The cellular communication is a modern networking paradigm to support the high degree of node mobility. It has been evaluated from 2nd to 5th generation and beyond (5GB) cellular communication system (Panwar et al., 2016). The 5G network has several cutting edges unfriendly advantages such as device-centric communication, massive MIMO, millimeter-wave communication, native support for heterogeneous networking and smart-device to smart-device communication (Andrews et al., 2014). In this paper, we emphasize device-centric communication and explore it towards the new dimension, and it is an expedition of device-to-device (D2D) communication. The D2D communication is a promising concept to enhance the performance of network associated devices by allowing direct transmission between closely located user pairs (Noura and Nordin, 2016). The initial studies about D2D have proven that direct communication will improve spectrum reuse, end-to-end networks throughput, energy consumption, network coverage, and reduce end-to-end latency (Mishra and Biswash, 2016, Mishra et al., 2016). Additionally, D2D communication enables the creation of new peer-to-peer services and location-based applications. Therefore, current research trends have revealed that D2D will be one of the best attributes for next-generation cellular networks, i.e. 5GB networks within the pervasive computing environment (Lin et al., 2020, Chiu et al., 2019). Nowadays the researchers are introducing the D2D association with fog computing-based cellular network, which imposes various technical and deployment challenges some of them are listed in Yang et al. (2018) and Wu et al. (2019). In D2D networks, the interference management between cellular mobile users and D2D pair (in fog networks) users to be considered as one of the most critical issues. The main cause behind this is because D2D users share the same licensed spectrum with cellular users (Xiang et al., 2020, Xiao and Krunz, 2018, Akyildiz et al., 2016, Barmpounakis et al., 2017). Thereafter our main research focus is to emphasize the 5GB, D2D, fog networks, and cellular networks. Precisely, we consider to improving the performance of fog computing-based cellular networks and availing the device-driven communication.

In this paper, we provide a comprehensive research and state-of-the-artwork for fog computing-based cellular communication systems, where energy-efficiency and associated network delay are main performance parameters. It provides network’s management in device-centric methodology within the fog computing environment. It enabled the concept of next-generation cellular networks. Furthermore, we classify these network management techniques based on node mobility. To address the mobility management and its open research challenges we proposed a fog computing-based next-generation mobile cellular network.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the complete state-of-the-art information about the modern cellular communication system and fog networks. It includes the core motivation and contributions to this paper. The main contribution is described in Section 3. It includes the DND network architecture and mode selection procedure. Section 4 used to describe the proposed delay-assisted mobility management procedure. The mathematical and system model is formulated in Section 5, which helps us to compute the efficiency and effectiveness of proposed work. The simulation results and performance comparison is available in Section 6, the conclusion of work is highlighted in Section 7, thereafter the listed references in the last section.

2. State-of-the-art works
Fog computing association within the cellular network is a demanding area in the research community (Peng et al., 2018). It is widely used in a modern network, 5GB and cellular networks (Liang and Wu, 2020, Zhan et al., 2019). The authors of Chang and Liou (2017) proposed an adaptive cooperative communication for ultra-dense LTE-A to support the 5G heterogeneous networks. They proposed a link reliability determination of the cooperative candidate cells methodology, adaptive maximum throughput, and QoS-based real-time priority for mobile users with no mobility condition. The numerical results show that the proposed work has outperformed w.r.t system capacity, net profit, reward, average packet dropping probability, and average packet delay. In Biswash and Jayakody (2020) authors proposed a new paradigm of cellular network system, where fog computing is associated with cellular networks and fog nodes support the mobile nodes. Thereafter fog networks became an emerging area of research and it is well deployed in cellular networks (Azimi, 2020). The 5G-based fog network communication system support all-IP backbone architecture. The 5G fog network architecture consists of mobile users, different radio access technologies (RAT), fog nodes, next-generation eNB (gNB) and all basic networks hardware for QoS and QoE, it has many applications including VANET, Sensor networks, and mobile communication (Liang and Wu, 2020, Maan and Chaba, 2021). The fog and cloud-based network methodology is one of the efficient ways to manage resource utilization. The authors of Xiang et al. (2020) proposed a mode selection and resource allocation in fog radio access networks (F-RAN), they advocated as key techniques to improve spectral and energy efficiency. But it also has the challenges of online caching management (Azimi, 2020, Sun et al., 2021).

In the next generation cellular communication network’s performance association of cloud-based network support have many cutting edge real-time advantage. The mobile applications are supported via cloud computing and network services via infrastructure-based networks, and it is a new area of research. It offers cloud computing resources (CCR) management components, such as mobile portals, mobile commerce, mobile health care, mobile government, and others. Cloud computing enables communication systems to offer consumers to use networks applications without installing them at end-user devices where the user applications are utilized than installed. The access to users data on any internet-accessed computer is the fundamental task of cloud support network and cellular communication system. The basic 5G and cloud-based network architecture are present in Fig. 1.

The “All cloud” strategy is an illuminating exploration into hardware resource pools, distributed software architecture, and automatic deployment, it is demand of modern communication system. Operators transform the networks using a network architecture based on data center (DC) in which all functions and service applications are running on the cloud DC, referred to as a Cloud-native architecture (Lee et al., 2019, Anon, 2016). The authors of Ali et al. (2018) proposed a joint cloudlet selection to minimize the latency in fog networks. It has two phases, in phase 1 each IoT enables devices  is initially assigned to a randomly selected cloudlet server , (as IoT node assigned to closest cloudlet). IoT node  discovers the nearby cloudlet . The SINR is calculated for each IoT device to enable network nodes and activate the utilities. In phase 2, IoT nodes and cloudlets update their utilities and preferences based on the current matching procedure.


Download : Download high-res image (297KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. 5G networks and cloud computing-based communication system architecture.

In this paper we consider the works of Ali et al. (2018) as the benchmark contribution for delay and latency. Therefore, we compare our work w.r.t it Ali et al. (2018) for the listed parameters and we are abbreviating as “JCFN”. The authors of Lee et al. (2019) proposed an online optimization framework for distributed fog networks to improve the network latency. Here, the problems of fog networks formation and task distribution are jointly investigated while considering a hybrid fog-cloud architecture. The energy efficiency of fog networks is well discussed by authors of Shahid et al. (2020) and Alhumaima (2020). The author of  cites QDL proposed device-driven and human-driven intelligence key enablers to achieve reduced energy consumption and latency in fog networks. Here proposed contribution helps to minimize the energy and latency.

In this paper, we compare our results (for energy efficiency) with state-of-the-artwork as explained in La et al. (2019), and we are abbreviating it as the “EIFC” technique. The fog network is the cutting-edge computing and communication paradigm. It has many real-time applications in IoT and smart environments (Kaur and Sood, 2019). The authors of Saba et al. (2021) discussed the massive growth of the IoT applications and cloud-based applications that motivate us for fog networks-based cellular communication systems. Also, they work for QoS and QoE improvement of fog networks. In Kaur and Sood (2019), authors proposed a novel fog-assisted IoT-enabled framework for early prediction and forecasting of wildfires, it includes a new proposal for the efficient energy utilization of the resource-constrained sensors responsible for wildfire monitoring by adapting the sampling rate of wildfire causing attributes (WCAs) at the fog layer. Fog networks have many attributes such as cost-effective communication, quality-aware networking, and cloud-supported radio access networks (RAN), and they are the great necessity of next-generation mobile networking. Using this fact, the authors of Chen et al. (2021) advocate the emergence of fog-computing-based RAN architecture (Fog-RAN) and data processing units, it can be separated from base stations and hosted in distributed fog servers, where each server accommodates a community of proposed works to handle data traffic and user handover. As the fog network is part of an IP backbone supported communication system, and it is prone to security attacks i.e DDoS attacks, worms, denial-of-services. The authors of Sharma et al. (2021) proposed an anomaly detection architecture for IoT networks with several real-life security challenges, where the fraud detection performs on the fog layer. The proposed algorithm is based on the CRPS metric which is a single variable most statistical algorithm. As we have discussed fog networks application domain includes wireless communication (Santos et al., 2021) and big data management (Ribeiro Junior and Kamienski, 2021), where the author proposed performance improvement with fog networks in LoPWANs and data resilience system for fog computing.

2.1. Motivation and contributions
Node-centric communication is an emerging concept to improve the cellular network’s performance, where devices are allowed for direct communication within the proximity area. Initial studies have proven that direct communication will improve spectrum reuse, throughput, energy consumption, coverage, and reduce end-to-end latency. But, its association with cloud computing is completely missing, especially in the domain of fog computing (fog computing is a derived field of cloud computing). The real-time embedded system for fog computing and next-generation cellular communication system is a highly demanding area of research. It is the need of the hour because the current cellular network is not able to fill the high expectation of greedy mobile users. In modern cellular networks the nodes deserve the least delay, high data rate, pervasive communication environment, least network dependency, and energy-efficient green networking with a high degree of node mobility, and better mode selection methodology (Xiang et al., 2020). Thus it motivates us for following fourfold cutting edge contributions.

2.1.1. Device-and-network driven fog networks
Fog network is the one of modern core research and computing paradigm. Its association with 5G networks enable the door for next-generation networking such as 5GB or Sixth Generation (6G) of cellular communication system, where mobile nodes have least network dependency. It leads us to device-centric or user-centric communication, as widely accepted by 5GB networks. An all cloud-based methodology is also required to manage high computing requirements, big data management and analysis, and robust system performance. Therefore in this paper, we proposed a device-and-network driven (DND) communication methodology for 5GB fog networks, it is the future of cellular communication networks. We can highlight it as a benchmark work for the next generation of mobile communication networks.

2.1.2. Mode switching procedure
To reduce the delay and energy consumption in cellular networks, the mode switching methodology is the most effective and promising solution. It provides better QoS and QoE to dynamic mobile users. Therefore we propose a new mode switching procedure subject to network performance parameters without any negotiations on node mobility and network scalability. Mode switching procedure having the unique attributes (threshold value calculation procedure for performance metrics) to achieve better network quality.

2.1.3. Mobility management procedure
The mobile network’s users are free to move in any possible direction, which can reduce the performance of the proposed mode switching procedure. To achieve better node mobility management and network scalability, we are introducing a new mobility management procedure for a device-and-network-centric communication environment, without compromising the user experiences and performance quality. Here we are providing the full consideration on the QoE parameters such as communication delay, associated network latency, signaling cost between source and destination, the registration cost for location management, user mobility performance for scalability, and energy efficiency for green networking.

2.1.4. Performance parameter analysis and optimization
We are analyzing our proposed works with several performance parameters and comparing them with LTE networks and state-of-the-art research works such as cited in Ali et al. (2018), and La et al. (2019). To justify the proposed claim we introduce an analytical and mathematical model for the DND communication system and mobility management procedure. Further, we optimized the model w.r.t several performance metrics, also comparing the analytical model and results with LTE networks, Ali et al. (2018), and La et al. (2019).

2.1.5. System level performance measurement
The efficiency and effectiveness of proposed work with all justified proof is a mandatory task for all scientific contributions. The analytical, mathematical model, optimization, system-level simulation, and hardware-level testbed are the most popular approaches to validate the results. In this paper, we are using the optimized analytical (mathematical) model and a software-based simulation (Matlab) is used to validate the performance of contributions. To justify the subsidiarity of the proposed DND communication system and mobility management. We develop a simulation setup and show the outcome, merits, de-merits, and limitations, advantages, and effectiveness.

2.2. Objective and novelty of work
As we discussed in the above sections, fog computing association in the mobile cellular network is a demanding area of research in next-generation cellular networks to achieve better QoS and QoE (Akyildiz et al., 2016, Biswash and Jayakody, 2018, Biswash and Jayakody, 2020, Chen et al., 2021). Therefore we proposed our contribution as listed in previous sections. This paper provides the following novel contributions and state-of-the-art knowledge towards fog networks and cellular networks. It fills the following gaps for the research community and industry.

1.
To provide a better user experience and pervasive network interface several works have been proposed and they are available literature, some of them are linked with device-centric, node-centric communication. The device-driven and network-driven communication procedure with as association of fog networks, 5GB, and cloud computing is a novel dimension for the future of telecommunication systems, communication protocols for 6G networks, and integrated robust communication systems.

2.
The proposed work is a new concept in a cellular communication system where the mobile nodes are facilitated by fog nodes and gNBs, having minimum network dependency. Meanwhile, we also proposed a mobility management procedure where mobile nodes have the freedom to move in any direction and cellular networks guarantee the quality assured network services.

3. Device-and-Network-Driven (DND) fog networks
In this section, we explain our proposed Device-and-Network-Driven (DND) mobile cellular architecture, and mode switching procedures for better QoS and QoE, mobility management techniques for pervasive communication environment, and their working in next-generation cellular networks. They are well described in subsequent sections.

3.1. DND fog networks architecture
In 5G and 5GB network technologies, the eNB has intelligence capabilities where a mobile node may call to another mobile device with minimum network infrastructure support, this feature was discussed and explained in Biswash and Jayakody (2018). To the same line of research and fundamental work on 5G, cellular system and its full description and working procedure are available in Noura and Nordin (2016), where there are several mobile devices, eNB, and modern network access points (such as a femtocell, WLANs, mobile hotspots, etc.) are available within the network service area. The mobile nodes can communicate to other users with minimum/partial network support, using device-to-device communication methodology.

The 5G network is not well designed to handle the massive amount of mobile nodes. It was the main motivation from 5G to 5GB/6G research, development, and deployment. As the 5G network is being deployed slow and gradually, but it has many networks complexities such as high delay, poor user experience, poor support energy efficiency and green networking, and cost-effectiveness. To overcome these issues we propose a new cellular network architecture, which is an improved version of the 5GB system architecture, therefore calling it as next generation of the mobile communication system. The proposed network schema will help us to overcome the listed challenge and achieve the best QoS and QoE. Fig. 2 shows the proposed network architecture, it has two layers of working named as a central layer and fog end-users layer. The fog and end-user layer are the IoT enable layer, all network-associated devices are attached to this layer. The upper layer is the back-bone layer (central server layer) or remote server layer. All network-associated databases, central servers, and services are available to this layer. It is responsible to provide very limited data access to end-users, it deals with new location area adaptation, inter-service area network management, complex networks functionality, etc... The lower layer (fog and end-user layer) is the most important layer and core of the network, it deals with all types of networks services and deployment in the coverage area. Smart homes, connected vehicles (VANET), smartphones, smart industries, next-generation eNB (gNB), femtocell or access points, and smart industries are widely deployed in the network coverage area.1 To provide the additional network interface, the system uses an additional networks hardware called fog node and processing units (FNPU) and it is deployed in the proposed architecture. FNPU act at the end-users level, fog nodes are working as a user’s database, all network intelligence and services are available to FNPU. As any network request arrives at FNPU, it analyzes, process, and computes the request with available data sets. Finally, it provides the best QoE and QoS to mobile users.


Download : Download high-res image (412KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Device-and-network driven fog networks architecture for the next-generation cellular communication system, where minimum network dependency and high node mobility is the prime objective. It consists of cloud support, intelligent network infrastructure, and smart system integration.

As a mobile user want to start communication with the target mobile node (corresponding node), this signal request passes through the associated gNB, then it is forwarded to nearby FNPU. The FNPU decodes incoming signal patterns (for the information about source node, target node, associated gNBs, serving FNPU, data-sets availability, etc.) and performs further request processing. FNPU identifies the target mobile nodes and tries to find the best possible route towards the destination nodes. This route may include many fog nodes and target gNB. FNPU includes a database and it stores the best route towards the destination node and possible network conditions for future purposes. As the call is routed to the target node, the associated FNPU store the path for future reference. If any other node seeking the network services (within the same condition), then the associated FNPU utilizes the previously-stored results. It does not re-compute them the does not perform the associated network tasks. It will reduce the computing and processing overheads over the channel. In proposed networks, we introduce device-driven and network-driven communication methodology, which will be discussed in the subsequent sections. The proposed DND-based communication has many real-life network applications such as vehicular communication, IoT-based communication setup, mobile cellular networks, and wireless node-to-node communications. Using the proposed methodology, we can reduce the energy consumption, communication delay, high QoS and QoE.

3.2. Advantages of the proposed DND architecture
The DND communication system has the following cutting edge advantages over the traditional cellular networks to improve the QoS and QoE.

3.2.1. Computing and processing
In the DND network, mobile data sets are accessed, computed, and processed by the nearby FNPU, and the fog node stores the processed data for future reference, it utilizes this data for upcoming mobile nodes. Therefore overall network computing and processing overheads are reduced. It is one of the major advantages of the proposed DND architecture.

3.2.2. Delay and latency minimization
In DND networks all computing and processing tasks are managed by FNPU. The mobile data is not moving towards central databases (as compared to traditional cellular communication systems i.e LTE and 5G networks). Therefore it provides fast and efficient data processing and leads us towards the least data accessing time, least delay oriented communication, and energy-efficient communication. Overall it improves the networks QoS and QoE.

3.2.3. Throughput maximization and green networking
As DND does not seek the information from the central database, it always fetches the data from FNPU. FNPUs are densely deployed in the network service area and it is available at a most two-hop distance from mobile nodes. We count the two-hop distance as follows, one hop from the mobile node to gNB, next hope gNB to FNPU. Therefore it has less signaling cost, minimum network traffic, least bandwidth consumption, maximum throughput. Another hand less signaling refers to the energy efficiency of the system and green networking.

3.3. Research challenges and possible solutions
As we discussed the advantages of proposed DND architecture in Section 3.1 and their benefits in Section 3.2. To achieve them we may have some cutting-edge research challenges. Here we are listing the challenges and possible outcomes as follows.

•
The fog node-based computing and processing is a highly technical, sophisticated, and expensive procedure. Fog networks deployment has frequent updates and upgrade. It needs an efficient procedure for database manipulation. Therefore a qualitative, efficient, and effective data update methodology is a highly demanding domain. To solve this challenge we can apply data lake methodology. It can be a cost-effective and efficient solution in the Fog domain.

•
The delay and latency are one of the major components in modern cellular networks. As we claim the proposed work has less delay, then delay reduction mechanism originate many cutting edge issues such as; how can we reduce the hardware processing time, hardware setup time, propagation time?. To overcome this issue possible methods can be time optimization, FGPA-based hardware, and least hop communication.

•
The throughput is one of the major factors to improve the network performance, as proposed DND architecture is helpful for this issue. While we improve the throughput of the network, then MAC layer issue, packet loss, and buffer overloading are cutting edge research points. To address these emerging areas of research we implement the high densification of the mobile base station, proper utilization of frequency reuse, and efficient spectrum utilization.

3.4. Performance-based mode selection and control mechanism
The fifth generation of the cellular network provides the “Big Five” features in mobile communication networks. They are listed as, massive multiple input multiple outputs (M-MIMO), device-centric communication, native support for heterogeneous communication, millimeter-wave communication, smarter device-to-smarter device networking, and native support for machine-to-machine communication systems (Biswash and Jayakody, 2018). In this paper, our keen interest is to support green networking and energy-efficient communication using 5GB network features. We extend the device-centric communication attribute of mobile cellular networks to a new level where it supports the minimum infrastructure base communication and salable networking, we call it the DND communication model. In this paper, we proposed an improved device-centric model of communication procedure subject to network performance and network-centric/device-centric mode of communication. These modes are fully dependent on networks performance and user experiences. Now, we discuss our proposed mode switching procedure where the network selects device-centric or network-centric modes of communication, it is based on network performance metrics. If the network’s performance-metric is above the pre-set threshold values then it chooses the device-centric model of communication, otherwise the traditional network-driven mode of communication (as shown in Fig. 3). The performance calculation procedure takes place inside the FNPU. The threshold values are decided by the network service providers. The mode switching procedure has the scalability and adaptability of node mobility management, and it has the following steps.

1.
A mobile user starts the communication and tries to call the target mobile node.

2.
The initiated call is facilitated by nearby gNB, the associated gNB should provide the best network support (for best QoE/QoE between the source and target mobile node).

3.
gNB forward the call to nearby FNPU, and it decodes the beacon signal packet, as they are received by gNB. The FNPU tries to find information about target mobile nodes by using incoming signals from the networks. FNPU flood the following information (network updates, target node location, and best possible routes to reach destination node).

4.
FNPU computes the performance metrics between source and target mobile nodes, it contains associated gNB of the caller and called nodes. This performance calculation is a hop-by-hop measurement procedure. FNPU compute parameters and analyze each of them very religiously (between source and target mobile terminals). In this paper, we consider energy consumption, network delay and latency, signal overheads, bandwidth consumption, signaling cost strength are the performance parameters of networks.

5.
These performance matrices are greedy by nature, if they are higher than pre-set threshold values then FNPU transfer the call to device-driven mode of communication, gNB and FNPU monitor the overall link performance metrics. Here we are not negotiating the any performance metrics.

6.
Otherwise, if the performance metrics are below than pre-define threshold value, then FNPU select the network-centric mode of communication as similar to LTE/LTE-A cellular networks.

In Algorithm 1, the function DC() and NC() represents the device-centric and network-centric mode of communications. It will take the input as energy function E() with four parameters, as the energy of mobile node , energy consumed by target node , the energy of FNPU , and energy consumed by gNB is . The function DL() is used to calculate the delay and latency associated with the mode switching procedure, it takes four parameters as n, m, f, g. The function Bd() and S() represent the bandwidth consumption and signaling strength of the network, it takes parameters as n, m, g, f. As the input set is complete, therefore it computes the performance function P(). If the value of P() is greater than pre-set values then the networks select a device-centric mode of communication. The pre-set network value is defined by the network’s service provider. If the performance parameter is not up to a satisfactory level then the network selects network-centric NC() mode of communication. During the communication, the mobile node may change the position (point of attachment or associated gNB), therefore performance parameters may decrease. Then the network again tries to establish the DC() with relay nodes DC(R), where the P(
) is the performance between the source node () and target node (
). The Algorithm takes inputs to form various functions and thereafter computes the modes of communication. Our main objective is to introduce the methods of communication, and not computing the individual functions. These dependent functions can be deterministic or non-deterministic in nature and we are directly using them in the Algorithm. Thus Algorithm is linear by nature and complexity will be . In Fig. 3, UE1 looking forward to a network connection to UE2 (UE1 is calling to UE2), therefore the call is forward to associated gNB. The gNB forwards relative information and signal to FNPU and establishes a device-centric communication with UE2. The gNB and FNPU observe the network performance, if they are not satisfactory then the networks push the communication toward relay assistant device-centric or network-centric mode of communication.

4. Relay-assisted mobility management procedure
Node mobility and networks management are one of the most important factors in a mobile cellular network. During the mode switching procedure, the caller and called devices may change the position (point of association or gNB). To provide better network performance, we proposed a mobility management procedure, where the source and target nodes are changing their position very frequently. Here the mobility management procedure is adding the performance robustness to the proposed DND architecture. The novel mobility management procedure has the following steps.

1.
The mobile nodes (source or target mobile user) change their respective positions or point of association in the cellular networks coverage area. Simultaneously a call is initiated by the caller and it must reach to called (target) node. The call signal reaches to nearby gNB (caller) then it forward to FNPU.

2.
The FNPU search incoming request in its database to serve the mobile node and find a possible path to reach the destination node. Current FNPU sent a control signal to target FNPU. The FNPU reply that the target node is no more available within its proximate area or in a previously registered location.

3.
Target FNPU predicts the next possible locations for the mobile user using the mobility production procedure, it takes the input as signal strength and bandwidth consumption of incoming signals.

4.
As the FNPU predicts locations or next position of the mobile node, FNPU transfer the user credential to that place (new location).

5.
The next FNPU process the received data. Then it serves the mobile user, overall it improves the network performance.

6.
If the performance metrics for mobile nodes are above the pre-set threshold value then the network selects the device-driven mode of communication (while nodes are moving frequently). The important consideration point is that source and the destination node is changing the position very frequently, therefore the performance of networks will fluctuate frequently.

7.
If the performance metric values are less than the pre-set threshold then the network selects the network-centric model of communication, otherwise the device-centric mode of communication. If the source and target node have some performance issues, then the network may select any intermediate node as a relay node. This intermediate node is treated as a relay-nodes in device-centric communication.

8.
This relay node improves the network performance, and it is the relay-assisted device-driven mode of communication, it also supports the mobility management procedure. The gNB contentiously monitors the QoE parameters for networks. If the performances do not improve with relay-nodes assistant-ship, the network continues with the traditional cellular model of communication (network-centric mode).

9.
With node mobility the performance metric is calculated subject to mobility coefficient, signaling cost, energy consumption, and bandwidth consumption through the entire route.

4.1. Mobility prediction procedure
The mobility prediction is an important part in proposed mobility management technique. Now we introduce the intelligent mobility prediction procedure, and it has the following steps, as discussed with Fig. 4.

Algorithm 2 shows the proposed node mobility prediction procedure. The function Loc() is the output of complete algorithm, it will return the location of mobile users. The algorithm takes input of two functions such as MC() and Sig(), repents the mobility coefficient and signal strength of the mobile node, respectively. MC() take the parameters of  and , where  is the Euclidean distance between the current and previous location of the mobile user. Sig(), take parameter as . Prd (Loc (), MC()) function predict the next location of mobile user.


Download : Download high-res image (357KB)
Download : Download full-size image

Download : Download high-res image (298KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Proposed node-mobility prediction procedure in a three cell-based networks architecture.

The Algorithm 2 used to predict the next location or possible position of mobile nodes. As we discussed it take many non-deterministic functions thereafter it computes the next location. Thus it also has the complexity of .

In a mobility management scheme, the network predicts the movement of the mobile user and according to the user movement pattern, thereafter the system performs a network management procedure. Let, a mobile user is moving far from its current position. In Fig. 4, the mobile node UE1 can move to cell 2 or cell 3. Therefore, the node must change the associated gNB, because, the network performance for node (UE1) decreases from the current gNB (i.e gNB1) and its signal strength may increase to the next gNB (gNB2 or gNB3). The mobile user is moving from one side to another side, in Fig. 4 the UE is moving to cell2 or cell3. The complete process needs an efficient handover mechanism. The mobile node must be overhanded from the current eNB1 to the next (possible) gNB2. If gNB2 has the better signal strength from the UE1, then it refers that UE1 is moving to cell2. If the gNB2 has better signal capacity then the next location of UE1 will be cell 3. In 5 GB/6G, the network follows the extreme base station densification technique, where the gNBs are deployed very close to each other. In Fig. 4, we consider three cell-based network topologies, where the mobile user is free to move in any direction. The seven cell-based or -cell topology is only the combination of three cell systems architecture. This proposed movement prediction procedure can be vise-versa (cell 2 to cell 3, or cell 1 and cell 3, or cell 1 to cell 2). We proposed the novel mobility management procedure and it is based on mobility prediction procedure. It also has some drawbacks and limitations. If the mobile node has the ping-pong of circular movement then next location prediction is easy but the signaling cost is high this leads us to cost-inefficient communication. If the node population is very limited then the node prediction procedure is not a favorable option because of high computation and signaling overheads.2

5. System model and mathematical formulation
Proposed cellular network architecture is discussed in Fig. 2, it has all essential networks hardware. The end users layer contains the active mobile nodes and associated network gNBs. The gNBs are deployed in the network’s service area using stochastic geometry. As we proposed there are two modes of communication i.e device-centric model and a network-centric mode of communication. The respective working of mode switching procedure is shown in Fig. 5, and mode switching function is discussed in Fig. 6.

In this paper, we consider single-cell up-link communication scenario having  mobile nodes and , and 
, in the set  some node establish device-centric communication mode and it show in set 
. Few nodes avail the  and other node uses only network functionality. In Fig. 6 of part (A), we explain the mode switching procedure from device-centric to network-centric mode of communication, subject to network performance towards the mobile end-users. Stochastic mode switching among the mobile users has well explained in Fig. 6 of (B). The  move to  based on performance, the  mode may switch to , where the  take help of relay node, the mode may move  to  or  or vice versa. Here, we consider a one-to-many model as an adaptation. It means that one cellular node can share its channel and resource with only one  mobile node, while one  can reuse multiple cellular mobile nodes. Assuming that the channel resource of the th cellular mobile user is reused by th  pair, the data rates of cellular mode and  mode is given by Eq. (1) as follows, (1)
 
where, 
 is rate-of-mode-change from NC to DC mode of communication. 
, is the power gain between NC and DC modes, 
 is channel gain (from mobile user to gNB), and 
 channel gain between the modes i.e DC to NC modes of communication. The generic specification is 
 means  from  to  and same for  and . Similarly, rate of change from DC to DC(R) is in Eq. (2), DC(R) to DC is in Eq. (3), and DC(R) to NC is in Eq. (4), as follows, respectively, (2)
 
 (3)
 
 (4)
 
A mobile user is connected to nearby gNB, at position 
 within the networks coverage area . We assume networks connections follow the capacity theorems. Therefore, the communication sub-channel does not cross the maximum transmission capacity of medium. Let, complete channel information is available to each mobile users within the network coverage area, and gNBs. The data transmission is successful, if the received signal-to-interference noise ratio (SINR) is not less than threshold (set by network service provider) as . Let, a mobile node 
 (node  at position ) send data to target node 
 (node  at position ) at frequency band  in a given time slot , then the channel capacity 
 between the source and target node is mention in Eq. (5) as, (5)
The maximum data rate of the channel is explained in Eq. (1). In Eq. (5), we set the hard condition for network channel capacity 
, and must be followed by all gNBs, network hardware, singling links, and available mobile nodes. 
 represents the bandwidth consumption in cellular networks by a mobile user. The SINR value in a call during is , it must be higher than the threshold value for better networks performance.Then we can compute the value of  as described in Eq. (6), (6)
 
In Eq. (6), 
 is average signal gain during the entire communication procedure and it must satisfy the condition of Eq. (7). Therefore, we can write 
 as follows, (7)
 
Let, 
 is the percentage of resource allocation, 
 is the average bandwidth utilization in DC mode of communication and NC mode of communication. Therefore the link utilization between the source mobile user, target node and gNB is described in Eq. (8). To maintain the QoS and QoE the network allow maximum bandwidth and recourse allocations. Then we can optimize it in Eq. (8) as, (8)
 
 
where  is the average power gain during the cellular communication, we can write it in Eq. (9), (9)
 


Download : Download high-res image (269KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Device-driven communication and Device-driven communication by relay node. The cellular network infrastructure have a performance observation over the networks users to select the relay node.


Download : Download high-res image (234KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Markov’s state space diagram for mode switching procedure using stochastic geometry, where the nodes are free to move any directions without negotiations of QoS and QoE.

5.1. Performance calculation procedure
In this section, we calculate the performance measurement procedure. It is accomplished by energy consumption, delay, latency, scalability, call-to-mobility (CMR) ratio, mobility management cost, and signaling cost during the communication. In cellular networks, the node mobility have a important role in user’s experience. It depend on distance value (from the origin or previous location of mobile user) and angle of displacement form the original position. To calculate it, we compute the Euclid method of distance measurement. Let, the node has a movement probability p, where movement is in IID direction space distribution within a stochastic environment. The mobile user move within the coverage area (CA) in a pervasive network interface environment. The initial location of mobile node in a 3D network plane is 
 the current location is 
, the Euclid distance is calculated as 
. During the node movement, a node seeks the network services, and networks facility may available at several hops distance. Therefore, hop counts () is a dependent factor in distance calculation methodology. Let,  is the initial position vector index indicator of a mobile node. Then-after movement coefficient () of the user is shown in Eq. (10) as, (10)
The  affects performance of networks, QoS, and QoE to mobile subscribers. Node mobility is another important parameter for a user’s robust network experience. It is a fundamental aspect of cellular communication. It allows the mobile users to move in any direction for a pervasive networks interfaces. In this paper, we consider a three-cell-based network topology. It is extracted from seven cell-based networks schema as discussed in Biswash and Jayakody (2018). This movement coefficient deals with user movements, displacement, distance, and node movement probability. The proposed model provides better QoS/QoE with user mobility, thus the mobility coefficient has an important role. Using an efficient mobility management procedure we can manage the call arrival and departure mechanism. Here we set call arrival rates () and departure rate is , respectively. Fig. 7 shows the state space diagram for three cell-based network topologies. The probability of mobile nodes staying at the same cell is , the possible movements are as follows, also discussed the various call arrivals and departure conditions. When a mobile user is moving far from its origin/current position, the new location can be a neighboring cell or neighbor-to-neighbor cell. In Fig. 7 the  is used for current cell and  is used for neighbor cells. The respective call arrival and departure rates are 
 and 
 for origin-to-neighbor, neighbor-to-neighbor and neighbor-to-origin in each cells.

With every movement of the mobile nodes, associated movement probability will change, and it will affect system performance. These probabilities is describe as, 
 for current, neighbor, and neighbor-to-neighbor cells. Mobile moves between the cells, and call arrival and departure rate in for each cell is written in Eqs. (11) and (12), (11)
 
 (12)
 
The value of i, j, C represents the index of positions vector, call-arrival, call-departure states in a mobile environment within the network service area.


Download : Download high-res image (178KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Markov movement state diagram for a three cell-based network topology. The three cell-based schema is the inherited topology from seven cell-based cellular architecture.

5.1.1. Energy consumption
The energy consumption in proposed networks is divided into two parts such as network-energy and hardware-energy. In this work, we focus on network-energy consumption only, as it is the communication energy. Networks energy depends on three components, network update energy (
), packet binding energy (
) and packets transmission energy (
) (Biswash and Jayakody, 2018). These factors are proportional to hop count(), , number of FNPU, and number of active mobile nodes (Yang et al., 2018, Shahid et al., 2020, Shahryari et al., 2021). Thus the total energy consumption in cellular network () is written in Eq. (13), (13)
Here,  define the hop counts between the source to destination node. DND networks has  value of 2 because it import the information from FNPU, other hand traditional network has at-least 10 hops communication. In this path all gNBs, FNPUs, network hardware are included. Further, we can write as 
, it is the unit energy for binding the network hardware and data packets, it vary from various transmission media, geographical condition, weather conditions, and device manufactures model and etc. The  is constant amount of startup energy for individual devices (booting energy for hardware). Now, we can write 
 as in Eq. (14), (14)
The Eq. (14) refers to the singling cost for location updates, it includes the transmission cost and processing costs. Where, 
 is the size of data packets, 
 is the rout-request packet, and 
 is route-reply packet. In this paper, we consider the network in a time-slotted manner (denote by ). Let 
 denote the energy consumption on link 
 and it will depend on the distance between source and destination nodes, user mobility from the last registration position, bandwidth utilization during the communication, hop count between the source and destination, distance and users mobility. Then the energy consumption in NC mode of communication (
) is written in Eq. (15), (15)
Thereafter, the energy consumption in  mode of communication is calculated and abbreviated as (
), It is written in Eq. (16), (16)
Similarly, we can write the energy consumption in the device-centric model of communication () is written in Eq. (17). (17)
In this paper, we compare our proposed work with two existing state-of-the-art technology, LTE networks, and EIFC, they are cited as Biswash and Jayakody (2018) and La et al. (2019), respectively. First, we formulate the energy consumption in LTE networks (
) as written in Eq. (18), (18)
Now, we can write the energy consumption in EIFC (
) formulated as in Eq. (19), (19)
where, 
 and 
 is probability of mode switching form device-centric to network centric, and network-centric to device-centric, respectively. It is explained with associated probability in following equations (is also showed in Fig. 6). Their respective event probability is describe in Eqs. (20) and (21) as, (20)
 
 (21)
 

5.1.2. Communication delay
In the proposed work FNPU and gNB select the mode of communication subject to network performance. Therefore delay is an important factor, and it depends on processing time (
) and propagation time (
). So, round trip time is calculated as 
. It is calculated between the source and destination node base communication time. The mobile user is independent to move in any direction. Therefore node mobility and hop counts will affect the value of total time . During the communication, the network selects the mode of communication i.e device-centric mode or network-centric mode of communication. The delay in network-centric mode (
) is formulated in Eq. (22), (22)
where  is the call duration between the caller and called a mobile node. In the proposed work FNPU selects the mode of communication, and if there is a fluctuation between NC and DC modes. Then delay in the NC mode (
) is written in Eq. (23), (23)
Now the delay in DC mode of communication is written in (24), (24)
where the maximum value of , because it is only two hop communication. The communication time in LTE is well describe in Biswash and Jayakody (2018), also formulating in Eq. (25). (25)
Now we optimize the communication delay. It is a mandatory tool for fog networks, because the first-time user may experience a higher delay as compared to old networks users. This performance variation causes registration and de-generation process, and additional information storage and processing at FNPU. The stochastic model is one the best model to formulate the FNPU based cellular fog networks. Here, FNPU location, processing, and node mobility have an important role. We formulate the associated delay for the proposed technique based on the stochastic model with an uncontrolled optimization technique. It provides us with the best mechanism to discover the processing and communication delay. To minimize the delay function over the FNPU, gNB imports the required data from nearby FNPUs and cloud storage points.

Let, the gNB find least delay in FNPU within the th iteration of search, where the delay function is minimum. Its weight value is defined as (
 
). It is calculated on the basis of several dependent metrics and processing capacity of FNPUs. Therefore, the gradient of delay can be written in Eq. (26). To find the equilibrium state where the associated delay is minimum can be written in Eq. (26), (26)
 
 
 
To find the more optimized, optimistic and realistic results in Eq. (26), we apply the second order Taylor series expansion. It will help us to get more precise results in Eq. (27), (27)
 
 
 
 
 
In Eq. (27), 
 is the Hessian Matrix. It is written in the Laplace transform of 2nd order derivative for associated delay function. The complete explanation and derivative is in Eq. (28), (28)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, overall communication delay in fog based network is express as Eq. (29), (29)
 
The 
 is the input matrix for delay functions, and 
 is calculated for every FNPU concerning user location  and  within the network service area . Inline to 
, we can compute the output of Taylor expansion. Then output function  is written in Eq. (30). For more accurate results we consider error as , (30)
In this work, gNBs import the desired information from nearby FNPU. There exist a probability of error in data processing because of node mobility (within the network service area ). As the mobile node moves away then the associated data and delay functions result in change very frequently. This complete process needs a quick and frequent information update in mobile databases and FNPUs. The nearest FNPUs (form users) have the most accurate data about mobile nodes. Therefore its value is modified in Eq. (31), it is the best possible representation of errors. It generates the difference between targeted and actual outputs w.r.t node mobility and the current location of the mobile user. (31)
In Eq. (31),  and  are the expected delay (target hardware level communication delay) and actual output (after real time deployment) is th position of the network service area . This error value is oversimplified as in Eq. (32) (32)
In Eq. (32), the  represent sets of samples at th position. Now, we formulate the above equation w.r.t minimum delay in fog based cellular networks as shown in Eq. (33), (33)
 
In Eq. (33), we minimize the delay with all possible methods, also reducing the error probability. The main constraint to achieve the minimum delay with least iterations. Error description and minimum delay is describe and explain in Eqs. (34), (35), (34)
 (35)
In Eq. (35),  is energy consumption w.r.t.  and . The  is the learning rate to find the most optimal place to import the accurate information (information is imported from the fog nodes). To find the upper bound of , the system takes many iterations to get the exact fog node, from where the information should be imported? and the lower bound is the reverse of it. The high value of  leads us towards the high signaling cost. Thus, our objective is to minimize the  value.  has a vital role in the proposed DND-based communication architecture and mobility management procedure. The lower value of  is highly desirable. For the simulation purpose, we consider the lower value as 0.0001 and high as 1. So we set almost error-free to fully erroneous.


Download : Download high-res image (465KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Number of mobile users versus energy consumption/Sec. In this figure we consider number of active mobile users are varying form unit 10 to 250/per cell. The energy consumption is computed in Joules/Seconds, call duration is limited to 180 s, number or fog nodes are fixed to 10/cell.


Download : Download high-res image (458KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Node movement probability versus energy consumption in Joules/Second. Here we consider 50 units of active mobile users/cell. The energy consumption is consider in Joules per seconds, call duration is 180 s, number or fog nodes is 10 units, average node mobility speed in 100 m/min.


Download : Download high-res image (449KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Number of active mobile nodes versus associated delay in milliseconds. The number of active mobile users are varying from 10 to 250 units/cell. The energy consumption is computed in Joules/Seconds, call duration is considered as 180 s, number of fog nodes/cells is 10.


Download : Download high-res image (450KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Node movement probability versus associated delay in milliseconds. The number of active mobile users is 50/cell. The energy consumption in Joules per second, call duration is 180 s, the number of fog nodes is 10, average node speed is 100 m/min.


Download : Download high-res image (405KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Associated delay in milliseconds versus error ratio in the proposed work. Error ratio is referring to the probability where the FNPU is not able to fetch the exact information from servers, and we compare our result with Ali et al. (2018). The call arrival rate and departure rates are 0.01 and 0.1, respectively. We fix the node movement as 
  0.25.


Download : Download high-res image (376KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Error ratio versus network consumed energy in joules/seconds. The call arrival rate and departure rates are 0.01 and 0.1 respectively. The node movement probability is 
  0.25, number of active mobile users, fog nodes, and gNBs are 100, 30 and 15, respectively. The node movement speed is 30 m/min.


Download : Download high-res image (1008KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Call-to-Mobility (CMR) versus energy consumption in Joules/Seconds. Here we consider there are 150 active mobile nodes/cell, call arrival rate is 0.10, call departure rate is fixed to 0.15, call duration is 180 s, node mobility is 30 m/min.


Download : Download high-res image (791KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 15. In this Figure we show the Call-to-Mobility (CMR) versus associated communication delay, where the number of nodes is 150/cell, gNBs  25/cell, FNPU  15/cell, node mobility is 25 m/10 min, call arrival and departure rates are 0.10 and 0.20, respectively.

5.1.3. Bandwidth consumption and signaling cost
Bandwidth consumption in a cellular network depends upon link utilization, interference, and signaling patterns between the mobile nodes and associated peripheral network hardware. In our proposed model the bandwidth consumption is fully dependent on FNPU, gNB, and mobile nodes. Here we formulate the bandwidth consumption model and we are optimizing w.r.t several parameters. To consider a basic interference model we assume the interference causes a mobile user at a particular location is 
, it is listened to by a nearby associated gNBs 
 (at location ), the serving FNPU is 
 using a frequency band of 
 to serve the mobile node. The same gNB may serve other mobile nodes (transmitting the network signals to other mobile users within the proximity area). We describe the network model with associated interference between gNB and FNPUs. It depend only on the interfering gNB and FNPU parameters (). We have to set the upper bound for total interference, and weights, as they are normalized such that the upper bound is always . A mobile user can listen the eNB at location  with frequency level  only iff the overall interference at  is at-most 1. Then we can formulate interference model () as in Eq. (36), (36)
In the cellular network, there is an up-link and down-link communication signal from gNB. The next 2 sets of signals are used to determine, where UE will be handover, thereafter another 2 sets of signals for current eNB to old gNB. Then the signaling cost is written as in Eq. (37), (37)
 
 
 
 From Eq. (37) we can determine the signaling cost fully depends on the number of active mobile users, gNBs, FNPUs, and directly propositional to hop count between source and destination nodes. Now we formulate the bandwidth consumption by the mobile nodes, between source and destination nodes is calculated as in Eq. (38), (38)
 As we defined the bandwidth consumption in cellular networks is depend on link utilization, node mobility, hop count, network coverage area, and the number of active mobile users. In our proposed network architecture bandwidth consumption is based on the number of active FNPU, gNB, node mobility, and mobile nodes. Therefore we can write it as in Eq. (39), (39)
The bandwidth consumption between source node, target nodes via gNB and FNPU can be written as follows. Here, FNPU will respect the network performance parameters as they are set by networks service provider. (40)
(41)
 Then the overall bandwidth consumption and signaling cost is explained in (42), (42)
This bandwidth consumption model respects the capacity theorem for noisy communication channel. Here we can observe the signaling cost and bandwidth cost have a major factor in node mobility and number of hops.

6. Simulation results and discussions
The results, validation, verification and comparison is an important aspect of modern science and technology. To simulate proposed work set the simulation parameters as discussed in Table 1.

In this section, we provide numerical and simulation results for proposed user-centric fog network architecture and compare the obtained results with pre-existing state-of-the-art works like LTE networks (Biswash and Jayakody, 2018), JCFN (discussed in Ali et al. (2018)), and EIFC (La et al., 2019). To simulate the works, initial parameters are as follows. The hop counts between source node or nearby fog node is  units, user movement direction is  (as per the IID distribution), initial node movement probability is 0.01, call duration is  s, distance from last updated location to the current location is  m, and the call arrival rate 
, call departure rate is 
. The eNBs gain for transmitting and receiving the network’s signal is  dBm and  dBm, respectively. The number of active eNBs within the network service area is , and at least  numbers of active mobile users are available per cell, unit cell-radius is  meters, user-mobility-distance threshold value is  cells crossing, the average interference margin is  dBm.


Table 1. Parameters and respective numerical values.

  2	  6	
  0.01
  180 s	  50 m	
  0.01
  45 dBm	
  43 dBm	Number of gNBs  100
Cell radius  50 m	Min. active users  20	Inf  7 dBm
CA 
 Km	n  10 000	N  100
The Fig. 8 shows effect of the number active mobile users in cell versus energy consumption per second. We have a general observation, as the mobile user increases the energy consumption increases proportionally, but the obtain results are far better than LTE networks. Because in the proposed work, non-network-centric mode of communication have the optimal utilization of fog nodes to maintain the QoS and QoE. Fig. 9 shows the effect of node movement probability versus energy consumption per second. Here, we consider at least 50 active mobile users per cell, and the call duration is 180 s. The proposed work has better results because it always imports the information from nearby FNPUs rather than central servers. The proposed networks schema is a cutting-edge architecture, where the mobile users have the least network dependency, and it leads us to a better user experience.

Fig. 10 shows communication delay versus active mobile users. The proposed work has the least delay because it pushes the communication towards a device-centric mode rather than a network-centric model where many levels of networks hardware are involved. Here we consider call arrival and departure rates are 0.10 and 0.02 units, respectively. The node movement speed is increased up to 100 m/s. With this figure, we can observe that the proposed work has better scalability and robustness.

Fig. 11 shows the effect of node movement probability versus associated delay in milliseconds. Our proposed methodology has better results as compared to other state-of-the-artwork because, as movement increases the information retrieval from FNPUs is very easy and frequent. It leads us to minimum delay and latency. Here we consider call arrival rate is  and call departure rate is , the node movement probability is 
 and varying from 0.1 to 0.9, the higher value of 
 is assuring that mobile device is highly dynamic. With the high degree of node mobility, we also achieve better results than the legacy of networks.

The optimization of network performance is fully dependent on various factors. The most important parameters and their calculation method are described in the proposed work. Here we consider the network’s associated delay component must be optimized, therefore the performance of the proposed work will be maximized. Fig. 12 show effect of error ratio (as we explained in Eq. (30)). The range of error for non-supportive network infrastructure varies from 0.001 to fully erroneous (1.0), we consider values of  and  equal to 0.01 and 0.1, respectively. The associated delay is computed in milliseconds, the number of active mobile users is 100/ cell, active FNPUs and gNBs are 10 and 25, respectively.

In Fig. 13, we can observe that the error ratio is increasing thereafter energy consumption in networks also growing continuously. The proposed work has the least energy consumption as compared to state-of-the-work. If the fog node and processing unit are not able to fetch the information for the network management procedure then the networks put an effort to find the exact location of the mobile user. Therefore the energy consumption is maximum. Here we consider mobile node movement probability is 
 = 0.25, the number of active mobile users, fog nodes, and gNBs are 100, 30, and 15, respectively per network cell. The node movement speed is 30 m/min.

In Fig. 14 we can observe that the proposed QoE aware fog networks and mobility management scheme has the better performance as compared to La et al. (2019) and Biswash and Jayakody (2018). The main reason for this improvement is listed as follows. In our proposed scheme always import the network management-related data from FNPUs and the communication towards target nodes is 2 hop-based communication (in almost call cases).

In Fig. 15 we show the Call-to-Mobility (CMR) ratio versus associated communication for LTE networks (Biswash and Jayakody, 2018), JCFN (Ali et al., 2018) and proposed DND-based communication system. As the CMR increases in the networks associated delay will be improved because the network seeks more frequent data from databases and cloud server backbones. In the traditional communication system (LET and JCFN) the desired information is always fetched from a multilevel networks schema (databases), but FNPU-based architecture follows the device-centric mode of communication system, therefore data is processed and fetched from FNPU. Thus it has better performance in high CMR value.

In this section we have discussed the numerical analysis, simulation results, and fundamental observation of the proposed DND work and mobility management procedure. The results are dependent on various factors such as bandwidth consumption, SNR, SINR value, number of active mobile users, participating fog nodes, coverage area gNBs, central cloud-servers, up-link/down-link signal capacity.

7. Conclusions and future works
In this paper, we proposed a fog computing-based cellular network architecture, and it is a new edge communication methodology for next-generation networks. As it has two modes of communication i.e device-centric and network-centric mode of communication. The mode selection is fully subject to network performance parameters. If the performance of networks is very poor then the system may select a relay-node assisted communication to improve communication system performance. As the mobile node changes the position then an efficient mobility management procedure is proposed where the network update information must be imported from nearby fog nodes. It will reduce network delay and energy consumption. Here, we are not compromising node mobility. Overall the proposed work improves the QoS and QoE. Finally, we compared out the results with LTE and other state-of-the-art networks w.r.t. energy consumption and delay parameters. We observed that the proposed work has a better result than compared networks/works.