With the rapid development of communication networks, there are more stringent requirements for its maintenance management. This paper uses edge cloud computing technology and wearable technology to improve the inconvenient information flow of on-site maintenance of communication networks. We propose an Emergent Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model (ETARR) in the edge cloud computing environment to solve emergency task allocation in smart network maintenance. Firstly, based on the basic reputation value, we add the work enthusiasm and work activity as the indicators to measure the work efficiency of the maintenance personnel. By using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model to predict the historical reputation value sequence, the work enthusiasm of the maintenance personnel is quantified. Furthermore, based on the historical movement route of the maintenance personnel, the location of maintenance personnel is predicted by using the modified Workers’ Movement Patterns (WMP) model. Finally, combined with the reputation value requirements of the emergency task and the geographical location of the maintenance personnel, the maintenance emergency task is assigned. Simulation results show that the ETARR mechanism proposed in this paper reduces the cost of task allocation, improves the efficiency of the completion of the emergency task, and can be better applied to the emergency task scenario in the smart network maintenance environment.

Index Terms
Communication network
Task allocation
Regional prediction
Reputation value

1. Introduction
With the application of intelligent wearable technology, integrating Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology, some researchers propose to apply Augmented Reality (AR) technology (Angrisani et al., 2020) to the management and maintenance of communication networks to improve the quality and efficiency of maintenance. At present, intelligent wearable devices based on AR technology (such as smart glasses, smart helmets, etc.), industrial robots, and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) have been applied in the field of communication (Perusquía-Hernández et al., 2017) (Derakhshandeh et al., 2019) (Shu et al., 2018). With the help of wearable devices, in smart network maintenance, maintenance personnel can easily obtain the detailed information and operation guidance of complex equipment maintenance and inspection. Wearable devices have the GPS positioning function, which can obtain the location of maintenance personnel in real-time. In addition, wearable devices can provide standardized operation guidance and performance assessment functions. It can solve the problem that it is difficult to judge because the subjective factors of maintenance personnel greatly influence the results of maintenance tasks. This will change the traditional maintenance mode of communication network and improve on-site maintenance quality and efficiency.

At the same time, the demand for low-latency computing for time-sensitive applications such as location-based AR applications and real-time smart network management is growing rapidly. On the one hand, in on-site operation decision-making and implementation, inconvenient information flow leads to low efficiency and unstable quality of on-site maintenance. On the other hand, smart network maintenance has routine tasks, including on-site inspection and on-site maintenance and emergency tasks such as on-site fault handling and on-site emergency repair (Qiaoet al., 2019). So, it is important to propose an agile, efficient, and reliable allocation mechanism. The task allocation mechanism should consider maintenance personnel's ability and geographical location, and the switching of different types of tasks. Most of the existing research analyzes the allocation of routine tasks, such as inspection tasks, and seldom involves emergency tasks with higher priority. Therefore, this paper focuses on the efficient allocation of emergency tasks to ensure the timeliness and reliability of the smart network maintenance.

Edge cloud computing technology and wearable technology can be used to improve the inconvenient information flow of on-site maintenance (Guo et al., 2019). Edge cloud computing technology enables IoT applications to access and process resources closer to terminals. Edge cloud computing also guarantees low latency for delay-sensitive applications. Moreover, with the help of wearable and AR technology, the location of on-site maintenance personnel can be easily obtained, and they can get the details of maintenance inspections for complex equipment from sight.

The main contributions of this paper are as follows.

First, we apply the concept of edge cloud computing and AR technology to smart network maintenance. It provides computing and storage at the edge of the network for real-time requirements. It satisfies stringent requirements on real-time performance and reliability and improves the applicability of the ETARR model.

Secondly, we designed the comprehensive reputation value calculation model. Based on the basic reputation value, add the work enthusiasm and work activity as the indicators to measure the work efficiency of the maintenance personnel. Using the LSTM model to predict the historical reputation value sequence, quantify the work enthusiasm of the maintenance personnel in the time dimension. The comprehensive credit value, which can guarantee work-ability comprehensively, is used to measure the working ability of maintenance personnel.

Thirdly, we established the regional prediction model based on the maintenance personnel movement mode. Based on the historical movement route, the movement mode of maintenance personnel is defined. Select the element with the highest confidence in the candidate mobile mode set as the mobile mode, and the mobile modes of different lengths constitute the mobile mode set of maintenance personnel. And the level factor is added to the model to measure the time required to complete the task. The model also considers the time cost of static personnel (idle, assigned, or working) and the mobile cost of dynamic personnel (on the way), respectively. It can make up for the shortcomings of a single factor in reference literature. This method can have a better effect than other trajectory prediction methods for considering the influence of historical moving trajectories and the relationship between regions without increasing extra cost.

Finally, considering the requirements of reputation value and geographical position of maintenance personnel, we propose an Emergent Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model (ETARR) in the edge cloud computing environment. ETARR can reduce the cost of task allocation and ensure the efficiency and reliability of completing emergency tasks. The simulation results highlight the superior performance of our ETARR model in terms of completion time, success rate, and average completion quality in assigning emergency tasks in the smart network maintenance environment.

Simulation results show that the ETARR mechanism proposed in this paper reduces the cost of task allocation, improves the efficiency of the completion of the emergency task, and can be better applied to the emergency task scenario in the smart network maintenance.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief review of the related work. Section 3 describes the role of edge cloud computing and the architecture of ETARR. Section 4 describes ETARR model in detail. The realization of the ETARR is provided and discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Related works
An emergency task can occur at any time and any place, with the characteristics of uncertainty and urgency. If emergency tasks cannot be handled promptly and correctly, it may cause severe losses. Based on this, ensuring the quality and timeliness of emergency tasks is one of the focuses in this paper.

In terms of solving the drawbacks of time-consuming, low efficiency, and heavy workload of traditional modes in the smart network maintenance, reference (Wang et al., 2018) proposes a remote maintenance technology for substation automation equipment based on General Service Protocol (GSP), which has better performance compared with the traditional maintenance modes.

In terms of quality assurance, reputation value is an important indicator for measuring the quality of maintenance personnel. The process of establishing the reputation value is dynamic and developing, with time and context relevance. At present, most of the researches on reputation value prediction is based on the time attenuation factor and the Markov model.

Reference (Adewuyi et al., 2019) proposed a dynamic trust model called CTRUST. In CTRUST, trust is accurately parametrized, while recommendations are evaluated through belief functions. The effects of trust decay and maturity on the trust evaluation process were studied. In order to solve the problem of historical QoS values contributed by different users can have great impacts on prediction results, reference (Qiuet al., 2013) proposed reputation-aware QoS value prediction approach. It first calculates the reputation of each user based on their contributed values, and then takes advantage of reputation-based ranking to exclude the values contributed by untrustworthy users. Reference (Singh and Sinha, 2015) proposed a trust aware mechanism by using the Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process Regression (HGPR) model. This model accepts, as input, the reputation feedback from third-party sources and predicts the real reputation value. Reference (Mohammed et al., 2018) introduced four enhanced techniques: Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Multiple Regression (MR), Analytic Hierarchical Process (ACTHP), and PSO-Multiple Regression (MR-PSO). According to the implementation results of these techniques, it is found that the PSO is the proper technique to calculate the trust percentage.

In terms of timeliness, studying the historical trajectory and access behavior of mobile users can bring value in the fields of resource allocation, rescue, and disaster relief.

Trajectory Prediction (TP) is essential for various location-based applications in intelligent transportation systems, such as location-based advertising, route planning, traffic management, and early warning systems. Reference (Zyner et al., 2020) presents a method for predicting driver intent at urban intersections through multi-modal trajectory prediction with uncertainty. It is based on recurrent neural networks combined with a mixture density network output layer. Reference (Rathore et al., 2018) proposed a scalable hybrid framework based on clusters and Markov chains, suitable for short-term and long-term TP, which can handle a large number of overlapping trajectories in dense road networks.

Aiming at the problem of ignoring the semantics in the spatial layout (e.g., social interactions and properties of the locations), reference (Tang, 2021) proposed a PrefixSpan-prediction using a Partial Matching (P-PPM) destination-prediction algorithm. PrefixSpan-prediction can mine the frequent movement patterns from the trajectory data and determine the confidence of the movement rules. Reference (Yang et al., 2020) proposed a novel approach named DestPD. It first determines the most likely future location and then predicts the destination. Moreover, a new future trajectory prediction approach is devised. It captures the most recent movement based on a query trajectory. It consists of similarity finding through Best Path Notation (BPN) and best node selection.

LSTM model is one of the most commonly used trajectory prediction models. In order to solve the problem of previous deep learning, LSTM-based approaches focus on the neighborhood influence of pedestrians but ignore the scene layouts in pedestrian trajectory prediction. Reference (Xue et al., 2018) proposed a novel hierarchical LSTM-based network considering both the influence of social neighborhood and scene layouts. Reference (Inkyuet al., 2019) used LSTM to model the motion information of all pedestrians and mapped the position of each pedestrian to a high-dimensional feature space. The inner product between features was used as a measure of the positional relationship between two pedestrians. Then, the motion characteristics of all pedestrians are weighted according to the positional relationship between all pedestrians and the target to perform position displacement prediction.

Table 1 shows the objective, method, and limitation of the related work above. By comparing with related work, the ETARR model proposed in this paper uses time information in reputation value calculation and trajectory prediction. Then, in allocating emergency tasks, the ETARR model can assign maintenance emergency tasks more accurately and reasonably. Table 2 shows the meaning of notations in ETARR model.


Table 1. Related work.

Study	Objective	Method	Limitation
Wang et al., (2018)	The remote maintenance system architecture.	A remote maintenance technology for substation automation equipment based on General Service Protocol (GSP).	–
Adewuyiet al., 2019	The trust value of nodes.	A dynamic trust model considered effects of trust decay and maturity on the trust evaluation process.	It can not take time series information into consideration.
Qiu et al., (2013)	The reputation-aware QoS value prediction approach.	A reputation-aware QoS value prediction approach, which first calculates the reputation of each user based on their contributed values, and then takes advantage of reputation-based ranking to exclude the values contributed by untrustworthy users.	It only takes contribution into consideration and takes users with low reputation value away.
Singh and Sinha, (2015)	The reputation of Web services on the user side.	A framework for a time and trust aware mechanism for inference and prediction of reputation using Heteroscedastic Gaussian process regression (HGPR) model.	It can not take time series information into consideration.
Mohammed et al., (2018)	The trust model for cloud service consumers.	A trust model based on trust metric stage. The function of this stage is to define the trust percentage for each consumer.	It can not take time series information into consideration.
Zyner et al., (2020)	The path prediction of driver intent.	A method for predicting driver intent at urban intersections through multi-modal trajectory prediction with uncertainty.	It is used to predict the trajectory of users by using the data of all users. But maintenance personnel's trajectory is predicted by using it own data in the past.
Rathoreet al., 2018	The short-term and long-term TP.	A scalable hybrid framework based on clusters and Markov chains, which can also determine the number of clusters that represent different movement behaviors in the input trajectory data.	It doesn't take time dimension into consideration and can not predict the trajectory of dynamic maintenance personnel.
Tang, 2021	The clustering links prediction.	A PrefixSpan-prediction using a P-PPM destination-prediction algorithm to mine the frequent movement patterns from the trajectory data and determine the confidence of the movement rules.	It doesn't take time dimension into consideration and can not predict the trajectory of dynamic maintenance personnel.
Yanget al., 2020	The destination prediction.	The future trajectory prediction approach captures the most recent movement based on a query trajectory. It consists of two components: similarity finding through Best Path Notation (BPN) and best node selection.	It doesn't take time dimension into consideration and can not predict the trajectory of dynamic maintenance personnel.
Xue et al., (2018)	The trajectory prediction.	A novel hierarchical LSTM-based network considering both the influence of social neighborhood and scene layouts.	It considers the influence of social neighborhood and scene layouts, which is not suitable for trajectory prediction in smart network maintenance.
Inkyu et al., (2019)	The position displacement prediction.	It used LSTM to model the motion information of all pedestrians, and mapped the position of each pedestrian to a high-dimensional feature space.	It mainly takes positional relationship between two pedestrians to predict precise position of pedestrians. But in this paper, we only need to predict the region that maintenance personnel will appear.

Table 2. Information table.

Notations	Meaning of notations
The input of current network.
The output of LSTM at previous time.
The cell state of LSTM at precious time.
The output of LSTM at current time.
The cell state of LSTM at current time.
The work activity of maintenance personnel.
The comprehensive reputation value of maintenance personnel.
The basic reputation value of maintenance personnel.
The work enthusiasm of maintenance personnel.
The number of centroids.
The cluster.
The position point of maintenance personnel.
The centroid of cluster i.
The maintenance task i.
The area number of .
The level of .
The confidence of specific path.
The number of missing areas of subpath in the corresponding sequence of the main path.
S	The set of emergency tasks.
M	The set of maintenance personnel.
The mobile pattern set of maintenance personnel k
3. System architecture and the role of edge cloud computing
Traditional maintenance systems are mostly based on cloud architecture. While cloud architecture provides efficient storage and computing power, it also brings problems (Jose and David, 2016) (Chu et al., 2020). Most clouds are centralized, remote from terminals and users, and overloaded with heavy business access (Talal et al., 2018). For real-time computing services such as AR, remote feedback is required, which often leads to problems such as long-distance round-trip delays, network congestion, and reduced quality of service. The use of AR-based wearables brings convenience to on-site maintenance while also placing stringent requirements on real-time performance and reliability. In the process of on-site operation, there are problems such as inefficient communication and low efficiency, which need to be solved urgently.

In this paper, we introduce edge cloud computing. As shown in Fig. 1, edge nodes serve as an intermediate computational layer between the terminals (wearable) and the cloud. Edge computing increases the overall operational efficiency by providing computing power near the terminals. And in inspection, UAVs, robots, and maintenance personnel with wearable devices can upload collected data to the edge node. Then, the Edge-based Smart Wearable Maintenance System (SEWMS) (Rui et al., 2019) uses edge nodes between the maintenance center and smart glasses, providing services at the edge of the network.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (422KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Smart network maintenance edge cloud computing.

The overview of SEWMS is shown in Fig. 2. On-site maintenance personnel equips with AR glasses. With AR glasses, they can get detailed information on the equipment to be maintained and the solutions pushed by the system within their field of view. The edge nodes have computing and storage capabilities to provide fault analysis and operational recommendations for the smart glasses. Edge nodes process data and send it to the data center for historical storage and analysis. The analyzed data is sent back to the edge nodes to increase the efficiency and responsiveness of the system.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (217KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The overview of the edge-based smart wearable maintenance system, SEWMS.

4. An emergent task allocation mechanism based on comprehensive reputation and regional prediction model (ETARR)
4.1. Main idea
This paper proposes the Emergent Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model (ETARR). The mechanism is mainly composed of comprehensive reputation calculation and area prediction models based on maintenance personnel's movement mode. By using edge cloud computing and wearable devices, the specific process is shown in Fig. 3. In the process of task allocation, edge nodes collect information from on-site maintenance and forward information to the central server firstly. Then, the central server can update historical and predictive data to edge nodes so that they can dispatch work orders by using ETARR. After the task is completed, the job record will update to edge nodes and the central server.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (484KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Task allocation process in smart network maintenance.

The whole design of the ETARR model is shown in Fig. 4. Firstly, we design a comprehensive reputation calculation model. Based on basic reputation value, work enthusiasm and work activity are added as indicators to measure the work efficiency of maintenance personnel. And the work-ability of maintenance personnel is measured by comprehensive reputation value. Then, we design a location prediction model based on maintenance personnel movement patterns. By clustering regions and designing a mobile pattern set algorithm, the model can predict the location of maintenance personnel. Finally, by combining reputation value requirements and geographically requirements, we design an emergent task allocation mechanism.

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (239KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The design of ETARR.

4.2. Comprehensive reputation calculation model
In the communication network maintenance, emergency tasks, especially on-site repair tasks, have stricter requirements for the maintenance personnel. Therefore, a comprehensive assessment of the capabilities of maintenance personnel is required. Based on historical data and the completion of current tasks, this paper comprehensively measures the reputation value of maintenance personnel from various aspects, such as the basic reputation value, work enthusiasm, and work activity.

4.2.1. Basic reputation value
In the communication network maintenance scene, each maintenance personnel will be given a reputation value to evaluate the quality and efficiency of maintenance personnel to complete the maintenance work. The higher the reputation value is, the higher the work quality and efficiency of the maintenance personnel. Emergency tasks with high priority, which need to be completed in time and with high quality, can be allocated to maintenance personnel with high reputation value. The lower the reputation value of the maintenance personnel, the lower the quality and efficiency of the maintenance personnel to complete maintenance work.

The evaluation of maintenance personnel's completed task is usually performed with a score of 1–5. 5 indicates that the quality of the task is high. 1 indicates that the quality of the task is low. Every time a task is completed, the maintenance personnel receives a score of the completion of the task. It may contain the completion cost and quality of the task. This paper will use the task completion score as the basic reputation value of maintenance personnel.

4.2.2. Quantification of work enthusiasm
Reputation value is an important indicator for measuring the efficiency of maintenance personnel. Reputation value is dynamic and developing, and its development trend has a certain law, and there is a certain correlation between historical reputation value and current reputation value. However, most of the existing reputation models do not consider the impact of historical reputation on current reputation value evaluation well and ignoring the time and context correlation of reputation value, making the calculation of reputation value not accurate enough.

Maintenance personnel's task completion is regular, and in this paper, we call it work enthusiasm. Under the condition that the basic reputation values are the same, this paper believes that maintenance personnel with high work enthusiasm will have better task completion quality in the future. By studying and analyzing the historical reputation value series of maintenance personnel and changing trends, the predicted value can be quantified as the work enthusiasm. Most of the existing methods use the Markov model or time factor model, and construct a continuous-time interval sequence to predict the reputation value. But the Markov model has no memory, and the state of the current moment is only affected by the previous moment, not by the state of the historical moments. Because the reputation value can be influenced by time and context, this method cannot be used well to quantify the work enthusiasm of maintenance personnel.

Reference (Kareven and Suykens, 2020) shows that LSTM models can solve sequence problems effectively. Unlike the relatively simple structure of a recurrent neural network (RNN), each layer of the LSTM has a memory unit to process the current information, the output before the storage layer, and the previous information. In Eq. (1),  is the input of current network,  is the output of LSTM at previous time,  is the cell state at previous time. And  is the output at the current time,  is the cell state of the current time.(1)

Therefore, this paper adopts LSTM model to predict the reputation value of maintenance personnel. The prediction is based on the historical reputation value sequence and uses the predicted value to quantify the work enthusiasm of maintenance personnel.

4.2.3. Work activity calculation
Work activity is used to measure the frequency of maintenance personnel to complete the task in recent time. The more frequently the task is completed, the higher the work activity. On the one hand, the setting of work activity takes into account the recent participation of maintenance personnel. When the task is assigned, maintenance personnel who have been active recently are selected to complete the task. On the other hand, work activity and work enthusiasm complement each other. With work activity as the basis, work enthusiasm can more accurately describe the recent work enthusiasm of maintenance personnel.

This paper adopts the monthly activity rate as the calculation standard of work activity, defined as the number of active days that the maintenance personnel completed the task in the latest month (calculated in 30 days), which is a proportion of the total days. The calculation method of work activity is as follows:(2)

As shown in Eq. (2), d is the actual number of days for maintenance personnel to perform the task. The numerator of the equation uses arctangent to simulate the features of work activity: work activity changes fast in the middle and slowly on both sides. The denominator of the equation is used to unify the result. The graph of the change in work activity with the number of active days of maintenance personnel is shown in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (157KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Change of work activity with days of maintenance personnel.

As shown in Fig. 5, when the number of active days of maintenance personnel is 15, the work activity value is 0.5. When the number of active days of maintenance personnel is less than 15, the work activity value increases from 0 as the number of active days increases, and the growth rate becomes faster and faster. When the number of active days of maintenance personnel is greater than 15, their work activity also increases with the increase of active days, eventually reaching almost 1, but the growth rate gradually slows down. From Fig. 5, we can see that when maintenance personnel's number of active days is more than 20 days, their work activity is high, which is almost 1. In addition, when the number of active days of maintenance personnel is between 10 and 20, the increasing rate is the largest. This change law meets the requirements of the on-site maintenance scenario in this paper and motivates the maintenance personnel to maintain the enthusiasm for completing tasks.

4.2.4. Comprehensive reputation value
The work enthusiasm guarantees the quality of the recently completed tasks of maintenance personnel. The work activity value ensures that the maintenance personnel who do not participate in the maintenance task regularly will not have a high reputation. Therefore, when assessing the overall reputation value of maintenance personnel, it is necessary to calculate on the basis of basic reputation value and comprehensively consider the impact of work enthusiasm and work activity.

The weighted average method is the most widely used in reputation value calculation methods. This paper uses the weighted average calculation method to calculate comprehensive reputation value using the basic reputation value, work enthusiasm, and work activity. The comprehensive reputation value can be obtained by combining the above three constraint indicators:(3)

As shown in Eq. (3),  is basic reputation value,  is work enthusiasm and  is work activity.  are the weights of ,  and , which satisfies  are static parameters.

4.3. Location prediction model based on maintenance personnel movement pattern
Maintenance personnel is usually responsible for the maintenance tasks in a specific area, and their work area is relatively fixed. For tasks in their area, maintenance personnel usually performs routine tasks such as inspections on specific fixed routes based on their habits and experience, such as the degree of road congestion and the distance of the route. The historical trajectory data of maintenance personnel can provide a lot of meaningful information, such as the movement pattern, behavior habits, and preferences of certain places for maintenance personnel. Based on this, it is possible to analyze and predict the areas where maintenance personnel may appear and assign the emergency tasks to the corresponding maintenance personnel, which can complete the emergency tasks faster and more efficiently. The basic procedure is shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6
Download : Download high-res image (327KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Location prediction model.

4.3.1. K-means regional cluster
According to the characteristics of communication network maintenance, the maintenance site is usually remote. Due to the sparseness of GPS data and the easy loss of network connections, the location of maintenance personnel is usually discrete (Nguyen et al., 2017). It is difficult to find the continuous trajectory path of maintenance personnel from these discrete historical movement data. Therefore, before location prediction, data pre-processing is needed first. Therefore, the mid-point shift of the movement trajectory during the completion of the task is converted into a transfer between regions according to the area division.

In this paper, the most popular k-means algorithm is used to cluster the discrete locations of maintenance personnel. Its workflow can be summarized as three steps of initialization, allocation, and update (Reddy and Supreethi, 2017).

Step 1: Initialize. Set k points as the initial centroids and use a random selection method. The centroid of cluster i is .

Step 2: Allocation process. By calculating the distance between each point and each centroid in the set, the points in the set are assigned to the cluster closest to them. In this paper, the position of maintenance personnel is determined by latitude and longitude, and the distance between the positions is calculated by Euclidean distance. As shown in Eq. (4), each maintenance personnel's location point  is assigned to a cluster .(4)

Step 3: Update. Calculate the mean of all points in the cluster, and use this mean as the new centroid, as shown in Eq. (5):(5)

The allocation and update operations are repeated until the cluster allocation result of any point does not change, the algorithm converges, and the clustering is complete.

After the clustering of the location points of maintenance personnel is completed, the transfer of the maintenance personnel between regions can be visually represented by a graph. Each region is represented as a vertex in a directed graph. If two regions A and B are adjacent in practice, there are two edges in the graph connecting the two regions, indicating that region A can directly reach region B. Area B can also reach area A directly.

4.3.2. Mobile pattern set calculation
The mobile pattern set is trajectories of maintenance tasks performed by maintenance personnel. It can reflect certain mobile behavior habits of the maintenance personnel when performing tasks and can be used to describe the daily movement behavior of maintenance personnel (Wang et al., 2016). Based on the movement pattern and the location trajectory information obtained in real-time, the algorithm can analyze and predict the task areas that maintenance personnel will reach, and assign the emergency tasks in these areas to the corresponding maintenance personnel, which can reduce costs of tasks such as time, distance, and expenses.

Reference (Jiang et al., 2018) proposed a trajectory prediction algorithm based on the context of mobile users. Based on the user's real-time location trajectory information, it predicted the area where the user was about to arrive and assigned tasks in the area to the corresponding users, avoiding additional cost of the journey. However, because this method is used to predict the person's location, it does not have the time dimension, making it impossible to locate the area where the user will appear accurately and only predicts the next area where the person is most likely to appear. It lacks the prediction ability of movement and cannot determine the exact location of dynamic personnel. Therefore, this method is not suitable for the scenario of emergency task allocation. Based on the idea of reference (Jianget al., 2018), the possible location of maintenance personnel is obtained according to the movement pattern of the maintenance personnel and time information. This can be applied to the emergency task allocation for dynamic personnel. In the process of allocating emergency tasks, we also consider the impact of the previous task completion status of the maintenance personnel to assign maintenance emergency tasks more accurately and reasonably.

The queue of emergency tasks contains several tasks, and it is necessary to select a maintenance personnel with a relatively low cost and a high reputation value from nearby potential maintenance personnel to perform these tasks. A burst task t is defined as a two-tuple , where r is the number of the area where task t is located, and l is the level of the task, with a range of 1–5. This paper assumes that the higher the level, the longer it takes to complete the task, and the higher the demand for reputation. High-level tasks cannot be completed by maintenance personnel whose reputation value is lower than a certain value.

The historical route P of maintenance personnel is defined as a multivariate vector group (). Similarly,  represents the number of the area where task  is located.  represents the level of task . The historical route P indicates the order of the historical trajectory when maintenance personnel complete the daily routine tasks. That is, the maintenance personnel first completed the task  in the area , then completed the task 
 in the area 
, and finally completed the task 
 in the area 
.

According to the historical route of maintenance personnel, the movement mode of maintenance personnel can be defined. The movement mode MP of maintenance personnel is defined as (
), where (
) represents the historical path for maintenance personnel to complete the task,  is the confidence degree, which is used to measure the possibility of a certain route in the historical paths of maintenance personnel (Kazemi et al., 2013). The higher the confidence level, the more likely the route appears in the historical route of maintenance personnel, otherwise, the less likely it is.

The calculation of confidence is as follows:(6) 
 
 

As shown in Eq. (6),  is the number of missing areas of subpath compared with the sequence of the main path. It represents the number of regions where the sub-path is missing in the order of the main path. Ifs there are three paths A, B, and C, they are as follows:(7)
 

Path A is the main path, and path B is a sub-path of path A. At this time,  = 1. Because B only lacks one region, 
. B = 1/1+Δ = 0.5, the confidence of B relative to A is 0.5 according to formula (7). C is not a sub-path of A, so the confidence of C relative to A is 0.

Firstly, the local prediction model based on the movement pattern calculates the confidence of the all historical routes' sub-paths of the maintenance personnel. Then, the model selects the elements with the highest confidence from candidate movement mode patterns with different lengths as the movement pattern of the maintenance personnel. The process of calculating the movement pattern set of maintenance personnel is shown in Algorithm 1.

It can be known from Algorithm 1, firstly, the historical movement trajectory records of maintenance personnel need to be obtained from the maintenance system. The historical route set P is obtained. P contains actual routes of maintenance personnel during the execution of historical tasks. These historical routes can dig out the movement pattern of maintenance personnel. The sub-paths with different lengths in the historical route set P constitute candidate movement pattern sets with different lengths. For each element in the candidate movement pattern set, the confidence level of each path in the historical route set P is calculated and accumulated to obtain the confidence level of the sub-path. Finally, the sub-path with the highest confidence in each candidate mobile mode set is added to the mobile mode set of according to its length, and the mobile mode set 
 of maintenance personnel is obtained.

Algorithm 1: Calculate mobile pattern set
Input: Historical trajectories set of maintenance personnel 
Output: Movement pattern set 
1: Initialize , 
;
2: 
 all the sub-paths with length of k from all the actual paths in P;
3: while 
 do
4: for each  do
5: for each 
 do
6: accumulate the confidence  of c;
7: end for
8: end for
9:  sort (
);
10:  
;
11: k++;
11: end while
13: return 
;
In summary, the regional prediction process based on the mobile mode of maintenance personnel includes the following steps:

Step 1: Use the k-means algorithm to cluster discrete location points of maintenance personnel to obtain maintenance area;

Step 2: According to the reachability of the maintenance area, the maintenance area is represented by a directed graph;

Step 3: Obtain the historical movement routes of the maintenance personnel, and calculate the confidence of the sub-paths in the candidate movement pattern sets of different lengths;

Step 4: Select the sub-paths with the highest confidence of different lengths to build maintenance personnel movement pattern;

Step 5: According to the real-time movement route of the maintenance personnel, predict the area that they may reach.

4.4. Emergent task allocation mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model
The goal of emergency task allocation based on comprehensive reputation value and the regional prediction model is to reduce the task allocation cost and ensure the completion efficiency of emergency tasks. In the smart network maintenance, emergency tasks are usually high-level tasks such as failures and rush repairs, which need to be handled quickly and efficiently. Therefore, when performing tasks with higher priority, maintenance personnel's work quality and efficiency need to be considered, and the distance cost between maintenance personnel and the task needs to be considered. Therefore, this section focuses on how to assign emergency tasks to maintenance personnel who are “closest” to the task location and have the highest reputation value.

Before introducing the algorithm in detail, we need to give the maintenance personnel information table and the emergency task information table. They save the relevant information and attributes of maintenance personnel and the emergency task, respectively. Some examples are shown in Table 3.


Table 3. Information table of maintenance personnel.

ID	Name	Historical path	Work state	Area	Aim area	Start time	Reputation value
001	
Allocated	
14:51	4
002	
Idle	
null	11:36	3
003	
Working	
null	09:20	4
004	
Ongoing	null	
12:40	4
As shown in Table 3, the historical route records the historical movement trajectory information of maintenance personnel, which is the basis for movement mode and area prediction. There are four kinds of operation status of maintenance personnel: idle, allocated, on-going, and working. Among them, the on-going can be further divided into two types: routine task and emergency task. The idle status indicates that maintenance personnel is currently idle and waiting to be allocated a task. The allocated status indicates that maintenance personnel has been allocated a task. The routine task status indicates that maintenance personnel are performing daily routine tasks and can be preempted to be allocated emergency task when the maintenance personnel is moving to the next routine task. The emergency task status means that maintenance personnel is on their way to the next emergency task point. They cannot be preempted and can no longer assign an emergency task. This paper stipulates that only the maintenance personnel whose status is on-going, its area is null, and its aim area is the endpoint of the journey; the state working indicates the state that during the execution of the task, maintenance personnel can be allocated next task in advance before the task is completed. The start time field is used to help record the work status of maintenance personnel. This field is used to record the start time of the task or journey.

Table 4 provides some information on the emergency task table. In Table 4, the task level indicates the level of the emergency task. The higher the level, the higher the urgency of the task and the higher the quality requirements of the task. In this paper, in order to ensure the quality of the task, the emergency task must be completed by the maintenance personnel whose reputation value is greater than the task level. For example, if communication access device located in the area 
 fails, the task level is 4. According to the maintenance personnel table, there is two maintenance personnel in the area: 
 and 
. The credit value of 
 is 3, which is less than task level 4 of the task. Therefore, the task cannot be assigned to 
. The reputation value of 
 is 4, which is no less than the task level of the task. 
 meets the requirements of reputation value. This task can be assigned to 
 without considering the geographical location. The occurrence time and allocated personnel have the function of logging. The allocated personnel field records the assignment status of the task. If it is allocated, it records the corresponding maintenance personnel ID. If it is not allocated, it is marked as null. Fig. 7 shows the matching between tasks and maintenance personnel.


Table 4. Emergent task information table.

Task ID	Task name	Task level	Task area	Occurrence time	Allocated personnel
200601001	Repair of communication cable lines	5	
11:00	null
200601002	Communication access device failure	4	
12:00	003
Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (364KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. ETARR matching.

Therefore, we describe the problem first. For the task set 
}, there are m different tasks. 
} means n maintenance personnel. And 
} means possible region maintenance personnel k will disappear. It is based on mobile pattern set of maintenance personnel. In this paper, the goal of emergency task allocation based on comprehensive reputation value and regional prediction model is to ensure the completion efficiency of emergency tasks, both completion time and success rate of emergent task allocation. It needs to satisfy following requirements.(8) 
 
 represents the reputation value of maintenance personnel i is higher than the level of task j. 
 means the work state personnel is idle, ongoing or working. Then, we introduce the detail design of algorithm.

When allocating emergency tasks, the distance between areas must be considered first. The distance between areas is used to quantify the time spent by maintenance personnel on the journey. As can be seen from the above, due to the sparseness of GPS data, this paper uses k-means algorithm to aggregate discrete location points into regions 
, and converts the maintenance personnel's position points transfer of the movement trajectory during the completion of the task into the transfer from area to area. In order to simplify the calculation, it is assumed that the distances between adjacent regions are equal, and both are one unit of length. Considering that the time spent by maintenance personnel in moving between regions is usually greater than the completion time of a common task, this paper quantifies the time spent in traveling between regions as 2T. Dijkstra's algorithm is a classic algorithm to solve the shortest path problem of graphs. It is used to calculate the shortest path from one node to other nodes. The Dijkstra algorithm can be used to obtain the distance between any two regions.

Then, we need to pay attention to the classification of personnel. Time cost of different types of maintenance personnel are calculated in different ways. The maintenance personnel whose working status is idle, allocated, and working is in a certain area and can be classified as static personnel. The maintenance personnel whose working status is on-going is dynamic personnel. For static personnel, the time spent depends on the distance between the area they are in and the area where the emergency task is located and the degree of the completion of the current task. For dynamic personnel, it is necessary to obtain the difference between the current time and the completion time of the previous task and use the movement mode of the maintenance personnel to predict the area they will reach. Therefore, its time cost depends on the distance between the area to be reached and the area where the emergency task is located.

In addition, the reputation value requirements for emergency tasks must be met. Emergency tasks have higher requirements on response time, completion time, and completion quality. The higher the reputation value, the higher the quality and efficiency of maintenance personnel. Therefore, to ensure the quality of the task, the emergency task must be completed by maintenance personnel whose comprehensive reputation value is greater than the task level.

As shown from Fig. 8, the Emergent Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model can be divided into static personnel and dynamic personnel.

First, search for static personnel who meet the requirements. The conditions here include quality requirements and timing requirements. The quality requirements request maintenance personnel's reputation value is greater than the task level, and the timeliness requirements need to select maintenance personnel who are “closest” to the task location. So, the sum of the distance cost and the remaining time of the current task should be the smallest. According to the analysis, the specific steps for searching for static personnel who meet the conditions are as follows:

Step 1: Initialize parameters, k = 0, k is the distance between a certain area and the area of the emergency task; R is the area with a distance of k from the area of the emergency task; minId and minTime record the ID of maintenance personnel allocated to the emergency task and the minimum time required to complete the task, both are initialized to the largest integer;

Step 2: Based on the directed graph transformed by the clustered regions, the breadth-first (Skiena Steven) search is performed to obtain the region R with a distance k from the region of the emergency task;

Step 3: If the cost of the distance between the areas of distance k is less than the current minimum time minTime, then Step 4 is performed; otherwise, dynamic personnel search is performed;

Step 4: Traverse the static personnel in the area R. If the reputation value of maintenance personnel is greater than the level of emergency task to be allocated, calculate the time maintenance personnel needed to arrive at the emergency task area according to the working status;

Step 5: If time is less than the current minimum time minTime, update minTime and minId; otherwise, go back to Step 4 and continue until the static personnel in the area that meets the conditions are traversed, return to Step 2;

Step 6: k ++;

After completing the search for static personnel, search for dynamic personnel that meets the requirements. Similarly, dynamic personnel also have reputation and distance cost constraints. For dynamic personnel, it is necessary to obtain the difference between the current time and the completion time of the previous task and then use the movement mode of the maintenance personnel to predict the area they will reach.

Calculate the distance and time cost between the area to be reached and the area where the emergency task is located. According to the analysis, the specific steps for searching for dynamic personnel who meet the conditions are as follows:

Step 1: Obtain the current dynamic personnel set through the maintenance personnel information table, and traverse the dynamic personnel in the set;

Step 2: If the reputation value of maintenance personnel is greater than the level of the current emergency task to be assigned, calculate the difference x between the current time and the time the last task was completed;

Step 3: According to the time difference and the movement pattern of the maintenance personnel, predict the area r they will reach;

Step 4: Calculate the time when the area r arrives at the emergency task area;

Step 5: If time is less than the current minimum time minTime, update minTime and minId; otherwise, go back to Step 1 and continue until the dynamic personnel that meets the conditions is traversed and end.

To sum up, Emergent Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 traverses all tasks and allocates maintenance personnel for each task. Lines 3–36 enumerate all possible maintenance personnel that can handle the current task and selects one maintenance personnel. Lines 3–25 are allocation processes for static personnel, and lines 26–35 are allocation processes for dynamic personnel. For static personnel, the first while loop means traverse until the time cost for regions with distance k is larger than current minTime (lines 3–25). In each while loop, the first for loop means to traverse all the maintenance personnel in all maintenance areas with distance k (lines 5–23), and the second for loop means traverse maintenance personnel who meet the reputation value requirements in this area (lines 6–22). Therefore, for the whole while loop, it traverses static maintenance personnel that satisfies requirements, and the number of iterations is less than or equal to the number of all static personnel. For dynamic personnel, lines 26–35 traverse all dynamic personnel to calculate the completion time and select the minimum completion time. So, it traverses dynamic maintenance personnel that satisfies requirements, and the number of iterations is less than or equal to the number of all dynamic personnel. Finally, update the status of the selected maintenance personnel (line 36). Then, the algorithm will traverse the next tasks. So, the complexity of algorithm 2 is O(MN). M is the number of maintenance personnel. N is the number of tasks to be allocated.

Algorithm 2: Emergency task allocation algorithm
Input: maintenance personnel table , task set , movement pattern set 
, distance set 
Output: Task allocation table 
1: for each  do
2: Initialize ;
3: while  do
4:  use breath-first algorithm to search the area with distance k;
5: for each  do
6: for each  do
7: if  , && m, r is in the same region then
8: Initialize time = maxInteger;
9: if  then
10: break;
11: end if
12: if  then
13:;
14: end if
15: if  then
16:;
17: end if
18: if  then
19:，;
20: end if
21: end if
22: end for
23: end for
24: k++;
25: end while
26: for each  do
27: if  &&  then
28: x = ;
29:
;
30: time = distance<r,s.area> * 2T;
31: if  then
32:，;
33: end if
34: end if
35: end for
36: Add  to ;
37: Change the work state of current maintenance personnel into allocated
38: end for
39: return ;
5. Results and discussion
5.1. Environment setup
The experimental environment of this paper is a computer with 32G memory, 8 cores, and 2.80 GHz main frequency. We conducted simulations of cluster methods and predict methods using Python 3.5. And using eclipse to simulate the task allocation experiment. And parameters in algorithms are shown in Table 5.


Table 5. Parameters in algorithm.

Parameter meanings	Parameter values
Reputation weights 
1/3, 1/3, 1/3
Time cost of two adjacent areas 2T	20 min
Reputation value 
1,2,3,4,5
Task level 
1,2,3,4,5
Emergency task level 
3,4,5
5.2. Comprehensive reputation calculation model
In order to verify the superiority of the LSTM model in predicting reputation value, we used a Markov model and ARIMA model for comparison. This part of the experiment uses the MovieLens data set provided by the GroupLens research group. It is a collection of movie ratings. It has time sequence feature for a specific user. And users score the movies they have watched, with a score of 1–5. And the comprehensive reputation value varies from 1 to 5. The MovieLens dataset is available in 1 M, 10 M, and 20 M versions. This paper uses the 20 M version, containing about 1,000,000 ratings of 3900 movies made by 6040 independent users. The ratio is divided to evaluate the predictive performance of the proposed model.

Firstly, in order to extract representative data to prediction. We generated the number of scoring times and average scores of each user in the MovieLens dataset. Then, using the elbow method to verify the number of clusters and the k-means algorithm to cluster the dataset. The best number of clusters is 3, so 3 centroids are selected to be predicted. Fig. 9 shows the comparison between the three models on the scoring dataset. Each figure shows 10 prediction results. As can be seen from the figure, the LSTM model we used shows a good fit in the scoring time series, accurately describes the law of scoring changes, and can be used to quantify the work enthusiasm of maintenance personnel. As shown in Table 6, we compare the MSE value of these models. The Markov model and ARIMA model have more obvious prediction errors than the LSTM model. This is because the Markov model has no memory, and the prediction of the next score is based only on the current score. The principle of ARIMA is sliding average and autoregression, so the predicted results are close to the historical average value. If the real value fluctuation is not very severe, ARIMA prediction may be more suitable. On the contrary, the LSTM model has a long memory and can well fit the time and context-dependent characteristics of the reputation value. Therefore, the LSTM model fits the scoring data to a higher degree.

Fig. 9
Download : Download high-res image (349KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Reputation value prediction result.


Table 6. MSE comparison of reputation value prediction.

Model	MSE
Cluster 1	LSTM	2.68
ARIMA	8.25
Markov	5.79
Cluster 2	LSTM	2.13
ARIMA	6.19
Markov	4.16
Cluster 3	LSTM	1.74
ARIMA	5.97
Markov	3.49
5.3. Location prediction model based on maintenance personnel movement pattern (DWMP)
This part of the experiment uses a check-in website Brightkite dataset, a social networking site containing time and location relationships. In this paper, the Brightkite data centralized sign-in and photo shooting tasks are converted into on-site maintenance scene inspection tasks to build a scene consistent with the on-site maintenance.

This data set collected 4,491,143 user check-ins from April 2008 to October 2010. The data set consists of user ID, check-in time, latitude, longitude, and location ID. This paper uses the location in the data set as the location of the maintenance task and the user's check-in location as the current location of maintenance personnel. The successful sign-in in a certain place indicates that maintenance personnel has completed the on-site inspection task in a certain place. Then, use the k-means algorithm to cluster the area. Considering the characteristics of on-site maintenance scenarios, this paper randomly selects 1000 users with adjacent IDs as the target users and the corresponding 77,435 location data. In this experiment, the K-means algorithm is used to cluster the discrete location points of maintenance personnel into multiple regions as the location of emergency tasks. Considering the small moving range of maintenance personnel, which usually does not exceed a city, and the latitude distance is 110 km, therefore, after clustering the selected users and locations for many times, the range of 33.9 N to - 34.1 N north latitude and - 118.5W to - 118.3W west longitude is selected, and the location points in the range are clustered regionally, based on which the movement model of maintenance personnel is studied. Fig. 10 shows the clustering results for k = 100, k = 200, and K = 500.

Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (347KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Cluster results.

In order to verify the superiority of the proposed model, the prediction methods in reference (Jianget al., 2018) and reference (Manas et al., 2015) are selected for comparison. The UMP proposed in reference (Manas et al., 2015) only makes predictions based on the person's current position. In reference (Jianget al., 2018), WMP uses the next position with the highest degree of confidence in the candidate mobile mode set of all lengths as the prediction result.

5.3.1. Accuracy
This paper evaluates the effectiveness of the mechanism with accuracy, which is defined as follows:(9)
 

In formula (9), TP is the positive example, that is, the number of successful predictions for the next position data of maintenance personnel, and Total is the total number of data.

Fig. 11 shows the comparison of the predication accuracy of the three algorithms for the maintenance personnel's movement area under the same area division. It can be seen from the figure that our proposed regional prediction mechanism has a high accuracy rate. The method proposed in reference (Jianget al., 2018) does not take into account the effects of historical movement trajectories and inter-regional relations on the next position, which leads to a lower accuracy of its prediction. Compared with WMP, because DWMP predicts mobile pattern sets of different lengths, sometimes the accuracy may decrease, but from the simulation results, the accuracy is still very high.

Fig. 11
Download : Download high-res image (172KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Comparison of the accuracy of maintenance personnel's mobile area prediction.

With the increase of the number of regions, the prediction accuracy of region has shown a downward trend. This is because the regions are aggregated based on latitude and longitude. When the number of regions is small, the range of each region will be large. Maintenance tasks are usually assigned in the nearest way. The movement range of maintenance personnel is limited, although the location has changed, they still belong to the same area. Therefore, the next moving area predicted based on the historical routes of maintenance personnel is the current area, the accuracy is high. As the number of areas increases, the range of each area gradually decreases, the historical movement route set of maintenance personnel gradually increases, and the movement mode becomes more complicated. Therefore, the accuracy of regional prediction is slightly reduced, but it is also maintained above 70%, and the accuracy is higher.

5.3.2. Extra cost
The extra cost is the movement cost of the maintenance personnel when they go to the next task point, which is defined as follows:(10) 
 

As shown in formula, if the area prediction is accurate, the emergency task in the predicted area or nearest to it will be assigned to the maintenance personnel. The maintenance personnel can perform the task on the way, which the extra cost is 0. Otherwise, the extra cost is 1.

Fig. 12 shows the extra cost comparison of the three algorithms. As the number of regions increases, the accuracy of region prediction decreases, so the additional cost also increases. It can be seen from Fig. 12 that the extra cost of the mechanism proposed in this paper and document reference (Jianget al., 2018) is similar, while the extra cost of the regional prediction mechanism proposed in reference (Manas et al., 2015) is higher than that of this paper and reference (Jianget al., 2018).

Fig. 12
Download : Download high-res image (188KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Extra cost comparison.

5.4. Emergent task allocation mechanism (ETARR)
In order to verify the superiority of the proposed algorithm, we chose the comparison methods in reference (Jianget al., 2018) and reference (Zhan, 2018). Reference (Zhan, 2018) adopts the greedy idea to maximize the effectiveness of the platform. It is based on the user's reliability to complete the task and achieves the optimal match between the user and the task. Reference (Jianget al., 2018) can implement task assignments based on user trajectory prediction and assign tasks to users who reach the area. In this paper, to maximize the platform's effectiveness, we consider both the completion time and the quality of tasks. That is, the maintenance personnel who is closest to the task and has the highest reputation is selected.

For ETARR algorithm, we design the simulation from 3 aspects: region, task, and personnel.

In terms of region, based on the results of regional clustering, this experiment selects two central regions with large connectivity and more location points as the maintenance sites. These two central regions are the start point and end point of daily tasks of maintenance personnel. In this experiment, the distance cost between two adjacent areas is 2T. T is 10 min.

In terms of tasks, to simulate the actual emergency task allocation scenario better, the tasks in this experiment include routine and emergency tasks. Routine tasks are randomly distributed from 8:00 to 21:00 with different proportions every day. Emergency tasks are randomly distributed throughout the day with different proportions. According to the density of regional clustering results, the occurrence areas of all tasks are distributed with a different probability. The execution time of the maintenance task is composed of basic time and technical time. The basic time is directly proportional to the task level, and the technical time is inversely proportional to the reputation value of maintenance personnel. The task level of the emergency task ranges from 3 to 5. The higher the level is, the longer the maintenance time is. The task level range of routine tasks is randomly distributed in the range of 1–5 with different probabilities, and the probability of level 1 or 2 is larger.

In terms of personnel, the initial positions of personnel are all located in the maintenance site, and the reputation value is randomly assigned to the maintenance personnel in different proportions according to the needs of emergency tasks.

5.4.1. The completion time and success rate of task assignment
The completion time and success rate of task assignments are important indicators to evaluate the timeliness of emergency task assignments. Since the completion time of an emergency task is closely related to the allocation success rate, only the completion time of a successfully assigned emergency task can be calculated in the completion time of emergency tasks. Therefore, this paper uses these two indicators to evaluate the timeliness of emergency task allocation comprehensively.

The completion time of an emergency task is defined as the time it takes for maintenance personnel to complete the task from the time when the emergency task is assigned to maintenance personnel. The longer the time is spent, the lower the timeliness. The task assignment success rate of emergency tasks is defined as the proportion of emergency tasks that are successfully assigned to maintenance personnel to the total emergency tasks.

Fig. 13 shows the impact of different numbers of emergency tasks on task completion time and task assignment success rate when the number of maintenance personnel is 150, and the number of routine tasks is 1000. It can be seen from the figure that with the increase of the number of emergency tasks, the task completion time of the algorithm in ETARR and reference (Jianget al., 2018) shows a linear growth trend. When the number of emergency tasks reaches 1,000, it stabilizes. On the contrary, with the increase of the number of emergency tasks, the task assignment success rate of ETARR and reference (Jianget al., 2018) gradually decreases. Only when the number of emergency tasks is large will the task assignment success rate decrease significantly, but still much larger than reference (Zhan, 2018)'s algorithm. Therefore, it can be considered that it has a good distribution effect.

Fig. 13
Download : Download high-res image (374KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Impact of the number of emergency tasks on task completion time and allocation success rate.

Because the allocation of dynamic personnel in reference (Jianget al., 2018) only considers the next area where maintenance personnel may appear, the task is assigned only when the emergency task appears exactly in the next area where maintenance personnel will appear. Therefore, the time of completion of the single task is shorter. The ETARR mechanism can calculate the travel cost of the area to be reached and the area of the emergency task according to the time difference and the movement mode of maintenance personnel to determine whether to assign the task. This mechanism ensures a high success rate. Therefore, the task completion time of the ETARR mechanism is longer than that of the algorithm in reference (Jianget al., 2018) when the number of emergency tasks is over 900, but the success rate of emergency task allocation is higher.

In addition, when the number of emergency tasks is greater than 500, the task completion time of the algorithm in reference (Zhan, 2018) tends to be stable and is much smaller than the ETARR mechanism and the algorithm in reference (Jianget al., 2018). This is because the algorithm in reference (Zhan, 2018) sacrifices task assignment success rate and brings lower task completion time. As can be seen from the figure, when the number of tasks is greater than 500, the success rate of task allocation drops sharply, and the workload of maintenance personnel reaches a saturated state, and it is impossible to complete all the emergency tasks in one day. Therefore, the task completion time of the algorithm in reference (Zhan, 2018) does not change much, which is the total time that maintenance personnel can complete the task that day.

Fig. 14 shows the impact of different numbers of maintenance personnel on task completion time and task allocation success rate when the number of routine tasks and emergency tasks is both 1000. It can be seen from the figure that when the three algorithms have a small number of maintenance personnel, the task completion time and the completion assignment success rate are not much different. This is because when the number of maintenance personnel is small, and the tasks are large, the work of all maintenance personnel is in a saturated state. With the increase of the number of maintenance personnel, the task assignment success rate of the algorithms in ETARR and (Jianget al., 2018) has significantly improved, and the corresponding task completion time has gradually accumulated. When the number of maintenance personnel reaches 150, the success rate of task assignment reaches 100%, and the task completion time tends to be stable. At this time, the number of maintenance personnel is sufficient to complete the task efficiently. Therefore, at this time, the increase of the number of maintenance personnel can not improve performance.

Fig. 14
Download : Download high-res image (437KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Effect of the number of maintenance personnel on task completion time and allocation success rate.

Compared with reference (Jianget al., 2018), when the number of maintenance personnel is between 70 and 90, the task completion time of the ETARR mechanism is longer. It can be obtained from the figure. The ETARR mechanism guarantees the success rate of task allocation as much as possible and assigns emergency tasks to maintenance personnel as much as possible, which also shows that the ETARR mechanism has high timeliness in completing tasks.

In reference (Zhan, 2018), the algorithm assignment only considers static personnel. When the amount of tasks is large, there is fewer maintenance personnel available. Therefore, the task assignment success rate is much smaller than the ETARR mechanism and the algorithm in reference (Jianget al., 2018). And this leads to slower convergence.

Fig. 15 shows the impact of different numbers of routine tasks on task completion time and task allocation success rate when the number of emergency tasks is 1000, and the number of maintenance personnel is 150. It can be seen from the figure that when the number of routine tasks is small, the task allocation success rate is 100%. When the routine task is greater than 1000, there is fewer maintenance personnel in the idle state or on-going. The ETARR mechanism in this paper does not allow preemption of tasks in the working state. Therefore, the assignment of emergency tasks needs to wait for the maintenance personnel to complete the current task. Therefore, the success rate of task assignments will decrease. Correspondingly, due to the reduction of assigned emergency tasks, the completion time of emergency tasks will also decrease accordingly.

Fig. 15
Download : Download high-res image (362KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 15. The effect of the number of routine tasks on task completion time and allocation success rate.

In summary, when the task allocation success rate is the same, the ETARR mechanism has the shortest time to complete the task; when the task completion times are similar, the ETARR mechanism has the highest task allocation success rate. Therefore, in terms of emergency task allocation, the ETARR mechanism has better performance.

5.4.2. Average completion quality
Completion quality is an important factor to consider for emergency tasks. This paper uses the reputation value of each task's maintenance personnel to evaluate the completion quality of the task. The higher the reputation value, the higher the completion quality of the task. The formal definition of average completion quality is as follows:(11)
 

As shown in formula (11), 
 is the reputation value of the operation and maintenance personnel performing task i, and quality is the average completion quality of the task.

Fig. 16 compares the average completion quality of the three algorithms under the same region division, the same task arrangement, and personnel arrangement. It can be seen from the figure that our proposed task allocation mechanism has the highest average completion quality and the highest task completion quality. This is because when the ETARR algorithm is used for the assignment of emergency tasks, to ensure the quality of the tasks, the tasks are assigned to maintenance personnel whose reputation value is greater than the task level to complete. At the same time, when assessing the reputation value, we also considered the factors of work enthusiasm and work activity and used the comprehensive reputation value as an indicator to measure the work ability of maintenance personnel. Compared with reference (Zhan, 2018), its average completion quality is higher. Without considering the reputation value, the random algorithm assignment simply assigns the task to personnel closest to the task. For emergency tasks with quality requirements, it is difficult to achieve the required quality.

Fig. 16
Download : Download high-res image (726KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Comparison of average completion quality of the three algorithms.

To sum up, the ETARR mechanism proposed in this paper reduces the cost of task allocation and improves the completion efficiency of emergency tasks, which can be better applied to the emergency task scenarios in smart network maintenance.

6. Conclusions
This paper proposes an Emergency Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model in an edge cloud computing environment. Combining the reputation value requirements of the emergency task and the geographical location of the maintenance personnel, ETARR model allocates emergency tasks efficiently in smart network maintenance. First, take the time and contextual relevance of the reputation value into account, comprehensively considers the impact of the basic reputation value, work enthusiasm, and work activity, and uses these indicators to measure the work ability of maintenance personnel. Secondly, a location prediction model based on the movement pattern of maintenance personnel is proposed. After using the k-means model to cluster discrete locations, the movement pattern of maintenance personnel is used to predict possible future occurrence areas. At last, this paper proposes an Emergent Task Allocation Mechanism based on Comprehensive Reputation and Regional Prediction Model. Considering the reputation value requirements and the geographical location of the maintenance personnel, the time cost of the static personnel and the movement cost of the dynamic personnel are considered respectively. Finally, simulation experiments verify the effectiveness of the proposed mechanism, which reduces the task allocation cost and improves the reliability of allocating emergency tasks.