Cellular vehicle-to-everything (C-V2X) is one of the key enabling vehicular communication technologies endorsed by the vehicular industry, scientists, and researchers. Introduced by the 3GPP, LTE device-to-device in Release 12 evolved into C-V2X with mode 3 and mode 4. In mode 4, semi-persistent -scheduling-based sensing is performed by vehicles to select resources. However, when the density of vehicles increases, the performance of C-V2X mode 4 degrades. To address this challenge, 3GPP Release 16 introduced New Radio (NR) for V2X services, also known as NR-V2X. Modes 1 and 2 along with four additional sub-modes were considered in NR-V2X to achieve high reliability and higher throughput with low latency. This article discusses and evaluates the advancements introduced in NR-V2X by comparative analysis with C-V2X. To compare the performance, an NR-V2X simulator based on a network simulator (ns-3) for sub-6 GHz band is also introduced. In addition, feasible practical solutions to resolve resource selection problems are also discussed.

Introduction
Research and development in vehicular technologies are increasing rapidly with the introduction of autonomous onboard driver-assistance capabilities. Next-generation self-driving vehicles are capable of reducing road accidents caused by human error, making driving on the road safe and efficient. Artificial intelligence (AI) advanced vehicular applications demand radio access technologies (RATs) that support communication with high throughput, low latency, and high reliability. The evolved versions of RATs, that is, dedicated short-range communications (DSRCs), IEEE 802.11bd, cellular vehicle-to-everything (C-V2X), and New Radio V2X (NR-V2X), are purposefully designed to provide services to these advanced vehicular applications.

IEEE 802:11 p 1 was the first standard designed for the short-range and short-lived high-mobili-ty vehicular applications. However, due to limited spectrum resources, the performance of IEEE 802.11P degrades in dense vehicular environments [1]. C-V2X2 was developed over L TE device-to-device (LTE-D2D) communication by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) in Release (ReI.) 14, which utilizes cellular infrastructure for communication that significantly extends the vehicular communication range [2].

For direct V2X communication in PC5 interface, C-V2X introduces two transmission modes (mode 3 and mode 4). Mode 3 operates when eNodeb 3 (eNB) coverage is available, and the resources are allocated by the eNB itself. In mode 4, the vehicles use a resource reservation algorithm for autonomous resource utilization in the absence of (eNB) coverage [1]. To support advanced vehicular applications for autonomous vehicles, the IEEE 802.11bd Task Group was created that evolved IEEE 802.11 p into IEEE 802.11bd. The objectives were to increase the medium access control (MAC) throughput and communication range by two times that of IEEE 802.11 p. After the completion of 3GPP Rel. 14, C-V2X still lacked stringent requirements for autonomous vehicles. C-V2X was further evolved to NR-CV2X by 3GPP in two phases. Phase 1, Rel. 15, focused on enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and initial ultra-reliable low-latency communication (URLLC) [1], and phase 2, Rel. 16, focuses on further optimization and expansion of the Rel. 15 features [3].

The authors discuss and evaluate the advancements introduced in NR-V2X by comparative analysis with C-V2X, To compare the performance, an NR-V2X simulator based on a network simulator (ns-3) for sub-6 GHz band is also introduced, In addition, feasible practical solutions to resolve resource selection problems are also discussed.

To support 5G and beyond 5G V2X communication, 3GPP in its Rel. 16 standardized NR, which is solely developed for V2X applications. Two modes of transmission are defined in NR-V2X, mode 1 and mode 2. In mode 1, sidelink resources are scheduled by the gNB4, while in mode 2, vehicular user equipment (V-UE) autonomously selects sidelink resources from the pool of sidelink resources [4]. Evolved physical resource utilization ensures quality of service (QoS) in dense, highly mobile vehicular network environments. This article overviews the physical layer enhancement of C-V2X to NR-V2X with focus on the autonomous resource selection based on semi-persistent scheduling (SPS).5 The following section presents the overview of SPS in mode 4 in C-V2X. We then highlight the key features of NR-V2X including NR numerologies and NR-V2X mode 2. Following that, we present the progress on the standardization activities on a sensing mechanism in NR-V2X mode 2. Then we state the differences and probability of packet collision in NR-V2X and C-V2X considering the impact of NR numerologies on the sidelink resources. Simulation analysis for NR-V2X and C-V2X for sub-6 GHz band, in line with the 3GPP Rel.16 specifications, is also presented. Future directions for resource selection in NR-V2X is then discussed, and finally, the article is concluded.


Figure 1.
Semi-persistent-scheduling-based sensing mechanism,

Show All

Table 1. NR defined bands and associated subcarrier spacing.

C-V2X
Physical Layer
C-V2X utilizes single-carrier frequency-division multiple access (SC-FDMA) with 10 MHz-20 MHz channels [1], [2]. Resources are allocated to the vehicles for their transmission from the resource grids. A resource grid contains a number of resource blocks (RBs) where each RB comprises 12 subcarriers with equal 15kHz subcarrier spacing in the frequency domain and subframes in the time domain.

For the transmission of packets, the sidelink control information (SCI) is transmitted over the physical sidelink control channel (PSCCH), and the data in the transport block (TB) is transmitted over the physical sidelink shared channel (PSSCH). The control information consists of a resource reselection counter (RRC) that depends on the number of transmitted packets per second λ, resource reservation interval (RRI), and the receive signal strength information (RSSI) field that assist neighboring vehicles in the scheduling of resources. The SCI also includes the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) for the transmission of TB, which assists the receiving vehicle in decoding the information. The SCI information is always transmitted in the same subframe in which the TB is transmitted [3]. The maximum transmission power requirement and the sensitivity power requirement at the receiver are specified by the standard as 23 dBm and -90.04 dBm, respectively [1].

C-V2X Mode 4
Vehicles communicate using sidelink PC5 interface in both coverage region and out-of-cover-age region. Mode 3 operates in coverage region, whereas mode 4 operates in out-of-coverage region. The eNB schedule the resources for vehicles in mode 3, where in mode 4, vehicles use the sensing-based SPS to select the resources for their transmission. The sensing-based SPS scheme is explained in the following three steps. Figure 1 shows the sensing-based SPS scheme.

A vehicle reserves the new resources for the packet generated at time to from the selection window. The selection window interval is from the sum of to and T1to the sum of to and T2. T1is between 0–4 ms, and T2 is defined by the latency of the generated packet, also called the packet transmission time interval (TT1). T2 is usually considered as 100 ms, 50 ms, and 20 ms for λ= 10Hz, 20 Hz, and 50 Hz, respectively.

In this step, the vehicle identifies the list of available subframe resources (LA) that can be reserved for the transmission of the generated packet. The transmitting vehicle senses the last 1000 subframes received. The LAexcludes those subframe resources that satisfy the following two conditions simultaneously:

All those resources that are already reserved for the consecutive packet transmission from other vehicles

Those subframes in which the RSSI is higher than the defined threshold equal to -120 dBm

The LA should contain at least 20 percent of the available subframe resources identified in step 1. If the 20 percent target is not met, the RSSI threshold value is iteratively increased by 3 dB until the merit is satisfied. From the LA, it will create the list (Le) of candidate subframe resources (CSRs) that contains least average RSSI. From Le, a vehicle randomly selects the resources for its transmission and reserves the resources for consecutive packet transmission.

NR-V2X
NR-V2X supplements C-V2X in advanced vehicular applications that require high throughput and high reliability with low latency. NR-V2X is designed to support the transmission of both periodic and aperiodic messages. The QoS requirements for application-specific vehicular communication is discussed in [3], [5].

5G N R specifications define two frequency bands, FR1 for sub-6 GHz band and FR2 for above-6 GHz band between 28–52 GHz. FR2 is considered as a millimeter-wave (mmWave) band that can cover short range with high throughput requirements [6]. Table 1 summarizes the NR defined bands, applicable subcarrier spacing, and maximum bandwidth. NR adopts the orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) base waveform for both uplink and downlink with a subcarrier spacing of 15 kHz, 30 kHz, and 60 kHz for FR1 and subcarrier spacing of 120 kHz and 240 kHz for FR2. NR-V2X radio frame length is 10 ms, containing 10 subframes in the time domain and 12 subcarriers in the frequency domain. In NR-V2X, like in C-V2X, resources are distributed over two-dimensional frequency and time space, also called a resource pool. A resource pool is shared by user equipments (UEs) for their sidelink transmissions [7].

Unlike C-V2X, in NR-V2X the control information is split into two stages, stage-I SCI and stage-II SCI. The stage-I SCI carries the information that is useful to notify neighboring vehicles regarding the reserved and already occupied resources by the transmitting UE. The stage-II SCI carries information that is useful for the decoding of TB. The complexity is reduced for the decoding of SCI with two stages of SCI [8]. The physical channels defined in NR-V2X sidelink [9] are summarized below.

PSCCH: In NR-V2X, the stage-I SCI is carried over PSCCH, including information such as RRI, RC, and RSSI.

PSSCH: The payload data is transmitted over the PSSCH along with the additional control information such as stage-II SCI.

Physical Sidelink Feedback Control Channel (PSFCCH): NR-V2X, introduces the feedback for failed or successful reception of packets in unicast and groupcast sidelink transmission.

Physical Sidelink Broadcast Channel (PSBCH): The information regarding the synchronization signal is transmitted within the sidelink-synchroni-zation signal block (S-SSB), which is carried over the PSBCH.

The following outlines the key physical layer attributes of New Radio.

NR Numerologies
NR numerologies play a key role in maintaining the required QoS. NR-V2X, unlike C-V2X, supports flexible subcarrier spacing of (15, 30, 60, 120, 240) kHz with each subframe of 1 ms. In the context of NR-V2X, subframe and slot have different meanings.6 Each subframe has a different number of slots depending on the NR numerologies, and each slot contains 14 OFDM symbols. Figure 2 shows the NR numer-ologies and corresponding slot duration. When the subcarrier spacing is increased by a factor of 2, the slot duration is reduced to half due to the inverse relationship between time and frequency. The subcarrier spacings (15, 30, 60, 120, 240) kHz have corresponding slot durations of (0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0.625, 0.03125) ms. A shorter slot duration can support latency-crit-ical messages.

PSCCH and PSSCH Multiplexing
PSCCH and PSSCH are multiplexed in the frequency domain in C-V2X, whereas in NR-V2X, they are multiplexed in the time domain. The MSC information is carried over PSCCH, while the data information is carried over PSSCH. Multiplexing in the frequency domain is inefficient for time-critical applications, as the receiver has to buffer until it receives the entire subframe before decoding. However, in N R-V2X, PSSCH information is transmitted followed by the PSCCH, which benefits the laten-cy-critical use cases.

Figure 2. - NR numerologies and corresponding slot duration,
Figure 2.
NR numerologies and corresponding slot duration,

Show All

Mini-Slot and Multi-Slot Scheduling in NR-V2X
3GPP Rels. 16 and 17 are also considering mini-slot and multi-slot scheduling by default in NR-V2X. The transmission time is fixed to the subframe duration of 1 ms in C-V2X. Each V-UE has to transmit for 1 ms, which is resource-inef-ficient as V-UE has small data that can be transmitted over less than 14 OFDM symbols. In an ongoing transmission, V-UE has to wait for the transmission of a packet until the beginning of the next frame slot. For mini-slot scheduling, 3GPP ReI. 16 defines 2,4, and 7 OFDM symbols, and for large data, the V-UE combines multiple slots (i.e., 28 OFDM symbols) for the transmission.

5G NR Bandwidth Part
The bandwidth part (BWP) feature is introduced in 5GN R. It provides flexibility in assigning resources to a given carrier with which most base stations can utilize wider bandwidth available in 5G. However, it is quite challenging for V-UE to use large bandwidth that also depends on the V-UE capacity. BWP is a subset of contiguous RBs per carrier component (CC). Each BWP can be configured with different NR numerologies and signal characteristics. A vehicle can be configured with up to 4 BWPs for uplink (UL) and downlink (DL); however, only one BWP is active in UL and DL at a particular time [10].

NR Unlicensed Spectrum Access
In addition to FR1 and FR2, NR ReI. 17 is also considering the use of unlicensed V and W band (60 GHz-114.25 GHz) to support beyond 5G vehicular applications. In mmWave band, the radio signal is more vulnerable to attenuation that reduces the propagation distance. The concept of beamforming is utilized to extend the signal energy for long-distance coverage [11].

Short-term sensing, also known as Listen Before Talk (LBT), is a potential sensing technique where V-UE senses the channel and performs the random backoff before accessing the channel. LBT is defined for unlicensed spectrum band; however, at this stage, it is not clear whether it can be used for V2X advance applications over licensed spectrum.

NR Sidelink Interfaces
Two sidelink modes, mode 1 and mode 2, are defined in NR-V2X. In mode 1, radio resources are scheduled by the gNB for V-UEs, while in mode 2, V-U Es schedule the resources themselves. NR-V2X mode 2 is similar to mode 4 in C-V2X with some additional modifications in order to achieve low latency and high reliability. The changes are highlighted as follows.

NR-V2X Mode 2
NR-V2X mode 2 operates based on the sensing-based SPS mechanism illustrated in Fig. 1.

Step 1 of the algorithm is different in terms of selection window interval. 3GPP discussion concluded that T1is similar as in C-V2X, from 0–4 ms, equivalent to [3], [5], [7], [9], [17] slots corresponding to subcarrier spacing of [15], [30, 60, 120] kHz. T2, which is associated with the latency budget, is equivalent to [1], [5], [10], [20]– ms depending on the packet delay budget.

In step 2, vehicles sense the last 1000 subframes and create the list LAas explained in C-V2X mode 4, but based on decoded stage-I SCI. The stage-I SCI contains the RRI for consecutive packet transmission. The value of RRI specified in NR-V2X is [1-99,100,200, …, 1000] ms, whereas in C-V2X it is defined as [20, 50, 100, 200, …, 1000] ms. The consecutive packet transmission depends on the RRC. After each transmission, RRC is decremented by one. When RRC becomes zero, new resources are selected with the probability of (1 - P), where P is the resource kept probability that varies between 0 and 0.8.

In step 3, from LA, it creates Le as explained in C-V2X mode 4. From list Le, V-UEs will select the resources; however, averaging the least RSSI step is removed in NR-V2X mode 2.

Unlike C-V2X, NR-V2X is considering four submodes of mode 2. The submodes are defined as:

Mode (2a): Each V-UE autonomously selects the resources for its transmission.

Mode (2b): V-UEs assist other UEs in the selection of their resources. The receiving V-UE can also assist the transmitting V-UE via PSFCCH.

Mode (2c): V-UEs use the preconfigured sidelink resources for transmission.

Mode (2d):V-UEs perform the scheduling on behalf of other V-UEs for resource selection.

Progress in Standardization Activities on the Sensing Mechanism in NR-V2X Mode 2
This section sums up the already identified 3GPP ReI. 16 work on NR-V2X and new items for ReI. 17. Subsequent 3GPP meetings are considering NR-V2X mode 2, and evaluating the submodes and sensing-based mechanism. 3GPP ReI. 16 identifies the two sensing procedures as long-term sensing, defined in C-V2X, 3GPP ReI. 14/15, and short-term sensing. Short-term sensing, also known as Listen Before Talk (LBT), is a potential sensing technique where V-UE senses the channel and performs random backoff before accessing the channel. LBT is defined for unlicensed spectrum band; however, at this stage, it is not clear whether it can be used for advanced V2X applications over licensed spectrum.

In NR-V2X mode 2, 3GPP is considering the re-evaluation mechanism [8]. In the re-evaluation mechanism, the V-UE will continue sensing during the selection window after it has selected the sidelink resources. The V-UE will re-evaluate step 1 of the mode 2 algorithm to verify that the resources selected from the selection window are still available. If not, V-UE will reselect the candidate sidelink resources. The re-evaluation execution depends on the V-UE implementation. A preemption mechanism is introduced in NR-V2X for traffic prioritization. V-UE with low priority frees up its resources for high-priority V-U E. Furthermore, to meet the advance vehicular applications requirements. some enhancements are required in the following areas.

Reducing Latency
In C-V2X, a sensing win- dow of 1 s is used for the selection and reservation of resources that can be reduced to meet the latency requirements. However, the short time sensing can increase the probability of V-UE not finding the resources for transmission. An efficient mechanism should be introduced to balance the latency and probability of collision.

Reducing the Impact of High Mobility
Long- term sensing results becomes quickly obsolete because of high mobility of vehicles. A mechanism is needed to reduce the impact of high mobility on the usefulness of sensing results.

Reducing the Impact of Hidden-Nodes
Three nodes, A, B, and C, in which both A and C are aware of B, but A is not aware of C and C is not aware of B, constitute the hidden node problem. Relying only on local sensing, if A and C start a simultaneous transmission toward B, there will be collision. A mechanism should be introduced to coordinate with other V-UEs regarding the scheduling of resources, avoiding the hidden node problem.

Performance Comparison and Evaluation of C-V2X and NR-V2X
The resource selection mechanism works well for periodic messages transmission in C-V2X, whereas in NR-V2X, both periodic and aperiodic messages are equally relevant. CAM generation rules defined by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) state that messages are not necessarily periodic [12]. CAM generation relies on the position, direction (heading), and velocity of V-UE when any of the following conditions is met:

Position: Change in position by 4 m

Heading: Change of direction greater than or equal to ± 4°

Velocity: Change of speed greater than or equal to 0.5 ms-1

The size of CAMs is also not fixed. CAM includes an intelligent transportation system (ITS) packet datagram unit (PDU) header, a basic container, and a high-frequency container. The basic container includes the vehicle position. Information such as velocity and direction is included in the high-frequency container. A low-frequency container and a special vehicle container can also be included optionally. The CAM size depends on the optionally included container. Considering the aperiodic messages, vehicles have to reselect the resources in two cases: first, when a new message packet is generated that is a bigger size than the previously reserved message size, and second, in latency-critical transmission [13]. For a particular scenario, consider a message packet generated at to time that selects the two subchannels at TR1for its transport block transmission. For its future transmission, the vehicle reserves the resource at TR2, which is equal to the sum of RRl and the time TR1at which the last message packet was transmitted. If a next message packet generated for the same vehicle at t1 and the sum of t1 and RRl is less than TR2, the vehicle has to reselect the subchannels for its transmission.

The probability of collision increases when two vehicles at the same time sense the channel as the sensing window overlaps. The probability of collision also increases by the increase in the number of vehicles. The probability that two vehicles can select the same resources depends on λ and the number of slots available in 1 s [14]. In C-V2X the probability is equal to λ/1000, whereas in NR-V2X with subcarrier spacing equal to 30 kHz and 60 kHz, the probability of collision is reduced by factors of 2 and 4, given as λ/2000 and λ/4000, respectively.

Performance Evaluation
The N R-V2X and C-V2X performance comparison is performed on a simulator (the open source simulator is provided at https://github.com/malik-saadS4/NR-V2X-sub-6GHz-band) developed over the LTE module in ns-3 in line with the 3GPP Rels. 14 and 16. NR numerologies are implemented with subcarrier spacing of 30 kHz and 60 kHz with the WINNER + B1 channel. The B1 channel model is considered for 5.9 GHz band, and the antenna height set for V-UEs is 1.5 m. A 3GPPP Manhattan grid of 750 x 500 m-2 is deployed with V-UE density up to 300 vehicles in the grid. Figure 3 shows the impact of resource reservation period on the performance of C-V2X and NR-V2X. Vehicle traffic of 250 vehicles is considered. The inter-arrival time of application packets is assumed to be 100 ms. The resource reservation period of 100–1000 ms is considered. Packet delivery ratio (PDR) is measured with the increase in resource reservation period. As the resource reservation period is increased, it results in decrease of the number of used resources by the vehicles within a given period. Figure 3 shows that the PDR exceeded more than 80 percent in C-V2X when the resource reservation period is increased beyond 500 ms. However, in NR-V2X with subcarrier spacing 30 kHz and 60 kHz, the performance is improved when the resource reservation period is increased beyond 300 ms. The improved performance in NR-V2X with subcarrier spacing of 30 kHz and 60 kHz is due to the number of available slots per second being two times and four times greater than C-V2X with 15 kHz subcarrier spacing. Consequently, the probability of selecting the same resources by the V-UE is reduced, which results in better performance of NR-V2X.

Figure 4 shows the effect of sidelink variations, that is, the number of dedicated subchannels to the V-UEs on the PDR. Each dedicated subchannel consists of 10 RBs, where each RB has 12 subcarriers. With the increase in the number of sidelinks, the PDR also increases. In C-V2X, the performance of PDR is improved by dedicating more subchannels to the V-UEs, which reduces the probability of multiple vehicles selecting the same resources simultaneously. PDR increases more than 90 percent in NR-V2X even by utilizing fewer sidelink subchannels. This is due to the higher number of slots available for transmission in NR-V2X with 30 kHz and 60 kHz subcarrier spacing, which in return reduces the probability of concurrent selection of the same resources by different V-U Es.

Figure 3. - Impact of resource reservation period.
Figure 3.
Impact of resource reservation period.

Show All

Figure 4. - Impact of number of avaialable sidelink (sl) subchannels.
Figure 4.
Impact of number of avaialable sidelink (sl) subchannels.

Show All

Figure 5 shows the impact of number of vehicles on PDR. As the number of vehicles increased, PDR decreased due to the increase in the probability of same resource selection by different V-UEs. Performance of C-V2X and NR-V2X with subcarrier spacing of 30 kHz and 60 kHz was observed by varying the density of vehicles. The number of vehicles was kept between 100 and 300, and the probability of resource reselection was kept at 0.5, with RRI of 100 ms. PDR decreased in all three cases; however, the impact on NR-V2X equipped vehicles was less.

Figure 5. - Impact of number of vehicles,
Figure 5.
Impact of number of vehicles,

Show All

Future Research Directions
Resource selection is still an open challenge recognized by 3GPP in NR-V2X. The current sensing-based mechanism, also known as long-term sensing, can reduce the probability of collision to increase reliability with induced latency. However, due to the highly dynamic environment, the sensing results quickly become obsolete. To overcome this problem, a potential technique, short-term sensing, with window size ≤ 1 s, is introduced. However, this increases the probability of collision or added latency if vehicles cannot find the free resources available in the short term. The following potential solutions are included, where some of them are officially approved and some are under discussion.

Sidelink Grant-Free Transmission
Grant-free transmission includes pre-configuration of a pool comprising time-frequency repetition patterns (TFRPs). TFRPs include the frequency and time location of each UE for its transmission. It can provide low latency and high reliability as in LTE-020 Rel. 14/15 mode 2, and can be extended for NR-V2X applications.

Assisting V-Ue
For resource selection, V-UEs assist other V-UEs. Using PSFCH, a receiving V-UE can notify a transmitting V-U E of its preferred resources.

Scheduler V-Ue (Sv-Ue)
The idea is to devise a mechanism such that a V-UE can schedule resources for other V-UEs. This kind of mechanism is useful in vehicular platooning [13]. The V-UE can perform resource allocation for other UEs to avoid collision

Inter V-Ue Coordination
Introducing coor- dination between vehicles, that is, in which the UEs share their action of selecting resources with their proximity UEs, is a potential solution that can reduce packet collisions.

Furthermore, ML techniques can also be incorporated; for example, a reinforcement-learning-based mechanism can be used by vehicles to find the optimal sub-band for transmission. The other solutions include geo-based scheduling as discussed in [15], which mitigates the hidden terminal problem due to sensing-based SPS in C-V2X. In the geo-based scheduling scheme, vehicles approximate the location of neighboring vehicles and form a virtual queue. Based on their order in a virtual queue, vehicles assign them a position index (PI) which is an integer number. Corresponding to the PI, each vehicle selects the dedicated subframe from the pool for its transmission to avoid packet collisions.

Conclusions
This article summarizes the comparison and advancements between 3GPP Rel. 16 and C-V2X Rels. 14 and 15. Furthermore, the article emphasizes C-V2X mode 4 and NR-V2X mode 2. As these modes do not require any cellular infrastructure, they are considered as the baseline scheme. The conducted research has shown that NR numerology in NR-V2X plays a key role in line with advanced vehicular applications. However, sensing-based SPS for resource selection still needs amendments to make it a collision-free distributed scheduling scheme. This article has also presented future research directions to improve the distributed scheduling for resource selection in V2X. 3GPP Rel. 17, in addition to reliability enhancement, is also working on improvement of the distributed scheduling scheme.