Achieving higher spectral efficiency is an efficient approach to address the bandwidth crisis of optical networks, but it faces significant technical challenges. High-spectral-efficiency non-orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (NOFDM) has been proposed for meeting the requirement of optical networks' capacity upgrade. Compared to orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing, NOFDM can achieve higher spectral efficiency by compressing the subcarrier spacing narrower than the Nyquist orthogonal spacing, but this inevitably induces inter-carrier interference (ICI). ICI cancellation algorithms are crucial in NOFDM for correctly recovering the transmitted signal at the expense of extra processing power. Nowadays, processing power is no longer the obstacle to eliminate ICI due to the rapid development of application-specific integrated circuits for efficient implementation of digital signal processing. In this article, fast multiplexing and demultiplexing for NOFDM are implemented based on inverse fast Fourier transform and fast Fourier transform, respectively. Meanwhile, three representative ICI cancellation algorithms are discussed, and one of them is experimentally implemented. Furthermore, we propose non-orthogonal discrete multitone (NODMT) by integrating the advantages of NOFDM and DMT, which has the potential to achieve improved spectral efficiency for future optical networks.
Introduction
Compared to orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing, NOFDM can achieve higher spectral efficiency by compressing the subcarrier spacing narrower than the Nyquist orthogonal spacing, but this inevitably induces inter-carrier interference (ICI). ICI cancellation algorithms are crucial in NOFDM for correctly recovering the transmitted signal at the expense of extra processing power.
The development of bandwidth-hungry network applications (e.g., 4K/8K high-definition video and virtual/augmented reality applications) results in exponential growth of data traffic [1]. In the foreseeable future, the capacity of optical networks based on current technologies will reach the limit [2], [3]. Increasing the capacity per wavelength is becoming more and more difficult due to the severe constraints induced by the channel and devices. In the backbone optical networks, it is hard for the bandwidth of devices to keep pace with the evolution of baud rate per wavelength (e.g., the next generation 200 GBaud). At the edge of optical networks, many cost-sensitive scenarios prefer low-cost devices with relatively low bandwidth, such as passive optical networks and optical interconnects. Consequently, the restriction of device bandwidth is a significant challenge in the capacity upgrade of future optical networks.

In 1975, as an evolution of Nyquist signaling, faster-than-Nyquist (FTN) signaling was first proposed to pack more data by further compressing the symbol duration or subcarrier spacing in a single-carrier or multi-carrier system, respectively [4]. However, the compression operation destroys the orthogonality to inevitably induce the inter-symbol interference or inter-carrier interference (ICI) in a single-carrier or multi-carrier system, respectively, which seriously degrades the performance of the systems. Fortunately, the Mazo limit shows that the induced interference can be eliminated without performance penalty when less than ∼25 percent extra bits are packed in FTN signaling. In exchange, FTN systems require extra complicated processing to deal with the induced interference. Efficient interference cancellation algorithms are crucial for improving the performance of FTN systems. In essence, FTN systems trade off between the computational complexity and increased spectral efficiency.

Multi-carrier FTN systems have been viewed as a promising technology with small granularity in future optical networks. Figure 1 shows the evolution of multi-carrier systems from conventional frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) to non-orthogonal FDM (NOFDM) for achieving higher spectral efficiency. At the beginning, a frequency-domain guard band should be added between the subcarriers of FDM to avoid interference. As the evolution of multi-carrier systems, subcarriers of orthogonal FDM (OFDM) are overlapped but orthogonal, which achieves high spectral efficiency as Nyquist signaling for flexible optical networks [5]. As a variant of multi-carrier FTN systems, NOFDM is proposed to further compress the subcarrier spacing for obtaining a narrower bandwidth than OFDM [6]. Not surprisingly, optical NOFDM has been implemented to achieve higher spectral efficiency for bandwidth-limited optical networks [7]. The compression of subcarrier spacing breaks the orthogonality between subcarriers, which induces severe ICI. In the early stage, the high-power digital signal processing (DSP) application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) of the complicated ICI cancellation algorithms limits the practical applications of NOFDM. Nowadays, with the advances in complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology, a high-performance 7 nm DSP ASIC has been applied in commercial 800G high-capacity optical networks [8]. Therefore, practical implementation of ICI cancellation algorithms is no longer an obstacle for NOFDM systems.

In this article, we further propose non-orthogonal discrete multi-tone (NODMT) by integrating the high spectral efficiency of NOFDM and the adaptive bit allocation of DMT to achieve higher spectral efficiency for bandwidth-limited optical networks.

Spectral compression: Compared to OFDM, NOFDM can allocate more subcarriers or better tolerate high-frequency distortions on the limited bandwidth to achieve higher capacity or better performance, respectively [9].

Bit and power allocations: DMT is a variant of OFDM with bit and power allocations, which allocates different modulations and power on each subcarrier for maximizing the number of bits depending on its signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [10].

With such inherent features, NODMT can sufficiently exploit the available bandwidth and SNR to achieve higher capacity or better performance for bandwidth-limited optical networks.

In the following sections, we first introduce the fast multiplexing and demultiplexing of NOFDM based on inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) and fast Fourier transform (FFT), respectively. For eliminating the ICI of NOFDM, we discuss and compare the popular ICI cancellation algorithms. The multiplexing, demultiplexing, and ICI cancellation algorithms for NOFDM apply equally to NODMT. Finally, by using fast multiplexing and demultiplexing, ICI cancellation algorithms, and bit and power allocations, NODMT is experimentally demonstrated for 50G optical access networks based on low-cost 10G-class commercial devices to verify the superiority of NODMT for bandwidth-limited optical networks.

NOFDM Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
In the beginning, the high-complexity hardware of OFDM limited it to application in commercial communication systems. In the late 1960s, researchers proposed IFFT and FFT to implement fast multiplexing and demultiplexing for OFDM, respectively, which significantly simplified the implementation complexity. In the 1990s, high-performance processors and low-complexity IFFT and FFT promoted OFDM to be applied in commercial asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) scenarios [11]. Similarly, how to implement fast multiplexing and demultiplexing is also one of the key steps for practical applications of NOFDM. Inverse fractional Fourier transform (IFrFT) and fractional Fourier transform (FrFT) are usually employed to implement multiplexing and demultiplexing in NOFDM, respectively. However, IFrFT and FrFT have no fast algorithms, and thus have high computational complexity. Here, as indicated in Fig. 2, we employ the fast multi-plexing and demultiplexing based on IFFT and FFT for NOFDM to replace the conventional IFrFT and FrFT, respectively [12].

Figure 1. - The evolution from FDM to NOFDM for achieving higher spectral efficiency.
Figure 1.
The evolution from FDM to NOFDM for achieving higher spectral efficiency.

Show All

In the multiplexing process, the bit sequence is first mapped into quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). Only some frequency-domain subcarriers are modulated with QAM. The rest of the frequency-domain subcarriers are set to zeros. After the IFFT, some of the time-domain output samples are kept for generating an NOFDM symbol, and the others are discarded. Therefore, the compression factor of the generated NOFDM symbol is equal to the length of the remaining time-domain samples divided by the length of valid frequency-domain subcarriers. To achieve the spectral efficiency of FTN signaling, the number of valid frequency-domain subcarriers should be larger than the number of the remaining time-domain samples. In the demultiplexing process, the zeros are added to the positions of the discarded time-domain samples to reconstruct one input symbol of N-FFT. After the N-FFT, the output simultaneously contains QAM and ICI. Obviously, ICI is caused by the discarded time-domain samples, which seriously degrades the performance of NOFDM. Therefore, how to effectively eliminate ICI becomes one of the key issues for NOFDM.

Review of ICI Cancellation Algorithms
In this section, three representative ICI cancellation algorithms are discussed for NOFDM, including successive interference cancellation (SIC), iterative detection, and maximum likelihood detection.

Successive Interference Cancellation
The concept of SIC is well known and widely applied to eliminate regular interference in the field of communications. For NOFDM, a coding-assisted SIC algorithm was proposed to effectively eliminate ICI [13]. Figure 2 shows the transmitter and receiver diagrams of NOFDM with the coding-assisted SIC algorithm. At the transmitter end, the information bits are coded by channel coding such as convolutional code. Π denotes the interleaving operation, which can eliminate the burst-consecutive error in channel decoding. After QAM mapping and NOFDM multiplexing, the NOFDM signal with channel coding is generated. At the receiver end, the recovered symbol after NOFDM demultiplexing contains the QAM symbol and ICI. The ICI can be extracted and subtracted by reconstructing the transmitted symbols, as described in the following steps. Channel decoding based on the Bahl, Cocke, Jelinek, and Raviv (BCJR) algorithm has a strong error correcting capability, which can correct the error symbols to obtain more accurate soft decision symbols. Then the soft decision symbols are sent into NOFDM multiplexing and demultiplexing. The outputs subtract the soft-decision symbols to extract the ICI. The recovered symbols subtract the estimated ICI to obtain the symbols with less ICI. After each iteration, the soft decision symbols are more and more accurate due to less and less ICI and error correction of channel decoding, and the estimated ICI is also more and more accurate. When the soft decision symbols are error-free after channel decoding (i.e., the symbol error ratio is equal to zero), the estimated ICI is absolutely accurate. The recovered symbols after NOFDM demultiplexing can subtract the accurate ICI to obtain the QAM symbols without any ICI.


Figure 2.
The block diagram of DSP for NOFDM based on the coding-assisted successive interference cancellation algorithms. LLR calc.: Log-likelihood ratio calculation; Π: Interleaving operation; BCJR: Bahl, cocke, jelinek, and raviv.

Show All

Iterative Detection
Figure 3 shows iterative detection and cascaded iterative detection for 4-QAM and 16-QAM in NOFDM, respectively. In the iterative detection, 4-QAM is first decomposed into two 2-level pulse amplitude modulations (2-PAMs). Each 2-PAM is processed by iterative detection. We map the points that fall in the colored area to the matched constellation positions. While falling in the uncertainty region (i.e., the white region), the points remain unchanged. The ICI can be gradually eliminated after each iteration. The uncertainty region becomes smaller gradually with the increase of iterative times. The number of samples in the uncertainty region is reduced gradually until it vanishes with the increase of iterative times. To effectively eliminate ICI on high-level QAM, cascaded iterative detection with more stages should be employed [14]. Cascaded iterative detection with three stages can eliminate the ICI for 16-QAM in NOFDM. Due to the cascaded structure, all the decision errors can be considered as being induced in the last stage. Assuming the iterative detections in the previous stages effectively remove the corresponding ICI, the residual ICI in the last stage is relatively small, and can be eliminated easily. Therefore, cascaded iterative detection is effective for reducing ICI for high-level QAM-modulated NOFDM, although certain performance degradation may occur since higher SNR is required.

Maximum Likelihood Detection
Figure 4 shows a schematic diagram of maximum likelihood detection based on multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) for NOFDM. The ICI in NOFDM systems has similar characteristics with interference between antennas in MIMO systems. Therefore, the interference cancellation algorithms for MIMO systems are also effective for NOFDM systems. Maximum likelihood detection is one of the popular interference cancellation algorithms for MIMO systems, which has also been investigated to reduce ICI in NOFDM [15]. However, conventional maximum likelihood detection is based on exhaustive search, which suffers from exponentially increased computational complexity with increased subcarrier number and QAM level, making it infeasible for practical applications. The researchers proposed tree-search algorithms to decrease the computational complexity of maximum likelihood detection, which are mainly divided into two categories: depth-first and breadth-first tree-search algorithms. Both the depth-first and breadth-first tree-search algorithms make a trade-off between performance and complexity.

In conclusion, the performance and complexity of iterative detection and maximum likelihood detection are both sensitive to the QAM level and subcarrier number. Therefore, iterative detection and maximum likelihood detection may be impractical for NOFDM with dynamic QAM level and subcarrier number. The coding-assisted SIC algorithm is almost transparent to the QAM level and subcarrier number. Although the coding-assisted SIC algorithm repeats the DSP of the transmitter and receiver in each iteration, leading to high computational complexity, it is not a bottleneck for practical implementation thanks to the rapid development and advancement of DSP ASICs.

Non-Orthogonal DMT
In this section, we investigate NODMT by integrating the advantages of NOFDM and DMT to further improve the performance of bandwidth-limited optical networks. Compared to NOFDM, NODMT can exploit the SNR more sufficiently by using adaptive bit allocation. Compared to DMT, NODMT enables the enhancement of spectral efficiency by employing spectral compression. The superiority of NODMT is verified in the scenario of optical access networks, where economically viable devices with strong bandwidth limits are preferred since end users are very sensitive to cost.

Existing commercial 10G optical access networks use 10G-class devices with sufficient bandwidth to transmit 10 Gb/s user data, in which DSP is not required. In next-generation 50G optical access networks, the bandwidth of commercial devices is difficult to substantially increase to match the data rate of 50 Gb/s under the constraint of cost and techniques. Therefore, next-generation 50G optical access networks will use the relatively mature 25G-class devices; thus, DSP is inevitably employed to ensure an acceptable power budget. Here, we propose to reuse 10G-class devices of 10 Gb/s optical access networks to achieve 50 Gb/s data transmission for cost-sensitive optical access networks, representing a five-fold increase in capacity and cost effectiveness per bit. The performance comparisons are demonstrated among NODMT, NOFDM, and DMT for 50G optical access networks based on 10G-class devices.

For NODMT, first of all, the SNR of each subcarrier is estimated by using training symbols at the stage of communication establishment. Then certain criteria of bit and power allocations such as the Chow algorithm are applied based on the estimated SNR of each subcarrier and targeted average bit number per subcarrier as well as SNR margin [10]. The algorithm starts with bit allocation based on the channel capacity approximation in an iterative manner; then the power allocation is applied depending on the bit allocation and the margin. Ideally, after bit and power allocations, the number of bits on each subcarrier is optimal while achieving the targeted average bit number per subcarrier. Obviously, the QAM level varies with subcarrier index in NODMT. Meanwhile, the resolution of bit and power allocations is determined by the subcarrier number. As discussed above, the coding-assisted SIC algorithm is almost transparent to the QAM level and subcarrier number. Therefore, the coding-assisted SIC algorithm is well suited to NODMT, which is implemented in the experiment of 50 Gb/s NODMT.

Figure 5 shows the experimental setup of the 50 Gb/s NODMT using low-cost 10G-class commercial devices for next-generation optical access networks. At the transmitter end, the digital NODMT signal was generated by offline DSP using MATLAB, which follows the steps depicted in Fig. 2. The random bits were first coded by the channel coding based on convolutional coding. After interleaving operation, bit allocation was implemented based on the estimated SNR of each subcarrier for generating the corresponding QAM. Finally, the digital NODMT signal was generated after the NOFDM multiplexing. The subcarrier number was set to 1024. The cyclic prefix was not added due to the time-domain equalizer used in the experiment. A digital-to-analog converter (DAC) converted the digital NODMT signal into an analog electrical signal, which has a maximum sampling rate of 90 GSa/s and a 3dB bandwidth


Figure 3.
Iterative detection and cascaded iterative detection for 4-QAM and 16-QAM in NOFDM, respectively. of 16 GHz. After resampling operation, the sample rate of the analog electrical signal is 25 GSa/s. The link rate of NODMT is 50 Gb/s when the average targeted bit number per subcarrier is set to 2. An electrical amplifier (Microsemi OA3MH-QM) was employed to amplify the analog electrical signal. Then the amplified electrical signal was modulated on a 1330 nm optical carrier to generate an optical NODMT signal by a commercial transmitter optical subassembly (TOSA) based on a 10G direct-modulated laser (DML). Finally, the optical NODMT signal was launched into 20 km standard single-mode fiber (SSMF).

Show All

Figure 4. - Schematic diagram of maximum likelihood detection (MLD) based on the multiple-input multiple-output model for NOFDM.
Figure 4.
Schematic diagram of maximum likelihood detection (MLD) based on the multiple-input multiple-output model for NOFDM.

Show All

At the receiver end, we employed a variable optical attenuator (VOA) to change the received optical power (ROP). A commercial receiver optical subassembly (ROSA) based on 10G avalanche photodiodes (APD) with a 25G trans-impedance amplifier (TIA) was used to convert the optical signal into an electrical signal. Then the electrical signal was digitized by an 80 GSa/s real-time oscilloscope (RTO) with a cutoff frequency of 36 GHz. Finally, the offline DSP at the receiver end as indicated in Fig. 2 was used to recover the digital signal into the transmitted bits. The offline DSP consists of a time-domain equalizer for compensating the linear and nonlinear distortions and the coding-assisted SIC algorithm for eliminating the ICI to recover the transmitted bits. The main processing of the coding-assisted SIC algorithm was detailed earlier. The iterative number of the coding-assisted SIC algorithm was set to 2.


Figure 5.
High-spectral-efficiency, sufficient-SNR-exploitation, and high-receiver-sensitivity 50 Gb/s NODMT using low-cost 10G-class commercial devices for next-generation optical access networks.

Show All

The bit allocations of NODMT and DMT in Fig. 5 depict that NODMT has narrower bandwidth while achieving the same data rate as DMT. The optimized compression factor of NODMT is set to 0.875, which can save 12.5 percent high-frequency bandwidth compared to DMT. Therefore, NODMT is more effective in avoiding high-frequency spectral fading than DMT. Conventional NOFDM usually transmits the same number of bits on each subcarrier, which inevitably encounters high bit error rates (BERs) on the subcarriers at the high frequency region, leading to a high average BER. NODMT transmits an optimal number of bits on each subcarrier depending on its SNR enabling an optimal average BER. Therefore, NODMT has better BER performance compared to DMT and NOFDM in theory. As the BER performance in Fig. 5 shows, the ROP of NODMT is approximately −20 dBm at the BER of 0.01 after 20 km SSMF transmission, which is approximately 2 dB better than both DMT and NOFDM. The 2 dB improvement of receiver sensitivity enabled by NODMT agrees well with the theoretical analysis, verifying the superiority of NODMT over NOFDM and DMT.

Discussions
In this section, we discuss the challenges for the application of NODMT in practical scenarios.

Complexity and Latency
The coding-assisted SIC algorithm reconstructs the ICI by repeating almost all the DSP of the transmitter and receiver, which causes high complexity and latency. Although today's DSP ASIC can support implementation of the coding-assisted SIC algorithm, it still faces significant challenges for cost- and power-sensitive scenarios. Therefore, reducing the complexity and latency of NODMT is the prime task for practical scenarios. Effective implementation approaches of the coding-assisted SIC algorithm can be further proposed and studied to decrease the complexity and latency of each iteration or reduce the number of iterations.

Efficient Channelcoding
The SIC algorithms usually introduce a phenomenon of error propagation when the BER of the feedback bits is high. Therefore, the error correcting performance of the channel coding determines the performance of the coding-assisted SIC algorithm. In NODMT, serious ICI leads to a high BER, which requires efficient channel coding to effectively correct the error bits. In the coding-assisted SIC algorithm, a desired channel coding can correct the error bits even with a high BER at the first iteration and significantly reduce error bits after each iteration. The qualified channel coding is one of the challenges in NODMT.

Conclusion
Effectively transmitting more data over an optical channel with limited bandwidth has become the main challenge with the upgrade of capacity per wavelength in future optical networks. By integrating the advantages of NOFDM and DMT, we propose NODMT to achieve enhanced spectral efficiency for future optical networks. For promoting the practical applications of NODMT, fast multiplexing and demultiplexing have been implemented based on IFFT and FFT, respectively. Meanwhile, the coding-assisted SIC algorithm has been investigated to effectively eliminate the ICI in NODMT. Finally, we set up a 50G optical access network based on low-cost 10G-class commercial devices to experimentally demonstrate the performance superiority of NODMT for bandwidth-limited optical networks. The experimental results show that NODMT has a 2 dB gain in receiver sensitivity compared to conventional NOFDM and DMT. In conclusion, NODMT has the potential to be applied in future optical networks toward higher spectral efficiency.