Abstract
In this paper we explore gender issues in the maker movement using four different methods of data analysis: standardised questionnaires, analysis of makerspaces’ social media, statistical analysis of machine use and the coding of interviews and focus groups. The objective is to give a voice to female makers and makerspace managers, looking at the maker movement from an inside perspective.

The paper demonstrates how gendered stereotypes are still reproduced within the maker movement. Makerspaces still attract considerably more males than females and exhibit a primarily “male” culture, reflected in the interior design of places, or by the language and attitudes of their members. Females in makerspaces, however, often have a background in communications, arts or design, as opposed to the coding or engineering background of the males. Previous research has shown how machines and materials also take on gendered connotations. The “genderisation” of objects refers to an attributed gender-specific use of machines. An example here could be that 3D printing, which is more often used by female makers compared to male members of makerspaces. Our research also identifies promising approaches for tackling the issue of gender imbalance. The maker movement has significant potential to improve gender equality as younger generations bring societal change to makerspaces and break with stereotypes. One of the findings our paper puts forward is the lack of female role models, especially in leading positions.

Our data suggest that the maker scene still has to develop a tradition in reflecting questions around gender stereotypes or their role in partly reproducing them. Hence, we argue that the maker community should be more attentive to this issue and should make a concerted effort to become more diverse. Overall, our case research did not reveal any explicit animosity to gender questions; on the contrary, male makers and most maker communities showed great interest in avoiding gender stereotyping. We suggest applying the Bechdel-Test as a simple tool for clarifying gender topics and encouraging self-reflection among makers. Overall, our paper aims to support makerspaces that want to make diversity part of their strategy for future growth.

Previous
Keywords
Makerspace

Making

Gender

1. Introduction
The maker movement is spreading rapidly all over the world. This can be seen in the increasing number of FabLabs, i.e. spaces that offer digital fabrication machinery and teach the skills to operate it. In 2003, when the first FabLab was founded at MIT in Boston (Gershenfeld, 2012), it was still a unique initiative. By August 2020, the number of FabLabs registered on fablabs.io had reached 1,937 (Fablabs.io, n.d.). The maker movement grew out of a desire to make digital manufacturing and communication technologies, such as 3D printers, laser cutters and online community platforms, more accessible. They subscribe to a culture defined by an open source rationale based on the sharing of knowledge and the free circulation of designs. Thus making is theoretically open to anyone interested (cf. Anderson, 2012; Dougherty, 2012; Rifkin, 2014).

These FabLabs are key actors of the maker movement and are expected to function as spaces of technological and social innovation. The movement is faced with high expectations regarding its potential to dismantle the gendered nature of ‘anything tech’ because makerspaces are seen as places of empowerment as well as tech-related education (cf. Taylor et al., 2016). However, “hacking, technologies may make space for new gender dynamics” (Fox et al., 2015, 57). Every new technology opens up a, sometimes tacit, renegotiation of power and gender relations (Wajcman, 2013) or, as Fox et al. (2015) state: “Technological change is a struggle for control of different groups” (p. 46).

There are huge differences in makerspaces, with the likes of tech spaces, repair cafes and hacker spaces on the one side (Ammari et al., 2017; Sherrill, 2017) and on the other, female dominated spaces and communities, such as sewing cafes, the arts and craft movement and cultural and learning spaces (Weibert et al., 2014). Expectations might merge and overcome these dichotomous biases. The act of tech-inspired making in open makerspaces and FabLabs is a low-threshold offering open to everyone interested, and therefore it can act as an engine for social inclusion and gender equality.

For the maker movement, this article endeavours to apply a multifaceted and dynamic understanding towards gender as a social construct. Due to binary constructions in early research design it must be stated that this endeavour has its limitations and finding concentrate foremost on the issues of females. People outside the gender binary, including non-binary people as well as those who identify as agender, gender-fluid or genderqueer, are not taken into account in the present research.

One of the societal issues related to this research is females’ underrepresentation in tech-related professions, also known as the “women tech gap” or the “tech industry gender gap” (Wojcicki, 2017). Peers (2018) sketches this situation by contrasting the good salary and employment situation in engineering (Atkins, 2013) with the facts of gendered tech: In the UK only 11% of the engineering workforce is female (Kumar et al., 2015), the number of women in computing degree programmes seems to be declining (Jee, 2015), and access to education in STEM subjects has not changed in 25 years (Joint Council for Qualifications, 2017). This issue is of growing importance, shaping the fourth industrial revolution (Schwab, 2016) and the knowledge and information society. One of the main results of the Global Gender Gap report, published by the World Economic Forum (2016), as to how the exclusion of women in tech professions will harm not only them, but socio-economic development as a whole.

In our empirical research as part of the project “MAKE-IT”, funded by the European Commission's Horizon 2020 programme, gender was treated as a cross-cutting theme in our approach to understand the maker movement (MAKE-IT, n.d.).

The following explanations search for dimensions of inequality within the maker movement and their inherent modes of action. We therefore employ qualitative and quantitative measures to find gender issues in the maker movement. The overriding aim is the synthesis of all findings on gender-issues through the integration of various sources of data. Chapter 2 provides an overview of the research on gender in makerspaces so far, and then in chapter 3, we present the framework and methodology used to analyse the material generated in our empirical research. The heart of this paper is to be found in chapter 4, where all findings are presented alongside four guiding categories. Nearly all of the cases examined have already implemented strategies to combat gender inequalities and imbalances in their everyday lives. These approaches and efforts, taken from existing literature, are collected within a subchapter of chapter 4. Chapter 5 then concludes with a synthesis of the data, before offering an outlook on further research demands, as well as an initial approach as to how these issues can be treated in the future with a specific tool, the “Bechdel Test for makerspaces”.

2. Related work and research gap
The HCI discourse has a long tradition of examining power relations connected to technology and social practices. Work in this field considers whether new technologies repeat or even deepen existing power asymmetries. This dialogue is aimed at overcoming or mitigating these problems through an understanding of the potentials of technology.

Power asymmetries can be found at several levels, such as world regions (e.g. Pick and Nishida, 2015), gender (e.g. Ammari et al., 2017), wealth (e.g. Tichenor et al., 1970) and education or disabilities (e.g. Stendal, 2012), to name a few. This debate has been enriched by the maker movement as a social phenomenon that aims to provide access to technology for everyone. According to Toombs et al. (2015): “In HCI, they [communities of makers, the authors] seem to carry the promise of new forms of computer use, education, innovation and even ways of life” (p. 629).

The maker movement is not considered to be unpolitical (cf. Unterfrauner et al., 2017, 81). There are several strong political dimensions to the movement, which “aims to correct an erroneous history, namely a divide between a few producing and many consuming countries” (Carstensen et al., 2014). It claims, in large part, to be inclusive and there is a common self-perception among makers of the community being open in all terms. This philosophy of wanting to be accessible, available, adaptable and acceptable to everyone willing to participate implies a credo integrally bound up with the conception of equal rights and dignity regardless of personal characteristics or skills and abilities. The Fab Charter (2012) defines FabLabs as an open available resource for the community. Thus, as Chidgey (2014) argues, making as a grassroots movement has the potential to create different narratives. This places the maker culture in line with the academic strand of linking the internet to counter-culture, empowerment and democratic technology access (Coleman, 1999). Or, according to Green et al. (2019): “Making and open source hardware, in other words, have become a site to confront and contest who gets to say what counts as ‘openness’, ‘authentic’ innovation, and creativity” (p. 2). The question of whether an open culture of technology access has contributed to mitigating existing power structures and exclusivity is discussed ambivalently. Green et al. (2019) identify two lines of arguments: “On one hand, we have the celebratory endorsements of ‘openness’ as applied to technology and design. On the other hand, we have a continuous and expanding critique of these very ideals and questions, where that critique identifies persisting forms of racial, gender, age, and class-based exclusions (...)” (p. 2).

However, even grassroots movements may mask power differences and structural marginalisation. Toombs et al. (2015) connect the question of technology access and power relations to political schools of thought: “We found that the maker ethic entails a complex negotiation of both a neo-liberal libertarian ethos and a care ethos” (p. 629). With these two poles of ethics, Toombs et al. (2015) span the array of approaches fielded by the maker movement in questions of inclusion and openness, and therefore its role in overcoming existing power-technology binds: from individual use, profit and empowerment to shared, social and even societal technology access.

One of the expectations of the maker movement is its ability to make a valuable contribution to dissolving gender stereotypes in the tech sector (Fox et al. 2015; Marshall and Rode, 2018; Taylor et al. 2016), whereby these stereotypes themselves construct and reproduce a sex-based understanding of gender (male/female). As diverse and widespread as the maker scene may be – the actors, stakeholders and communication channels involved all seem to share a specific rhetoric towards their self-perception as being open, innovative and inclusive spaces, with no room for discrimination or reproduction mechanisms of social inequalities. According to common opinion, makerspaces have potential to counteract and reverse exclusive tendencies stemming from discrimination based on personal dispositions, such as gender, ethnicity, class and disability. Weibert et al. (2014) credit the maker culture with empowering individuals to “construct a multitude of sociotechnical gendered identities” (p. 15). But there are also voices which point out how there are phenomena in the maker scene that reproduce power asymmetries through various inner workings and the predominance of certain discourses (cf. Britton, 2015; Dougherty, 2013). Bardzell et al. (2017) challenge the prevalent techno-solutionism in making and ask: “If making democratizes, why are there barriers to entry for disadvantaged populations? [...] If making empowers individuals to express their personal values and aesthetic sensibilities, why are they inculcated into entrepreneurial subjectivity?” (p. 168). For example, recent research has indicated significant disparities regarding the participation and visibility of marginalised groups in general within the maker scene (cf. Bean et al., 2015; Faulkner, 2014; Faulkner and McClard, 2014; Godfrey, 2015 and the extensive literature review by Dayton, 2017). This applies to ethnic diversity as well as sexual orientation and gender dispositions.

On a micro-level, this is of course a problem for the affected groups and individuals. The issue clearly gains complexity on a macro-level where, according to some authors, it results in “a huge untapped resource in the female population that could otherwise be contributing to these important sectors and industries” (Lewis, 2015). This economically oriented perspective is complemented by others. For example, Okerlund et al. (2018) find that “while one of the values of these spaces is radical inclusion, the general maker culture can be exclusive to some based on gender, race and socioeconomic status” (p. 187). The problem is increasingly recognised by the HCI community (among others: Ammari et al., 2017; Fox et al., 2015; Marshall and Rode, 2018; Okerlund et al., 2018; Sherrill, 2017; Weibert et al., 2014) and one insight from the debate is the necessity to exploit the maker scene's potential as a key pillar in addressing the gender gap. To do so, both research on maker movement culture and the development of gender sensitive social structures and gendered products and tools are needed.

2.1. Current debate
As part of its research agenda, the HCI discourse has revealed several mechanisms that support exclusion within makerspaces: on a general level, Ammari et al. (2017) state that the DIY-culture is used to express and reproduce masculinity and Sherrill (2017) attests that most tech communities exclude females. As the maker scene has its roots in the DIY culture (Voigt et al., 2016) and firmly builds on tech communities, path dependencies towards a male-dominated culture become visible. Beneath these broad tendencies, several issues have been identified. For the research results presented here, it must be recognised that a binary construction of gender is addressed foremost. The quantitative results, in particular, operate on a binary understanding of male and female and non-binary individuals are not taken into account.

Fox et al. (2015) identified that motherhood can create problems for female makers. Toupin (2014) found conflicts between male and female makers over the meaning of openness; difficulties in acknowledging privileges associated with gender, race, ethnicity and class; and patriarchal behaviour within the spaces. In the interviews that she conducted with female makers, several also reported sexual harassment and everyday sexism forcing them to leave. Fox et al. (2015: 59) support this by reporting sexual harassment in male-dominated makerspaces and identify social constructs, such as access and recognition, that discriminate against females in makerspaces. Although openness, as a key value in the maker movement, is a well-intended concept that is difficult to challenge, it is this openness that also creates tensions and may cause females and non-binary people to feel uncomfortable. Weibert et al. (2014) posit that a socially constructed gender inauthenticity makes it difficult for one to be both feminine and technical. Faulkner and McClard (2014) found that the sort of making undertaken by females is often not valued as ‘real making’, as their background and previous experience is not based upon professional experience in a traditional tech-field like engineering, and their products are perceived in a similar way. This also seems to affect the self-perceptions of makers. While female makers refer to themselves as “creators, designers, crafters and inventors”, male makers relate more to descriptions such as “tinkerer, hobbyist, DIYer, and engineer” (Wittemyer, 2014). Wittemyer examined female involvement in the maker movement, combining the data of three surveys, various expert surveys and ethnographic research on the ground. The first survey included 963 respondents from the U.S., China and Mexico and the other two surveys included U.S. youth and adults (n= 3,364). Wittemyer's study reported that 56% of female makers defined their role as helping others or generally “making a difference”. Additionally, they wanted to create gifts for friends and family. However, just 25% of male makers stated the same. The gender balance was nearly opposite when it came to problem solving: 50% of male makers said they were in the maker scene because they liked to “solve problems”, while 32% of women stated the same. Furthermore, women tended to avoid male-dominated makerspaces (Wittemyer, 2014).

With recourse to Kanter's theory on homo-social reproduction (2008) (‘cloning effects’), Wuschitz (2013) raises the issue that people are more likely to find their way into social environments if people with interests and characteristics similar to their own are already part of the environment. Following this approach, it can be said that makerspaces offer only a few female or non-binary role models who could attract individuals with the same dispositions. Closely connected to this insight is the indication that inclusion has a twofold challenge: not only to address “questions of access (who is included)”, but also ”questions of recognition (who is visible). (Fox et al., 2015, 56). Siann (1997) identified gendered choice in computational education and found a „can do, but don't want to“ attitude, as the offers were not found attractive by females. We can hypothesise that a similar feeling might emerge in makerspaces that are mostly designed by males. If interior design and the educational offer are implemented by males, this could result in a lack of spaces and offers that are attractive for females. There seems to be a connection between design, both in the architecture and social aspects of makerspaces, and female participation. Carstensen et al. (2014) argue that females tend to be excluded from makerspaces if these are presented as high-tech factories, while Sherrill (2017) found that makerspaces with a focus on fashion or textiles are able to attract more females.

In general, the obstacles to joining makerspaces are the same for everyone. Lack of money, information, mentorship and materials, in particular, prevent individuals from participating (cf. Bean et al., 2015, 63). But there are also significant differences between males and females. Godfrey (2015) shows that in makerspaces, “women are more equally spread between STEM fields and the humanities”, while the vast majority of cases, men have computer science and engineering backgrounds. In line with these findings, males and females find different paths into the maker movement. 41% of the women entered the scene through arts and crafts, compared to only 10% of the men (Faulkner and McClard, 2014). Here, Faulkner and McClard (2014) see different motivations in the first place; those coming from a design background are interested in “what the technology enables”, the others are often interested in the technology itself. The “accidental technologists” from the first group are mostly female and, in general, younger than their male colleagues. According to a 2014 study on the maker movement in the US (Wittemyer, 2014), male makers are, on average, nine years older than female makers. If examined separately, the disparities seem to vanish amongst the young generation of makers. In her extensive literature review on females in the maker movement, Dayton (2017) notes that “hopeful trends are evident among younger makers” (p. 9). Surveys show that self-perceptions converge and “girls and boys are equally likely to identify as ‘tech makers’, ‘girls and boys participate in making activities in similar places and have similar reasons for making with technology’, and ‘all youth makers, both female and male, are more likely than other young people to describe themselves as independent, hardworking, solution oriented, and social” (Dayton, 2017, 9). Furthermore, Peppler et al. (2015) found a greater diversity of ethnicity in those makerspaces directed towards young people and thus believes that “this new generation of makers looks to be more diverse and holds a great deal of transformative potential” (Peppler et al., 2015).

2.2. Two pathways to improvement
Taking these insights as steppingstones towards supporting females in the maker movement, the literature presents several different approaches. Overall, two pathways can be traced. First, authors suggest changing the maker culture in order to increase sensitivity to gender issues in practice. Sherrill (2017) promotes gendered pathways in the use of technology and suggests moving ‘making’ to topics that are interesting for females. A broad strand of activities can be placed on this pathway: the use of gendered devices like the microprocessor Lilypad (Weibert et al., 2014) or gendered fields of work like sewing, jewellery or fashion (Fox et al., 2015; Okerlund et al., 2018; Sherrill 2017; Weibert et al., 2014). Okerlund et al. (2018: 187) suggest “disrupting (the) existing maker culture” by introducing different working styles and new ways to open making to society (‘Statement making’). Different activities could also change the ‘look and feel’ of makerspaces in order to be less exclusive. On a more general level, this approach to changing makerspaces from within entails a reconsideration of the “set of practices that ‘count’ as making” (Bardzell et al., 2017, 182). This perspective highlights the fact that making, too, is a social construct based on successfully established, reiterated and socially accepted practices. However, this view also acknowledges that social practices can be changed, complemented or re-configured.

A second pathway encourages the foundation of specific feminist spaces. Critical voices are increasingly being heard on various platforms and in channels through which the scene communicates, especially from females (cf. i.e. Henry, 2014), manifesting the foundation of feminist makerspaces (cf. Beaudoin, 2016; Fox et al., 2015; Henry, 2014; Okerlund et al., 2018, Savic and Wuschitz, 2018). This movement follows principles of participation and plurality in order to reduce obstacles for female, trans, non-binary and also people of colour. These feminist spaces are creating safe spaces with zero tolerance towards sexism or racism. Toupin (2014) argues that there is a need for boundaries and, for codes of conduct to change male-dominated structures. A lack of formal structures would lead to those being favoured who are already privileged by their gender, ethnicity, etc. and would thus reinforce the power structures (Freeman, 1972). Thus, open spaces are not necessarily inclusive and specific feminist makerspaces could be an instrument to empower females in the maker scene. Fox et al. (2015) describe different types of feminist hackerspaces, from “woman oriented hackerspaces” (p. 58) that are “also connected to other non-feminist spaces” (p. 58) to feminist hackerspaces that choose not to disclose their address online because their members prefer to restrict access to their space.

Within both strands, we trace discussions about the role that infrastructure—both technological and social—plays in supporting inclusiveness. Green and Kirk (2018: 173) highlight “a need for new infrastructure to support iterative, collaborative making within—and across—interconnected networks of makers” and Toombs (2015) and Toombs et al. (2015) draw a connection between community maintenance in makerspaces and their openness.

Overall, we found there to be several different layers to the discourse on technology use and exclusion. The following chart tentatively sketches three different layers (“HCI and power relations”, “making and empowerment” and “making and gender”) that we present as narrowing from the broad level of technology in general to the specific level of making, and also narrowing from the broader question of power to the more specific of topic of gender-related power.

Fig 1
Download : Download high-res image (462KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Spheres of gender, openness and power.

2.3. Research gaps in the existing research
So far, our review of the literature has revealed insights into on-going discussion of gender in the maker scene, but it has also highlighted research gaps. Within their broader context, the cited authors have contributed to an understanding of gender issues in the maker scene by selective studies. We have not found comparative studies that analyse gender issues and different types of makerspaces. Yet this approach could be beneficial: the maker scene is not homogenous, rather it spans a variety of different spaces and cultures that should be considered alongside different types of makerspaces. Our literature review has described this heterogeneity, but we have not found this addressed in specific research designs. We therefore recommend a study that starts by identifying gender issues across different types of makerspaces in order to trace differences that might be linked with these types. Such a study would ask: What can we say about factors that support or hinder factors for females’ and non-binary people's participation, not only in selected makerspaces but across different types of makerspaces? Are there “gender friendly” types of makerspaces? What could be learned from them?

Our state-of-the-art review also found quantitative and qualitative studies focusing on gender relations in the maker scene. We found evidence on the number of active females but did not find this connected to qualitative results describing different types, cultures, procedures or structures. We suggest combining quantitative questions—such as the number of active female makers or their time spent in the makerspace—with qualitative descriptions of the types of makerspaces, conditions of working, the makerspaces’ social environment and the objects made in the makerspace. This work would address questions such as: how many makers self-identify as female? which position do they hold in makerspaces? what do they “make”? and how do they learn and interact? The combination of quantitative (e.g. how many females are there?) and qualitative (what do they do and how could the space and the culture be described?) data could contribute towards the identification of “what works”. However, this approach bears a significant risk of reproducing gender as a binary construct by neglecting its complexity as culturally and socially constructed.

Thus, we present a study that considers the heterogeneity of the maker scene while quantitatively and qualitatively assessing the question of gender. We examine the gender balance in the maker movement, the cultures and values of making, as well as gendered objects to better understand the scene and to suggest interventions that could work towards supporting inclusive participation in makerspaces.

3. Research framework and methodology
The study was conducted as part of a broader research project analysing the development of maker initiatives in Europe, with a focus on three research pillars. We were particularly interested in their (1) organisation and governance, (2) peer and collaborative behaviours and (3) value creation and impact, with gender as a cross-cutting issue in all three pillars.

3.1. Case selection
The backbone of our analysis is formed from case studies conducted with 10 maker initiatives in eight European countries. The cases were chosen to cover a variety of initiatives, both in terms of their level of scaling and interaction—with cases varying from single initiatives to those embedded in wider networks—as well as in regard to their societal intentions—varying from cases satisfying social demand, to those with a focus on systemic change (c.f. Fig. 2). In order to identify cases that would fill each of the three pillars and spread across all four sectors of the coordinate system, we invited experts to suggest maker initiatives from their networks. This allowed us to build a database of pre-selected initiatives. We analysed those pre-selected cases according to our research scheme and picked ten cases that best fill and spread across all sectors of the coordinate system. This purpose-driven selection was repeated until the research team and the invited experts agreed that the cases were well-represented and information richness was reached.

Fig 2
Download : Download high-res image (277KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Coordinate system for maker community organisations with interaction dimension (vertical) and sustainability and social innovation dimension (horizontal).

The following 10 maker initiatives were identified as case studies covering all quadrants described above comprehensively (with the exception of the Global FabLab network type of maker initiatives):


Table 1. General type of maker initiatives as well as the selected maker initiative.

No.	Maker initiative general type	Selected maker initiative
1	Smart makers ecosystem in Copenhagen	Lab DTI, DTI (Denmark)
2	Makers ecosystem in a large city and global hub	FabLab Barcelona, IAAC (Spain)
3	Open source micro-computing hardware	Arduino (Italy)
4	Open factory	Regional Metal Network, RMN (The Netherlands)
5	Mini Maker Faire	Mini Maker Faire, AHHAA (Estonia)
6	Metropolitan FabLab	Happylab Vienna, HLW (Austria)
7	Neighbourhood-focused FabLab	Dezentrale (Germany)
8	University FabLab	FabLab Hochschule Ruhr West, HRW (Germany)
9	Manufacturer of Maker technology	Create It Real, CIR (Denmark)
10	NGO FabLab	FabLab Zagreb, FLZ (Croatia)
For the purpose of data triangulation (Rothbauer, 2008), where qualitative and quantitative data sources complement each other and also lead to contrasting findings, we collected different data from the ten case studies: We carried out 39 interviews with makerspace managers and makers, analysed the makerspaces’ websites and the usage data of the makerspaces and facilitated a group discussion with makers. The following graph gives an overview of the processed case-specific data and the respective significant content for the striven analysis.

Fig 3
Download : Download high-res image (325KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Data sources and data content processed in this chapter.

3.2. Interviews
In each of the ten maker initiatives, four qualitative interviews were conducted (mainly face-to-face; in some cases, by phone or Skype) (Unterfrauner et al., 2017), which lasted between 40 minutes and 1.5 hours. The manager of the organisation served as a first contact providing further contact to three additional makers actively involved in the initiative (i.e. one interview with the manager of the maker initiative and three with makers engaged in the initiative each). In this way, four interviews were conducted in all but one of the organisations (in one organisation, one maker interview could not be used as it turned out that the interviewee was associated yet with another maker organisation which was not part of the sample). This resulted in a total of 39 interviews.

Of the 29 interviewed makers, 12 makers identified themselves as female, while among the maker initiative managers it was just one. The age of the interviewees varied between 23 and 54. The semi-structured interviews comprised questions regarding the overall organisation of the maker initiative, how skills were developed, and gender-specific questions, such as how gender equality was addressed in the particular maker initiative.

The primary source of data for our research was interview material from these 39 guided interviews with managers of maker initiatives and makers from the respective places.[1] The qualitative content analysis of the interview transcripts yielded three inductive codes in relation to the overall topic of gender equality, with a total of 65 interview segments addressing one or more gender specific aspects. These three guiding codes form the basis of the synthesis of all data collected:

•
Culture and values

•
'Gendered task' and 'Gendered objects'

•
Role models

For this article, the qualitative interview material has been enriched with further empirical resources to gain more detailed insights.

3.3. Self-reporting sheets
In addition to the qualitative interviews, we gathered quantitative data on self-reporting sheets filled out by the manager of each maker organisation resulting in a total of ten completed sheets. These were collected in spring 2017 (between March and May). This included details on, for example, the number of employees, demographic data of members as well as information on the organisational infrastructure or the integration of the organisation into networks (Unterfrauner et al., 2017). Half of the initiatives were able to provide exact usage data, as they relied on membership data with some basic demographic information they had collected. However, some initiatives did not monitor usage data, in which case we requested an accurate estimation. We also referred to a study conducted by Voigt et al. (2017) in one of the makerspaces where accurate membership data was available through their registration system.

3.4. Website and social media analysis
As described above, according to Kanter's theory of homo-social reproduction and the tendency for homophily (2008), people are more likely to find their ways into social environments if people with similar interests and characteristics to their own are already part of the environment. This effect starts not only in the physical makerspace but also in virtual spaces, i.e. in the online representation of the maker initiatives on their websites and social media channels. From a gendered (and intersectional) perspective, diversity in the online representation of a maker initiative, both in pictures and content, would be the most feasible way to attract people with different backgrounds and characteristics.

Gender categorisation in visual representations (Rai and Khanna, 2012; Shan, 2012) has been used in various fields, such as studies on the effects of advertising (Arsel et al., 2015; Schroeder and Borgerson, 1998). Makerspaces’ online representations have also been analysed, as they also function as potential entry points to the makerspace. Researchers inventoried the shared pictures on their webpages, as well as on other online channels, such as Facebook, calculating the ratio of phenotypically male and female representations. For the social media analysis, 655 images from Facebook galleries of the respective maker initiatives were checked for gender visibility.

3.5. Focus group discussion
A focus group, i.e. a group discussion guided by moderators and structured according to defined questions of inquiry (Stewart et al., 2007), took place at a gathering of makerspaces in Vienna and was therefore able to reach 19 people from eight different makerspaces, including Muse (Italy), Innoc, ZSI, and Happylab (Austria), Brno University of Technology (Czech Republic), Regional Development Agency in Bielsko-Biala (Poland), RogLab (Slovenia), Slovak Scientific and Technical Inform. Centre - FabLab Slovensko (Slovakia), FabLab Zagreb (Croatia), and Unternehmertum makerspace Munich (Germany).

The focus group took place in June 2017, shortly after we had done the interviews and collected the self-reporting sheets. The focus group took place inside a FabLab for about 90 minutes. Stakeholders from all maker initiatives talked about gender disparities and strategies to overcome gender gaps. Through an active format, addressing lab managers, owners, and decision makers, participants explored potential activities in their own labs to become more aware of diversity aspects as well as exchanging ideas about how to address these issues. The interactive workshop integrated two topics: the possibility of open data across multiple makerspaces and the situation of relatively homogeneous user communities (generally male, white, under 40). Foundational material for the workshop was a publication for the Internet Science Conference 2017 on Diversity in FabLabs (Voigt et al., 2017). The guiding codes mentioned above remain effective for analysing the complementary data material of the transcribed discussion. A major takeaway was the subtle realisation that improving the diversity of makerspaces cannot be achieved through short-lived initiatives or one-off projects (e.g. ‘making for girls’ days) but requires measures that change patterns of communication and collaboration during day-to-day activities.

3.6. Machine use data
The idea behind analysing a large set of machine usage data was to see if findings from previous studies and comments from interviews could be corroborated by the ways in which male and female makers made use of a makerspace's shared machinery. The data obtained had two major components: demographic data and machine use data (CNC Milling, Laser Cutter, Cutting Plotter, Printed Circuit Board Etching, 3D-Printing).

Demographic data included age and gender information from 1,627 registered members from the Viennese FabLab in 2016. These demographics were matched with 55,450 data points describing their use of machines in terms of frequency and duration. Prior to analysing the datasets, e.g. non-parametric statistics such as the Mann-Whitney-Test for group comparisons and descriptive statistics such as medians and time series, we adjusted the data for outliers, using 98% winsorization, effectively dropping all data below the 1st percentile and above the 99th percentile as outliers. This type of outlier treatment helps focus the data analysis on dominant group characteristics. However, outliers can be omitted or highlighted in various ways depending on the purpose of the analysis.

4. Findings
Drawing upon the results of the different data sources presented in the previous chapter, the presentation of our results follows the coding-structure developed to analyse the interviews, and was subsequently used as an analytical framework to investigate additional data material. Chapter 4.1 provides a comprehensive overview of general assumptions regarding the presence and absence of all genders in the maker initiatives as well as gender-specific use and membership times. The assumptions are considered in an analysis of interview material and group discussions, while the quantitative data stems from an evaluation of the self-reporting sheets, analysis of the representation of males and females in Facebook galleries of the initiative, as well as the analysis of machine usage in one of the case studies (Happylab Vienna). Drawing upon interview material, chapter 4.2 (culture and values) considers the implicit innerworkings of gendered stereotypes derived from societal and cultural circumstances. Chapter 4.3 relates the interview material to self-reporting sheets as well as use time and looks closely at the context in which machinery is used.

Chapter 4.4 analyses the representation of male and female role models in Facebook photos and considers the accounts given in interviews and discussions about leadership and role models in makerspaces. This chapter compiles information on the advertisement of role models for potential female makers, a strategy that is often pursued by maker initiatives to improve gender balance.

4.1. Gender distributions in making
In their self-reporting sheets, most of the examined cases report a slight user gender-imbalance in favour of males. At the FabLab Zagreb, 30% of the makers are female, while equal shares are reported among the younger students. At HRW in Bottrop, the manager estimates that about 40% of users are female. DTI's visitors are mostly students between 19 and 30 years old and include a mix of females and males. They reported a large number of Danes, including retired males with an artisanal/craft background. At FabLab Barcelona, an almost equal representation (55% male) was reported. At Happylab, around 80% are male and two thirds have an academic background, being either students or having a university diploma. The makers at the MiniMaker Faire in Estonia were 60% male, mostly with secondary education. The nationalities varied with participants from Estonia, Latvia, Russia, Poland, Finland, Sweden and the United States. The team at CIR is very diverse in terms of nationality. However, the team is mostly composed of males in their mid-20s, with an engineering background, with just one female around on a regular basis. At Dezentrale, the manager observed mainly Germanspeaking makers with an academic background, with both genders represented equally in the makerspace. At Arduino, the share of female makers is around 15%, with no further statistics available. The Regional Metal Network (RMN) stated that the metalworking industry is clearly male-dominated.

Facebook pages created by the cases reflect these findings. For a social media analysis, 655 images from Facebook galleries and homepages of the respective maker initiatives were checked for gender visibility. In total, 1,066 persons were portrayed, with a gender distribution of 65% male, 35% female (see also chapter 4.4). Images on the websites, which are used as a means of self-representation, are mostly male-dominated and rarely display ‘females at work’ in the makerspaces. The Facebook pages are more balanced, but also male-dominated.

Gender presence is also condensed in quantitative data, through surveys of the usage and presence time slots of the makers. An evaluation of the membership data of Happylab Vienna shows that the duration of a females’ membership is slightly shorter, compared to the average membership-time of male makers. Also, they tend to decide to take up a ‘small’ membership, while male users hold an ‘extensive membership card’ (cf. Voigt et al., 2017, 11). This may be due to the fact that female users tend to be younger and therefore do not have the same financial background as their male co-makers. Females seem to be unable or unwilling to spend as much money as male makers (extensive membership costs more than five times as much as small membership). This implies that males and females attribute different priority to making in their lives. According to Voigt et al.’s (2017) analysis, the two genders differ in the number of machines used in the makerspace. While only a minority of female makers use more than two machines, the use patterns of males are more diverse, with the use of different kinds of machines being quite common among male makers.

This observed imbalance in presence, representation and machine use stands in strong contrast to the self-perception and vision of many makerspaces. As the credo of makerspaces is to be open to all, makerspaces put great effort into reaching out to different segments of the population and making them aware of the opportunities provided by maker initiatives, e.g. free training for all (Happylab), zero or low membership fees (all cases), reduction in the complexity of machines through practical and simple procedures (Happylab). The Happylab manager states:

“We really want to approach all and this has the effect that people come to Happylab who have never heard about making before and they see what we do here. And only if they participate in the guided tour and have a look at the space and realise what they could do, that opens some doors” (Manager, male, HLW, 32 years)

A manager from AHHAA pays close attention to gender relations and comes to the conclusion that the gender-share can be “inherited” from the organisational background of visiting groups:

“The percentage differs from year to year. When there are bigger groups of makers like companies and schools, you may have a 50/50 ratio of males and females. With separate makers it is in favour of the men.” (Manager, female, AHHAA, 33 years)

Nevertheless, male makers generally outweigh female makers in general, and this holds true at this makerspace, though not as much as in other cases studied. The manager suggests that the underlying reason can be traced back to early education systems and the intended and unintended focus on male students in STEM-activities:

“This may be the case due to global issues of STEM activities having been very often consciously and unconsciously directed towards boys rather than girls. This mostly happens in schools, where girls are not encouraged to go in-depth in physics, for instance, and boys are. It then starts to snowball from there.” (Manager, female, AHHAA, 33 years)

The gender-shift within young generations, which Peppler et al. (2015) pointed out, was frequently reflected in the interviews, as well. One interviewee envisages a more gender-equal future:

“There is a lot happening in the school, with innovation as a subject. When it becomes mandatory for everyone to have classes in it, there will be more girls. Hopefully.” (Manager, male, HRW, 49 years)

A female maker from Croatia has the same impression when she reflects on her meetups with children from primary school:

“I saw these kids from 8 to 9 years old, so many girls who want to have this 3D printer. So maybe future generations according to girls will be more open to these technologies and to these technical fields […]” (Maker, female, FLZ, 29 years)

In general, gender-balance is an issue for all stakeholders involved in the study. The managers, in particular, have strong thoughts on the topic. They reported study results and have begun to implement strategies to counteract gender-imbalance. A female manager from IAAC reflects upon this process:

“[The question of] visibility of women was also invisible, now it's on our minds. For some time now we have started thinking in these terms—how many girls we have, etc.” (Manager, female, IAAC, 28 years)

The general (im-)balance of gender was also the most addressed topic within group discussions. The controversial discussions shed light on the question of whether the maker movement does in fact contribute to the gender divide. This could be seen in maker initiatives trying to attract females by offering activities that enforce gender stereotypes, instead of breaking or subverting them. The prevailing opinion in the discussions was that working with stereotypes is ok, as long as it is not a constraint and has the overriding goal of moving away from gender stereotypes.

4.2. Cultural aspects of making
Makerspaces, as a blend of novel technologies and new practices for developing and producing (almost) everything (Gershenfeld, 2012), are male-dominated just like many other technological sectors. The question is whether makerspaces can counteract or, to some degree, reverse such tendencies by moving technologies into other areas, i.e. design, human-computer interaction, or towards more general interest by presenting making as part of a bigger movement of self-expression and self-empowerment. This would also mean enlarging the concept of ‘making’ and accepting a wider range of practices as “real making”. The language and speech practices used in maker contexts reflects how preconceptions and stereotyping have historically resulted in socially exclusive tendencies. Some makerspaces approach this carefully in multiple ways and try to avoid gendered speech as well as keeping gender balance in their marketing material and public relation activities to raise the visibility of female makers:

“It depends on what you put verbally into focus when publicising events. If I describe in great technical detail how we solder resistors, then I'll have more men there. If I describe in a more general way what great things we make there, then it can be completely different. If I then put creativity a bit more into focus, then I'll often end up having more women there.” (Manager, male, HRW, 49 years)

“When we speak of the Maker Faire and success stories to the media, I always try to keep in mind that we do not focus on the males only or we risk giving the impression it is an all-male gathering, which is completely false.” (Manager, female, AHAA, 33 years)

A female maker from Arduino talked about how gendered speech and socialisation reinforces stereotypes in specific cultural contexts and emphasises the importance of raising awareness in early childhood:

“I also noted that when a man talks to a woman about technology, he does it in a different way, like he has to explain it more thoroughly—they call it mansplain—so in Italy it is also a matter of culture in the family. I get very angry if I see parents giving presents like robotics to boys and dolls to girls, just because of the gender without asking and without giving an opportunity to explore the topic. So, it needs to change in family and also in school.” (Maker, female, Arduino, 30 years)

Stereotyped viewpoints are implicitly and explicitly pointed out within the interview material. A female maker stated that her engagement in the maker initiative allowed her to move from “doing girls things” to more technology-driven work. Here again, the high importance of socialisation becomes visible:

“When I was younger, I was doing more sewing and simple things for a female. I […] have learned more topics and possibly those sewing things are not that interesting anymore. Electronics is more interesting.” (Maker, female, AHHAA, 25 years)

The (male) manager of a FabLab, where 15% of the participants are female, said they tried to initiate countermeasures by adapting surroundings to what he considered to be ‘female-friendly’. Apparently, reproducing gender-roles and stereotypes, in this case, did not lead to the intended effects:

“We tried to change the environment, nice, clean and friendly. But we don't have any special offers or programs. Actually we tried a stitching workshop, but it didn't work.” (Manager, male, Arduino, 31 years)

Millard et al. (2017) point out that female makers tend to define themselves as creators rather than makers, a self-perception that is in line with a cultural imprint of what is considered a female quality. Conversely, to ‘make something’ is seen as a male attribute in most cultures. Drawing on Faulkner (2001), Unterfrauner et al. (2017) state that the “nerdy image of computer hackers and techies is seen as the antipode to the social engagement a woman might appreciate”, but at the same time she is confronted with expectations defined by existing clichés. A female maker recognises these implicit gender biases in her country, but isn't quite sure where they stem from:

“Because in Croatia we have more female students than male students […]. But in these technical fields, I think that boys are not maybe better, but some girls are thinking ‘Ok, this is not a girls’ job’. So I don't know why that is so. But there are girls like I am and I hope there will be more in the future.” (Maker, female, FLZ, 23 years)

4.3. Gendered tasks
Females’ participation in making seems to go hand-in-hand with their self-perception and role-taking in specific cultural contexts. Especially in makerspaces and FabLabs, these immediate contexts are highly characterised by surrounding objects, machines, techniques and materials. While the gendering of tasks is culturally inherited, as shown in the previous chapter, the gendering of objects seems to be an inevitable side-effect, i.e. if sewing is considered to be a typical ‘girl's-thing’, machines and techniques relating to the treatment of textiles become ‘girl's-machines’. The technologies viewed as masculine are ‘hard’ and real, while those associated with the traditional definition of ‘women's work’ are understood to be soft and of smaller scale (Faulkner, 2001). One of the interviewees gets to the heart of these practices of gendering interests, resulting in gendered activities and connotations regarding the machines and materials used when he says:

“Women make bio stuff; men make 3D print. […] If you look at surveys and so on as well. 3D printing is male. It is maybe a typical macho instrument, no idea.” (Manager, female, Dezentrale, 34 years)

Using 3D printing as a way to get beyond stereotypes can be an initial way of attracting the target group of younger females. A manager from FabLab Zagreb had positive experiences in schools in doing so:

“What is nice about 3D printing in schools is that you can print jewellery and girls become interested, and some other things for boys.” (Manager, male, FLZ, 54 years)

In the makerspace Dezentrale, the share of females is estimated to be nearly 50:50, but applying the introduced gendered object perspective, we can observe that this ratio strongly depends on the kind of work makers engage with. A female maker from Dezentrale talked about an interesting intersection in the process of her collaborative work, where she intentionally mixed ‘typical girls’ materials via laser cutter techniques with other materials:

“Here it was also interesting, because it's silk, somehow a typically female material, I'd say. And through this laser-cut it becomes something sports-like. It was the goal of our course to melt the typically male and the typically female with each other, so that it becomes unisex clothing.” (Maker, female, Dezentrale, 24 years)

Quantitative data regarding use times by gender reflect these findings relating to gendered objects. The monitored data from Happylab in Vienna indicates that fewer female members used CNC machines and 3D printers compared to male members. For example, 15% female members used CNC milling machine compared to 25% of male members making use of the same machine. There is no significant difference between female and male makers in the use of the laser cutter and PCP etching machine. Interestingly however, proportionally twice as many females use the plotter (38% of all female makers and 18% of all male makers) (cf. Voigt et al., 2016, 13). Although the pattern of use differs, proportionally, the average time spent with the machine does not differ significantly between female and male makers. This shows that females and males, once interacting with the machine, invest the same amount of time in working with it and probably encounter the same technical and non-technical challenges.

The deterministic gendering of objects and tasks is furthermore expressed through references to past experiences:

“Most of the women were in communication, business and design. Now the one we have is doing design but at the same time, she can program" (Manager, male, CIR) and "... [they] already employ female lorry drivers, but generally there are no women wanting to work in these factories” (Manager, male, RMN, 41 years)

While males tend to have an engineering background, female makers often work in design, communication and social relations. A female maker stated (HLW), that the main inspirations for female makers are aesthetic aspects and the influence of photographic social media platforms and communities like Pinterest and Instagram:

“Laser cutters are typical for girls, because 'My best friend is getting married and I can make a nice cake topper for her' - Pinterest plays a huge part in that ... that's why makerspaces are booming” (Maker, female, HLW, 42 years)

The division between ‘crafting’ and ‘making’ becomes visible once more. This separation has been cultivated from the start of the maker movement (cf. Henry, 2014). The main magazine and mouthpiece of the maker culture, the ‘Make: magazine’ was first published in January 2005. In April 2006 a spin-off magazine called ‘Craft: magazine’ specifically directed towards females was released by the same publisher.

Some FabLabs are actively promoting a broader definition of making as they meld artistic and design techniques together with engineering specialities. This process starts with expanding the spectrum of machines and opportunities offered in the makerspaces. Nevertheless, broadening the definition of ‘making’ seems to be a difficult task, as even some female makers seem to have certain prejudices against females coming to the lab inspired by Pinterest or Instagram:

“It is a garage shop. That's more for the boys. You get to see some hip young female graphic designers sneaking around; not coming back again or being just there once in a blue moon for a new design or anything like that […] it's because of Pinterest – that's why the labs are booming.” (Maker, female, Happylab, 42 years)

Alongside the widespread connotation of machines, materials and practices with male or female attributes, the actors in makerspaces devoted to enhancing gender balance tend to create special offerings or special ‘female environments’. A female maker from Arduino puts the gender-imbalance in tech down to the marketing strategies of computers in the 1980s, which were directly aimed at male users. In these campaigns gender stereotypes were reproduced to a high level, showing the man at the PC as the tech-using genius:

“It's an old problem in the sense that since the 1980s, the PC has been marketed towards males. And some statistics show that, because of this marketing strategy, the number of female programmers decreased and also the number of girls taking programming courses.” (Maker, female, Arduino, 30 years)

To counteract this in her own surroundings, she actively empowers her own circle of female friends to come to the lab and get involved. Moreover, she thinks that the foundation for gender-balance in makerspaces is built at a very early stage. Females need to be visible, even in the initial period of a FabLab:

“I am calling my female friends to experiment on this stuff—it's a matter of giving the tools and the knowledge to do it […] and if you are starting a makerspace with only men, then you have the same type of people talking about the same things just from the point of view of men.” (Maker, female, Arduino, 30 years)

This visibility of females as role models is reflected in scientific and popular literature and in blog entries on various internet sites. Furthermore, in MAKE-IT's data sources, the of positive female examples is evident in various ways. The following explanations concretise this impression.

4.4. Role models
Several of the examined maker initiatives are dedicated to attracting young people from all genders to tech professions by providing them with role models and a heterogeneous staff (cf. Unterfrauner et al., 2017, 84). As already mentioned in chapter 4.1, gender balance and equal representation of all genders is a critical point for all cases examined in this study. As the analysis of makerspaces’ social media channels (foremost Facebook) shows, the media presence is clearly dominated by the representation of male-connoted attributes. For the Facebook pages, the following table shows the share of female and male representation in detail.


Table 2. Depiction of males and females on Facebook pages of makerspaces.

Pictures	Individuals with male attributes	Individuals with female attributes	Male share	Female share
Mobile uploads	219	230	141	62%	38%
Maker Faire Albums	113	115	52	69%	31%
Promotional pictures	36	3	2	60%	40%
The promotional pictures from photo albums titled with the name of the respective FabLabs are mostly gender-neutral, as the focus seems to be on technical aspects. In 36 pictures, only five persons are displayed (in five pictures) with 3 individuals read as male by the researcher and two as female. The other pictures show the infrastructure and technical equipment of the spaces. The pictures taken at Maker Faires are clearly dominated by individuals showing male attributes, with a ratio of 69/31%. The mobile uploads show a similar ratio.

The maker movement is largely dedicated to the idea of social and technical empowerment and therefore strives to work closely with formal and non-formal education institutions. In this process of sharing knowledge and skills, the studied makerspaces and relevant stakeholders are aware of the necessity to bring in positive examples of diverse role models. A female maker from HRW, who organises the Girlsday events stated:

“For Girlsday we look for female students as role models so to say. […] There, we always try to make sure that the courses are also facilitated by women or female university students. That is the special thing about it. Through the fact that they are amongst themselves, they are a bit more relaxed, I think.“ (Maker, female, HRW, 32 years)

Most of the interviewees in our research regard the provision of role models as the most promising and most practicable approach within the direct environment of the makerspace, as family and school socialisation cannot be influenced directly by the actors of the maker community. Some labs reported a high demand on this topic. Within their courses, they try to motivate female makers with related topics, which are close to their everyday life to tear down potential scepticism on the participants’ side. A male maker from CIR points out the key influence of teachers, as he says:

“The problem that could be, is that if it's a man who is teaching, he would say it in one way, and a girl would say it in another way. They have role models, so if it is a woman saying it, it is great to look up to her and who she is. It really depends on who is standing there.” (Maker, male, CIR, 29 years)

The presence of female makers and teachers seems, to interviewees, to be a natural solution to achieving gender balance in the FabLabs. Furthermore, female inventors are sometimes particularly promoted on social media:

“So whenever we have female inventors, we are maybe sort of doing a bit more marketing and storytelling around those, because they are important. It is important for both males and females to look upon themselves as having the potential to come up with great ideas.” (Manager, male, DTI, 40 years)

The same manager of the DTI FabLab, where gender balance is already implemented, sees his two female employees as the most decisive success factor:

“If there is one factor above anything else that might explain the gender equality is that [name of employee] is a girl and our new student [name] is also a girl and I do think that by having the FabLab attended by a girl […] has to other women some sort of interest on coming to the FabLab.” (Manager, male, DTI, 40 years)

In some makerspaces, recruitment of female employees and makers seems to happen naturally, while others struggle with it. A CIR-Manager, who seeks to improve diversity in the Lab talked about their recruitment process, which is organised through an agency:

“In general, I've been wondering whether we should have some program for employees dealing more with gender, but it is not easy because when we do recruiting with an agency, we just ask for a certain profile, without any restrictions of gender or country of origin. They looked everywhere in the world and came back with 10 applications and all 10 were men. We have to push a bit.” (Manager, male, CIR, 34 years)

It becomes clear that most of the interview partners are struggling to bring female role models into their spaces. They would love to change the situation, but do not have a clear strategy as to how to do so. Another popular solution is to offer open-ended-versatile prompts, i.e. through the creation of a friendly and open environment. This, however, cannot be achieved through simple ‘pink washing’, as pointed out above. Of greater importance is the promotion of an atmosphere that appreciates diversity and welcomes everyone with their unique personality. The manager from HRW Lab points this out when he states:

“And it depends, of course, also on whom you admit and how you deal with mistakes, etc. You can quickly create an environment where making mistakes and also sometimes breaking something is not allowed. And by that you also exclude people quickly” (Manager, male, HRW, 49 years)

Initially, this can also mean providing gender-specific support groups to address possible stress factors. This is already happening, especially through events like ‘Girlsday’. A female maker who is also an organiser for Girlsday told us that this event is particularly interesting in overcoming initial reservations and also in providing shy pupils the opportunity to experiment:

“They are among themselves, they are a bit more relaxed, I think. We have limited capacities in the FabLab and they always have to work together in groups and if it's a mixed group, then the boys are always the first to run ahead. […] At the Girlsday, […] everyone can experience things for themselves.” (Maker, female, HRW, 32 years)

In addition to providing positive role-models who are active within the maker scene, it is important to avoid gender-stereotypes in socialisation and education. A female maker spoke about her professional background in biology and how it influenced her in becoming a maker. For her, the entrance into making was quite easy, as both of her parents are craftsmen and encouraged her to be active and creative with her own hands:

“I think I have always made things myself. My parents are both craftsmen. When I was a child, I already tinkered, hammered, screwed, and so on. I always built things myself. Back then, the term ‘maker’ did not exist […] through my interest, deriving from biographical issues, I became a ‘bio-maker’.” (Maker, female, Dezentrale, 24 years)

The influence of a positive atmosphere and encouragement in the family towards making, without acting alongside societal preconceptions, is an important factor in the personal trajectory to becoming a maker. Another female maker gained interest in building under the guidance of her grandfather, who helped her build a greenhouse in the countryside near her hometown:

“I don't remember where I got the idea. At some point I built this greenhouse, with the help of my grandfather, in the countryside. It's not very far away, but we don't go there every day, maybe weekly. It doesn't work well if it's always closed or open, and a couple of years after keeping this greenhouse open all the time, I decided I wanted to make it work properly, and I have the skills to do it.” (Maker, female, AHHAA, 25 years)

There are many similarities in the stories; a woman from Croatia answered the question regarding her personal story on how she got into making:

“[…] I think that it all started when I was little because in my childhood I dealt with many things. So, I was in a music school, in a ballet school, I was always making something and during my childhood I spent it with my grandparents and my grandfather was always making something innovative.” (Maker, female, FabLab Zagreb, 29 years)

Within the group discussion it was pointed out, that it is not only female makers who are important, but also the existence of a diverse management team. A multicultural, multi-gendered team is able to sustain its attention to a full range of diversity issues, from the initial offerings and opportunities to activities to attract multiple target groups, through to company policies and corporate identity issues.

It is apparent that role models are needed in the most diverse situations (teaching maker skills, managing a makerspace, organising an event, etc.). And ultimately 'success stories' capture attention, even though 'success' doesn't need to be interpreted exclusively in terms of business:

“There are women, when they are there, they are usually very good and they get noticed quite a lot because they are special. We are setting up a partnership right now with a company where we are taking shares in the company, and the CEO is a woman. ... As you give good examples, as you bring good success stories on women using 3D printers, the end users will evolve” (manager, male, CIR, 34 years)

According to the results regarding visibility of females in social media and public relations, it is clear that the goal of equality, both in presence and in visibility, equality has not yet been reached. But, at the same time, the strategy of presenting females in social media channels and placing them on the front line at special events is one of the most popular in the FabLabs we examined. The section that follows links these existing strategies with presumptions from previous research about how to improving gender equality in makerspaces.

5. Conclusion: towards gender-sensitive makerspaces
The aim of this study, building on the existing discourse in HCI, was to enrich the understanding of gender dynamics in makerspaces. Our research looked at differentiations in what constitutes a makerspace. We retrieved quantitative and qualitative data from different types of makerspaces (see Table 1), leading to a triangulation of the data and thus to enhanced validity.

By looking at the cross section of the studied cases it should be noted that all actors involved are aware, to a greater or lesser extent, that they are reproducing gendered stereotypes. The participants were generally concerned about how to attract females into making and how to create an inclusive environment that welcomes diversity. Many interview partners were even able to cite studies on the topic; furthermore, they closely evaluate use times and observe the gender share in their maker environment. This aligns with the self-perception noted in former research efforts (Carstensen et al., 2014). The maker scene's ethical spirit is characterised by its credo to be an open platform for anyone willing to collaborate with like-minded people. But, as becomes obvious, persistent stereotypes remain and are not easy to dismantle. Subchapters 4.1 to 4.4 offer an insight into general gender relations in the makerspaces alongside the categories of culture and values, gendered tasks and objects and role models. Within all identified categories, we found evidence that socialisation is an important field of intervention. In maker initiatives, a replication of socialisation takes place, making it as difficult to tackle the problem as it is to change mindsets within society. This insight has not previously been highlighted in the HCI discourse on makerspaces and could function as a steppingstone for leveraging future developments.

In this respect, initiatives to achieve gender balance and equal opportunities in makerspaces and FabLabs can benefit from experiences made in diversity management approaches. The context is different, since diversity management was mostly introduced in large, transnational companies and promoted especially by management (Aretz and Hansen, 2002). Hierarchy is less significant in makerspaces, which may open the door for gender initiatives driven by a broader set of actors.

Maker culture could play an important role in the future prospects in feminist emancipation, as it appears that societal change is already visible in younger generations of makers. Therefore, persistent stereotypes need to be further dismantled. As has been shown, the division between making and crafting and the underlying connotation with male and female attributes still seems to affect internal perceptions and role-taking processes. This result affirms the findings previously published by Sherrill (2017) and Weibert et al. (2014). Broadening the definition of making is a frequently discussed topic in scientific and popular literature and could be one way to address these issues. The solution is closely bound to overcoming gendered stereotypes within society, which “lie at the heart of the misconception that making is for ‘geeks’ obsessed with technology for its own sake, uninterested in the broader benefits that can be brought about by making” (Dayton, 2017, 40). Reframing ‘tech’ to include alternative conceptions which make room for design, art and craft, offers an opportunity to think differently about inequalities in makerspaces as discussed in chapter 2.2. Creating gendered tech or breaking down artificial boundaries between gendered activities are two possibilities that can counteract makers’ previous experiences of gender socialization.

Making holds the potential to reflect on gender-stereotypes in the direct working-process. By intentionally mixing female- and male-associated materials to produce something new that lies outside gendered mind-sets, the act of making is able to look beyond gender binaries. There is a huge potential for technological action—without implying any technological determinism—where communities of any gender, race or age can be empowered. As outlined in this paper, discussing gender requires a more in-depth reflection about the experience of gender from the actors of the maker scene. Voigt et al. (2017: 15) conclude their article on diversity in FabLabs with the claim that raising awareness and sensitisation are of foremost importance in facilitating diversity. They state that “change starts with appropriate language, communicating equal expectations for girls and boys, while accepting different approaches to making (regardless of gender)”. Also, they find “a strong link to early education and the wider presentation of women in tech” (Voigt et al., 2017). The origins of gender gaps reach back to socialisation in families and early education systems. As highlighted in the previous discussion, change starts with appropriate language and communicating equal expectations for girls and boys, while also accepting different approaches to making.

Because the maker scene is still very young and does not seem to stand deeply rooted in understanding gender issues, we suggest that awareness of gender issues should initially be raised within this community. Our cases did not indicate any explicit animosity to gender questions; on the contrary, male makers and most maker communities in general showed great interest in fighting gender-related issues. We therefore suggest a simple tool that aims to help this community raise awareness of gender topics and initiates a self-reflection process.

The case studies revealed a high demand for further strategies to improve the gender balance within makerspaces. Even those initiatives that have already reached a level of gender-balance are interested in how to invite people to activities they ‘naturally’ would not pursue. Respondents emphasised that making is also about experimentation and exploring new directions. Stereotypes and societal preconceptions, however, hinder creativity and therefore should not be given the freedom to reproduce and thrive in FabLabs. To address disparities and stereotyping in maker communities, Elisabeth Dayton (2017: 1) sharpens her findings from several studies to five guiding strategies; which were partly visible in the several makerspaces we studied.

1
Broaden the definition of making: i.e. through encouraging interdisciplinary education bridging STEM with arts, craft design etc.; combating the perception that females are generally less interested in making; develop inclusive paths to first engage students with new technologies;

2
Offer open-ended, versatile prompts: i.e. learn through play, setting own goals; emphasise a diversity of goals and a growth mindset; introduce the making environment in a social, inviting way;

3
Emphasise the broader benefits of making: seek to solve specific social problems; launch projects of personal relevance; overcome gendered stereotypes;

4
Build maker communities: encourage meaningful and productive social interaction; broadcast openness to everyone, from casual dabblers to dedicated members; create welcoming physical spaces; promote collaboration over competition;

5
Provide mentors: incorporate makers as teachers; encourage teachers to seek mentorship roles, etc.

Broadening the definition of making is a common topic in scientific and popular literature. The solution is close bound to overcoming gendered stereotypes within society and leads to the third strategy. Accordingly, clarification of the broader social benefits of making could be a way to create a more diverse environment. By aiming to combat specific social problems through making, it is possible to show the immediate social impact making could have. In terms of building maker communities through meaningful and productive social interaction, no hints were found in the data material. Dayton's (2017) underlying assumption is that collaboration and interaction are very important to both male and female makers. But, according to our material, females seem to rely more on personal and community connections to support their making and maker projects.

Finally to wrap up this conclusion, we suggest a more attentive approach for reflecting on the making environment and for planning making-related initiatives in a gender sensitive way. To this end, we propose an adaptation of the Bechdel Test, an assessment well-known from media studies. (Launius and Hassel, 2015).

The Bechdel Test has gained attention as a measure for critically reflecting the representation of females in movies and other media. The test consists of only three questions:

1)
Are there at least two named females in the movie?

2)
Do these females talk to each other?

3)
Do these females talk to each other about something besides a male?

If a movie can answer all three questions with “yes”, it passes the Bechdel Test, and females are considered to have an active role. Though the test is not without criticism, it is able to effectively point our attention towards a number of key points. The simple structure of the Bechdel Test could also provide insights into the situations regarding gender balance in specific places of making. We adopted the three questions of the Bechdel Test to the case of maker spacemakerspaces and enhanced it by posing a question stemming from our results about the importance of female role models. We propose to ask the following four questions to makers and maker communities to assess their gender balance:

1)
What percentage of your members identify as male, female or non-binary?

2)
Do all three groups make things?

3)
Do all groups initiate and lead their own projects?

4)
Is there a female or non-binary makerspace manager in your makerspace?

A similar version of this “test” has already been published by the European FabLab network and printed as a postcard that was disseminated to makerspaces around Europe (MAKE-IT, 2018). In conclusion, scientific research on diversity in the maker culture has begun to gain a significant shape and outline. Gender is the most commonly considered aspect of diversity in the current literature and other dimensions, such as ethnicity, class, sexual orientation or dis-/ability are less often considered. A thorough scientific intersectoral analysis is still needed to fully understand the interplay of various dimensions of inequality in the culture of makers.