Abstract
Within the Virtuality Continuum from completely real to completely virtual, Augmented Virtuality (AV) has been much less explored in comparison to studies on Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality. This project aims to understand whether adding artefacts from the physical world into the virtual world (Augmented-virtuality) increases sense of presence and enhances the efficacy of an Intelligent Virtual Agent (IVA) to achieve its intended purpose. A study was designed where the purpose of the IVA was to reduce study stress in students. The between-subjects experiment involved 50 participants in two groups: The Augmented-virtual group and the Virtual group. The Augmented-virtual group experienced a Virtual Reality (VR) environment augmented with a chair and coffee table also experienced in the real world. The Virtual group experienced the same VR environment without augmentation; the real chair does not match the virtual chair and the virtual coffee table does not exist in the real world. Self-reporting and heart rate were analysed to measure stress levels. Self-reporting indicated significant changes in study stress (participants’ cognitive level) for both groups. However, measurement of stress via heart rate (participants’ physical level) was significantly reduced for the Augmented-virtual group, who also reported higher presence. Presence instruments only revealed significant differences for items relevant to visual aspects, as other aspects were not manipulated. We conclude that augmenting virtual worlds with elements concurrently experienced in the real world may increase sense of presence and enhance simulation efficacy, e.g. increased stress reduction, when compared to the use of VR only.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Intelligent virtual agent

Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtuality

Immersion

Presence

Stress

1. Introduction
Virtual Reality aims to create an experience where the user's perspective bypasses technology and senses the experience as real. When the user feels present, they can interact in the virtual space as in real life, and sense the experience as a place they visited rather than some images they perceived (Slater and Wilbur, 1997). It is believed that the sense of presence has a positive impact on performance, training, and learning outcomes (Witmer and Singer, 1998). Nevertheless, mixed results have been achieved with little evidence of the benefits delivered (Skarbez et al., 2018).

Studies have sought to understand a wide range of factors that might influence and be influenced by presence and immersion in computer-based simulations. Such factors include affordances (Shin, 2017); empathy and embodiment in Virtual Reality (VR) (Shin, 2018) and satisfaction with and attitude towards Augmented Reality (AR) on immersion and engagement (Shin, 2019). A review of “fidelity, immersion, presence, and buy-in and their effects on transfer in pc-based simulations and games”, found that simulations with higher levels of presence and fidelity with the real world training context enhance training transfer and in simulations where therapy is given presence increases the efficacy of the treatment (Alexander et al., 2005). Using immersive VR technologies, a study by Tichon and Wallis (2010) compared two simulators (cab-based and larger wide-screen) and concluded that the lower fidelity and less immersive (i.e. cab-based) simulator resulted in better decision-making and performance because they believed it was less distracting.

Witmer and Singer (1998) argue that an increase in realism factors (scene realism, consistency with the objective world and meaningfulness of experience) leads to an increase in presence. They clarify that scene realism is more about connectedness and continuity than real-world content and that consistency does not necessarily refer to real world objects in the participant's immediate surrounding but the extent to which “the information conveyed by a VE is [consistent] with that learned through real-world experience” (Witmer and Singer, 1998), p.230. Thus, it follows that including familiar items from the real-word would increase perceived realism which should increase presence. One type of mixed reality, known as Augmented Virtuality, involves adding items from the real world into the virtual. It differs from the more familiar term Augmented Reality where the virtual is overlaid on top of the real world. In comparison, little research has been conducted concerning Augmented Virtuality. While the literature connects increased presence with improved treatment outcomes and learning transfer (Alexander et al., 2005), previous studies involving mixed reality (i.e. mixing real and virtual) and presence have not looked at the effect of increasing presence on delivering improved outcomes in our context of study stress reduction. Addressing this gap, this study will focus on enhancing the sense of presence by adding items from the real world to the virtual world to see if there is an increase in presence, particularly in perceived visual realism, and if the session with the Intelligent Virtual Agent (IVA) delivers better outcomes in terms of reduced study-related stress levels.

Stress is an external factor that alters the personal wellbeing in an individual's mental and physical state (Lyzwinski, 2019). Some occupations face higher levels of stress in their daily roles and activities. Being a college or university student is one such high stress occupation, but one which has been less studied in stress-related research (Robotham and Julian, 2006). Students enrolled in coursework degrees continually face stress related to their studies due to having to learn new concepts and skills and being continuously assessed to demonstrate skill and knowledge mastery. “Postgraduate students suffer from higher stress which affects the mental wellbeing of these students” (Shete and Garkal, 2015), p 119.Therefore creating services and tools that help to improve the mental and physical state of students, both undergraduate and postgraduate, is important.

Most higher education institutions offer well-being support services to their students. However, students may be unaware of their stress or the available services, may prefer informal over formal sources of help, and the services may be limited due to higher student-staff ratios as a result of widening participation (Robotham and Julian, 2006). Demand for mental health services has reached a crisis point, with long waitlists and insufficient appointments available to each individual (Xiao et al., 2017). To supplement counselling services, informational materials are often provided. In response to students lack of engagement with institutional services provided for stress management, Bergström et al. (2016); Chiauzzi et al. (2008) delivered an intervention across six US colleges that provided evidence that Internet-based programs can offer interactive tools, self-assessments, peer stories, encouragement to seek support and provide a single source that is more easily maintained than printed materials. Motivated by high levels of student stress and inadequate stress management solutions, Lyzwinski (2019) created a mindfulness app that significantly reduced reported study stress levels. However, neither of these approaches (website or app) include the human element or type of social interaction typically found in a counselling session.

To provide the human element involving face-to-face conversation and social interaction as found in a human-human counselling session, we can draw on technology known as Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA). IVAs are embodied virtual characters driven by VR software and cognitive agent architectures that guide their reasoning and behaviour. Studies using IVAs that educate in an empathic way have been shown to reduce reported stress levels in a “Reducing Study Stress” scenario (Ranjbartabar et al., 2018). Furthermore, IVAs can decrease stress and anxiety of being judged by a real human being and by “making the user feel comfortable talking and sharing information” (DeVault et al., 2014), p. 1061. IVAs exist within a VR environment. Delivery of a virtual counselling session would require the use of VR technology to allow creation and rendering (typically using a game engine such as Unity3D) of a virtual counselling environment, such as an office or home, and an animated virtual advisor. Despite education achieving third place after gaming and entertainment as an application area of VR technology, a review of VR in higher education did not find any applications involving the use of VR for supporting student well-being or managing study behaviours or stress (Baxter and Hainey, 2019). Review of the VR literature revealed studies that have used VR to emulate stressful environments (Kwon et al., 2013; Tichon and Wallis, 2010), reduce stress (Sponselee et al., 2004) and to induce stress in order to evaluate multiple instruments for measuring stress (Skarbez et al., 2018). However, none of these studies involved use of an IVA. To address these gaps, in our VR simulation, students discuss their study stress and behaviours with a virtual advisor, an IVA, to help manage their study stress.

This project aims to investigate the differences in the levels of presence, measured using physical heart rate and subjective self-reporting, with the addition of objects experienced in the real world into the virtual world to determine if Augmented Virtuality can increase the efficacy of the stress training being provided. This study asks the following research questions:

•
Will adding real objects into the virtual space increase the sense of presence?

•
Will adding real objects into the virtual space deliver a greater reduction in study stress levels?

•
Is there an association between the sense of presence and the change in study stress levels?

This paper first introduces background concepts and related literature, then the methodology, experimental results, discussion, conclusion and future work.

2. Background and Gap Identification
2.1. Virtual Reality, Mixed Reality & Virtual Humans
Virtual reality is often referred to as an environment where the user is completely immersed and is able to interact with a virtual world (Milgram and Kishino, 1994). It is much more than the hardware used to create it (Steuer, 1992). As an ever-evolving communication medium encompassing simulation, virtual environments, virtual worlds, artificial reality and more, Biocca and Levy (2013) declare “Virtual Reality is not a technology; it is a destination” (p.4). Virtual worlds and experiences can be created in a way that imitates the characteristics of the real world, however, it can also simulate a different reality (Richards and Szilas, 2012). “Virtual reality is defined to be a computer-generated digital environment that can be experienced and interacted with as if that environment were real” (Jerald, 2015), p.111. Some benefits of using VR are the replicability and the ability to control scenarios without exposing the user to a public or risky situation (Riva et al., 2001). Virtual Reality technologies are often experienced by using a Head Mounted Display (HMD). Current technologies that use HMD are HTC Vive, Oculus Rift, Samsung Gear VR, PlayStation VR, among others.

Virtual Reality is commonly used in different environments and scenarios where not every element is virtual, but falls somewhere along a Virtuality Continuum (Milgram and Kishino, 1994). Virtuality continuum was defined by Milgram and Kishino (1994) as a combination of situations displayed in a specific situation, where real environments are located on one side of the continuum and completely Virtual Environments (VE) are located on the opposite side. Mixed Reality (MR) is defined as “the combination of real-world and computer graphics which are blended into reality in real-time” (Sobota et al., 2013). How real or virtual each object is in the environment defines where the event takes place in the Virtuality Continuum. Augmented reality (AR) is when the real world is enhanced with a virtual overlay and typically something in the real world triggers the virtual simulation to be activated. Examples are retrieval and display of data in a HMD when a QRcode is read or a visual reconstruction of an historic site overlying the physical ruins. This paper involves the less explored MR approach known as Augmented Virtuality (AV), where the user is immersed in a VE to which something from the real world has been added. While in both AR and AV, the user experiences virtual and real objects at the same time, as implied by their names, the Virtuality Continuum places AR (which adds virtual elements to reality) closer to the reality end and AV (which adds real elements to the virtual) closer to the virtual end of the continuum. As defined by Drascic and Milgram (1996), “Augmented Reality describes that class of displays that consists primarily of a real environment, with graphic enhancements or augmentations. Augmented Virtuality describes that class of displays that enhance the virtual experience by adding elements of the real environment”, p. 123.

VR environments are often inhabited by virtual humans, or IVAs. An IVA is defined as “a software which imitates human behaviour in a virtual world in a realistic manner”(Brom et al., 2007). Many studies using VR and IVAs have demonstrated their ability to assist humans (Gratch et al., 2014; Richards and Caldwell, 2015; Riva et al., 2001). There are numerous advantages of using a virtual human in clinical scenarios (Lisetti, 2012). For sufferers of Post-Trauma Stress Disorder (PTSD) benefits include increased self-disclosure due to feeling less judged by a human and anonymity (DeVault et al., 2014).

Virtual Reality has been used in training simulations to aid acquisition and transfer of skills. Less common is the use of Augmented Virtuality. A study by Johnson et al. (2019) looked into augmenting a musical instrument by combining it with a virtual environment and virtual elements. The study showed a small amount of improvement whilst using the VR environment, nevertheless the participants claimed to feel more engaged and confident while using the augmented virtual environment than the real one. Bergström et al. (2016) and Yuan and Steed (2010) have placed a real element in the form of self-embodiment into the virtual environment and measured the sense of presence. Both studies have shown an increase in presence by being able to match/link an element from real-life into the virtual environment. In a study involving 31 participants, Bergström et al. (2016) placed a life-sized virtual body of each participant into the simulation. Participants viewed their body from the first person perspective within an Immersive VR to create subjective body ownership illusion. Sixteen of the participants witnessed their body in a comfortable posture and the remainder witnessed their representation in an uncomfortable posture. The latter group experienced subjective, physiological and cognitive discomfort. In a study with 20 participants across 4 conditions, in the “virtual hand” and “virtual hand drifted” conditions, Yuan and Steed (2010) taped a rubber hand prop to the participant's hands which also appeared in the VR simulation. They found an increase in participant's galvanic skin response and higher association with their body. The study by Bruder et al. (2009) used head mounted cameras to provide a video-see-through Augmented Virtuality setup where Wii remotes which existed in the real world were also modelled in the virtual world. A within subjects design evaluated the ability of the 7 male participants to find the blinking Wii remotes, used in both conditions, when their virtual body was rendered in Condition 2 (C2) but not in Condition 1. Presence was significantly higher in C2, though presence scores in general were low. Participants’ comments revealed they felt safer when walking in the room and could judge distance and find objects when they could see their hands. Unlike our study, that study did not compare AV with VR only as the Wii remotes were included in both conditions. Also, we were not seeking to include the participant's body in the virtual environment because we were simulating a counselling/advising session that did not involve movement in space or interaction with any objects to carry out tasks. Our study is similar to these three studies in that we add elements from the real world into the virtual environment and measure levels of presence. We go further, and measure the impact of the increase in presence on the achievement of our intervention goal, i.e. to reduce study stress.

Also falling under AV on the virtuality continuum is work on passive haptics, that uses spatially-registered low-fidelity props to increase realism, immersion and/or presence (Insko et al., 2001). The initial work by Insko et al. (2001) was motivated to improve spatial knowledge training transfer. In a visual-cliff environment, the passive haptics produced significantly higher changes in heart rate and skin conductivity. In a maze navigation task blindfolded participants trained in the augmented virtual environment had significantly less collisions and navigation errors. Since its conception, many researchers have extended the concept and approach. Azmandian et al. (2016) have designed a framework to support haptic retargeting which allows one prop to be repurposed for multiple virtual artefacts. This work “leverages the dominance of vision when our senses conflict” (p. 1968). The framework supports alignment of physical and virtual objects through body manipulation, world manipulation or a combination of both. They found that participants experienced the highest presence and satisfaction using the hybrid approach. Cheng et al. (2017) augment the haptic retargeting with sparse haptic proxy to dynamically remap a set of geometric primitives based on prediction of the users’ intentions. Fucentese et al. (2015) evaluated the use of passive haptics with 68 novice, intermediate and expert participants for procedural training of diagnostic and therapeutic arthroscopy. They obtained high scores for realism and utility as a training method for all levels of expertise. Presence wasn't measured.

To improve safety in the construction industry, Hasanzadeh et al. (2020) created a mixed-reality environment using a CAVE-like display system where each of the 33 participants were exposed to three different levels of safety intervention. A virtual two-story building was augmented with a physical sloped roof on which participants installed shingles. The study found that individual factors such as personality and varying levels of presencme would alter risk-taking behaviours. All participants experienced the augmented physical roof.

To study the affect on presence, Gonçalves et al. (2019) evaluate a wider range of sensory stimuli. Their study divided 37 participants into three groups to compare visual and auditory (Control) with Control plus passive haptic (a wooden board that acted as a 10 cm high step) and a third group that additionally received wind, vibration and scent. The experimental VR environment involved playing a number of games using the scary, adventure, detective and action game genres. When all sensory stimuli were used there was a significant increase in the involvement subscale with positive impacts on presence for the groups with the passive haptic.

With respect to the above studies, our study also involves AV and the addition of physical objects into the virtual world but does not concern their use to support navigation or completion of a task. Closer to our AV design, the study by Gall and Latoschik (2018) investigated the match between an action and the expected and predicted sensory changes, known as sensorimotor contingencies and presence. They conducted a study that looked at the interaction between haptic and visual feedback. Unlike the other studies where the passive haptic object had low fidelity with the virtual object, their virtual environment was augmented with a virtual replica of a real table that also existed in the real world in the AV condition. Their study provided evidence to support the hypothesis that presence is a function of sensory prediction accuracy by varying the alignment. The experiment invited a participant seated at a table replicated in the HMD to concurrently feel the table's dimensions. The virtual replica of the table was either in the aligned condition where the virtual matched the reference location or in the non-aligned condition where the virtual and reference locations were offset by 20cm. We discuss this study further in our experimental design due to its similarity to our own study but note here that we manipulated the physical object rather than the virtual object and our motivation was to reduce stress through increasing presence rather than study presence itself.

2.2. VR for enhancing User Experience, Presence and Immersion
The ISO (2009) defines User Experience as “the person's perceptions and responses resulting from the use and/or anticipated use of a product, system or service” (ISO, 2009). An experience should be easily communicated and represented in the user's memory. An experience is a finite state, anticipation and recall are part of the experience too (Chertoff and Schatz, 2014). How the user perceives the experience will determine the sense of presence, therefore it is important to think of creating meaningful experiences. Virtual Reality seeks to create an experience that the user can remember that is typically an event with a specific defined start and end, which aims to provoke emotions and relationship with the experienced event (Hassenzahl and Ullrich, 2007; Olsson et al., 2013).

Presence is the internal state of an individual, most commonly defined as the feeling of “being there” (Skarbez et al., 2017). Slater (2009) defines the state of “being there” as “place illusion” (PI), and it is defined by “the intense illusion of being in a place, even though having the knowledge of not being in that place” which is differentiated from “plausibility illusion” (Psi) which is the feeling that the virtual scenario is real (Slater, 2009). Skarbez et al. (2018) found that high PI and Psi in a virtual visual cliff environment leads to greater presence. Presence is a personal state, and can be only comprehended when experienced. Nevertheless, presence is often measured indirectly by using questionnaires in which the responses are compared with expectations of real world experiences (Slater, 2009). Commonly used instruments include Witmer and Singer's Presence Questionnaire (PQ) (Witmer and Singer, 1998) and Slater-Usoh-Steed Questionnaire (SUS) (Slater et al., 1994). Witmer and Singer (1998) also developed the Immersive Tendencies Questionnaire (ITQ) as they believe immersive tendencies will influence the sense of presence in the participants. Slater et al. (1994) believes that individual characteristics will influence the sense of presence of each participant and has criticized the PQ measure because it does not differentiate the individual characteristics of the user (Slater, 1999).

In a study that compared the ability of PQ and SUS to measure real versus virtual experiences, only SUS had a marginally higher mean score, indicating that while these instruments may be useful to measure experiences in the same environment they may not be effective in measuring or comparing experiences in different environments (Usoh et al., 2000). It was not our goal to measure whether participants perceived one environment as more real or virtual than the other. Our focus was on measuring the impact of the environments on stress levels.

“Immersion is a description of a technology and describes the extent to which the computer displays are capable of delivering an inclusive, extensive, surrounding, and a vivid illusion of reality to the senses of a human participant” (Slater and Wilbur, 1997), p. 603. Immersion factors rely on the quality of the presentation and accuracy of the visuals, audio, 360 degree tracking, resolution, frame rate and responsiveness of the virtual environment (Jerald, 2015). In other words, immersion deals with technology factors and how well technology can captivate the users in the experience. On the other hand, how the user interprets immersion is called presence. Skarbez et al. (2017) clarify that “Immersion provides the boundaries within which [presence] can occur” (p.3).

Immersion is capable of producing presence, but that is not always the case; the user is capable of feeling presence by simply closing their eyes and imagining they are somewhere else. Higher immersion levels enable greater levels of presence, allowing the user to feel as if they were in a real space (Jerald, 2015). Isolation from the physical environment is a factor that affects immersion; a head mounted display (HMD) is used as a tool that provides isolation in the Virtual Environment (VE). This notion of immersion aligns to Slater and Wilbur's definition which can be called technological immersion. Some other factors that influence immersion are involvement and interaction. Witmer and Singer (1998) define involvement as the psychological state experienced on focusing complete attention in an activity or event. Involvement is crucial to accomplish presence. This definition can be called psychological immersion. Our study provides physical immersion through the use of HMDs to encourage psychological immersion in a virtual study stress reduction session.

2.3. Stress and Virtual Reality
Hans Selye defined stress in 1936 as a syndrome which modified hormone responses causing sicknesses which include ulcers, increased heart rate, and high blood pressure (Selye, 1980) as the “non-specific result of any demand upon the body” (Selye, 1980). Standardised methods are not always available to measure stress levels. An important advantage of using VR and IVAs is the replicability of the experiment and a standardisation that allow a meaningful analysis (Skarbez et al., 2018). There is some debate concerning how best to measure stress. Despite a lack of consensus and understanding of how to reliably measure stress levels, heart rate variability (HRV) has been found to be a sensitive detector of stress with higher statistical power compared with most self-reported measures and the physiological measures of skin temperature and skin conductivity and also correlates best with reported measures (Meehan et al., 2005). HRV is used to measure stress as it reflects the sympathetic and parasympathetic activities of the autonomic nervous system by measuring the time difference between successive heartbeats in milliseconds (Kyriakou et al., 2019). HRV has been used as a way of measuring stress responses in a range of contexts simulated in VR where individuals commonly exhibit stress as in the study to reduce stress in palliative cancer patients (Oyama, 1997), a study on alcohol abuse (Croissant et al., 2011) and the study by Hasanzadeh et al. (2020) who used HRV as an objective measure of the risk, and associated stress, experienced by roofers. While other measures such as skin conductivity, skin temperature, and brainwaves are also used, Hasanzadeh et al. (2020) note that HRV “is very sensitive to changes in the autonomic nervous system activity associated with stress, with higher HRV signifying a lower level of stress or arousal.” (p. 2119). We further note that HRV has been used by researchers as a physiological measure of stress/arousal and/or presence (Hasanzadeh et al., 2020). Using a calming virtual environment, Rockstroh et al. (2019) employed HRV biofeedback (i.e. controlled breathing) as a means to reduce stress and found the VR implementation improved motivation and attentional focus, and improved short-term HRV compared to the control (no stimuli) but not the traditional non-VR visual stimuli group. They did not study presence.

Skarbez et al. (2018) created a stressful environment for evaluating the interactions between instruments for measuring presence (including PQ and SUS), PI, Psi, immersion and heart rate. The importance of evoking stress in VR training simulations for skill retention and knowledge transfer from the simulator to the real world has also been identified (Mayer and Volanth, 1985; Williams, 1980). This stress can be “positive (e.g., entertainment-induced energy and/or motivation) or negative (e.g., conflict-induced fear and/or adverse physiological reactions)” (Alexander et al., 2005), p. 5. In a study measuring the effect of latency, Meehan et al. (2003) found in the low latency condition that participants reporting higher sense of presence also exhibited a statistically higher change in heart rate. Their environment aimed to induce high stress. They suggest “follow-on research should investigate whether less stressful environments also elicit statistically significant physiological reactions” p.242. Our virtual environment addresses this gap, as does the study by Sponselee et al. (2004); in our case by providing a comfortable environment and friendly advisor designed to reduce study stress.

Virtual Reality plays an important role in clinical psychology (Vincelli and Riva, 2000) and has been used to deliver cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) for stress or anxiety reduction (e.g.(Seol et al., 2017)). As an alternative to CBT, VR can deliver exposure therapy, which simulates the cause of the stress, for the treatment of PTSD (Baños et al., 2011). Closer to stress in the university context, VR was used by the careers service to simulate a job interview and evaluate varying levels of realism of the virtual environment and virtual interviewer (an IVA) and levels of immersion using different display devices (Kwon et al., 2013). They found that more immersive visual displays (e.g. HMD) led to greater anxiety and sense of presence. Sponselee et al. (2004) conducted a study with 80 participants to moderate stress by showing a calming nature film after a stressor task and manipulated presence by using different size screens. They refer to the stress reducing process as restoration. They only found a significant interaction between screen size and time to restoration measured by skin conductance level. None of these studies have investigated the impact of Augmented Virtuality on presence.

Finally, we seek to address “a major issue concerning simulated or game-based training [that] involves the absence of the surrounding context in which the trained skills will be used.” (Alexander et al., 2005) p. 4. Our study involves training in the form of educating the participant about good study skills and habits to help them understand and manage their study stress. While our simulation, or serious game, does not involve creation of an environment in which the student can try out the study tips, e.g. joining a study group, opening the window, studying during daylight hours, etc, the context we seek to simulate is a student welfare counselling environment to encourage contemplation and provide empathic support as the focus is on empowering them to manage their study stress. As explained next, we seek to bring the real world into the virtual, allowing the participant to experience both concurrently, and measure the effect.

3. Methodology
To answer the research questions we conducted an experiment at the Virtual Reality Laboratory on campus that was approved by our university Human Ethics Committee. Our recruitment, design, materials, methods, procedure and data collection are described below.

3.1. Recruitment
Students are valid participants for a study on reducing study stress. Participation in our study involved recruitment via posters and social media across our university. This open recruitment method resulted in a range of students in our study that included undergraduate, postgraduate, coursework and research students. The data was collected on six days over a three week period.

3.2. Materials
To determine if Augmented Virtuality could increase sense of presence and enhance the benefit of stress reduction sessions delivered by an IVA, we modified an IVA (Sarah) who gives stress relief tips to students by adding items from the real world into Sarah's virtual environment. Sarah's dialogues were designed using 10 cues for empathic dialogue (Bickmore et al., 2005) and materials prepared by our university to provide tips for managing study stress. Sarah's dialogue has been previously evaluated and shown to help students reduce their study stress. It is not the focus of this study. As shown in Figure 1, Sarah interacts with the student through speech bubbles and answer options and Sarah's environment previously consisted only of a bookshelf background. Previous studies have involved using Sarah on desktop/notebook computers rather than immersive technologies, such as Head Mounted Displays, and have not evaluated presence, immersion or realism.

Figure 1:
Download : Download high-res image (300KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Sarah in 3D Space showing interaction method.

For this study, a new Unity3D package was created that would allow Sarah to run on a HTC Vive HMD. The virtual environment created for this study, depicted in Figure 2, is composed of Sarah and other virtual elements, such as a chair, coffee table, bookshelf, plant pots and frames. To provide the Augmented Virtuality experience, two items were included in both the virtual and the real environment: a chair and a table as shown in Figure 3. To match the size of the objects, we used photographs of the items and in the 3D environment imported a 3D model of a real-size person, and adjusted the model accordingly. After modelling, using the VR headset, the models were matched to the real items in height and in space.

Figure 2:
Download : Download high-res image (365KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Sarah the Virtual Advisor who provides tips to reduce study stress.

Figure 3:
Download : Download high-res image (255KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Real objects modelled in Virtual space.

We chose to include two items rather than one only to ensure the items were noticeable. If we had just provided a matching chair, then the connection between the real and virtual might have been missed or less impactful. However, we did not include all items in the virtual world into the real space as we did not want to simply recreate the virtual world to match the physical experimental environment. From a logistical perspective, as you provide more real items in the simulation environment there is an increase in the cost, effort and space required and reduces some of the benefits of conducting virtual training or therapy. We chose a chair because it is something both visual and tangible that participants interact with through being seated on it during the experiment. Sarah sat on the same type of chair. In the virtual environment, we also placed a table close to the participant's chair. The participant did not interact with the table as the dialogue did not require such interaction. The intended impression was that you were seated near Sarah. To interact with Sarah, students selected their answer options using a game controller, see method and procedure concerning its usage.

The majority of 3D elements represented in the VE were obtained from a free 3D library. The real objects (the coffee table and the red chair) where modelled and textured using Autodesk MayaⓇ 2018 for students (Figure 6). Sarah was created using Adobe MixamoⓇ, dialogues where recorded and implemented in the Game Engine Unity3DⓇ, and the VE was adapted for Virtual Reality using Steam VR plug in.

3.3. Methods
Immersion levels are constrained to technology, and it is believed that higher levels of immersion produce higher levels of presence (Brom et al., 2007; Riva et al., 2001). Therefore, as described in the previous section the VE was augmented with real objects to measure if levels of presence were affected by these real elements. Using this environment, we conducted a between-subjects experiment involving two groups: “Augmented-virtual” and “Virtual”. The only aspect that was different for each group was whether or not they experienced in reality the chair and coffee table that were modelled in the virtual world. The first group “Augmented-virtual” is a VE augmented by having two real objects in it a chair and a coffee table (Figure 4); meaning that the real objects will be consistent with the VE for these participants. The second group “Virtual” is the same VE however in the real world they have a different chair and there is no coffee table: thus the real and virtual world they experience do not match (Figure 5). For practical and experimental design reasons, we wanted the two chairs to differ in more than just colour. We wanted the two chairs to be visually noticeably different. Both groups were seated during their interaction with Sarah and used the same equipment (i.e. HMD and game controller) and interaction method as shown in Figure 6. As shown, participants could sit and position their arms as they chose. To simplify the design and implementation and minimise distraction, as argued by Gall and Latoschik (2018), no body representation or tracking was done as participants did not have a virtual body represented in the simulation. The alignment condition created by Gall and Latoschik (2018) is similar to our AV condition but we did not include tactile interaction with the coffee table, though additionally we had a replica chair which provided a tactile experience. We did not manipulate the virtual environment to produce an equivalent to the Gall and Latoschik (2018) non-alignment condition. Instead our Virtual condition used the same table and chair models used in the AV condition, but there was no physical table and the physical chair was not congruent with the visual model.

Figure 4:
Download : Download high-res image (365KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. “Augmented-virtual” group. Left: Real life environment. Right: Virtual Reality Environment.

Figure 5:
Download : Download high-res image (360KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. “Virtual” group. Left: Real life environment. Right: Virtual Reality Environment.

Figure 6:
Download : Download high-res image (188KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Participants using a HMD in “Virtual group” (left) and “Augmented-virtual group” (right).

Participants were randomly assigned to either the “Augmented-virtual group” or the “Virtual group”. Randomisation was achieved by allocating the next participant to the alternative group to ensure equal numbers in each group. We did not know anything about the participant except their name before they arrived at their appointment time.

As part of the experimental design, before the interaction with Sarah, participants engaged in the “study focus activity” to focus their attention on their study and potentially trigger their stress associated with it. This strategy is similar to other studies (e.g. (Sponselee et al., 2004)) that used a stress inducing task to provide a baseline to evaluate the effect of their intervention on stress. Sponselee et al. (2004) used a validated stressor task that asked participants to perform a mental arithmetic task with background industrial noise. However, our intervention concerned study stress, and thus we specifically sought to induce stress related to their studies and also to personalise the stress to their own situation. We had no way of knowing if participants were thinking about their studies when they arrived. Participants could have come to the VR laboratory just after or before a class, rushed there from the train station on the other side of campus (a 10 minute brisk walk) or had a leisurely stroll across our green campus.

Participants did the stressor activity on a computer in the VR lab. The activity was managed by Qualtrics survey software and involved instructing them to “think about the unit that concerns you most this semester”. Then they were given a URL to look up the unit guide for the unit of most concern so they could look at the assessment tasks and to write a short paragraph outlining what they still needed to complete for that unit and when. We captured heart rate at baseline before and after this activity, as a way to validate this step and measure whether a purposeful focus on their studies made a difference to their heart rate soon after arrival and before the intervention. This activity was immediately followed by the interaction with Sarah to minimise the participant's change in focus to something other than their study.

3.4. Procedure
All participants followed the same procedure. The experiment took 30 minutes (mean 29.08, min=20, max=39, s.d. 5.23). The experimental procedure is as follows:

Participants were welcomed and given instructions regarding the study process including the intended use of the HMD and how to stop participation for any reason (i.e. close eyes and take off HMD), including if they felt motion sickness or other discomfort from using the HMD.

1
Sign Consent Form on performing the experiment

2
Answer a demographics questionnaire

3
Answer Immersive Tendencies Questionnaire (ITQ)(described under measurements)

4
Measure heart rate before interaction and before study stress activity (before stress)

5
Focus students on their study stress with activity described in the previous section.

6
Measure heart rate after stress activity and before interaction (after stress)

7
Participate in the VR experiment where they interact with Sarah.

8
Ask the participants to stand next to the chair (Virtual/ Augmented-virtual)

a
Explain how to use the controllers if they were not familiar with them

b
Put HMD on their head and wait a moment for them to confirm what they can view in the scene (including the chair, table and IVA as shown in Figure 2) to facilitate their observation of the chair (and table for Augmented-virtual) to make a connection with the chair and table in the virtual world

c
Ask them to take a seat on the chair,

d
Interact with Sarah. At start and at end participant scores their level of stress (self reported).

e
Take HMD off their head

9
Answer presence questionnaires (described under measurements – approx. 2-5 minutes)

10
Measure heart rate (after interaction)

11
Thank the participant

Step 8, particularly substeps 8.1 and 8.3, sought to help participants pay attention to the chairs (same or different) and tables (present or not present) in the real and virtual environments. We asked the SUS and Presence questions immediately following the interaction to minimise interference with their sense of presence and did not want them distracted by the procedure of taking heart rate before they answered. Information, instructions and data collection at steps 2, 3, 4, 6 and 9 were recorded using the online research software Qualtrics. The participant's responses during interaction with Sarah were recorded into a MySQL database. Qualtrics was used to randomly order the immersive tendencies and presence questions. A participant number was recorded in Qualtrics and the MySQL database to link the data for analysis.

3.5. Measurements
We collected basic demographic data including gender, age, cultural identity (using the Australian Bureau of Statistics categories); and what course they were enrolled in. Other data collection is described next.

3.5.1. Stress and Heart Rate Data collection
Heart rate levels were measured using a pulse rate (PR) monitor (FitbitⓇ Alta HR) to gather stress levels of the participants. In its price range, it was a high rating cost The wearable device uses photoplethysmography (PPG) which is a “non-invasive method used to detect volume changes in blood vessels” (Tamura et al., 2014) p 159. PPG collects heart rate information depending on the changes in the absorption of green light in the skin at a particular red wavelength (Tamura et al., 2014), p 159. Wearable devices have been compared with the gold standard reference method, an ambulatory electrocardiogram (ECG), in a range of studies revealing that differing results have been achieved depending on the intensity of the activity or the degree of erratic wrist movements, with most studies finding that accuracy at rest was higher, possibly due to the position of the device (Nelson and Allen, 2019). Issues have been raised concerning replicability and reproducibility of wrist-worn devices to measure heart rate due to differences that might exist in data collection and processing, participants’ demographics (e.g. skin tone) and biobehavioural variables (e.g. wrist dominance and circumference) and technological differences (e.g. device type, sampling rate, firmware version) that may influence heart rate measurement (Nelson et al., 2020). To mitigate technological errors the same device was used for all participants. Randomisation of participants to the VR or AR conditions sought to mitigate demographic and biobehavioural variables.

Errors relating to procedure, data collection and individual differences were minimised by having the same researcher conduct exactly the same procedure for all participants and when the participant was at rest, to increase accuracy. This involved re-fitting the Fitbit at each specific data capture timepoint to the same physical location on the right hand above the wrist ensuring it was touching the skin but not too tight. Once fitted the research asked the device to take the heart rate, observing the reading after 5 seconds, waiting another 5 seconds and asking again and writing down the second measurement. There was no need to keep the Fitbit on the participant since there were specific times when we were recording the HR. We wanted to avoid the participant entering their own HR into the database (which could be prone to human error). Some participants may not have wanted to keep the Fitbit on, might have moved the placement of the Fitbit, or might have found it distracting. We wanted the procedure to be consistent for all participants. The whole procedure was managed using the Qualtrics software including the order of activities using instructions such as “Please ask to get your heart rate measured again, and input the number in the box” followed by “Please ask to participate in the Virtual Reality Experiment which involves the use of a Head Mounted Display (HTC VIVE)”. Furthermore, removal of the Fitbit ensured the device was attached at the same location each time and had not been in use immediately before but was reset each time. As recommended by the manufacturer, the wearable device was placed on the participant's wrist for around 3 minutes whilst seated. The heart rate level was recorded in a database.

As described under procedures, heart rate was captured at three time points: 1) before the study focus/stressor activity; 2) after study focus activity and before interaction and 3) after interaction with the IVA and completion of presence questionnaires. Sarah captured a subjective measure of level of stress from the student by asking them at the beginning and again at the end of the interaction “From 1 – 10, 1 being not stressed at all and 10 being extremely stressed, how are you feeling today?” This practice is commonly used by counsellors and therapists to monitor the psychological state of their client and to evaluate the efficacy of the sessions together.

3.5.2. Questionnaires
Subjective questionnaires are the most common means to measure presence (Schwind et al., 2019). VR studies commonly use both the Witmer and Singer (1998) Immersive Tendencies Questionnaire (ITQ) Presence Questionnaire (PQ). We used ITQ version 3.01 September 1996 and OQ Vs. 3.0, Nov. 1994, revised by UQO Cybersecurity Lab in 2004. ITQ and PQ have been widely tested for reliability and are commonly both used to ensure that differences between levels of presence after a stimuli are not due to individual pre-dispositions to become more immersed, for example in reading a book. To measure pre-disposition to becoming immersed, ITQ has 18 questions that measure factors such as focus, involvement, emotions and games. PQ includes 24 questions that measure factors such as realism, control, quality of interface, possibility to examine, possibility to act, self-evaluation, sounds and haptic. Our study did not include the optional haptic questions and questions about control, searching, manipulating/moving objects that were not possible in our study. To avoid bias and understand the overall multi-faceted sense of presence experienced by our participants, we retained the remaining 16 PQ questions. The Slater-Usoh-Steed Questionnaire (SUS) (Slater et al., 1994) is also widely used for measuring presence. SUS includes 6 questions focused on measuring the sense of being in a VE (Nystad and Sebok, 2004). To limit time we used the first 4 questions only as the 5th question is long and complex and we did not envisage users having visited a similar real place that day. Question 6 overlapped with Question 2 and 4. ITQ, PQ and SUS are measured using a likert- scale with seven answer options, where lower scores for ITQ and PQ indicate lower immersion and presence. The scales for SUS appear with the results to aid interpretation.

Nystad and Sebok (2004) compared SUS and PQ questionnaires with ITQ questionnaire. It was found that PQ and ITQ were not significantly correlated in their total scores, but significantly correlated with SUS in the total score (Nystad and Sebok, 2004). Because the PQ and SUS questions focus on different aspects, we have included both questionnaires in our study. In terms of finding differences between the two groups, we expected that realism would be the only PQ factor that might differ between the two groups, because realism is the only aspect we manipulated. As discussed and justified further below, we created a focussed hybrid instrument (PQ Realism+SUS) based only on the PQ realism factor (4 questions Q2 and Q4 about interaction and control mechanism were dropped because they were identical for both groups) and SUS questionnaire (4 questions). Cronbach's Alpha would be used to validate the reliability of each instrument. This hybrid PQ Realism+SUS instrument was used in addition to the longer PQ.

4. Results and Findings
4.1. Participants
A total of 50 participants, 25 in each condition participated in our study. The participants included 24 females and 26 males, aged from 18 years old to 68 years old; the average age was 24.5 years old, standard deviation 7.99, mode of 19. The age range is indicative of the open invitation to any student at our university to participate. A diverse range of cultures were represented, with 20% identifying as South-East Asian, 16% as Southern and Central Asian, 14% as People of the Americas/Oceania/don't identify with any cultural group, 12% as North-Western European, 12% Southern-Eastern European, 8% North African and Middle Eastern and one person identified as North-East Asian. Regarding courses being studied, the largest single cohort were undergraduate domestic psychology students who accounted for 42%, next were 8 Computing students making up 16% of the participants. The rest were a mix of international/domestic, undergraduate/postgraduate enrolled in business and commerce, arts, science and health courses. The spread made it impossible to perform any meaningful statistical analyses on different enrolment cohorts. No participants reported feeling sick either by following the procedure of removing the HMD or via the free text comment at the end of the study.

As outlined in the procedure above (steps 5, 7 and 10), the heart rate values for the “Virtual” and “Augmented-virtual” group soon after arrival, before the interaction with Sarah and after the interaction with Sarah can be seen in Table 1. Table 1 also shows the descriptive statistics for the self-assessed stress levels recorded during the interaction with the Sarah (where 0 means extremely good and relaxed and 10 extremely bad and stressed).


Table 1. The relationship between participants’ response to Virtual and Augmented-virtual Experimental Conditions.

Experimental Setting	Virtual1	Augmented-virtual1	Total1	Statistics	p-value
Number of participants	25	25	50		
Heart Rate (bpm)					
 Before stress	79.0(15.5)	79.1(16.2)	79.05(15.70)	-0.035*	0.97
 After Stress	81.2(11.8)	77.6(10.4)	79.38(11.15)	1.131*	0.26
 After Interaction	77.0(14.0)	69.1(12.2)	73.06(13.62)	2.14*	0.037
p=0.4042	p=0.0032	p=0.008443		
Self-assessed stress					
 Start of Interaction	6.12(2.07)	6.20(2.20)	6.16(2.11)	299#	0.80
 End of Interaction	5.20(1.8)	4.56(1.73)	4.88(1.78)	386#	0.15
p<0.00014	p=0.000034	p<0.00014		
Immersive Tendencies Questionnaire					
 Involvement	16.8(4.37)	18.8(3.89)	17.8(4.21)	-1.709*	0.094
 Focus	24.04(3.83)	24.16(2.56)	24.1(3.22)	-0.130*	0.897
 Emotion	17.16(4.09)	19.2(4.24)	18.18(4.25)	-1.731*	0.090
 Games	10.04(4.31)	10.2(4.19)	10.12(4.20)	-0.133*	0.895
 Total	72.4(12.5)	77.0(9.09)	74.74(11.04)	-1.491*	0.143
1
Mean (standard deviation), followed by relevant test statistics p value for heart rate and self-assessed stress.

2
Repeated measures ANOVA is used to assess whether heart rates were statistically significantly different in three experimental points.

3
Friedman Test is used to assess whether heart rates were statistically significantly different in three experimental points. Assuming there is no difference between the experimental groups, the statistics are calculated for all participants to identify the benefits.

4
Wilcoxon signed rank test with continuity correction

⁎
Two-sample t-tests with degrees of freedom 48

#
Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction

4.2. Statistical Analysis
Before performing statistical analysis a Shapiro-Wilk normality test was performed on all variables to check that the data was not significantly different than normal distribution. As an alternative to ANOVA, where required, the Friedman Test is used which was followed by Wilcoxon signed rank test to identify where the differences were between different time points (Table 1 Heart Rate). Wilcoxon signed rank tests and Wilcoxon rank sum tests were performed on the self-assessed stress to discover if the differences between groups and two time points were statistically significant (Table 1).

When we ignored the experimental groups and analyse the heart rate differences for whole cohort of participants, the heart rate was statistically significantly different at the different time points (Friedman test, χ2(2) = 9.55, p = 0.00844). Pairwise Wilcoxon signed rank test for whole cohort revealed statistically significant differences in heart rate between after stress (mean=79.4, std=11.2) and after experiment (mean=73.1, std=13.6) (p = 0.0009). When we investigated the differences with repeated measures ANOVA within virtual group, the heart rate was not statistically significantly different at the different time points, F(2, 48) = 0.924, p = 0.404 while heart rate was statistically significantly different at the different time points within Augmented-virtual, F(2, 48) = 8.256, p = 0.003. Post-hoc analysis with a Bonferroni adjustment revealed that there were statistically significant differences between heart rate after stress and after experiment (paired t-test t(24) = -4.54, p < 0.0001) and between heart rate after stress and after experiment (paired t-test t(24) = -3.06, p = 0.016).

Two-tailed t- tests were performed on ITQ scores to test that there were no significant differences between the two groups in their tendency to become immersed. None of the ITQ dimensions (involvement, focus, emotions and games) were significantly different between the two groups (virtual and augmented virtual). In addition, total ITQ score were not significantly different either.

Table 2 shows the means and p-values from independent t-tests for each question in the Presence Questionnaire (PQ), SUS and provides totals for each factor, questionnaire and our adapted Realism+SUS Questionnaire.


Table 2. Presence and SUS Questionnaire Results.

Survey Question	Virtual1	Augmented-virtual1	Total1,2	T (df=48)	p-value3
PQ- Realism					
 Q2. How natural did your interactions with the environment seem?	4.28(1.81)	4.84(1.65)	4.56(1.73)	-1.14	0.259
 Q3⁎⁎. How much did the visual aspects of the environment involve you?	4.28(1.72)	5.32(1.62)	4.8(1.73)	-2.19	0.033*
 Q4. How natural was the mechanism which controlled movement through the environment?	4.96(1.33)	4.88(1.58)	4.92(1.45)	.193	0.848
 Q5⁎⁎. How much did your experiences in the virtual environment seem consistent with your real world experiences?	4.6(1.63)	5(1.63)	4.8(1.62)	-.866	0.391
 Q6⁎⁎. How believable was your sense of moving around inside the virtual environment?	5.16(1.7)	5.76(1.09)	5,46(1.44)	-1.48	0.144
 Q7⁎⁎. How involved were you in the virtual environment experience?	4.92(1.35)	5.52(1.32)	5.22(1.35)	-1.54	0.120
 Total	28.2(7.73)	31.32(7.32)	29.76(7.61)	-1.46	0.149
Possibility to Act					
 Q1. How responsive was the environment to actions that you initiated or performed?	5.72(1.17)	5.56(1.04)	5.64(1.10)	0.509	0.613
 Q8. How much delay did you experience between your actions and expected outcomes?	6.08(1.28)	5.84(1.51)	5.78(1.39)	0.603	0.550
 Total	5.72(1.17)	5.56(1.04)	5.64(1.10)	0.380	0.705
Quality of Interface					
 Q11. How much did the visual quality distract you from performing assigned tasks or required activities?	5.60(1.29)	5.12(1.73)	5.36(1.53)	1.108	0.273
 Q12 How much did the control devices interfere with the performance of assigned tasks or with other activities?	5.48(1.75)	5.56(1.52)	5.52(1.63)	-0.172	0.864
Total	17.16(3.3)	16.52(3.19)	16.84(3.22)	0.697	0.489
Possibility to Examine					
 Q13. How well could you concentrate on the assigned tasks or required activities rather than on the mechanisms used to perform those tasks?	5.68(1.18)	5.64(.90)	5.66(1.04)	0.134	0.894
Total	5.68(1.18)	5.64(.90)	5.66(1.04)	0.134	0.893
Auto/Self-Evaluation					
 Q9. How quickly did you adjust to the virtual environment experience?	5.76(1.33)	6.16(1.17)	5.96(1.26)	-1.124	0.266
 Q10. How proficient in moving and interacting with the virtual environment did you feel at the end of the experience?	5.72(1.42)	5.76(1.3)	5.74(1.35)	-0.104	0.918
 Total	11.48(2.31)	11.92(2.22)	11.7(2.25)	-0.68	0.495
Sound					
 Q14 How much did the auditory aspects of the environment involve you?	5.24(1.42)	5.48(1.35)	5.36(1.38)	-.61	0.545
 Q15 How well could you identify sounds?	6.44(.76)	6.28(.89)	6.36(.82)	.68	0.50
 Q16. How well could you localize sounds?	5.8(1.29)	5.56(1.35)	5.68(1.31)	.641	0.52
 Total	17.48(13.4)	17.32(13.9)	17.4(13.56)	.195	0.846
Presence Total	68.24(11.5)	70.96(12.1)	69.60(11.77)	-0.813	0.419
SUS Questionnaire					
 Q1⁎⁎. Please rate your sense of being in the virtual environment. On a scale of 1 to 7, where 7 represents your normal experience of being in a place.	5.2(1.15)	5.24(1.45)	5.22(1.29)	-.108	0.915
 Q2.⁎⁎ To what extent were there times during the experience when the virtual environment was the reality for you? On a scale of 1 to 7, where 7 represents reality.	4.12(0.52)	4(0)	4.06(0.37)	1.141	0.260
 Q3⁎⁎. When you think back to the experience, do you think of the virtual environment more as images that you saw or more as somewhere that you visited? On a scale of 1 to 7, where 7 represents somewhere that you visited and 1 images that you saw.	3.68(1.7)	4.92(1.89)	4.3(1.88)	-2.437	0.019*
 Q4⁎⁎. During the time of your experience, did you often think to yourself that you were actually in the virtual environment? On a scale of 1 to 7, where 7 represents reality 1 a virtual environment.	4.44(1.6)	5.4(1.29)	4.92(1.52)	-2.327	0.024*
 Total	17.44	19.56	18.5(3.28)	-2.38	0.0208*
PQ Realism+ SUS Total	36.4(7.37)	41.16(7.46)	38.78(7.72)	-2.27	0.0277*
1
Mean (standard deviation)

2
Assuming there is no difference between the experimental groups, the statistics are calculated for all participants to identify the benefits of experiments (regardless of the condition).

3
Two independent samples t-test assuming equal variances for the comparisons between Virtual and Augmented-virtual experimental conditions.

⁎
p < .05 ** p < .01

⁎⁎
included in PQ Realism+SUS instrument

To discover if the variables for the Augmented-virtual group were correlated with each other, pairwise correlations (Pearson's) were calculated for PQ Realism+ SUS, Heart Rate after the interaction, and self-stress assessment at the end of the interaction with Sarah by using R Core Team (2019). The results of the analysis can be found in the Table 3. There is no evidence to say that there is a statistically significant correlation between heart rate after interaction and self-assessed stress at the end of interaction; heart rate after interaction and PQ Realism + SUS; and self-assessed stress at end of interaction and PQ Realism+SUS.


Table 3. P-Correlation analysis for Augmented-virtual group.

Variables	Heart Rate After Interaction	Self-assessed Stress at End of Interaction	PQ Realism + SUS
Correlation	P-value	Correlation	P-value	Correlation	P-value
Heart Rate After Interaction	-	-	0.168	0.419	-0.007	0.973
Self-assessed Stress at End of Interaction	0.168	0.419	-	-	0.221	0.287
PQ Realism + SUS	-0.007	0.973	0.221	0.287	-	-
5. Discussion
5.1. Answering the Research Questions
The first research question concerns the effect of augmenting the virtual environment with real items (i.e. chair and table) on sense of presence. In order to calibrate and compare the sense of presence of the two experimental groups, we measured each group's tendency to become immersed (using ITQ) before interacting with Sarah and their presence (using PQ and SUS) after interaction. The Witmer and Singer questionnaires PQ and ITQ were created on the hypothesis that people with higher immersive tendencies will experience higher presence; for this to be true there should be a positive correlation with the sense of presence (Nystad and Sebok, 2004). There was no significant difference between groups for ITQ, thus the presence results are not influenced by participants’ propensity for immersion.

Analysis of the PQ results revealed that there were no significant differences for PQ or any of its factors, including realism. Since our experiment only manipulated “real” aspects of the study, it is to be expected that other aspects such as possibility to act or examine, quality of interface, sound, etc would not be perceived to be significantly different. In fact, if any of these had been significant, it would call into question the validity of the participants’ responses captured. However, we were perplexed why PQ-realism did not show a significant difference. We had initially asked all questions from PQ because we did not want to alter the reliability of the questionnaire. Review of p-values of individual PQ-realism items in Table 2, reveal that there are significant differences for Q3. “How much did the visual aspects of the environment involve you”, but not for any of the other items. We conclude that since the physical chair and table are visual items, rather than items for manipulation or an aspect of the dialogue with Sarah, that it is the chair and table that have had the main influence on realism and sense of presence. We note that the question which asks “How natural was the mechanism which controlled movement through the environment?” has the smallest mean difference between the two groups. Both groups used the same device to interact with Sarah (see Figure 6).

There was a significant difference in self-reported stress levels before and after interacting with Sarah to get study tips and learn about stress management. Thus, in answer to the second research question, we could say that the virtual reality tool was useful for reducing participants’ perceived stress levels regardless of whether there is a real chair in the virtual space or not. We might say that there is a reduction in stress at the cognitive level through participating in the study and gaining study stress tips. However, when one or more elements in the real world (i.e. the real chair and table) are present in the virtual space, there is also a reduction in stress at the participants’ physical level (i.e. heart-rate). This is a significant finding and suggests the value of integrating the real into the virtual experience. This benefit goes beyond making the virtual world more realistic. It is also different to Augmented Reality that enhances the real world with a virtual overlay. The purpose of adding an element from the virtual world to the real world (usually the focus is the other way around), is to enhance the benefits and impact of the virtual experience.

Relating to the third research question, we hypothesized that a significant reduction in stress levels might occur in the Augmented-virtual group, due to a greater sense of presence (i.e. being there) when the real world environment was incorporated into virtual world experience. SUS and PQ Presence questionnaires were used to measure presence of the participants after the experiment. The overall SUS results show a statistically significant difference (p= 0.0208) between “Virtual” and “Augmented-virtual” groups where the Augmented-virtual group achieved a higher score in terms of presence. However, we note that only 2 out of the 4 SUS questions were significant and a test of the reliability of the SUS questions was low (Cronbach's Alpha of .381). So we were hesitant to rely on those results. As identified in the methods section and previous paragraph, while PQ contains 6 factors, only realism was manipulated in any way. Because of this, our methodology included a hybrid instrument PQ-Realism+SUS, which was found to be reliable (Cronbach's Alpha 0.811). With the PQ-Realism+SUS measure, we observed a statistically significant difference between the two groups, where the Augmented-virtual group report higher sense of presence, albeit from a realism perspective only. Thus, we conclude that the reduction in stress can be associated with the increase in sense of presence. Based on the results, all groups showed a reduction in stress, and the “Augmented-virtual” group felt more presence. Though not focussed on stress as such, Seol et al. (2017) found decrease in anxiety and depression, and levels of presence correlated with sense of peacefulness. Since peacefulness indicates low stress and stress is typically correlated with anxiety and depression (Lovibond and Lovibond, 1995) we would thus expect that levels of presence would be correlated with decrease in stress. Furthermore, heart rate has been found to be a reliable physiological measure of presence (Meehan et al., 2002; Meehan et al., 2005) with higher self-reported presence with statistically higher change in heart rate (Meehan et al., 2003). However in our study, there seems to be no correlation between presence and reduction on heart rate between scenarios. Other studies have similarly found significant changes in sense of presence have not been correlated with other study factors as in the study by Kwon et al. (2013) where anxiety levels were not directly affected by sense of presence or the study by Cadet and Chainay (2020) that emotion affected presence and memory, however presence and memory performance were not linked. As these studies concluded, further research with other factors and designs are needed to shed light on the findings. (Kwon et al., 2013)

5.2. Discussion of Findings, Future Work and Practical Implications
As intended by randomisation of participants into groups, no significant differences between groups were found in immersive tendencies (average 77.04 versus 72.44) or in initial heart rates (average 79 versus 79.1 bpm) or reported stress levels (average 6.12 versus 6.20). This indicates that heart rate at baseline is probably due to walking across campus to the VR lab and the possible calming effect of sitting down to answer the biographical questions and ITQ. Further, the change in participants’ heart rates prior to and following the mental exercise of contemplating what assessment tasks they still needed to complete (i.e. the study focus activity) indicates that students did engage with the activity. The study by Sponselee et al. (2004) suggested that the non-significant results for reduction in affect and heart rate in their study may have been due to the task not being stressful enough and cite other studies that drew similar conclusions. They even comment “Some are now turning to naturally appearing stress e.g. as exists among students directly after exams”. (p.201). It was not feasible for us to attract participants on campus after the exam period. We observe that the heart rate of the Augmented-virtual group went down while the heart rate of the Virtual group went up a similar amount. However, the after stress heart rates were not significantly different between the two groups. Devising an appropriate stressor task to achieve a good baseline is important.

Our study aimed to used AV to increase the efficacy of our study stress reduction sessions. Based on the literature (Lyzwinski, 2019; Ranjbartabar and Richards, 2016; Witmer and Singer, 1998), we hypothesized that all groups would show a reduction in reported study stress following the study. Prior to data collection, we further hypothesised that the Augmented-virtual group would experience higher presence due to the existence of items in both the real and virtual world. Following our line of reasoning further, increased presence would make the participant feel more strongly that they were “in” a stress management session with Sarah, learn more about how to understand and manage their stress, and this would lead to greater stress reduction that would be evidenced in lower heart rate and reported stress levels for the Augmented-virtual group. Our results show that both groups did lower their stress levels, as measured via heart rate and also via self-report. For self-reported stress, both groups significantly reduced their stress levels. This is consistent with other studies using self-report measures (Ranjbartabar and Richards, 2016) and suggests that there was no benefit in augmenting the virtual environment with objects also experienced concurrently in the real environment. This finding contradicts our hypothesis that adding real objects will increase sense of presence leading to increased stress reduction. A different finding emerges when we look at the heart-rate data.

Capture of heart rate sought to provide an objective measure, improve the reliability of the results, mediate the recognised shortcomings of seeking to measure presence via a self-reported survey and concerns over measuring different environments using SUS and PQ (Usoh et al., 2000). The heartrate after interaction includes the effects, if any, of a 2-5 minute time delay during which the participants answered the presence question. As both groups had the same delay and set of questions, the impact of answering the questions on heartrate, if any, should be similar. For the Virtual group there is a non-significant reduction in the average heart rate. In contrast, the Augmented-virtual group significantly lowered their stress level measured by heart rate. It can be argued that a significant reduction in heart rate between the two time-points before (after stress) and after interaction was harder to achieve for the Augmented-virtual group because the heart rate after the study focus activity was lower, though not significantly, for the Augmented-virtual group compared to the Virtual group. This significant finding supports our hypothesis that adding real objects will leading to increased stress reduction and highlights the need for both objective and subjective measures.

Similarly, the stress inducing study by Skarbez et al. (2018), involving a cliff scenario, found significant differences between experimental groups based on heart rate that were not found via subjective measures. They attribute the increase in physical stress to a confusing scenario and warn that low coherence may interfere with physiological measurements. The notion of coherence, somewhat similar to Psi, captures the extent to which a virtual scenario behaves as expected from a perspective of scenario suitability, interactions and system behaviours, (Skarbez et al., 2018) and is differentiated from immersion that focuses on the physical interface and environment. In contrast, in our study, the virtual scenario is in a pleasant office environment rather than a physically stressful situation, such as being on the edge of a cliff. Furthermore, our study was designed to reduce stress experienced in the real world, not induce stress in the virtual world. Nevertheless, in the future we should include a short debrief before participants leave the laboratory in case consideration of their study stress has triggered fears and dangerous levels of stress (Robotham and Julian, 2006) or due to separation anxiety or disorientation, which is a sub-factor of Witmer and Singer's realism factor (Witmer and Singer, 1998).

In addition to the visual differences, the differences in the tactile feel of the two chairs could have been a factor in producing differences in presence and/or stress reduction. We note that participants with the red chair found it easier to take a seat. While both chairs had armrests and a padded seat and backrest, the chair used by the Augmented-virtual group might have been softer and more comfortable than the other chair and the reason for their reduced stress. The study by Bergström et al. (2016) showed that feelings of discomfort can be induced using VR through the participant's simulated embodiment displaying comfortable and uncomfortable postures. However, in our case the VR simulation was exactly the same for all participants. What differed between groups in our study was whether the chair they physically experienced was also part of the virtual world. The significant differences for the question concerning the realism of the visual aspects (PQ-Q3) suggest that the appearance of the item was a key factor, not just an increased level of comfort, particularly since increased sense of comfort was likely to distort perceptions for the other questions as well. However, in the future duplication of this study should use a chair of equal comfort/design but with sufficiently different appearance from the virtual chair to ensure removal of this possible explanation.

Looking at the specific SUS realism questions, both groups tended to feel (5/7) that the virtual scenario was similar to how they normally experienced being in a place and expressed an average (4/7) sense of the experience being reality. However, the Augmented-virtual group experienced the scenario more as a place they visited rather than as imagined and had a greater sense that they were actually there. This indicates that our goal to make the participant feel that they were sitting there with Sarah through Augmented Virtuality was successful, at least to some extent.

From a practical perspective, deployed applications of IVAs for stress reduction could potentially enhance their effectiveness by allowing the user to upload an image of something in their environment which is added into the IVAs environment, or the product could ship an item such as a stress ball or toy to be placed in the user's physical location that also appears in the virtual environment.

6. Conclusion and Future Research
Understanding how and when technologies on the Virtuality Continuum can deliver maximum benefit is important. We investigated the least considered dimension: Augmented Virtuality. Significantly and novelly, this project used Augmented Virtuality to increase realism and potentially increase presence to reduce stress. An experiment was conducted that sought to understand how sense of presence can be increased and how increased sense of presence can improve the intended outcome of an intervention delivered by immersive virtual reality technology.

The PQ-Realism + SUS results suggest that augmenting the virtual world with items experienced concurrently in the real-world by the participant can increase sense of presence and that enhanced the session with the IVA, leading to greater reduction in the student's stress levels, at the participant's cognitive (measured via self-report) and physical (measured via heart rate) levels. To confirm the generalisability of our results further studies would need to involve greater numbers and participants representing other student populations. We are currently arranging running online desktop/smartphone studies in India and China involving Sarah. However, it is not feasible for our collaborators to set up a laboratory based experiment similar to our own. We acknowledge that heart rate was only measured in three instances with a consumer Fitbit device that has known issues with regards to providing accurate measurements (Benedetto et al., 2018). Our mitigation of these threats were discussed under data collection. Future studies should acquire more reliable devices for measurement and possibly use additional physiological measures of stress and presence such as skin conductance and temperature, though heart rate has been shown to be a better measure (Meehan et al., 2005). Also, capture of heart rate while participants were completing the presence questionnaires would capture both measurements concurrently and avoid delay that might have reduced impact of the intervention. While, we used heart rate to measure stress others have used it as a measure of presence in stressful environments (Meehan et al., 2002). We did not find a correlation between presence (self-reported) and stress (self-reported or measure via heart rate). This suggests further studies to clarify the relationship between stress and presence. While our procedure went to some lengths to assist participants to notice the virtual and real chairs and tables, in hindsight, after all other data had been collected to avoid desirability or other bias, we could have asked how similar participants perceived the real and virtual items. This could have been used as a manipulation check.

Future research could look at placing the user in the scenario to evaluate the effect on stress of embodiment and body ownership (Latoschik et al., 2017) and presence (Bergström et al., 2016; Yuan and Steed, 2010), though adding realism is questioned in the study by Jo et al. (2017) that suggests a cartoon version actually increases presence and body ownership. Also there is potential to use AV in the context of immersive journalism where one could allow models of the user to interact with a story recreated in a virtual environment, though evaluation should ensure the models avoid the uncanny valley (Shin and Biocca, 2018). Future studies could explore the relationship between the PQ, SUS, Heart Rate, Self-Assessed Stress with the concepts of PI, Psi and Coherence similar to the work done by Skarbez et al. (2018). In the future, we would like to look at the implication of providing a haptic experience. Particularly in the context of stress reduction, it could be valuable to include items like stress balls, or explore different surfaces and textures that can increase realism (Shin and Choi, 2018). A future study to investigate the efficacy of Sarah delivered via the HMD compared with a pc-based version, could also answer whether the use of immersive technologies adds sufficient benefit over the use of more common and affordable technologies for the purpose of reducing study-related stress in students.