5G networks provide novel features that have generated huge expectations. Therefore, implementation and validation become crucial. In order to achieve this, the following concepts are important: first, to have a technical insight on the 5G technology and to understand better its advantages; second, to understand the specific needs and requirements of the use cases; and third, to know from an implementation point of view how to match the 5G technical features with the needs of the use cases. In this context, the main focus of this article is to describe the implementation approach followed to deliver 5G services to specific use cases with concrete high throughput and low latency requirements, and to present the current lessons learned, challenges, and open issues identified. This article uses as reference the integration work done by the authors of the Horizon 2020 projects, where the target is to design and implement an advanced and accessible 5G facility (5G-VINNI), and validate vertical use cases by the use of 5G technology (5G-HEART), providing the technology, use cases, and integration knowledge needed to understand better how to bring from theory to practice the 5G technology into the verticals world.

Introduction
The authors use as reference the integration work done by the authors at the Horizon 2020 projects, where the target is to design and implement an advanced and accessible 5G facility (5G-VINNI) and validate vertical use cases by the use of 5G technology (5G-HEART), providing the technology, use cases, and integration knowledge needed to understand better how to bring from theory to practice the 5G technology into the verticals world.
Unlike 4G, 5G is closely coupled with industrial verticals with the target to support and facilitate the digital transformation of these industries. Besides enhancing the traditional core telco business (voice and media), 5G is more into exploring new use cases (UCs) to transform industrial verticals, whose services either have synergies with telcos and can enrich the core business (e.g., Augmented Reality in eMBB) or could be spun off to flourish as independent business (e.g., drone delivery) [1]. However, these new UCs need to be validated.

The success of 5G relies on key enabling technologies including network slicing, network function virtualization (NFV), software defined networking (SDN), artificial intelligence (AI), and so on. These technologies need to be integrated organically into a 5G platform to cater for the requirements of vertical services in terms of flexibility, scalability, agility, and adaptability. Projects such as 5G-VINNI, 5G-EVE, and 5Genesis can be used as reference for 5G facilities that can be used by vertical industries for innovative UCs and validate the key 5G PPP network key performance indicators (KPIs). These projects provide a platform for verticals to experiment and verify their innovative services, investigate the possible business values, and explore the potential collaboration models. More importantly, they enable verticals to test the feasibility of 5G PPP KPIs and identify the gaps between the expectation and the reality, or between the KPIs supported by the 5G platform and the KPIs expected by the verticals.

In addition to validating and benchmarking the 5G technology, the established end-to-end (E2E) facilities serve vertical trials in two ways. First, they provide the 5G network services to be consumed by participating verticals. Second, they support verticals to validate KPIs (network and application level). A successful network and slicing design is based on the experiences and learning from practical and iterative deployments. Continuous KPI validation and analysis are needed for both verticals and operators to reach the optimum slice design that meets the verticals' service level agreements (SLAs) and enhance the operator's operational efficiency.

In this context, this article is based on the progress of the cooperation between the 5G-VINNI and 5G-HEART projects, and the main goal is to show how a 5G network facility today can address high throughput and low latency demands. In order to achieve this goal, a set of contributions need to be provided in this article:

Provide insights on the architectural design of a 5G facility used for implementing and onboarding 5G verticals (5G-VINNI).

Give concrete details on how verticals can challenge 5G telco operators with bandwidth capacity and delay requirements (5G-HEART).

Illustrate how to match the 5G technical features with the vertical requirements by showing concrete architecture designs, implementation plans, and components needed (both).

Conclude with a table of lessons learned, and show the existing gaps and challenges based on the concepts presented in the three previous points (both).

The structure of this article is as follows. In the following section, the 5G network used is illustrated, based on the implemented 5G-VINNI Norway facility. We then provide details on the selected 5G-HEART UCs that are under implementation in the 5G facility. Following that, the implementation designs of the UCs in the 5G facility are presented. The final section illustrates the lessons learned and concludes the article.


Figure 1.
5G-VINNI norway facility site. Network domains and slices.

Show All

5G Platform. The 5G-VINNI Norway Facility
The 5G promises have to be verified and tested. This article uses as reference the implemented 5G-VINNI Norway facility. It is based on the latest 5G standards and designs, and it follows the global 5G-VINNI architectural principles presented in [2].

The 5G-VINNI Norway facility implements three different network domains, as described in Fig. 1.

The radio access network (RAN) domain uses 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Release-15-compatible New Radio (NR) from Huawei and Ericsson (5G-VINNI partners). The NG-RAN in Norway is built for mid-band (3600 MHz) and high-band (24.5-27.25 GHz), supporting non-standalone (NSA), as well as standalone (SA) deployments. It supports 3GPP standardized 5G carrier bandwidths. Current values used are 80 MHz for mid-band frequencies, and in high-band frequencies, four channels with 200 MHz each, with carrier aggregation for a potential total of 800 MHz.

The transport network domain uses the commercial transport network from Telenor Norway, which is a nationwide MPLS network with coverage in most parts of the country, and where dedicated VPNs are assigned to 5G-VINNI, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

The 5G-HEART project's objective is to perform validation trials to healthcare, aquaculture and transport vertical domains, implementing an extended a set of innovative UCs. 5G-HEART aims to contribute to further development of 5G communication technologies, additionally, it includes trials on the aquaculture vertical, which, according to the best of our knowledge, has not been validated in the context of 5G before.
The data center domain follows the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI-NFV) architecture principles with NFV infrastructure (NFVI) and management and orchestration (MANO) by Nokia. The 3GPP mobile core virtual network functions (VNFs) from Ericsson are deployed in the central cite located in Oslo and in different telco edge (edge) data centers allocated across the country depending on the implemented UCs. Firewalls with advanced security functions by PaloAlto are used to implement perimeter security and a security zoning model to protect against external and internal attack vectors. A detailed description of the 5G-VINNI Norway facility design can be found in [3].

From a slicing point of view, the 5G-VINNI Norway facility is today composed of five network slices, as described in Fig. 1. The three NSA slices are implemented with DECOR functionality [4]. The slices are enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), Internet of Things (IoT), and ultra-reli-able low-latency communications (URLLC) as presented in [3]. It is important to highlight that the URLLC slice follows the control and user plane separation (CUPS) architectural principle [5] that allows the separation of the control (C) and user (U) plane in the S/PGW VNF. In addition, the NSA slices are complemented with the edge sites, where the full mobile core can be deployed if there is need for high robustness and autonomous edge deployments, as presented in [6], or only the S/PGW-U for the reduction of latency only at the user plane. In addition, two 5G SA slices have been deployed in 5G-VINNI Norway. The SA slices run on a container-as-a-service (CaaS) platform based on Kubernetes. Finally, the edge follows the same NSA-edge principle, where the entire mobile core can be replicated for robustness reasons, or only the user plane part.

High Throughput and Low Latency 5G-Heart Use Cases
The 5G-HEART project's objective is to perform validation trials for healthcare, aquaculture, and transport vertical domains, implementing an extended set of innovative UCs. 5G-HEART aims to contribute to further development of 5G communication technologies. Additionally, it includes trials on the aquaculture vertical, which, according to the best of our knowledge, has not been validated in the context of 5G before.

In this article, the healthcare UC robotic ultrasound examination and the aquaculture UC remote monitoring of water and fish quality (a.k.a. Fish Farm) will be analyzed. The reason is to have concrete examples where the throughput and delay performance KPIs are challenged considerably.


Figure 2.
5G-heart: Robotic ultrasound examination UC.

Show All

Robotic Ultrasound Examination
According to the 5G IA White Paper on the e-health vertical in 2015 [7], the e-health sector is identified as a priority in the European Digital Agenda and subsequently in many national digital agendas because of the amount of spending as well as the worrying rise in healthcare costs. In 5G-HEART, three major UCs for e-health have been selected, which will challenge the performance and availability of 5G services:

Remote interventional support

Automatic pill camera (a.k.a. colon wireless capsule endoscopy) anomaly detection

Vital sign patches with advanced geo-location

The robotic ultrasound examination UC analyzed in this article is a subcase of remote interventional support.

Tele-operated medical robotics is an emerging medical field that utilizes wireless networking and robotic technology to connect medical doctors and patients who are distantly located. This UC is complicated, and the final implementation requires a deep analysis in terms of the real medical support required, the overall advanced medical and communication equipment, and in general the logistics needed. Therefore, the implementation presented in this article intends only to provide technical insights that provide arguments to enrich the discussion, rather than provide a final solution for the overall problem.

The aim of the robotic ultrasound examination test case is to develop a bilateral tele-operated medical robotic framework for capturing ultrasonic images transmitted wirelessly via the 5G network. The proposed framework consists of a master console, a slave console, and a 5G network, as presented in detail in Fig. 2. The master console consists of a master robot to provide manipulation commands and a big screen to display the videos and audio feedback from the slave side. The specialist sends manipulation commands via the haptic device, based on the 3D-HD video/audio of the slave side, and the ultrasound image. The slave console consists of a six-DOF (degree of freedom) robotic arm, equipped with a 6-axis force/torque sensor to operate on the patient's body, three HD video cameras to make three videos from perspective viewpoints, an ultrasound machine to capture ultrasonic images from the patient's body, and a screen to display the master side. User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is implemented over a 5G network to make a bidirectional data connection between master and slave consoles. The ideal framework is completely transparent with very accurate and synchronized haptic, 3D video, and audio feedback. In total, three main communication needs are identified:

The channel that communicates between the robot arm and the haptic device

The channel that transmits ultrasound video

The videoconference channel for additional conversation and ambient video information

Remote Monitoring of Water and Fish Quality
Since the 1980s, aquaculture has played an increasingly important role in meeting the demand for fish and seafood products. However, there are many procedures in this industry that are demanding and may be done more efficiently using 5G. The content provided in this article contains details of the 5G-HEART Norway Fish Farm location. The main idea behind this UC is to have the possibility of remotely monitoring:

The physical conditions of the fish farm infrastructure and environment

The current state of the fish and early detection of issues that can be addressed on time

Technically, this can be achieved by the use of diverse sensors and video images. Information needs to reach a control place that can take fast actions. The Norwegian pilot site consists of 10 to 12 ring cages holding approximately 150,000-200,000 salmon each. There is a floating feed barge at the site where feeding of the fish and monitoring of the facility takes place. The site should be connected to a remotely operated center positioned approximately 19.2 km from the site as well as to the national operation center. One of the main motivations for the use of 5G here is the constant issues that current solutions face, especially due to logistic problems that stem from the cut of optical fibers, which is not a rare problem, and where the consequences can have a tremendous impact.

By using 5G, this challenge can be overcome. On one hand, the transfer of the different sensor data is a normal task for 5G as it does not present demanding bandwidth and delay requirements. On the other hand, the biggest challenge here is posed by the huge amount of information that the video from each of the cages needs to transmit uplink. As shown in Fig. 3, each of the cages contains a specialized underwater camera that needs to send information at approximately 200 Mb/s. This means that the minimum throughput requirements of the entire fish farm vary between 2 and 2.4 Gb/s.

Implementation of Use Cases in the 5G Network
The main reason for selecting the two cases in the previous section is to illustrate how verticals can challenge the two most fundamental telecommunication performance metrics, delay and throughput [8].

During the past few years, the expectations for 5G have been described and analyzed from several angles, motivated by several UCs. However, one key question is how a 5G network can be concretely implemented to fulfill the demands of the UCs. Several attempts have been made via proofs of concept (PoCs) and demos in 5G subsets (e.g., only in RAN, or only in an NFV setting). Today, thanks to the maturity of 5G, it is possible to have initial experiences that have a more holistic view of the implementation, such as the one presented here.

This section presents the implementation architecture of the two UCs mentioned. The presented implementation is based on the NSA architecture, using functions compatible with the 3GPP Release 15 standards. This article adds value by presenting a real implementation with specific design decisions, which cannot be found in the standards. In the next section, this also helps to provide insights on potential improvements and next steps.

Implementation of Robotic Ultrasound Examination
This is a UC with a very demanding low latency requirement and medium throughput requirements. The remote ultrasound examination can be subdivided into three different communications channels, each of them with its own quality requirements. This is in principle very interesting since from the implementation point of view it shows that a single UC may use different slices at the same time. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.

In 5G-VINNI during the first phase, the allocation of a user in a particular slice is determined by the IMSI of the user equipment (UE), and this value should be pre-set manually in the respective mobile core.


Figure 3.
5G-heart: Fish farming UC.

Show All

The communication between the haptic device and the slave robot provides the biggest challenge in terms of delay and packet loss. The slave robot can execute strong moves, and hence the sensitivity that the specialist has from the haptic device needs to be extremely good to protect the patient. The requirements in terms of delay are very important for this specific UC. The integration actions between 5G-VINNI and 5G-HEART are as follows.

In the RAN configuration of this case, there are important quality of service (QoS) parameters to select such as guaranteed bit rate, priority, delay budget, and packet error rate, as presented in the 3GPP TS 23.501 specification [4]. The specific selection is summarized in a set of 5G QoS Identifier (5QI) values, as presented in [4, Table 5.7.4-1]. For this specific channel, the value chosen is in principle 5QI 80, with a latency of 10 ms and a packet error rate of 106, reflecting the needs in target. However, as explained in the next section, this is presented here to illustrate the methodology, since specific values may need to be adapted to the results observed along the duration of the project, following an iterative implementation and testing approach.

From the core point of view, it is important to select the slice that can fulfill the low latency requirements posed by this UC. In 5G-VINNI, this could be achieved by using the NSA Slice-3 (URLLC). One of the reasons is because the computational resources allocated to this slice via the virtualization platform are planned in advance to be over-dimensioned in order to guarantee that the performance will not be affected even in the case of high utilization, and to avoid re-scaling procedures that may create potential impact on the traffic. However, the most important property of 5G-VINNI Norway NSA Slice-3 is the split between the S/PGW user and control planes following the (CUPS) architecture. By use of the CUPS architecture, the user plane data can be managed locally by allocating the S/PGW-U at the edge, near the base station, as illustrated in the upper part of Fig. 4. The distance from the hospital to the central site is approximately 25 km, having a 50 km round-trip. When the edge is used, the S/GPW-U is at the hospital, and the E2E distance is on the order of a few hundred meters.

Figure 4. - 5G-vinni 5G-HEART: Implementation of the robotic remote ultrasound uc.
Figure 4.
5G-vinni 5G-HEART: Implementation of the robotic remote ultrasound uc.

Show All


Figure 5.
5G-VINNI 5G-HEART: Implementation of the fish farms UC.

Show All

In addition to the haptic-device-to-robot-arm communication, the image of the ultrasound is the most important information for this UC. The ultrasound image also demands a high-quality channel, where delay and packet loss are critical parameters. However, the difference here is that it allows, to a very small degree, a more relaxed setting compared to the robotic arm channel. The robotic arm and ultrasound image should be as synchronized as possible, which may lead in principle to the use of the same 5G-UE terminal. However, due to the consequences and high level of precision that the robotic arm case demands, the implementation may also consider the use of a separate 5G-UE to allow differentiation and prioritization in the RAN and core settings. In the latter case, the communication between the ultrasound machine and the ultrasound display will be implemented as follows. From the RAN configuration point of view, it is important to provide again guaranteed bit rate, with low delay and packet loss. However, this setting may have lower priority compared to the robotic arm channel. For this, the device(s) allocated in this slice are configured with the 5QI value 82, with a latency of 10 ms and a packet error rate of 104.

Finally, the doctor and the patient need to communicate in a videoconferencing type of setting. This is more relaxed in terms of 5QI and where the edge is not needed. Therefore, it is likely to use a separate 5G-UE terminal in Slice-1 eMBB to avoid unnecessary load at the edge, and with a 5QI value of 2, with a latency of 150 ms and a packet error rate of 10−3.

Implementation of the Fish Farm UC
The main 5G motivation and challenge of this UC is its very high throughput demand. The main generator of such traffic comes from the underwater cameras that need to monitor the underwater environment in each of the cages. Today, a fish farm contains a central barge, where the power generator, some devices for on-site operations, and a central communications switch are located, as illustrated in Fig. 5.

Basically, the fact of having a centralized switch makes the implementation easier, since this represents the connection point of the 5G CPE gateway that will transmit the data to the 5G base station (gNB). In addition, it is important to get insight into what is on the network side of the gNB, and what is needed so that the data can be transmitted. The 5G active antenna unit (AAU) is connected to a set of elements such as baseband units (BBUs) and cell site router (CSR) in order to connect to the transport network described earlier. This allows reaching the central 5G-VINNI data center, located in Oslo, where all the slices are implemented as shown in Fig. 1. Due to the volume of traffic to be managed in this UC, the slice allocated will be Slice-1, eMBB.

However, the very high throughput demand in this case is still a challenge for 5G, due to the need to provide approximately 2.4 Gb/s in the uplink. For this reason, a non-telco edge (no mobile core functions) site (i.e., local small data center at the central barge) has been designed and implemented. This is, in practical terms, a small data center composed of five servers that are assigned to run AI applications that allow local pre-analysis of the different video images collected in order to have pre-selection of the information that needs to be transmitted. Two of these servers are equipped with GPUs or efficient analytics processing. The specific tuning of the AI algorithms is still work in progress, but the target is to have a balance between the information needed and the transmission capacity of 5G.

Finally, it is important to clarify that the use of 4G illustrated in Fig. 5 is only for management purposes, with an alternative troubleshooting channel in case of problems. It uses a commercial mobile network in Norway, which is independent of 5G-VINNI.

Lessons Learned and Conclusions
The design and implementation progress described in the previous section has been useful to identify certain advantages, challenges, and open issues that can appear when using 5G for providing services to verticals.

One important lesson is that the usual practice would be to have a few slices with defined performance features (e.g., eMBB, URLLC, and IoT). The different verticals will be assigned to one of those slices, and they will share most of the components belonging to that slice. The architecture of 5G allows as strong isolation of the slices' components as possible [9], where it will be common to have dedicated and isolated VNFs. In fewer cases such as the military UC implemented in 5G-VINNI [6], a slice would be fully isolated and have dedicated slice components for the entire mobile core.

As a general remark, it is clear that current 5G implementations are susceptible to constant improvements, such as the implementation of new 5G releases. This may be smooth or difficult, for instance, a migration from NSA to SA because they may use different founding technologies (e.g., VMs vs. containers).

Initial performance results have been reported in [10], obtaining throughput from 600Mb/s to 900Mb/s, and from 70Mb/s to 90Mb/s for down-link and up-link respectively. In addition, the delay in local scenarios (e.g., with edge) oscillate between 7ms and 50ms. However, it is important to clarify that this is work in progress and a more official presentation of results will be delivered at the end of the projects.

Lessons from the Robotic Ultrasound Examination UC
The main motivation to implement this UC using 5G technology is to probe whether, among many others, this is a concrete example of the very low latency needs of the verticals.

A very interesting detail of this UC is that it contains three different communication needs, which may lead to the situation where different slices can be used to solve a common global need. On the other hand, it is important to clarify that in this context there are many variables susceptible to changes, which can evolve according to the results obtained through the implementation, testing, and trial and error methodology. For the number of UEs needed, there is a gap, from using only one for the three communication channels to using one for each of them. In addition, the possibility of the UE selecting a particular slice exists with SA 5G in 5G-VINNI, but the support for this in UEs to connect to multiple slices simultaneously is still to be investigated.

Another important detail is the selection of specific 5QI values. In this regard, 3GPP has provided a list of options with clear reference to associated examples of services, which enables a methodology to find the right parameter. However, the final selection of 5QI value will depend also on the iterative implementation and continuous testing process.

This UC needs the edge in order to fulfill the delay requirement, which will avoid longer round-trip times when traffic has to go to the central site by using a local S/PGW-U. The implementation designs presented in the previous section are based on NSA. However, the SA implementation is ready, and its use should be explored by the use of the SA user plane function (UPF) at the edge.

In 5G-VINNI, Slice-3 is labeled as URLLC for the reasons explained before. However, the new available 3GPP Release 16 (3GPP TR 21.916) has very concrete enhancement in this regard where key features considered for URLLC slices are preemption, redundant transmission, and synchronization. 5G-VINNI is working on updating its components to support Release 16 features, but in the experiments presented in this article it has not been used.

Table 1. Summary of lessons learned and challenges
Table 1.- Summary of lessons learned and challenges
Finally, one of the main challenges is the fulfillment of requirements by the non-telco components of the UC. For instance, in order to illustrate this, the work of Uitto et al. [11] evaluated the delay posed by video components used in a healthcare UC, where considerable delays on video decoders were identified. However, this assessment is a general principle that applies for all the non-telco components in the different UCs targeted.

Lessons from the Fish Farm UC
I he main motivation to implement this UC using 5G technology is to discover whether among many others, this is a concrete example of the high throughput needs that some industry and society UCs have.

On the other hand, the high uplink throughput demands of this specific UC represent a challenge that cannot be fully overcome by 5G. This shows that there are still gaps that 5G cannot fill, and the initial steps of 5G still need enhancements. Some of those will come with the next releases of 5G, and some will need to be addressed by the future 6G architecture, where there are already serious proposals that have defined some specific goals [12]. It is an idea that has a 10-year vision and needs to be elaborated in the coming years.

Another important detail is the selection of specific 5QI values. In this regard, 3GPP has provided a list of options with clear reference to associated examples of services, which enables a methodology to find the right parameter. However, the final selection of 5QI value will also depend on the iterative implementation and continuous testing process.
Finally, it is important to highlight that this project also studied alternative solutions that can support 5G when needed. This is the case of the edge implementation at the fish farm, where by the use of AI, 5G obtains the support needed to achieve the UC goals. This is an experimental setting that elucidates a new type of edge not considered in the traditional telco literature (where the operator can allocate the mobile core functions closer), since here, the edge is after the RAN (i.e., on the UE side), and mobile core functions no longer apply. However, it contains user applications that cooperate and complement the 5G technology for achieving a common goal.

To conclude, Table 1 presents a summary of the lessons learned and challenges observed during the implementation analysis of the UCs studied. This article is one of the first steps to show how 5G is used to achieve high throughput and low latency, but the challenges presented illustrate that there are still many open issues to be addressed.