Integrated terrestrial-satellite networks (lTSNs) are envisioned to provide seamless broadband services through evolving terrestrial B5G/6G cellular systems and emerging mega satellite constellations. The inherent dual mobility (i.e., satellites and ubiquitous mobile users) and highly overlapped satellite footprints in such ITSNs may result in massive and frequent handovers. This increases handover delays, signaling overheads, and decision making loads, especially under existing fixed, even limited, deployments of ground mobility management functions (MMFs). Thus, a lightweight handover scheme and a mobility management architecture with dynamic MMF configurations are of great significance to guarantee service continuity and management timeliness. Specifically, this article proposes mobility management architectures with an augmented reconfigurable management plane on a higher orbit. The architectures can support flexible configurations of space-distributed MMFs for efficient mobility management together with the ground MMFs. Subsequently, to achieve rapid and unified decisions for massive handovers, we design a clustering and game-based handover decision framework including centralized and distributed decision making functions for different conditions. Based on handover procedures, simulation results validate the high performance of the proposed schemes regarding handover delays, signaling overheads, and convergence property. Notably, many academic issues are worthy of further studies under this architecture, such as higher-layer constellation design and inter-layer management structure optimization.

Introduction
In recent years, terrestrial cellular systems have experienced rapid development to stride toward the beyond 5G (B5G)/6G era [1]. However, due to the heavy reliance on infrastructures, lacking terrestrial coverage will soon become insufferable with the ever increasing capacity demands for ubiquitous and seamless services in remote, rural, and urban areas. Given this, there is a renewed focus on satellites to provide the most comprehensive coverage integrated with terrestrial networks, that is, integrated terrestrial-satellite networks (ITSNs) [2]. However, the capabilities and resources of traditional satellite networks are relatively limited for broadband provision. Therefore, creating ITSNs by mega satellite constellations (MSCs) has become a trend toward augmenting the space segment [3]. For example, the latest report shows SpaceX plans to deploy more than 40,000 low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites to provide worldwide space Internet services for billions of people.

An ITSN is a large-scale heterogeneous network with dual mobility of satellites and user nodes (UNs). Due to the varying network topologies, resource mobility [4], and ubiquitous UN mobility demands, mobility management (i.e., registration and handovers) is of the utmost significance to ensure the security, continuity, and quality of ITSN services. Taking handovers as an example, not only traditional spot beam and inter-satellite handovers but also emerging sat-ellite-to-terrestrial (ST) and terrestrial-to-satellite (TS) handovers coexist in ITSNs. However, since some existing terrestrial security mechanisms cannot cope with the uniqueness of satellite networks, the security in mobility management (e.g., handover authentication) becomes an essential consideration for integrated designs [5]. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 1, ITSNs have high satellite diversity (i.e., overlapped satellite footprints) and ultra-dense cellular coverage. For instance, the maximum number of visible Telesat (only with 117 satellites) by a site at about 33°N is 12, which implies that handover schemes must be designed carefully; otherwise, frequent handovers will be disastrous for service continuity and quality. Although introducing high altitude platforms and terrestrial relays are effective in weakening the mobility [6], and buffering technologies can ensure seamlessness for frequent handovers [7], a large number of high-speed subscribers in ITSNs, such as aircraft with a speed of 1000 km/h, will still bring high-frequency mobility management requirements [8]. Furthermore, due to the inherent long propagation nature (e.g., at least 80 ms round-trip delay between the ground and a satellite at 1200 km) and fixed, even limited, deployments of ground mobility management functions (MMFs), it is tough to ameliorate mobility management delays and overheads with existing ITSN architectures [9]. All of these motivate us to pay attention to ITSN mobility management in this article. Unfortunately, almost all related work considers the mentioned mobility management issues strategically rather than architecturally. A flexible mobility management architecture is the guarantee for accurate implementation of decision making strategies and reliable execution of mobility management procedures.

Since the gNB-CU-CP, AMF, and their hosted MMFs are all on the ground massive and frequent mobility management demands put forward higher requirements on the delay and capacity of feeder links. Overall, it is still an open issue to design integrated architectures for efficient ITSN mobility management considering economic cost and performance.

To achieve deep terrestrial-satellite integration regarding mobility management architectures in this article, we consult standardized protocol architectures with gNodeB (gNB) functional split, that is, central unit (CU) and distributed unit (DU) split [10], in 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) non-terrestrial networks (NTNs) [9]. In detail, the gNB-CU-control plane (gNB-CU-CP) and the core access and mobility management function (AMF) are two main network functions (NFs) involving MMFs. The gNB-CU-CP hosts the radio resource control (RRC) for handover control and decisions, the Xn application protocol (Xn-AP) for mobility management signaling on the Xn interface (i.e., the interface between next-gen-eration radio access networks [NG-RANs]), and the NG application protocol (NG-AP) for mobility management signaling on the NG interface (i.e., the interface between NG-RAN and the core network). The AMF hosts the NG-AP and the non-access stratum mobility management (NAS-MM) for registration and tracking.

The contributions of this article are summarized as follows:

In response to the challenges posed by the heterogeneity, scale, and mobility of ITSNs, we introduce functionally reconfigurable satellites with higher orbits - geostationary Earth orbit (GEO), medium Earth orbit (MEO) - into the management plane, and then propose a flexible and distributed mobility management architecture (FDMMA), including networks, protocols, function implementations, and handover procedures. Specifically, this FDMMA supports GEO/MEO satellites (i.e., non-LEO satellites) in reconfiguring a gNB-CU-CP and an AMF flexibly to perform mobility management together with the ground MMFs. Thus, an optimal MMF configuration can be achieved based on the interested mobility management performance under current network environments.

To deal with massive link-layer handover decisions, we design a lightweight and intelligent handover decision framework that applies clustering and evolutionary game for decision making time reduction and network load balancing, respectively. To ensure unified criteria for selecting radio access points (RAPs) (i.e., satellites and cells) under different decision making conditions, this framework adopts an evolutionary approach to implementing centralized decision making if possessing complete information of all selectable RAPs, and applies a distributed learning method if details of some selectable RAPs are only from measurements.

We verify that FDMMA could provide better handover delays and lower signaling overheads through simulations, significantly when the number of ground stations (GSs) is severely restricted. We also show the feasibility and high efficiency of the handover decision framework when facing massive link-layer handovers.

This article is organized as follows. Mobility management challenges brought by ITSNs are investigated. Next, FDMMA, with its handover decision framework, is designed and evaluated, respectively. Finally, we conclude our work.

Mobility Management Challenges
This section presents some key mobility management challenges brought by ITSNs from the following triples: integrated mobility management architectures, limited GS deployments, and complicated handover decisions.

Integrated Mobility Management Architectures
To facilitate integrated services, 3GPP has proposed three architectures for NTNs: satellite with a repeater, satellite with gNB(s), and satellite with gNB-DU(s) [9]. The first architecture does not fully utilize satellite capabilities. Furthermore, the second architecture can implement a complete gNB and its hosted MMFs on satellites to support onboard management for lower delays, but it is too expensive to apply in MSCs. As a trade-off, the cost and payload of the third architecture are controllable and moderate. However, since the gNB-CU-CP, AMF, and their hosted MMFs are all on the ground, massive and frequent mobility management demands put forward higher requirements on the delay and capacity of feeder links. Overall, it is still an open issue to design integrated architectures for efficient ITSN mobility management considering economic cost and performance.

Limited GS Deployments
Some recent efforts study ground segment optimization for worldwide broadband provision [11], but they have not paid attention to the non-ex-istence of optional GSs. The ITSN faces a practical problem in that GSs are usually unable to deploy globally due to geographic and political reasons. In this context, inter-satellite links (ISLs) transmit large amounts of mobility management signaling back to a few GSs, resulting in severe local network congestion, unacceptable management delays, and massive signaling retransmission. Furthermore, the multihop signaling transmission could occupy more space segment resources and bring more significant signaling overheads. Thus, it is a tricky architectural challenge that the ITSN needs to solve limited GS deployments and to separate the data and management planes as much as possible.

Notably, recent literature has enlightened us that management functions (e.g., MMFs) could be placed on the LEO layer [12] or carried by non-LEO satellites [5]. On one hand, the dynamic placement of MMFs on the LEO layer may produce high migration and reconfiguration costs when facing MSCs [12]. On the other hand, the nature of broad coverage, high capacity, and long lifespans for non-LEO satellites are very suitable as a carrier of MMFs. However, the following difficulties need to be further studied:

How do we design ITSN mobility management architectures that include a non-LEO management layer?

What and how many MMFs should non-LEO satellites host?

Considering the inherent long propagation brought by non-LEO satellites, how can we ensure or even further improve the temporal effectiveness of mobility management?

What is the number and structure of non-LEO satellites?

Figure 1. - A network view of FDMMA includes a ground segment, a user segment, and a space segment.
Figure 1.
A network view of FDMMA includes a ground segment, a user segment, and a space segment.

Show All

Complicated Handover Decisions
On one hand, due to massive and ubiquitous service access, handover demands in ITSNs will increase exponentially compared to traditional satellite networks, which not only extremely tests the computing and processing capabilities of MMFs but also requires handover schemes to make more and faster decisions. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 1, the ITSN brings high satellite diversity, ultra-dense cellular coverage, and diverse service types, considerably complicating handover criteria and incurring more RAP selections. Thus, a very knotty challenge is when to trigger a handover accurately and how to decide a RAP rapidly for the massive and frequent ITSN handovers. Possible modeling could be based on clustering, games, and learning.

Flexible and Distributed Mobility Management Architectures
To cope with the challenges, we propose a flexible and distributed mobility management architecture named FDMMA, including network architectures, protocol architectures, function implementations, and handover procedures. The FDMMA is characterized by joint space and ground mobility management as well as distributed and flexible MMF configurations with the aim of improving mobility management performance in handover delays and overheads.

Network Architectures
Figure 1 illustrates a network view of FDMMA that includes a ground segment, a user segment, and a space segment.

Ground Segment
The ground segment contains the B5G/6G core network, a satellite management center (SMC), a telemetry, tracking, and command TT&C) center, and a limited number of GSs. These components are connected by ground links for satellite status monitoring and network management. Each GS configures a gNB-CU-CP and a relocated AMF, and maintains feeder links for signaling and gateway links for data.

User Segment
The user segment contains various UNs and services on land, sea, air, and space under overlapped satellite footprints and ultra-dense cellular coverage.

Space Segment
The space segment adopts hybrid networking that includes functionally reconfigurable non-LEO satellites for management, a LEO mega satellite constellation for access and forwarding, and intra-layer and inter-layer ISLs for satellite connections.

Non-Leo Satellites
The non-LEO satellites can provide full coverage to LEO satellites to weaken the dependence of mobility management on the restricted GSs. To realize the functional reconfiguration on non-LEO satellites, network function virtualization (NFV) and software-defined technologies, which have already been recognized by academia and applied in some commercial non-LEO satellites (e.g., MicroGEO, Boeing's 702X family, OneSat, O3b mPOWER), are preferred to implement functions agilely and programmatically. Depending on pre-estimated mobility management performance metrics, such as handover delays and registration update overheads, some non-LEO satellites will flexibly reconfigure a gNB-CU-CP and an AMF to perform mobility management together with GSs, for the optimal MMF configuration under current network environments, termed the hybrid management model. Different management nodes create differentiated signaling relays and transmission routes. For example, in Fig. 1, the handover-relat-ed signaling from an airliner (e.g., measurement reports) needs at least six hops to be forwarded to the nearest GS for decision making or processing, without the non-LEO management plane. In contrast, the same operation may only need three hops in our architecture, which could be attributed to the configured MMFs on some non-LEO satellites. This gain will significantly improve delays and overheads throughout mobility management procedures. Other non-LEO satellites can configure on-demand functions to utilize valuable onboard resources efficiently.


Figure 2.
A) control plane; b) user plane protocol architectures for FDMMA: nfs, protocols, and interfaces colored red are configured for the non-leo-based management model, where SAT-X is a non-leo satellite with gnb-cu-cp and amf; nfs, protocols, and interfaces colored blue are configured for the GS-based management model, where SAT-X is one LEO satellite with a gnb-du. (Abbreviations not mentioned in the text: smf: session management function, NAS-SM: NAS session management, PDU: packet data unit, f1-ap: f1 application protocol, GTP-U: general packet radio service tunnel protocol-user plane, UDP: user datagram protocol, SCTP: stream control transmission protocol, IP: internet protocol, PDCP: service data adaptation protocol, PDCP: packet data convergence protocol, RLC: radio link control, MAC: medium access control, NR PHY: new radio physical layer, SRI: satellite radio interface, l5: layer 5 (application layer), l4: layer 4 (transport layer), l3: layer 3 (network layer), l2: layer 2 (link layer), and l1: layer 1 (physical layer).)

Show All

LEO Satellites
This article considers an Earth- fixed LEO satellite system, where the Earth's surface is divided into many fixed location areas. Each LEO satellite keeps staring at one area until its antennas reach the maximum elevation angle and then stares at the next. Thus, spot beam handovers are not considered in this system. Each LEO satellite configures a gNB-OU and a gNB-CU-user plane (gNB-CU-UP) for service access, data, and part signaling. Regarding networking, the hybrid constellation, including polar and inclined orbits, is necessary for global coverage and hot-area coverage enhancement. In contrast, the single-layer MSC is more suitable for cases of limited frequency resources to avoid further frequency division and capacity reduction.

ISLs
Intra-layer ISLs are based on laser transceivers for a relatively stable intra-layer topology, while inter-layer ISLs are based on electronically steerable beams to provide short-term stable inter-layer connections.

Protocol Architectures
According to the NTN protocol architectures regarding gNB split presented in [9], we further propose control plane and user plane protocol architectures of FDMMA to elaborate NFs, protocols, and interfaces for mobility management procedures and data communications, as shown in Figs. 2a and 2b. In contrast to [9], we merge GS-based MMF configuration and non-LEO-based MMF configuration into one control plane protocol architecture for the hybrid management model. Moreover, the gNB-CU-CP and AMF are centralized into the same node (i.e., non-LEO satellite or GS) to shorten signaling interaction and reduce the core load.

GS-Based MMF Configuration
The NFs, protocols, and interfaces of this configuration are colored blue in Fig. 2a, where the GS hosts all MMFs in the protocols of gNB-CU-CP and AMF (e.g., RRC, NG-AP, Xn-AP, NAS-MM). In this case, SAT-X is one LEO satellite for signaling uplink/ downlink by the configured gNB-DU. With this GS-based management model, the GS dominates mobility management generally for the nodes located in the areas where GSs can build or manage. In detail, when LEO satellites or UNs move into/out a GS management area, they perform inter-AMF handovers (handovers for feeder links, gateway links, and service links) and registration updates to the/another GS.

Non-Leo-Based MMF Configuration
To achieve efficient mobility management in the areas where GSs are limited to place, functionally reconfigurable non-LEO satellites can flexibly reconfigure both the gNB-CU-CP and AMF, including MMFs in RRC, NG-AP, Xn-AP, and NAS-MM protocols, and dominate mobility management based on this non-LEO-based management model. The configured NFs, protocols, and interfaces are colored red in Fig. 2a. In this case, SAT-X is a non-LEO satellite for mobility management, and the GS acts as a gateway to connect space and ground segments. As two options for non-LEO satellites, MEO satellites have lower delays, while GEO satellites have a relatively stable relationship with ground nodes for convenient UN registration and tracking. However, to perform the non-LEO-based management model, inter-lay-er mobility always exists whether MMFs are deployed on MEO or GEO since there is relative movement between LEO and MEO/GEO.

Non-Leolayer Design
The non-LEO layer design includes the number and orbital structure of non-LEO satellites, and management structures between the hierarchies. Based on the proposed FDMMA, it is a crucial issue in the non-LEO design to configure the fewest non-LEO satellites under a limited number of controllable hops to achieve efficient signaling interaction. On one hand, it is critical for MSCs that the number of non-LEO satellites is directly proportional to network construction cost. On the other hand, configuring more non-LEO satellites can effectively reduce management loads and overheads of each non-LEO satellite, and decrease hop distances between non-LEO satellites and their managed LEO satellites for lower signaling delays. Thus, a trade-off must be balanced to minimize the number of non-LEO satellites but optimize management delays as much as possible.

In terms of analysis, we consider that the management structure of a non-LEO satellite to LEO satellites is directly related to coverage and controllable hops of the non-LEO satellite. If all management structures projected on the LEO layer can be embedded with each other and eventually form a torus lattice without overlapping, both the optimal LEO and non-LEO layers are achieved. Related derivations could be done through geometric and topological analysis. However, mobility management schemes must be carefully designed for long-term inter-layer mobility. In terms of optimization, independent satellite movements can be modeled by Kepler equations and slotted into instantaneous topologies as series of snapshots. The management structures projected on the LEO layer could be characterized by a Voronoi diagram [13] to formulate the optimal non-LEO layer design under the premise of a given LEO layer configuration, where the Voronoi diagram can ensure complete and non-repetitive management of LEO satellites by non-LEO managers.


Figure 3.
A lightweight and intelligent handover decision framework for link-lay-er handovers. (Abbreviation not used in the text: ho: handover.)

Show All

Function Implementations for Handover Decisions
Toward massive link-layer handovers, this section proposes a lightweight and intelligent handover decision framework (LIHDF) shown in Fig. 3 for handover decisions for selecting RAPs. The functions are set in the NAS-MM of AMF, and radio resource control (RRC) connection control of gNB-CU-CP.

Nas-Mm Functions
The NAS-MM has one necessary function: registration register, divided into service unit and management unit, to support the decision making. The service unit saves registration information, such as UN location, service type, and user subscription, for services managed by the current AMF. The management unit saves the set of managed RAPs (i.e., S) determined by network operators.

RRC Connection Control Functions
The RRC connection control is an RRC function responsible for handover control, and contains four main functions for LIHDF: attribute extraction, clustering, decision set generation, and decision making. The attribute extraction function extracts service characteristics, such as bandwidth and delay requirements, UN location, and service priority, from the service unit for the services triggered for handovers. According to the service attributes, the clustering function classifies and aggregates massive services by a clustering algorithm (e.g., fuzzy C-Means) to form C service clusters at the current decision instant. Services in each cluster c(1 ≤ c ≤ C) will get the same handover decision, which dramatically improves the time and loads for massive handover processing. Assisted by measurement reports from UNs, the decision set generator function generates a set of RAP selections lc∈l for each cluster for choosing a decision unit. If the decision set of an arbitrary cluster is a subset of S (i.e., ∀/c⊂S), all the selectable RAPs belong to the current AMF and gNB-CU-CP, and handover requests will be sent to a centralized decision unit. If a cluster whose decision set is not a subset of S (i.e., ∃/c ⊄S), handover requests will be sent to a distributed decision unit since handover decisions of current and other gNB-CU-CPs are mutually influenced. Considering colossal network traffic in ITSNs, the decision-making function formulates evolutionary games to balance loads and resource allocation on RAPs [14]. The clusters (gamers) managed by the same AMF/gNB-CU-CP and possessing an equal decision set constitute a population p∈P. LIHDF adopts an evolution approach for centralized decision making and a learning method for distributed decision making to ensure unified criteria for RAP selections under different decision making conditions.

To verify the effectiveness of the proposed schemes, we evaluate mobility management performance concerning handovers in a global scenario and a local scenario. The global scenario evaluates handover delays and overheads under the hybrid management model compared to the pure GS-based management model and pure MEO-based management model. The local scenario evaluates inter-satellite handover decisions and convergence properties for LIHDF.

Centralized Decision Unit
If the current AMF/gNB-CU-CP manages all selectable RAPs, intra-AMF handover decisions will be performed by this centralized decision unit. It is a more common situation since non-LEO satellites and GSs generally have a large jurisdiction area. The replicator equation is defined as x˙pj=σ(Upj(x)−U¯P(x)) xpj to find the evolutionary equilibrium by population evolution [14], where σ is an adjustment factor for the rate of strategy adaptation, x is a proportion vector of clusters selecting different RAPs in all populations, Upi(x) is the utility that a cluster in p selects an RAP i∈lc under x,U¯P(x) is the mean utility of clusters in p undar x,xpj is the proportion of a cluster in p selecting an RAP i, and x˙pj is the time derivative of xpj.

Distributed Decision Unit
If the measurement reports show that there are some selectable RAPs which the current AMF/gNB-CU-CP does not manage, the distributed decision unit comes in handy for intra-AMF and inter-AMF handover decisions. Since balanced resource utilization is a crucial criterion for RAP selections in ITSN handovers, besides signal-related measurements, we assume that UN measurement reports also include resource and load status of the RAPs managed by other AMFs/gNB-CU-CPs. With incomplete access information, the population evolution method disables solving the formulated game, while a distributed Q-learning method can be used to learn the decision knowledge QC,lC(t) of each cluster c to obtain the best action i∗ at time t [14].

Handover Procedures
This section specifies ITSN service handovers by presenting handover procedures for common handover types (i.e., inter-satellite handovers, ST handovers, and TS handovers). Since the AMF and gNB-CU-CP are configured in the same network node in our architectures, we need to consider procedures for intra-AMF handover (i.e., intra-AMF intra-gNB-cu-cp handover involving changes of gNB-CU-UP and gNB-DU) and inter-AMF handover (i.e., handover involving changes of AMF, gNB-CU-CP, gNB-CU-UP, and gNB-DU). The procedures are given in Figs. 4a and 4b, where similar interactions and detailed signaling messages can refer to 3GPP standards, such as Technical Specifications (TSs) 38.401 [10] and 23.502 [15]. Furthermore, the procedures have also given the network nodes corresponding to NFs for different handover types.

Performance Evaluation
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed schemes, we evaluate mobility management performance concerning handovers in a global scenario and a local scenario. The global scenario evaluates handover delays and overheads under the hybrid management model compared to the pure GS-based management model and pure MEa-based management model. The local scenario evaluates inter-satellite handover decisions and convergence properties for LlHDF.

Parameter Settings
Global Scenario: On the space segment set by Satellite Tool Kit (STK), the MEa layer contains 12 satellites orbiting at 4000 km, and the LEO layer adopts the OneWeb system composed of 720 satellites orbiting at 1200 km. The LEO-layer ISLs follow the rules of polar constellations, and other ISL connections are based on visibility. On the ground segment, SMC optimizes MMF configuration dynamically according to the estimated handover delays in advance. We select GSs with the best OneWeb coverage from 232 sites worldwide under the constrained number of GSs [11]. Any LEO or MEO satellite can establish a direct or an indirect connection with the nearest GS as its gateway. On the user segment, the initial location of 300,000 UNs has two random choices, dense urban area and remote sparse area, with a ratio of 2:1. We set 10 major cities in the world as dense areas. UNs allocated in the dense areas will be randomly assigned a point in these 10 areas, and UNs allocated in sparse areas will be assigned to a random point based on the distribution of continental mobile service demands [11]. The UNs apply the Gaussian-Mar-kov mobility model with a speed state between 0 m/s and 10 m/s in a random direction. The global service arrival rate follows a Poisson distribution with an average value of 5000/s, and the session time is subject to a Pareto distribution with a scale of 7, a shape of 0.5, and minimum session duration of 30 s.

Local Scenario
The local scenario studies a hotspot zone stared at by six satellites that schedule [7000 7000 5000 7000 5000 5000] Mb/s transmission resources for a specific service, respectively. The resources are evenly allocated to each accessed UN that is experiencing this service. A total of 5000 UNs have accessed satellites for the service, and another 1000 UNs also want to access it. To balance satellite loads and resources with the new 1000 accessing UNs, the 5000 accessed UNs are triggered to perform hando-vers. The utility is linearly related to the available resources and loads of satellites [14]. We consider two cases to compare the two approaches in LIHDF: let one MEO satellite manage the six satellites to make handover decisions by the centralized population evolution; let completely different MEO satellites manage the six satellites to make handover decisions by distributed Q-learning.

Results and Discussions
Figure 5a compares average handover delays with different management models and a varying number of GSs. The ITSN handover delays are characterized by intra-AMF inter-satellite handover < ST handover < TS handover < inter-AMF inter-satellite handover. With flexible MMF configuration, the hybrid management model has the best handover performance, and its advantage is more evident with the decrease of the number of GSs. Furthermore, although the pure MEO-based management model is the worst in terms of handover delays, the results in Fig. 5b illustrate that the broad coverage of MEO managers can avoid multihop signaling transmission on the LEO layer, thus significantly reducing signaling overheads. The hybrid model is a compromise choice in this perspective. If the flexibility depends on signaling overheads, the optimal MMF configuration and results will change accordingly.

Figure 4. - Handover procedures for ITSN services: a) intra-amf handover; b) inter-amf handover, where the color of the network node and its configured NF(s) are the same. (Abbreviations not mentioned before: info: information, PE: population evolution, RL: reinforcement learning.)
Figure 4.
Handover procedures for ITSN services: a) intra-amf handover; b) inter-amf handover, where the color of the network node and its configured NF(s) are the same. (Abbreviations not mentioned before: info: information, PE: population evolution, RL: reinforcement learning.)

Show All

Figure 5. - Performance evaluation for global scenarios: a) handover delays for different handover types; b) handover signaling overheads on the LEO layer, both with different management models and varying number of gss; and local scenarios: c) the number of accessed uns on the six selectable satellites after handovers; d) convergency property, both varying with different handover decision methods.
Figure 5.
Performance evaluation for global scenarios: a) handover delays for different handover types; b) handover signaling overheads on the LEO layer, both with different management models and varying number of gss; and local scenarios: c) the number of accessed uns on the six selectable satellites after handovers; d) convergency property, both varying with different handover decision methods.

Show All

Figure 5c compares the decision strategies by showing the number of accessed UNs on the six satellites after handovers and new access. The standard load balancing strategy is a reference, which selects a RAP strictly according to the proportion of satellite resources. In contrast, population evolution with clustering (PEWC), population evolution without clustering (PEWOC), and distributed Q-learning (DQL) methods aim at the same utility to achieve more flexible objective settings so that their results are close (average utility: PEWC -4.0391, PEWOC -4.0381, DQL -4.0320). Furthermore, due to the clustering for massive services, it can be observed from Fig. 5d that PEWC has the fastest convergence, which is an order of magnitude higher than PEWOC. Although DQL has the worst convergence property, it requires less information for decision making, which is irreplaceable by the other methods in its decision making conditions.

Conclusions
This article proposes flexible and distributed mobility management architectures for ITSN to improve mobility management performance by flexible reconfiguration of space-distributed MMFs. Toward link-layer handover decisions, a lightweight and intelligent handover decision framework is devised to realize efficient and unified RAP selections for massive handovers and different decision making conditions. The simulations have verified the high efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed architectures and approaches. Notably, there are still many academic issues worthy of further study under this architecture, such as higher-layer constellation design and inter-layer management structure optimization considering relative mobility. In summary, we expect this study can promote the development of mobility management for ITSNs.