With the fast development of smart terminals and emerging new applications (e.g., real-time and interactive services), wireless data traffic has drastically increased, and current cellular networks (even the forthcoming 5G) cannot completely match the quickly rising technical requirements. To meet the coming challenges, the sixth generation (6G) mobile network is expected to cast the high technical standard of new spectrum and energy-efficient transmission techniques. In this article, we sketch the potential requirements and present an overview of the latest research on the promising techniques evolving to 6G, which have recently attracted considerable attention. Moreover, we outline a number of key technical challenges as well as the potential solutions associated with 6G, including physical-layer transmission techniques, network designs, security approaches, and testbed developments.

Introduction
With the maturity and forthcoming commercialization of the fifth generation (5G), the expectation and development of 6G mobile network have attracted a great deal of attention. In the past two years, some countries have released relevant research plans concerning the development of 6G. For example, in September 2017, the European Union launched a three-year research project on the basic 6G technologies. The main task is to study the next generation forward error correction coding, advanced channel coding, and channel modulation technologies for wireless terabit networks (https://futurecom-research.eu). At the end of 2017, China began to study the 6G mobile communication system to meet the inconstant and rich demands of the Internet of Things (loT) in the future, such as medical imaging, augmented reality, and sensing (www.china.org.cn). In April 2018, the Academy of Finland announced an eight-year research program, “6Genesis,” to conceptualize 6G through a joint effort of the University of Oulu and Nokia. More recently, the U.K. government has invested in some potential techniques e.g.′C=15million in quantum technology studies) for 6G and beyond (https://www.standard.co.uk/tech/quantum-technologies), some universities in the United States have lunched research on terahertz-based 6G wireless networks, and South Korea Telecom (SKT) has started 6G research based on the cell-free and non-terrestrial network techniques.

In [1], based on the regularity of market entry of past commercial wireless communication systems and the expectation for 6G, the authors forecasted that 6G will start its commercialization in 10 years. In general, the 6G mobile network is expected to provide ultrafast speed, greater capacity, and ultra-low latency for supporting the possibility of new applications, such as fine medicine, intelligence disaster prediction, and surreal virtual reality (VR). Based on the former evolution rule of mobile networks, early 6G networks will be mainly based on the existing 5G architecture, inheriting the benefits achieved in 5G (e.g., the increased authorized frequency bands and the optimized de-centralized network architecture) and prodigiously changing the way we work and play.

Around 2030, our society will likely become data-driven, enabled by nearly instantaneous, unlimited wireless connectivity [1]. As a result, 6G is expected to advance the wireless technologies we are familiar with today and achieve considerably enhanced system performance. As a vision for the future, in terms of speed, 6G will probably utilize higher frequency spectrum than previous generations in order to improve the data rate expected to be 100 to 1000 times faster than that of 5G [2]. To be specific, 6G networks will allow hundred gigabits per second to terabit-per-sec-ond links by making use of multi-band high-spread spectrum; for example, the combination use of 1–3 GHz band, millimeter-wave (mmWave) band (30–300 GHz), and terahertz band (0.06-10 THz) [3].

On the other hand, in terms of capacity, compared to 5G, 6G will be able to flexibly and efficiently connect upper trillion-level objects rather than the current billion-level mobile devices. As a result, the 6G network becomes extremely dense, and its capacity may be 10 to 1000 times higher than that of 5G systems and networks.

Furthermore, in terms of latency, from 2G to 5G, the evolution of mobile communication networks is centered on service people, and hence latency depends on human reaction times, such as the auditory reaction time (~100 ms), the visual reaction time (~10 ms), and the perceptual response time (~1 ms). For the application of tactile Internet, 5G technology will allow for a latency time of 1 ms; however, this is too long for Industrial loT (IIoT) and some other latency-sensitive applications. For example, a minimal latency time is essential for decreasing collision rates and improving the safety in autonomous vehicles. For this purpose, 6G aims for an undectable (<1 ms) or even nonexistent latency, since it can enhance the application of autonomous vehicles, augmented reality, and medical imaging. Indeed, with the emergence of more new unmanned and autonomous applications, the latency time no longer solely depends on human reaction times.

While the preliminary sketch of 6G is being drawn up, efforts on configuring the potential techniques to match the aforementioned appealing vision remain in a nascent stage. It is worth noting that in [1], the authors first provided a general survey of different wireless generations and then highlighted an initial sketch of 6G based on the requirements of future users. Compared to [1], this article summarizes the potential requirements and the latest research on promising techniques toward the evolution to 6G. Another important purpose of this article is to provide the scientific community with an overview of the most challenging aspects in the focused context of 6G mobile networks and to give helpful suggestions for overcoming these challenges.

A Sketch of 6G Based on Thetime-Frequency-Spaceresource Utilization
In general, in the evolution and development of mobile networks, emerging new transmission schemes, such as code-division multiple access (CDMA) in 3G, multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), and orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) in 4G, the mmWave technique and massive MIMO in 5G, boil down to the question of how to innovatively exploit the degrees of freedom (OoFs) of time, frequency, and spatial resources to satisfy the diverse and refined requirements of society. Based on this perspective, in this section, we rough out and discuss the potential trends of utilizing these resources in 6G mobile networks.

Following on the innovation directions of previous mobile networks, 6G will be super-flexible in terms of the utilization of time-frequency-space resources in order to provide higher speed, greater capacity, and ultra-low latency for future faster-than-5G applications. Specifically, as depicted in Fig. 1, the OoFs of time-frequency-space resources will be exploited in 6G as follows:

Figure 1. - A sketch of 6G based on the time-frequency-space resource utilization.
Figure 1.
A sketch of 6G based on the time-frequency-space resource utilization.

Show All

In the frequency dimension, 6G will utilize higher frequency spectrum than previous generations in order to improve the data rates. On one hand, high frequency bands, such as mmWave band, terahertz band, and even visible-light frequency band will be used for the 100 Gb/s+ transmissions in 6G. On the other hand, in the future, mobile networks may be integrated with satellite systems and the Internet to build space-air-ground integrated networks, which will indeed increase the frequency ranges for services from the viewpoint of personal mobile communications.

In the space dimension, for further taking advantage of multipaths, the number of antennas equipped on both the transmitter and receiver will be increased. Post-massive MIMO (PM-MIMO) techniques, such as ultra-massive MIMO (UM-MIMO) for terahertz comminations, may support hundreds to thousands of transmit/receive antennas, for example, the (Nr,Nt)=(1024×1024)−element UM-MIMO design for 1 THz transmissions [4].

In the time dimension, 6G will deliver the low latency and architectural shift that 5G is promising. Even more, the basic time slot unit in 6G may be more compressed to more efficiently use the high frequency bands and satisfy latency-sensitive services. When the time particles become finer, the flexibility and versatility of the networks will be improved and hence facilitate their downward compatibility for 2G to 5G.

In general, the time-frequency-space resource utilization is interrelated. For example, when higher frequencies are used, the arrangement of multiple antennas becomes easier in terms of size. For example, for frequency at 60 GHz, 144+ antenna elements can be embedded in 1 cm2, while for 1 THz, 1000+ elements can be embedded in 1 mm2 [4]. These multi-domain interrelations also exist in 6G.

Promising Techniques for Evolving to 6G
In order to provide satisfying services for Industry 4.0, personalized health services, virtual presence, and other challenging anticipated applications in the future, 6G needs to further enhance its scalability, flexibility, and efficiency by embracing novel techniques. Like the emergence of many new technologies when the wireless world moves toward 5G, the new requirements of 6G will influence the main technology trends in its evolution process. The success of 6G will have to leverage breakthroughs in novel technological concepts. In this section, we review a range of recent research findings related to 6G design, including multi-band ultrafast-speed transmission techniques, super-flexible integrated network designs, multi-mode multi-domain joint transmission, as well as machine learning and big-da-ta-assisted intelligent approaches.

6G systems will also need to serve a wide range of applications in diversified scenarios, which have been defined in 5G. Moreover, with the rise of smart homes, buildings, cities, and society, 6G will meet the increased demands for human-to-machine and machine-to-machine communications, especially with the development of robotic and autonomous drone systems.

Multi-Band Ultrafast-Speed Transm Ission
For our bandwidth-hungry society, 2G, 3G, and 4G have used frequencies that reach approximately up to 6 GHz, while 5G systems exploit the range of less than 6 GHz as efficiently as possible by combining 24–100 GHz. Recently, developers are realizing that the current frequency bands may not be enough to serve the growing demands; for example, an uncompressed ultra high-definition video may reach 24 Gb/s, and some 3D videos may reach to 100 Gb/s [3]. As a result, in 6G, we will jump above 100 GHz, and the new radio will consider not only the traditional sub-5 GHz band but also validate little-explored frequency sources such as mmWave and terahertz bands to overcome the spectrum scarcity and provide wide bandwidth from hundreds of megahertz to several gigaherts and even to terahertz.

In recent years, a flurry of research activities have been reported concerning the use of multiple high-frequency bands for ultrafast-speed transmissions, which are recommended as promising solutions for 6G. Specifically, a consortium of DARPA, IBM, and Intel has focused on research into using 140 GHz, 220 GHz, and 340 GHz frequencies (https://spectrum-ieee-org.ezproxy.auckland.ac.nz). In early 2014, Akyildiz et al. provided an in-depth view of terahertz band in the range of 0.1-10 THz for supporting terabit-per-second high-speed communications [4]. A further advance of terahertz band communication is that it is enabled to simultaneously support macro-scale and micro-scale applications, such as terabit wireless local area networks (WLAN) and nanosensor networks.

Teams at New York University are already working on terahertz research and quantum devices, with the goal that transmit rates in 6G are expected to be 1000 times faster than those in 5G. Researchers from the Fraunhofer Institute have cooperated with researchers from Heinrich Hertz Institute and other partners from industry to build a network connection in the terahertz frequency range that is sufficiently stable to allow for wireless data transmission at speeds of up to 400 Gb/s (https://www.networkworld.com).ln [3], several terahertz-based medium access protocols for mobile heterogeneous networks were investigated, where conventional μWave, mmWave, and terahertz bands could coexist.

Moreover, another trend in 6G may be dynamically using different frequencies, especially these unlicensed bands, in order to enjoy the benefits of the sharing architecture. For example, as predicted in [1], optical indoor communication (visible-light frequency band) is a promising high- rate technique to replace conventional WLAN, since people spend most of their time indoors (more than 80 percent). Furthermore, we can also combine the fiber optic technology with the wireless-type transmissions for further improvement. The coexistence of multiple high-frequency bands and the dynamic utilization of different frequencies can be realized by advanced software defined radio (SDR) and software defined networking (SDN) techniques. Moreover, the emerging blockchain technique may be an appealing solution to facilitate dynamic spectrum sharing in the future (https://venturebeat.com/). With these aforementioned novel techniques, it is expected that 6G networks will be easier to upgrade based on the existing 4G and future 5G equipment.

Super Flexible Integrated Network
6G systems will also need to serve a wide range of applications in diverse scenarios, which have been defined in 5G. Moreover, with the rise of smart homes, buildings, cities, and society, 6G will meet the increased demands for human-to-ma-chine and machine-to-machine communications, especially with the development of robotic and autonomous drone systems. For the purpose of the Internet of Everything (loE) in the future, 6G will be an ultra-dense network with super flexibility, which can deftly integrate different techniques to simultaneously satisfy various different service requirements. Moreover, 6G networks will be decentralized and designed based on the integration of terrestrial communications, aerial networks, and satellite systems in order to accommodate emerging and urgently needed services (e.g., disaster prediction), and to realize global coverage and stringent seamless access, even for ocean and mountain areas.

Recently, many efforts have been devoted to designing super flexible integrated networks. Specifically, in [3] the authors proposed a scalable heterogeneous network architecture for supporting THz band communications, where a novel medium access control (MAC) protocol facilitating multi-band transmission was proposed. In [5], a potential architecture of the space-ter-restrial integrated network (STIN) that integrates the space network, Internet, and mobile wireless network was introduced. In general, STIN is a large-scale heterogeneous network with high flexibility, complex structure, and dynamic topology. By jointly exploiting the advantages of satellite systems, air segment networks, and ground segment systems, this multidimensional network will bring lots of benefits for future 6G wireless communications. In particular, as shown in [6], with the increasing number and types of aerial vehicles, such as balloon, airship, and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), the flying base station (FBS) assisted dynamic networks can be built to improve the conventional static structure. For example, in recent years, many different FBS projects have sprung up, such as the Google Loon project, the Facebook Aquila project, the ABSOLUTE project, and the Matternet project [6].

Multi-Mode Multi-Domain Joint Transmission
One of the most challenging tasks in 6G is to conceive suitable physical-layer transmission techniques to support the newly used spectral bands and enable new applications, including ultra-high-speed indoor wireless services. For example, when THz band frequencies are utilized, how to deal with the high spreading loss and molecular absorption is a vital issue. For this research objective, many universities and research centers have begun to study the next generation forward error correction coding, advanced channel coding, and channel modulation technologies for multi-band ultrafast-speed wireless communications [1,4].

In [4], a distance-adaptive physical layer design was proposed for mmWave and THz band communications, where each GHz (even THz) ultra-wide band was divided into narrower but still broadband sub-windows for allowing parallel multiple wideband transmissions. In each band, to add efficiency, novel multiple antenna techniques can be adapted, such as the PM-MI-MO technique. Specifically, as shown in [4], a novel class of PM-MIMO, namely UM-MIMO, is a promising solution for increasing the communication distance and improving the attainable capacity of the THz-band networks. Moreover, for further enhancing the PM-MIMO design, the multi-mode multiple antenna techniques, such as beamforming (BF) and spatial multiplexing (SMX), can be dynamically combined and adapted. BF can effectively decrease the effects of high attenuation at mmWave and THz bands, while SMX is able to increase the capacity per user. The above benefits of BF and SMX can be simultaneously obtained by adopting their combination in these parallel broadbands. Furthermore, to achieve the diversity gain inherited in MIMO for some specific applications, space diversity techniques, such as some classic space-time block codes (STBCs), can also be integrated.

Besides the multi-mode techniques, multi-do-main joint transmission techniques are also promising for future 6G transmission. For example, orbital angular momentum-based mode-di-vision multiplexing (OAM-MDM) is an emerging low-complexity but high-spectral-efficiency physical layer solution for short-distance line-of-sight wireless communications, which is capable of employing all available OoFs to convey the information over wireless links, including phase, polarization state, and other spatial OoFs [7]. In contrast, for innovatively exploiting the OoFs of multiple antennas (space-domain) and multiple carriers (frequency domain), in [8] a multi-do-main index modulation (MD-1M) technique was proposed, which relies on the generalized on/ off keying principle applied to any of the available signal resource domains to modulate the information bits on to the indices of the transmit resources, including the indices of subcarriers, transmit/receive antennas, code types, dispersion matrices, signal powers, precoding matrices, and so on. In general, OAM-MDM and MD-1M create completely new dimensions for data transmission. The main benefit of OAM-MDM and MD-1M techniques is that they can be flexibly configured to satisfy different performance requirements for supporting a wide variety of applications, which is in accord with the basic requirement of 6G network design. As a further advance, the above-mentioned multi-mode and multi-domain techniques can be roundly and penetratively combined for more efficient and flexible designs.

Machine Learning and Big Data Assisted Intelligent Transmission
Another trend predicted for 6G is intelligent networks and technologies to enable a fully immersive experience for users. For this research objective, 6G needs to be innovated by using and combining technologies from other fields. In recent years, breakthroughs have been made in the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies, such as deep learning neural network (DNN) algorithms [9]. In machine learning, the optimal solution (e.g., the optimal transmit mode) is capable of being obtained by classification or neural network learning instead of tedious calculation, where the classifiers and DNNs can be trained by offline datasets. These machine-learning-based methods are the best candidates to improve the design and optimization of wireless communication systems. Specifically, the key issues behind synchronization, channel estimation, equalization, MIMO signal detection, iterative decoding, and multi-user detection in wireless communication systems are similar to the theoretical basis of machine learning.

6G will be a big data-driven network, since it is expected to support extremely high data rates with heterogeneity in applications, devices, and networks. As a result, besides the machine learning techniques, some emerging big data techniques can be employed for further improving the 6G network design. For example, the latency will be improved through the use of machine learning and big data to determine the best way to transmit data from the user to the base station, since an intelligent 6G network will be capable of providing predictive analysis.

Motivated by the above-mentioned appealing characteristics of machine learning and big data techniques, a flurry of research activities on intelligent wireless communication system designs have been sparked. Specifically, machine learning was considered as a key approach in [1] for realizing 6G from a user perspective. In [9] the authors summarized the machine learning techniques for massive MIMO optimization, heterogeneous network design, and device-to-device communications. In [10], a novel mobile network architecture enabling big data analytics was proposed for facilitating physical layer optimizations. It is worth noting in [9]–[10][11] that machine learning and big data techniques will not only deliver compelling system performance but also profoundly change the design and configuration of the future 6G networks (e. g., the physical-layer processing and MAC protocol). Furthermore, machine learning and big data analytics are not independent and unrelated in future 6G network design. As noted in [11], by jointly utilizing these techniques, the mobile networks will become more promising in terms of self-adaptive, self-aware, and predictive ability.

Indeed, intelligent 6G network design requires knowledge and methods from multi-disciplinary aspects. To be specific, methods in optimization theory, data mining, computer science, and even life science will be involved. Recently, based on the development of brain-machine interface techniques, mind-controlled machines are gradually being realized [12], which have led some scientists to speculate that mind-to-mind communications may be possible in 6G and beyond (https://www.iflscience.com/). Moreover, a 6G network may also include other communication types, such as molecular communications [13] for future micro- or nano-scale medical applications. In these long-term, forward-looking, and service-ori-ented visions, the biology and chemistry fields are involved in future communication theory.

In conclusion, we summarize the aforementioned potential techniques for future 6G in Fig. 2.

Figure 2. - Some promising techniques for future 6G networks.
Figure 2.
Some promising techniques for future 6G networks.

Show All

Further Issues for 6G Development
It is worth noting that research in 6G is still in its infancy; hence, there are numerous open issues to resolve. We explore the potential main unresolved issues of the future 6G network designed in this section, and provide readers with inspiration for addressing these issues, as summarized in Fig. 3.

Figure 3. - Some potential problems for 6G development and their promising solutions.
Figure 3.
Some potential problems for 6G development and their promising solutions.

Show All

Power Supply Issue
6G will be able to flexibly and efficiently connect upper trillions of autonomous low-power mobile devices. In this case, energy-efficient techniques become very important in terms of the user experience. Currently, most smartphones can only be powered to last for one day, which narrows the bottlenecks of mobile communication development. As a result, it necessitates novel power supply techniques along with simplified signal processing architecture to make the 6G network efficient for the continued growth of mobile devices.

To deal with this issue, on one hand, new mobile device architectures enabling different power supply methods can be developed, especially for wireless-type methods (e.g., wireless energy harvesting and wireless power transfer). On the other hand, advanced energy-efficient wireless communication techniques can be adapted. For example, we can design low-complexi-ty precoding and signal detection algorithms to deal with its ultrahigh-dimension counterparts in UM-MIMO multi-user scenarios, resulting in high power efficiency. Moreover, the integrated optimization of power supply method and wireless transmission technique based on the requirement of the mobile devices is a strategic approach for realizing the future mobile-powered 6G network and enabling energy autonomy for pervasive devices over diversified conditions.

Network Security Issue
Security is a critical issue for 6G wireless networks, especially when the STIN technique is employed. In 6G, besides the conventional physical layer security, other types of security, such as integrated network security, should be jointly considered. Therefore, new security approaches, relying on low complexity and having high security levels, are worth more intensive study.

To this end, some physical layer security techniques proposed for 5G can be extended for 6G networks, such as low-density parity check (LDP-C)-based secure massive MIMO; secure mmWave techniques may also be suitable for UM-MIMO and THz band applications. For the integrated network security, a proper management mechanism of different function keys for different security areas is very important. As shown in [5], a distributed key management mechanism jointly considering the unicast and multicast communication key management may be a promising solution for STIN. With efficient management and implementation, these physical-layer and network-layer security techniques can formulate a well-integrat- ed security solution that efficiently protects the confidential and privacy information in 6G networks.

Hardware Design Issue
The third major challenge is miniaturizing presently large high-frequency transmitters and receivers. For example, Qualcomm and other companies spent years reducing mmWave components from the size of meter level (e.g., airport body scanners) to fingertip-sized modems and antennas. For terahertz band, this issue may be more challenging. For example, the antenna for jointly using mmWave and terahertz bands may need to be invented again, since the antenna size may vary in proportion from nanometers to micrometers. As shown in [15], optoelectronic integration (integrating the optical and electronic modules) is a promising technique for high-frequency communication systems, which is capable of exploiting the joint benefits of on-chip integration, high-speed semiconductor, and advanced antenna techniques.

Conclusions
We have presented a vision for 6G mobile networks, which can cater to the growing demands of loE. We commence with a sketch of 6G from the viewpoint of time, frequency, and space resource utilization. Then we review some promising recent approaches that could move this vision closer to reality. Finally, we focus our attention on some challenges in 6G communication systems, which will hopefully serve as guidelines for their future development. We note that the major features of 6G networks are their flexibility and versatility, and the design of 6G networks is a truly multidisciplinary field of science. We expect that the new research on 6G will also impact the areas of medical imaging, semiconductors, spectroscopy, chemistry, and even biotechnology. We hope that this work motivates more collaboration between researchers from these different areas.