Recent advances in networking and computing technologies have led to an increased interest in considering computation and communication in a joint and distributed mode according to the computing in the network paradigm. Furthermore, the emergence of the sixth generation (6G) networks is profiling the ever more challenging applications' requirements imposed by the new era service classes. In order to guarantee efficient implementation and availability to the upcoming applications, characterized by stringent quality of experience requirements, an accurate network design and delay analysis is becoming mandatory to pursue efficient 6G network dimensioning and enable computing in the network-based applications. Toward this goal, this article proposes a suitable end-to-end delay performance analysis and reliability evaluation in the case of a 6G network offering virtual reality services, which is considered one of the most challenging technologies for the coming new era service classes. More in depth, the aim of the article is the formulation of the stochastic end-to-end delay bound by applying supermartingale envelopes in order to allow accurate VR reliability prediction in relation to the number of users linked to the same computing node with a specified service profile. The goodness and effectiveness of the proposed approach is validated by providing comparison with simulation results and analytical predictions derived by resorting to the use of the classical Markov queueing theory.

Introduction
Computing in the network is currently an evolving paradigm, which involves moving data processing to the edge of a network in addition to the cloud. The goal of this, is selectively move computing, storage, communication, control, and decision making closer to the end user at the network edges where data is being generated to avoid network congestion drawbacks. This issue has become even more compelling with the advent of the Internet of Everything (IoE) paradigm, which extends the Internet of Things concept and foresees increasingly complex systems and applications with very strict real-time requirements. Among them, extended reality services including augmented, mixed, and virtual reality (AR/MR/VR) are emerging as the most critical services, triggering an unprecedented large variety of quality of experience (QoE) and haptic requirements, demanding of as accurate as possible analysis and network design, as well as high data rate and communications reliability [1]. In particular, the novel VR class, named ultimate VR services (uVR), has gained increasing attention as an empowerment of the traditional VR technology, involving all five senses in dictating perceptual and haptic requirements [2]. uVR's challenging requirements in terms of both high rate, and high reliability and low latency (HRLLC) over short distances require resorting to THz channels as foreseen in the next 6G wireless network. Despite the 6G connectivity assumption, due to the extremely stringent QoE requirements of the uVR applications, offloading to the cloud is not a viable solution, resulting in service latency that is too high. As a consequence, we have to move computing, storage, and communication facilities closer to the uVR users at the network edge, where data is generated. In fact, one of the most representative problems is that today's virtual equipment (VE) technology is not powerful enough to offer proper support to perform rendering locally at the uVR user site, respecting the quality of service (QoS) imposed by the upcoming uVR applications, since VEs are limited in battery lifetime, and prolonged rendering session time results in excessive heat and battery degradation [3]. Recently, offloading from users' devices to computing-assisted edge nodes (e.g., small base stations) to support wireless uVR environments hosting tasks' rendering computations has gained momentum, allowing limiting the energy consumption at the VE's site and preserving battery lifetime [4]. Within this perspective, due to the need for HRLLC dictated by the uVR services, the assumption of 5G millimeter-wave (mmWave) is not an option. In fact, as reported in [2], the stringent requirements of uVR impose an uncompressed bit rate of 1911.03 Gb/s, resulting in considering the THz band as a natural candidate. According to this, the article focuses the proposed analysis only on the edge network with the aim of providing a prediction on the maximum number of uVR users to be linked to a single computation node under specific service reliability constraints.

Toward the goal of providing an effective uVR performance-oriented network design, accurate evaluation of the end-to-end (E2E) delay becomes imperative in such an application class. Recently, stochastic network calculus (SNC) has emerged as a promising framework tackling nontrivial network traffic models [5]–[6][7], basing its analysis on the usage of statistical envelopes catching the stochastic behavior of the network traffic. In fact, compared to the standard queueing theory, SNC covers a wider traffic variety, including heavy-tailed traffic models and self-similar ones, to name a couple [5]–[6][7][8]. As a consequence, this article focuses on the performance analysis and formulation of the E2E delay bound of a uVR service system arranged with specific QoE constraints over THz communication channels. More in depth, our analysis has been conducted in terms of uVR service reliability, which represents an essential metric in THz communications [2], by applying SNC and the Martingale theory [9]. Toward this end, we have carefully taken into account the influence of the THz communication channels on the system performance. In more detail, the contributions of this article can be summarized as follows:

Analysis and discussion of the influence of both the interference and the blockage phenomena on the system performance [2]

The comprehensive analytical formulation of the E2E delay bound modeling the computing node as a tandem system consisting of the processing and transmission subsystems with the goal of identifying the maximum supported load

Validation of the proposed analytical framework by providing comparisons with simulation results and analytical predictions derived by resorting to an alternative method based on the classical Markov queueing systems theory

The rest of the article is organized as follows. The following section presents an in-depth review of the related literature. We then present the system model, SNC, and Martingale theory fundamentals. Furthermore, the E2E delay bound is formulated, and the performance analysis is presented. Finally, conclusions are drawn.

Related Works
Nowadays, the Martingale theory is receiving growing attention as a powerful performance evaluation and design tool to tackle complex networks and provide traffic analysis. An example is represented by [10], which proposes a delay traffic analysis through the application of the Martingale theory. More in detail, the authors in [10] focus on the investigation of the QoS in computation offloading environments. The objective of the paper is the minimization of the outage probability, that is, the probability that a task allocated to the computation nodes experiences a delay violation. Furthermore, the paper proposes a task allocation approach based on a special kind of water-filling policy. Then, in [11], the problem of the E2E delay bound formulation is addressed. In this case, a multihop vehicular ad hoc network is considered, and the delay bound is comprehensive in both access and queuing delay terms. The main contribution of [11] is given by the theoretical analysis and deep discussion of the E2E delay bound formulation with heterogeneous traffic demand, considering different scheduling policies. Specifically, the paper focuses on the E2E delay performance under first-in first-out, the static priority, and the earliest deadline first disciplines. Heterogeneous traffic classes are also the object of study in [12], in which the E2E delay bounds of delay-tolerant and delay-sensitive bursty applications, through Martingale analysis, are investigated. Lastly, the Martingale theory is also applied in [9], in which the authors present extensive analysis and discussion of the application of the Martingale envelopes theory to some of the major access schemes. The performance analysis is conducted in terms of evaluation of the mean packet delay and packet delay probability.

In addition to this, the performance analysis of HRLLC uVR services over THz communication channels, of interest here, is the subject of [2], where the authors propose an analytical framework based on the simplified assumption of considering the computation and transmission systems as independent queue systems, hence resorting to the application of Burke's theorem [13]. An interesting contribution of [2] is the deep investigation and modeling of the probability density function of the downlink transmission delay, in which the interference contribution resulting from a highly densified 6G network is considered. In addition, the authors of [2] discuss the reliability, in terms of accomplishment of a target deadline, in reference to the channel bandwidth and non-line-on-sight link conditions. Finally, the remarkable impact of the molecular absorption on uVR service reliability is detailed and studied, highlighting its correlation with the resulting performance degradations.

This article considers the same scenario and application context proposed in [2]. However, different from [2], a more realistic service time distribution is considered in carrying out the performance evaluation analysis in order to better meet the actual behavior of the computation system [14]. Such a different working condition implies that Burke's theorem, at the base of the analysis proposed in [2], cannot be applied, turning the original problem into a more challenging and complex one, demanding an alternative method for pursuing suitable uVR service design and implementation on THz communication channels.

System Model
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we address a scenario in which we have a set B of small base stations (SBSs), densely deployed to give access to the users demanding uVR services, throughout the THz channels. Each SBS offers communications to a community of v uVR users, referred to here as VS. In the same way, every uVR user is served by one and only one SBS, named tagged SBS. Each uVR selects as tagged SBS the SBS from which it receives the strongest signal. The uVR computation request, originated by a given user i, is forwarded to the central unit throughout its tagged SBS in order to achieve computation. Finally, the processing outcome is sent back to the uVR user through an allocated THz channel.


Figure 1.
System scenario.

Show All

Furthermore, we have to note that 6G networks will be characterized by high densification of SBSs over the service area, leading to severe interference problems affecting the THz channels. As is well known, interference is the phenomenon resulting from sharing of the same channel resource by SBSs located close enough (i.e., less than δ). Therefore, with SBSs massively deployed within the 6G network area, the interference issue is a critical aspect of the next generation cellular network that cannot be neglected. According to this, we denote by I the interference SBS set, that is, all the SBSs that lie within a radius of δ from a given uVR user.

Moreover, an additional drawback of the THz communications [2], [15] that needs accurate analysis is their inability to penetrate solid objects and their susceptibility to the surrounding environment, exhibiting higher penetration losses and lower reflection properties. For this reason, THz communications frequently experience communications blockage, typically divided between self-blockage and dynamic blockage, in compliance with [2], [15]. The term self-blockage means the situation in which a subset of SBSs is blocked by the body of the user considered [2], according to the geometric model proposed in [15]. Always following the analysis proposed in [2], the dynamic blockage means the condition in which the line of sight (LoS) between an uVR user and its tagged SBS is not available, usually on a time-limited basis, as detailed in [2], [15]. Furthermore, due to the electromagnetic dynamics, THz communication suffers severe molecular absorption, impacting signal propagation, reliability degradation, and significant difference between the LoS and the non-LoS (NLoS) links, compared to other bands such as mmWave [2]. Consequently, the available data rate results are defined as in [2], in which the signal-plus-interference-noise, in addition to the molecular noise, also takes into account the Johnson-Nyquist noise generated by thermal agitation of electrons in conductors [16].

Furthermore, the unguaranteed LoS case can be modeled as the product of the available data rate times the LoS probability, interpreting the NLoS as a scaling factor impacting the data rate. However, a deep discussion about propagation issues over THz channels is out of the scope of this article. Any interested reader can refer to [2, references therein] for further details.

Delay and Service Reliability Analysis
The implementation of new era services on future wireless networks needs an accurate design focusing on a deep performance investigation about the mechanism interconnecting different network components and the network protocols. Over the years, Markov queueing systems theory has been extensively applied to analyze many networks' aspects and behaviors. Due to the ever increasing network complexity, new theories have emerged to better fit the real-life traffic characteristics that do not always obey to the memoryless property-typical of the Poisson processes used in the classical queueing theory analysis.

During last decade, SNC has gained attention for its ability to treat nontrivial network traffic models limiting the complexity of the analysis. The network calculus has primarily emerged as a powerful tool to provide deterministic worst case backlogs and delay analysis. Over time, SNC has taken shape, focusing its analysis on the stochastic characteristics of the arrival and service processes of the system, providing consistent advancements in network performance investigation, such as in buffer capacity size and E2E application delays. In fact, the generic network element can be described throughout a service curve S representing the function implemented by the network element and offered to the arrival curve A during a defined time interval. Under this vision, the service curve S can be intended as an impulse response of a linear system under the novel min-plus algebra [5], as reported in Fig. 2. Under the assumption of this algebra, the departure curve D is given by the convolution of the arrival curve A with the service curve S. What makes SNC appealing is the presence of convolution form, which allows the transformation of a series system into a single whole system through convolution of the service curves of each individual system [5]. Furthermore, individual network elements lying on the same network path can be concatenated together easily by means of service curves convolution, resulting in the formulation of the E2E delay bound. In the following, the fundamentals of SNC notation and principles are introduced and discussed.

Figure 2. - Sketch of the min-plus convolution ⊗ procedure between the arrival $A(t)$ and service curve $S(t)$.
Figure 2.
Sketch of the min-plus convolution ⊗ procedure between the arrival A(t) and service curve S(t).

Show All

Under the hypothesis of lossless systems with unlimited buffer space, the system arrivals A(t) identifies the cumulative arrivals occurring from instant zero to instant t. Consequently, given the time interval T=[τ, t], the arrivals during T are expressed by the difference between the arrivals occurring between zero and t, and those between zero and τ (i.e., the gap between A(t) and A(τ)). In the same way, as detailed in [5], the system departures during T are defined as the infimum of the set of the number of arrivals occurring in [0,τ) and the services performed between zero and t−τ. This is equivalent to performing the min-plus convolution between the arrival and the service curves. Furthermore, as previously anticipated, these principles can easily be extended to derive one of the most exceptionally strong properties of the network calculus, that is, the service curve of an arbitrary large number of systems in series, resulting in the min-plus convolution of the service curves of the individual systems. In addition, as a consequence of the min-plus algebra, the convolution obeys the commutative property, having no impact on the order of services convolution.

In order to derive the performance bound, the arrivals can be considered upper bounded-by an envelope function. Over the years, Martingale theory has emerged in the literature [9]–[10][11][12], [17] due to its remarkable flexibility in modeling queueing systems and powerful statistical bounds, integrating the SNC principles with the definition of the Martingale envelope processes [17]. In this article, we consider the promising supermartingale envelopes, as detailed in [11], to predict the performance of the considered uVR system in terms of reliability and E2E delay. In reference to the E2E delay performance evolution proposed in this article, we would like to highlight that in typical SNC envelope models, the bounds are characterized on the basis of arrival processes only, whereas by resorting to the use of the Martingale theory to model envelopes, a suitable exponential transformation by considering both arrivals and service processes is formulated. It is important to highlight that the proposed performance analysis is focused on only one traffic source injecting uVR packets in the network. Nevertheless, the proposed analysis can easily be extended to the case in which we have multi-source traffic. In fact, the packets stemming from other users can be considered as a whole aggregated traffic, as detailed in [5], and it can be modeled as a cross-traffic flow. In reference to this, as the amount of cross-traffic grows, the impact of packet sorting on the waiting time due to batch arrivals may be non-negligible. The proposed formulation is performed by modeling the edge computing node as a tandem system, consisting of two cascaded subsystems: the computation and transmission subsystems. In the application scenario under consideration, the generic uVR user submits its computation request to the linked SBS. There, it receives the computation, that is, the service, from the computation subsystem. Finally, the transmission subsystem sends back to the requesting uVR user the computation outcome. It is important to highlight here that, regarding the uplink channel, we have considered negligible access delay in accordance with the hypothesis made in [2].

Let A1 be the arrival process of the computation request packets at the SBS input (i.e., at the computation subsystems). Furthermore, each packet requires, at the SBS site, a computation time whose curve is indicated as S1, defined accordingly with a hypoexponential distribution as in [14]. Finally, once a packet completes the processing phase, the outcome is sent back to the user demanding the service through the downlink channel. Therefore, the packet goes through the transmission subsystem, whose service time follows the statistical distribution with pdf presented in lemma 2 of [2], in which the interference occurrence is taken into account, and its pdf tends to a normal distribution. In the following, we name the service curve of the transmission subsystem S2. In order to derive the E2E Martingale bound for the departure process D(b), on the basis of the SNC principles, and the min-plus convolution and supermartingale proper ties, and after some algebraic manipulations, the probability that a uVR user experiences a delay W greater than a threshold k is given by
P(W(u)≥k)≤e−θ∗kKsB,(1)
View Sourcewhere B is the ratio between the product of the expectation of the supermartingale envelopes defined as
B=E[MA1(0)]E[MS1(0)]E[MS2(0)]E[MS3(0)]H,
View Sourceand H is a threshold set as the smallest value of the product of the arrival and service supermartingale parameters such that the instantaneous arrival is larger than any value of the stochastic process underlying the service process. Furthermore, θ∗=sup{θ>0:Ka≤Ks}, where Ka and Ks are greater than zero and are the parameters for which the supermartingale property is verified for arrivals and services, respectively. As previously introduced, k represents the VR deadline. Therefore, the reliability can be expressed as
R=1−P(W(u)≥k).(2)
View SourceRight-click on figure for MathML and additional features.

Finally, it is important to highlight that the proposed analysis provides a stochastic envelope for the E2E delay in the tandem system object of the analysis. For this reason, Eq. 1 represents a pessimistic prediction about the probability that a uVR packet suffers deadline expiration without completing the transit through the considered subsystems. In the same way, Eq. 2 represents a worst case prediction about the reliability reached by the system in guaranteeing the uVR services. In reference to this, it is important to note that, due to the analytical expression of Eqs. 1 and 2, the worst case approximation means lower values of reliability than the effective simulation results and greater predicted delay values than the actual simulation.

Numerical Results
The validation performance has been conducted by resorting to extensive numerical simulations in which we have considered the simulation scenario proposed in [2]. Therefore, the simulation parameters, selected in compliance with [2], consists of a squared network area with a side of 20 m, in which the transmission power has been set equal to 1 W for all the devices.

In the network environment object of the proposed analysis, the LoS link is almost surely available. In fact, the occurrence of an NLoS event has a probability equal to 1×10−3, that is, with negligible impact on the system performance behavior. The results hereafter presented have been obtained under the assumption of a region of non-negligible interference equal to 4 m, an arrival rate of λ1=0.06 packest/s, a bandwidth of 13 GHz, and the computation time for each uVR request at the computing subsystem hypoexponentially distributed with mean computation time of x¯¯¯1=5.25 ms. Finally, we provide a performance comparison with an equivalent Markov tandem queue model (MQ) with Poisson arrivals and exponential service processes. In more detail, we model the arrivals with a Poisson process with mean rate λ1 and an exponential service with parameter μ1=1/x¯¯¯1. Due to Burke's theorem [14], the subsystems result in being independent, and the arrival process at the transmission subsystem obeys a Poisson process with mean rate λ1. Then, in this case, we also have assumed exponentially distributed transmission service time, with mean value x¯¯¯2 and parameter μ2=1/x¯¯¯2, in which x¯¯¯2 represents the actual mean value of the transmission subsystem. It is important to highlight that both the MG and MQ are worst case analysis. For this reason, they reach lower levels of reliability than SR curves. However, as detailed later, the MG performs more accurate reliability prediction than the MQ alternative.

As a natural consequence of the working hypothesis assumed, the user uVR E2E delay results from the sum of two independent time contributions, that is, the time spent to complete the computation (t1) and the time elapsed at the transmission subsystem (t2) to send back the processing outcome to the uVR user.

Introducing ψ1(t) and ψ2(t) as the pdfs of random variables t1 and t2, respectively, defined according to the classical queueing theory as in [14], the pdf π(t) of the E2E delay results are given by their convolution. Therefore, the system reliability is expressed by
R=∫k0π(t)dt.(3)
View SourceRight-click on figure for MathML and additional features.

Figure 3 depicts the reliability trend when the bandwidth grows, assuming a target deadline k=15 ms. From Fig. 3, we can see that the reliability increases as the bandwidth grows. Furthermore, it is important to highlight the remarkable closeness between the Martingale predictions and the simulation results (SRs) compared to the MQ bound. The better behavior of the MG bound in reference to the SR curve is also confirmed by Fig. 4, which exhibits the reliability as a function of the arrivals load at the computation subsystem. In fact, it is straightforward to note that the system performance gets worse as the traffic load increases.

Figure 3. - Reliability as a function of the channel bandwidth.
Figure 3.
Reliability as a function of the channel bandwidth.

Show All

Figure 4. - Reliability as a function of the mean arrival rate.
Figure 4.
Reliability as a function of the mean arrival rate.

Show All

Figure 5 aims to highlight the impact of molecular absorption on the reliability behavior. From Fig. 5, it is evident that the molecular absorption coefficient strongly impacts THz communications. However, despite the performance degradation resulting from the increment of the molecular absorption coefficient, the good prediction accuracy of the MG bound is still noticeable, in comparison to the considered alternative.

Figure 5. - Reliability as a function of the molecular absorption coefficient values.
Figure 5.
Reliability as a function of the molecular absorption coefficient values.

Show All

Finally, Fig. 6 expresses the network performance as the mean computation time grows. Also, in this case, the reliability decreases as the mean service time of the first subsystem increases.

Figure 6. - Reliability as a function of the request mean computation time.
Figure 6.
Reliability as a function of the request mean computation time.

Show All

Future Directions
In reference to the future research directions, a very interesting topic needing further exploration may be represented by the influence on the uVR reliability of the presence of concurrent multisource traffic. In fact, the multi-user scenario originates batch arrivals crossing the target traffic flow, giving rise to a non-negligible impact of packet sorting on the wait time of the uVR flow due to batch arrivals. Furthermore, a very relevant topic strictly related to that addressed in this article is the study of uVR services reliability in the presence of heterogeneous network traffic, that is, when the SBS is shared between the uVR services and other standard traffic (e.g., the traffic originating in Internet of Things networks).

Conclusion
Within the context of computing in the network paradigm, which involves moving data processing to the edge of a network in addition to a cloud, this article has dealt with the proposal of an efficient analytical approach to predict the performance of a uVR service system as an example of the new era services within the context of a 6G network. In particular, the article has considered the reliability estimation and E2E delay bound for HRLLC VR services over THz communication channels by applying SNC and Martingale theory principles. The effectiveness of the proposed approach has been validated by exhibiting performance comparisons with simulation results and analytical predictions derived by resorting to the use of the classical Markov queueing system theory results.