Abstract
The formation of a personal identity represents a fundamental task in human development. Personal identity revolves around the commitment to goals, beliefs, and values that are central to who one is. Starting from adolescence and continuing into young adulthood, people envision their life and reflect on their career path. Given the fast-paced demands young people face nowadays, having a clear set of identity commitments related to career is often challenging. The present study investigates how best to leverage mobile apps to support young adults with their career goals. By combining theories from psychology literature with research on HCI, this exploratory study aimed to design and develop a self-tracking app prototype for monitoring career goals and investigate its potential influence on young adults’ identity commitments. The InstaGoal app's design included features which encouraged self-reflection, such as goal appraising, journal, log of past use, and reminders to engage. Using quantitative and qualitative analyses, the study's results revealed that the InstaGoal app represents a promising avenue for strengthening the adaptive identity commitments. Limitations, theoretical, and practical implications are discussed.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
self-tracking

mobile app

human-computer interaction

goals

identity processes

young adults

1. Introduction
Developing one's personal identity, that is, establishing meaningful commitments to goals, values, desires, and beliefs, represents a central focus for young adults (e.g., Arnett, 2004, Attig and Franke, 2019). Identity formation takes place in several identity domains, such as career, romantic relationships, friendships (Goossens, 2001). For young adults, the development of one's career identity is both important and complicated to achieve (Skorikov and Vondracek, 2011). By setting career goals, exploring a wide range of career opportunities, and enacting identity commitments in the career domain, young adults can self-construct who they are as a worker or future worker (Nurmi, 1991). However, a large percentage of youth enter young adulthood struggling to form their identity commitments (Kroger et al., 2010).

Nowadays, with the advent of smartphones, millions of mobile applications (‘apps’) are available to young adults, covering nearly every need (De Nadai et al., 2019), from social communication (e.g., WhatsApp), dating (e.g., Tinder), or healthy lifestyle (e.g., Fitbit) to increasing productivity (e.g., Better Habits) and managing or maintaining social relationships (e.g., Facebook). Although previous studies have shown links between how youth present themselves online through social media platforms and their identity (Michikyan, 2020; Michikyan et al., 2015; Thomas et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017), to the best of our knowledge no app is specifically designed to help facilitate identity processes and help young adults in their identity commitments. For example, recent studies have shown that youth with a low level of self-concept clarity (e.g., have unclear identity commitments) tend to present an online identity on social media inconsistent with their true self (Michikyan, 2020; Michikyan et al., 2015). This online presented identity is often more socially desirable than their true self (Thomas et al., 2017), often because of either fear of being marginalized by their peers or a need for positive feedback (Michikyan, 2020). Thus, social media as a tool for identity construction may not suit everybody, especially youth with unclear commitments, as it might lead them to conceal their true identities to please the majority.

The aim of this exploratory study was to design, develop, and test a mobile app prototype specifically devised to strengthen identity commitments through personal career goals. By drawing from psychology research on identity processes and goal-setting, we intended to inform the design of a self-tracking mobile app aimed at strengthening identity commitments in a sample of young adults. Hence, this paper contributes to the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) field by introducing and applying an established processes-oriented framework for identity development from psychology to the design of mobile apps, which aims to help young adults boost their commitments.

The article is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical psychological background on identity processes and goal-setting together with HCI research on self-tracking and examples from related apps with the aim of defining requirements for the prototype design of InstaGoal. Section 3 outlines the aims and exploratory research questions of the present study, namely if identity processes can be enhanced through the use of a self-tracking app. Section 4 briefly describes the design process together with the requirements that drove the design of InstaGoal. Next, Section 5 covers how these requirements were applied in the design and implementation of InstaGoal. Section 6 describes the methods, procedures, instruments, and participants involved in testing the app. A within-participant approach was employed and further knowledge was drawn through a thematic analysis of the app generated data. The results are presented in Section 7, while Section 8 further discusses the implications and limitations of the present study's findings and outlines future directions. The conclusions are included in Section 9.

2. Background
2.1. Young Adults’ Identity Development
Contemporary young adults are often regarded as ardent users of digital technology (Gardner and Davis, 2013). Young adults often express extremely positive beliefs towards technology's role in their lives (Little et al., 2007, Livingstone, 2011; Third et al., 2017; Turkle, 2017). Thus, today's youth has been characterized as ‘the app generation’ (Gardner and Davis, 2013) as they allocate an important proportion of their time searching, selecting, and engaging with mobile apps from which they derive most of their information (Gardner and Davis, 2013; Third et al., 2017).

Young adulthood, between ages 18-25, is marked by increased changes in instability in personal goals (e.g., career, family, romantic relationships), self-focus, feeling in-between, and trying out various roles and possibilities (Arnett, 2004). During this period, in-depth exploration of career choices represents a central focus (Negru et al., 2011; Super, 1990). Starting from adolescence and continuing into adulthood, young adults actively seek to answer the question “Who am I?”. Providing answers to this question is part of young adults’ quest to building a personal identity (Luyckx et al., 2006).

In the case of career development, personal identity represents a self-constructed definition about the self, encompassing goals, aims, desires, values, beliefs related to one's career (i.e., identity content; Vignoles et al., 2011), aspects deemed relevant for who one is as a worker or future worker. Identity research focuses both on the identity content and the identity processes, that is, how people construct their identity (Luyckx et al., 2017). One such process-oriented model of identity development is the dual-cycle model of identity (Luyckx et al., 2006), which consists of two identity cycles (i.e., identity formation and identity evaluation) and comprises five identity processes (i.e., commitment making, exploration in breadth, exploration in depth, identification with commitment, and ruminative exploration). The cycle of identity formation begins when young adults start gathering information by exploring in breadth different possible future alternatives on various identity options for defining the self (i.e., exploration in breadth). After exploring these identity options in breadth, people make a commitment in an important identity concern (i.e., commitment making). After a commitment is made, the identity evaluation cycle commences and young adults explore their decisions in depth by gathering new information on their chosen option (i.e., exploration in depth) with the goal of evaluating it (i.e., identification with commitment). The processes of identification with commitment refers to the degree to which young adults are certain that their decisions fit with their values, beliefs, desires, aspirations, preferences, or capabilities in light of the new information. When young adults no longer identify with their commitments, as a result of exploration in depth, the cycle of identity formation starts again with exploration in breadth. While exploration in breadth, commitment making, exploration in depth, and identification with commitment are seen as adaptive processes of identity formation, ruminative exploration represents a maladaptive identity process which often impedes the person in reaching a decision, hence hindering commitment making (Luyckx et al., 2008). Ruminative exploration has been found to be associated with performance-avoidance goals, that is, avoiding setting goals because of the fear of what others might think about you if you fail (Flunger et al., 2016). The same study also showed that high levels of identity commitments together with effort promote goal achievement, while low identity commitments and rumination impede action towards the desired goals (Flunger et al., 2016).

The concept of identity is also found in the HCI field, however it has been approached rather differently, focusing more on the narratives people construct about themselves (Doherty and Doherty, 2018; Sharon and Zandbergen, 2017). One such example is Sharon and Zandbergen's (2017) work on the self-tracking community, which uncovered that people construct their identity through gaining meaning from the self-narratives built around their regularly tracked data. In a systematic literature review on self-reports including both psychology and HCI research, Doherty and Doherty (2018) talk about three different selves (i.e., the experiencing self, the remembering self, and the future-oriented self), each with its own focuses, characteristics, and temporal orientation. The experiencing self lives in the present and builds a more objective momentary reflection based on the perceived experience. The remembering self looks in the past reconstructing an experience based on memories, thus indulging in a retrospective reflection. The future self focuses on the future by envisioning experiences and desired outcomes engaging in prospective reflection. According to their review, inter-self dissonance may exist between how the three selves experience and reflect due to factors specific to each self. Thus, bad future choices may be made due to a biased remembering self who does not equip the future-oriented self with an accurate picture of experience (Doherty and Doherty, 2018).

The narrative approach of identity construction and the dual-cycle model of identity formation are conceptually complementary (Van Doeselaar et al., 2020, Veral and Macías, 2019). At the heart of the narrative approach lie autobiographical stories representing coherent narratives which seek to answer the question of who one is by combining one's past, present, and future self (McAdams, 2001). In contrast, the dual-cycle model views identity not as a personal story, but rather as a set of identity commitments, emphasizing how they are formed and evaluated (Van Doeselaar et al., 2020).

2.2. Self-Tracking
Impressive amounts of personal data can be collected from a plethora of areas of interest through apps (e.g., health, physical fitness, nutrition, sleep; Blandford, 2019, Braun and Clarke, 2006, De Nadai et al., 2019; Kristensen and Ruckenstein, 2018; Mercer et al., 2016, Michikyan, 2020) giving rise to a self-tracking phenomenon. Self-tracking represents the activity of recording, monitoring, and reflecting on the self-generated data to gain knowledge and shape the self (Gabriels and Coeckelbergh, 2019; Lambert, 2016). Studies on self-tracking have generally employed members from self-tracking communities (Attig and Franke, 2019, Choe et al., 2014, Fritz et al., 2014, Li et al., 2010), so people with no or limited experience with tracking have been rather overlooked. Even though a primary motivator for self-tracking might be achieving a desired outcome, people are also interested in the process (Rapp and Tirabeni, 2020; Rooksby et al., 2014). For example, people also self-track to document certain aspects they deem important, self-diagnose by looking at tracked behavior patterns, or for gaining external rewards related to the performed tracked activities (Rooksby et al., 2014).

The process of self-tracking has also been found to elicit an emotional response to the self-generated data (Lupton et al., 2018, Luyckx et al., 2017). For instance, in a qualitative study, Lomborg and Frandsen (2016) found that regular fitness app users viewed self-tracking as a communicative, pleasurable, motivating, and meaningful activity. In the same vein, Ruckenstein (2014) noted that people felt reassured and motivated when monitoring their heart rates and physical activity levels. Moreover, Sharon and Zandbergen (2017) uncovered that the self-tracked data is not only valued for its perceived truthfulness and objectivity, but most importantly because people who practice self-tracking can attribute meaning to their data, creating narratives resulting in a “continuous process of identity construction” (p. 11).

2.3. Personal Goals in Mobile Apps
Goals represent a central aspect of identity content, as young adults develop their identity around their desires, aspirations, and beliefs (Vignoles et al., 2011). Research in psychology reveals that people set goals that focus on mastery or performance (Nicholls, 1984). Mastery goals focus on learning and developing competence (e.g., “I want to develop an app to learn how to code.”), whereas performance goals focus on the result (e.g., “I want to develop a mobile app that gets over 10000 downloads.”), or on comparing oneself with others (e.g., “I want to develop a better mobile app than my competitor”; Latham and Locke, 2007; Pintrich, 2000).

The level of goal performance is influenced by the strategies implemented, the level of effort, and the ability to review one's progress (Latham and Brown, 2006). Also, it has been found that people generally perform better when they set personally meaningful high goals, compared to vaguely defined “do your best goals” (Locke and Latham, 2002). A high goal is a desired outcome that is considered at the same time significant, meaningful, attainable, but also difficult to achieve by the person setting it (Latham and Locke, 2007). When the goal is new and the knowledge and skills required for attaining it are unknown, setting a mastery-oriented goal generally leads to a better outcome than a performance oriented one (Latham and Brown, 2006; Latham and Locke, 2007). Pursuing mastery-oriented goals generally also brings more satisfaction than performance-oriented goals (Latham and Brown, 2006). As goals can be used to evaluate one's performance, achieving higher more difficult goals brings more satisfaction than lower goals (Latham and Locke, 2007; Wiese and Freund, 2005). Previous research from HCI highlights that asking reflective questions may aid people in clarifying their underlying motives and goals and thus, it enhances motivation (Fleck and Fitzpatrick, 2010; Lee et al., 2015). One such set of questions (i.e., goal appraisals) was developed and tested on a population of adolescents and young adults (Negru, 2009). The goal appraisals were part of The Personal Goal Investigation Procedure (PGIP) and have been constructed based on the theoretical and methodological guidelines proposed by Emmons (1986), Little (1983, 2007), and Elliot and Friedman (2007). The appraisals cover both structural goal characteristics through the first two questions (i.e., perceived difficulty and perceived novelty) and process-relevant facets, tapping into the achievement goal orientations of mastery and performance through the latter three questions (i.e., resource allocation, performance orientation, and mastery orientation).

Most apps featuring goals focus on helping people achieve a desired outcome (Rapp and Tirassa, 2017) from losing weight (e.g., MyFitnessPal), to learning a new language (e.g., Duolingo), or eating healthier (e.g., Yazio). These apps usually include goal-setting and the process towards the desired outcome through monitoring and self-tracking (Gordon et al., 2019). Goal-setting is handled in a multitude of ways from prompting the user to choose from a predefined list (e.g., Lumosity) to asking the user to complete a questionnaire during onboarding about their current state and their desired outcome (Feastr; Villalobos-Zúñiga and Cherubini, 2020). In addition, typing goals has been found to increase precision in expression, deeper thinking, and accountability, thus an effective way of promoting setting of personally meaningful high goals might be to encourage users to type their desired outcomes (Kim et al., 2016; Kocielnik et al., 2018).

After goal-setting, most apps use reminders in the form of messages to keep users on track with their goals. These messages are sent around the time the users should perform activities related to their goals and can be either set by the users (e.g., 30 Day Fitness) or by the app designers (e.g., Arise app; Villalobos-Zúñiga and Cherubini, 2020). The number, moment of delivery, and content of the reminders need to be optimized to nudge the users towards their desired goals without being perceived as controlling, irrelevant, intrusive, or disruptive (Bakker et al., 2016; Mehrotra et al., 2016). Upon clicking on a notification, some apps prompt the user to track their activities and progress towards their desired goal. For example, in the nutrition app Yazio, during the morning, users are prompted to input what they ate for breakfast. By providing data to the app, users reaffirm their interest in continuing the activity (Villalobos-Zúñiga and Cherubini, 2020), thus reinforcing their commitment. In addition, the practice of actively and regularly logging certain activities gives self-trackers the ability to better notice and analyze aspects related to the tracked subject (Sharon and Zandbergen, 2017). In apps, the self-tracked data is often presented through a history feature, that is, a chronological representation of the tracked activities users performed in their goal pursuits (Villalobos-Zúñiga and Cherubini, 2020). This component enables users to self-reflect on their effort and progress to gain self-knowledge by mentally juxtaposing their achievements or failures with factors which might have influenced their performance in specific moments (Bakker et al., 2016; Li et al., 2010; Villalobos-Zúñiga and Cherubini, 2020).

3. The Present Study
Considering the background presented in the previous sections, the aim of the present exploratory study was to design, develop, and test a self-tracking app prototype aimed at strengthening young adults’ identity commitments through personal career goals. To this end, we first identified requirements for the design of the app, created an app prototype based on these requirements, and then proceeded to investigate whether the prototype accomplished its goal of strengthening young adults’ identity. We designed and tested the app making use of the dual-cycle model of identity development (Luyckx et al., 2006, Luyckx et al., 2008). Additionally, to further improve the app in the future, we also investigated how different goal appraisals used in the app related to the users’ identity processes and how young adults defined and tracked their goals through the app. Thus, the present study sought to answer the following exploratory research questions:

RQ1: Does the use of a self-tracking app (i.e., InstaGoal) contribute to improvements in identity commitments?

RQ2: How do the career goal appraisals used in InstaGoal relate to identity processes?

RQ3: How do young adults use InstaGoal's features to define, pursue, monitor, and subjectively experience their career goals?

4. The Design Process
The InstaGoal app was designed with the specific aim to improve young adults’ identity commitments drawing on the psychology theories of identity processes and goal-setting, and on HCI research on self-tracking outlined in the background section. The requirements informing the design were theory-driven, but also inspired from other apps featuring goals and self-tracking. The research team came up with the following design requirements after multiple brainstorming sessions:

•
Users can make identity commitments in the form of career goals (commitment making);

•
Users are encouraged to explore in-depth these career commitments (exploration in depth);

•
Users can change their commitments (identification with commitment);

•
Users are prompted to type their goals instead of selecting from a predefined list (encourage accountability, precision of expression, awareness, and setting of personally meaningful goals);

•
Users are encouraged to set meaningful high goals through reflective questions in the form of goal appraisals (e.g., perceived difficulty, perceived novelty, resource allocation, performance orientation, and mastery orientation);

•
Users are sent reminders to stay on track with their goals;

•
Users can actively self-track their goal pursuit through a journal (which has been previously found to combat rumination, promoting self-awareness and deeper thinking);

•
Users can review their history of past use (enabling documentation of activities, self-reflection, self-diagnosis, and better aligns the experiencing self with the remembering self);

•
Users are encouraged to focus on their subjective experience;

•
Users can easily use the app without external guidance.

5. The Design and Implementation of the InstaGoal App
An important general requirement for the app was to be easy to use without external guidance. In order to achieve this, we focused on creating a streamlined First-Time User Experience (FTUE), designed as a step-by-step process which gave all the necessary information about how to use the app and took the user through the core loop of setting, appraising, and monitoring a career goal. When starting the app for the first time, three information screens displayed in sequence informed the user about the app. Next, users were asked to type their first career goal and to appraise it on five different dimensions (perceived difficulty, perceived novelty, resource allocation, performance orientation, and mastery orientation). During the FTUE, the navigation buttons between the different sections of the app were removed to focus the entire attention of the user on the core loop of setting, appraising and monitoring of the goal. After setting the first goal, the app automatically switched to the journal dashboard where users could type about any thoughts, feelings, challenges, or accomplishments related to their goal. The first time this screen was shown, users were informed about the purpose of the journal and were encouraged to visit the page often. This was also the moment when the navigation tabs of the app became available to the user.

InstaGoal's main navigation was done through always visible and accessible tab bars positioned at the bottom of the screen, allowing users to quickly switch between the goals and journal sections of the app. Each tab included an icon and the name of the section. The active tab was highlighted with a brighter tone and its title was also displayed in the header of the page to help direct the user.

The central component of the InstaGoal app was the “Goals Dashboard”. From here participants could set, appraise, change, and view their career-related goals (Figures 1, 2, 3). A two-step process was employed for goal-setting. First, users were prompted to type a self-relevant goal on a dedicated page. This design choice was deliberately made to enable users to set personally meaningful goals and not to choose from a predefined list of potentially less relevant goals for the user, facilitating commitment-making. This design decision should further motivate users to pursue their goal. As pointed out in Kocielnik et al.’s (2018) study, typing promotes better precision regarding expression and deeper thinking. At the same time, this activity drives a sense of commitment and responsibility, while also serving as a mental note (Kocielnik et al., 2018). Second, immediately after setting the goal, users were asked to appraise it on five different dimensions (i.e., perceived difficulty, perceived novelty, resource allocation, performance orientation, and mastery orientation; Negru, 2009). Previous research from HCI highlights that asking reflective questions may aid people in clarifying their underlying motives and goals and thus, it enhances motivation (Fleck and Fitzpatrick, 2010; Lee et al., 2015). The choice of goal appraisals is grounded in psychology theories regarding goal-setting and motivation and were selected to guide the users in setting higher goals (Elliot and Friedman, 2007, Emmons, 1986, Little, 1983, Little et al., 2007).

On subsequent uses of the app, the “Goals Dashboard” reminded participants of their current goal (written in the center of the screen) and allowed them to reassess or change the goal by clicking the “Change Goal” button in line with their current identification with commitment. This button was conveniently placed in the lower part of the screen to be easily reachable on larger smartphones with the thumb. The “Goals Dashboard” also included a “Goals History” page, which gave participants the option to visualize their log of past goals. This feature was designed to enable users to reflect on their past activities, which was also recently supported by Villalobos-Zúñiga and Cherubini's (2020) systematic review of mobile apps.

In addition to the “Goals Dashboard”, InstaGoal also featured a “Journal Dashboard”. The journal encouraged users to record, visualize, and reflect on their thoughts, feelings, behaviors, challenges, and accomplishments related to their career goals, facilitating subjective self-tracking. This section helps young adults document their progress and self-diagnose potential failures in their goal-pursuit (Rooksby et al., 2014). Through journaling, young adults were encouraged to explore in depth their career goals. In addition, journaling was also employed to impede the maladaptive process of ruminative exploration (King, 2001; Pennebaker, 2003; Teismann et al., 2014). In InstaGoal, through the “Journal Dashboard”, young adults could attach journal pages to their goals. Each page contained a user-typed title and description and an automatically generated timestamp. The timestamp was used to visualize the pages in chronological order, facilitating the creation of identity narratives, while the typed title and descriptions afforded the tracking of subjective experiences going beyond mere numbers.

Push notifications were employed to remind users to engage with the app. The reminders were designed to keep users on track with their goals and had the message “How is your goal pursuit going?”. When the message was clicked, InstaGoal would open with the “Goal Dashboard” allowing the user to quickly reassess their goal or change it if they no longer identified with it. In addition, the journal was also only one tap away.

6. Methods
6.1. Participants
The sample for this exploratory study initially consisted of 55 young adults from North-Western Romania. The inclusion criteria were: 18-25 age interval (specific to the young adulthood period) and owning a smartphone capable of running the app (e.g., Android OS). Based on the inclusion criteria, a final sample of n = 25 participants (n = 20 female; Mage = 22.8, SDage = 2.12) was selected. Participants were recruited through a convenience sampling method by online dissemination of the announcement of the research to study groups of university students at bachelor and master levels. Thus, the recruitment was not based on the membership to a particular group of trackers who usually include people with experience in such technologies (e.g., Quantified Self Community), but rather from a general student population. This is particularly important, as previous studies have usually employed people with prior experience, for example professional athletes or runners (Attig and Franke, 2019, Choe et al., 2014, Fritz et al., 2014, Li et al., 2010). However, prior experience with self-tracking was not explicitly assessed. Additionally, we acknowledge that the convenience sampling method and the elimination of non-Android users limit the generalizability of our results.

6.2. Procedure
To gain insight into how the mobile app would support young adults’ identity processes, a within-participants design with the assessment times as independent variable and the identity processes as dependent variables was employed. Upon entering the study, participants were informed that they would need to use a mobile app and fill out an online questionnaire before using the app (T1) and after four weeks of app use (T2). The study was introduced as investigating how young adults set and track their career goals using a mobile app. Participants were asked to use the various app features (e.g., goal-setting, goal appraising, journal, log of past use) whenever they observed changes in their goal pursuit or when receiving push notifications. Participants were assured that all their data was kept private and anonymous. Also, they were informed that they could withdraw from the study at any time. Moreover, participants were encouraged to contact the research team by e-mail for any additional clarifications.

After giving their informed consent, participants received a unique code, which was used to link their app use with the data collected in the online questionnaires. Next, participants were invited to complete the T1 questionnaire consisting of demographic information and the Dimensions of Identity Development Scale (DIDS, Luyckx et al., 2006, Luyckx et al., 2008). Upon completing the questionnaire, participants received access to download and install the mobile app and were asked to use it for the next four weeks. Participants were reminded every week through push notifications to monitor their goals. The goal monitoring consisted of setting personally relevant goals, appraising those goals on different dimensions (i.e., perceived difficulty, perceived novelty, resource allocation, performance orientation, mastery orientation), and writing in the journal about thoughts, feelings, and challenges related to these goals. After four weeks of use, participants completed the T2 questionnaire consisting of the same identity processes scale as the T1 questionnaire. Data collection took place in April-May 2017, the first date representing the login of the first participant and the latter the closing period of the last participant.

The T1 and T2 identity process measurements were compared to gain insight into the extent to which the use of InstaGoal contributes to improvements in identity commitments (RQ1). To better understand how appraising career goals in InstaGoal related to identity processes (RQ2), the goal appraisals from InstaGoal were analyzed in relation with the T1 and T2 identity processes measurements. A thematic analysis using the goals and journal entries was employed to tap into how young adults use InstaGoal's features to define, pursue, monitor, and subjectively experience their career goals (RQ3).

6.3. Measures
6.3.1. Identity development
The Romanian version (Negru-Subtirica et al., 2016) of the 25-item Dimensions of Identity Development Scale was used (DIDS, Luyckx et al., 2006, Luyckx et al., 2008) to assess five identity processes: commitment making (e.g., “I have decided on the direction I want to follow in life”; 5 items), exploration in breadth (“I think about the direction I want to take in my life”; 5 items), ruminative exploration (“I keep looking for the direction I want to take in my life”; 5 items), identification with commitment (“Plans for the future offer me a sense of security”; 5 items), and exploration in depth (“I think about the future plans I have made”; 5 items). Participants responded to each item on a scale from 1 (completely disagree) to 5 (completely agree). High scores reflect high levels of the associated identity process. Exploration in breadth, commitment making, exploration in depth, and identification with commitment are regarded as adaptive processes of identity formation, while ruminative exploration represents a maladaptive identity process (Luyckx et al., 2008). Cronbach's Alphas for the five subscales ranged between .73 and .93 at Time 1, and between .68 and .91 at Time 2.

6.3.2. Career goal appraisals
When setting goals in the InstaGoal app, participants were asked to type their current career-related personal goal. After setting the goal, they appraised it by answering one question for each of the following dimensions: perceived difficulty (i.e., ”How hard is it for you to achieve this goal?”), perceived novelty (”How different is this goal compared to other goals that you have previously pursued?”), resource allocation (”How much time, energy and resources do you allocate to pursue this goal”), performance orientation (“To what extent do you compare yourself with others [colleagues, friends, family] when pursuing this goal?”), and mastery orientation (i.e., ”To what extent do you improve your abilities and knowledge through the pursuit of this goal?”). Asking people their motives for engaging in an activity triggers their underlying motivations (Lee et al., 2015). Assessment of each goal dimension was conducted on a 6-point Likert-type scale, where 1 indicated low levels (e.g., “Very low difficulty”) and 6 indicated high levels (e.g., “Very high difficulty”) of each goal appraisal. The goal appraisals were part of The Personal Goal Investigation Procedure (PGIP), which was developed and tested on a population of adolescents and young adults (Negru, 2009). The PGIP has been constructed based on the theoretical and methodological guidelines proposed by Emmons (1986), Little (1983, 2007), and Elliot and Friedman (2007). The appraisals cover structural goal characteristics through the first two questions and process-relevant facets, tapping into the achievement goal orientations of mastery and performance through the latter three questions.

7. Results
7.1. RQ1: Does the use of a self-tracking app (i.e., InstaGoal) contribute to improvements in identity commitments?
The data used in the analysis of RQ1 consisted of the Dimensions of Identity Development Scale (DIDS) before using the InstaGoal app (T1) and after 4 weeks of app use (T2). The five identity processes were modeled as dependent variables and time (T1, T2) as independent variable. First, we computed the scores for each of the five identity processes (i.e., commitment making, exploration in breadth, ruminative exploration, identification with commitment, exploration in depth) at T1 and T2 from the DIDS scale. Second, we calculated the internal reliability of the scale for the five identity processes at T1 and T2 (see Table 1). Third, we checked if all the assumptions for conducting a one-way Repeated Measures Multivariate Analysis of Variance (RM-MANOVA) were met. Thus, we checked the data for univariate and multivariate outliers, we performed the Shapiro-Wilk test for normality, and Pearson correlations to identify linear relationships between the dependent variables (Table 2). Finally, we performed a RM-MANOVA to evaluate whether the identity processes improve after using InstaGoal. A significant effect was found, Pillai's Trace = .46, F(5,20) = 3.38, p = .022, η2 = .46. A series of five repeated measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA) on each of the dependent variables was conducted as a follow-up to the RM-MANOVA (Table 3). The results showed that commitment making (F(1,24) = 7.06, p = .014, η2 = .23) and identification with commitment (F(1,24) = 13.09, p = .001, η2 = .35) increased after using the app. These results provide an indication that after using the InstaGoal app for four weeks, participants were more secure about their goals and considered their commitments as more aligned with their values and beliefs. However, those results can only be interpreted as a preliminary insight due to the lack of a control group.


Table 1. Descriptive and reliability statistics.

Cronbach's alpha		Descriptive statistics
T1	T2		T1		T2
M	SD		M	SD
Commitment making	.94	.82		3.82	0.90		4.12	0.63
Exploration in breadth	.75	.74		3.78	0.55		3.82	0.69
Ruminative exploration	.91	.91		2.67	1.02		2.58	1.05
Identification with commitment	.88	.91		3.90	0.72		4.14	0.73
Exploration in depth	.74	.69		3.23	0.70		3.22	0.72
Note. T1 = measurement before using the app, T2 = measurement after using the app; M = mean, SD = standard deviation.


Table 2. Pearson correlations between identity processes before and after using the app.

1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9
1. T1 Commitment making	–								
2. T1 Exploration in breadth	-.01	–							
3. T1 Ruminative exploration	-.67⁎⁎	.43*	–						
4. T1 Identification with commitment	.82⁎⁎	-.15	-.71⁎⁎	–					
5. T1 Exploration in depth	-.18	.61⁎⁎	.58⁎⁎	-.32	–				
6. T2 Commitment making	.79⁎⁎	.03	-.58⁎⁎	.79⁎⁎	-.32	–			
7. T2 Exploration in breadth	.04	.48*	.23	-.09	.41*	-.13	–		
8. T2 Ruminative exploration	-.47*	.36	.82⁎⁎	-.64⁎⁎	.59⁎⁎	-.52⁎⁎	.54⁎⁎	–	
9. T2 Identification with commitment	.77⁎⁎	-.29	-.75⁎⁎	.89⁎⁎	-.43*	.81⁎⁎	-.30	-.76⁎⁎	–
10.T2 Exploration in depth	-.09	.56⁎⁎	.41*	-.23	.61⁎⁎	-.20	.66⁎⁎	.65⁎⁎	-.42*
Note. T1 = measurement before using the app, T2 = measurement after using the app.

⁎
p < .05

⁎⁎
p < .01.


Table 3. Repeated measures ANOVAs.

Identity processes	ANOVA
F(1,24)	p	η2
Commitment making	7.06	.014	.227
Exploration in breadth	0.14	.711	.006
Ruminative exploration	0.49	.490	.020
Identification with commitment	13.09	.001	.353
Exploration in depth	0.016	.900	.001

Table 4. Spearmans's rho correlation results DIDS T1, T2 and Goal Dimensions.

Perceived Difficulty	Perceived Novelty	Resource Allocation	Performance Orientation	Mastery Orientation
T1 CM	.12	.14	.20	-.1	-.00
T1 EB	.11	-.06	-.19	-.03	.09
T1 RE	.25	.09	-.17	.36	-.01
T1 IC	.05	.12	.17	-.26	-.06
T1 ED	.31	.14	.09	.32	.20
T2 CM	.20	.24	.00	-.30	-.17
T2 EB	.20	.16	-.35	.36	.07
T2 RE	.17	.18	-.15	.53⁎⁎	.11
T2 IC	.06	.10	.07	-.32	-.16
T2 ED	.17	.31	-.10	.59⁎⁎	-.14
Note. T1 = measurement before using the app, T2 = measurement after using the app; CM = Commitment making, EB = Exploration in breadth, RE = Ruminative exploration, IC = Identification with commitment, ED = Exploration in depth.

⁎⁎
p < .01.

7.2. RQ2: Is the use of InstaGoal app to appraise personal goals related to identity processes?
To investigate RQ2, the goal appraisals from the app were correlated with the identity process measurements. Because the number of measurements for goal appraisals was not equal among participants, with some participants using the app more intensely than others and at different times of day, we computed one average score for each goal appraisal (i.e. perceived difficulty, perceived novelty, resource allocation, performance orientation, mastery orientation) for each participant. We then assessed if the data is suited for Pearson correlations by screening for outliers and conducting a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality. The Shapiro-Wilk test was significant for resource allocation (p = .034) and close to significance for mastery orientation (p = .052), thus the normality assumption for the two goal appraisal dimensions was not met. Thus, after the preliminary analyses were completed, non-parametric Spearman correlations were conducted instead of Pearson to test linear relationships between identity processes and goal appraisals (Table 4). Results indicated that performance orientation was positively related to ruminative exploration (rs(25) = .53, p < .01) and exploration in depth at T2 (rs(25) = .59, p < .01). These results imply that after using InstaGoal, young adults who tended to set goals focused on achieving a higher performance rather than mastering a particular career topic, tended to exhibit recurrent doubts and worries about their career goals, but also explore more.

7.3. RQ3: How do young adults use InstaGoal's features to define, pursue, monitor, and subjectively experience their career goals?
To answer RQ3, a deductive (i.e., top-down or theory driven) Thematic Analysis (TA) of the self-set goals and journal entries was conducted. Personal goals were analyzed on two dimensions: goal content and goal characteristics (Austin and Vancouver, 1996). Our approach was informed by Braun and Clarke's (2006) guidelines for conducting TA. The employed process included the following stages: (a) the goals and journal entries were read thoroughly several times to prompt familiarization with the data and preliminary ideas were highlighted; (b) initial codes were created around the contents of the goals and journal entries by two coders (i.e., the first and second author) independently, attaching data that was representative for each code; (c) to enhance reliability, disagreements were solved through discussion among the authors; (d) codes were organized and grouped to form initial themes; (e) the initial themes were revised and a thematic map was generated (see Figure 7). Next, we detail the main themes with examples translated into English from the goals and journal entries written by participants. The text excerpts are accompanied by the participant's code ranging from p1 to p25 to ensure anonymity.

Figure 7
Download : Download high-res image (65KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Figure 7. Thematic Map.

7.3.1. Dimension 1: Goal Content
Three main themes pertaining to goal content were uncovered: professional development, university-related, and work-related.

7.3.1.1. Professional Development
For some participants, their career goal was related to preparing for admission in a professional development program: “to study civil law for the admission at the National Institute of Magistracy” (p15). For others, professional development was reflected by engaging in volunteering activities: “engage in volunteering activities for disadvantaged children” (p23). Participants also saw their career-related goals as a means for raising professional visibility: “obtaining an academic achievement by being accepted at a conference […]” (p21), “to finalize the paper for [the conference in] Bistrita” (p2), or “to write at least a 1000 thousand words article on my blog” (p11). The goals also included aspects related to establishing daily routines and improving work ethic: “waking up early to be able to start working at 8 am every day” (p1) or “reading at least 10 pages from a book per day” (p9).

7.3.1.2. University-Related
As several participants were students in the final year of bachelor or master levels, most of their career-goals focused on exam preparation, reading mandatory course materials, or working on assignments. Also, these goals were often linked to the upcoming exam period: “to start working for the final semester projects and prepare for exams” (p6), “to finish reading my immunology book” (p3), or “to pass all my current and failed exams” (p18). In addition, participants were also preoccupied with preparing their thesis: “to write 5 pages for my thesis” (p4), “to finalize the theoretical section for the thesis” (p14), “to write the introductory section for my thesis” (p24), or “to present to my supervisor the last chapter I wrote for my thesis” (p10).

7.3.1.3. Work-Related
Although most participants were still enrolled in university studies, some of them were already actively engaged in the job market by exploring their future options (e.g., “analyze my career options as a clinical psychologist”; p21), searching for jobs (e.g., “to find work”; p8), applying for work online (e.g., “to bid on two UpWork projects daily”; p1), or starting a new job (e.g., “to transition well into the new team”; p25). For participants who were already employed, goals focused more on job-related tasks: “to outperform my target at my new job” (p25) or “organize the SAP training for the new employees” (p14).

7.3.2. Dimension 2: Goal Characteristics
Pertaining to goal characteristics, four main themes were uncovered: time framing, goal status, goal-related affect, and performance orientation, defining process-relevant aspects of the career-goals set by the participants.

7.3.2.1. Time Framing
Participants’ goals included a time-frame for goal completion. For example, “to prepare myself for the CSR course project presentation on Friday” (p6) or “to publish a version of the app until 15 of May” (p1).

7.3.2.2. Goal Status
Some participants used the journal to assess their progress while pursuing their goals. For example, they reported if the goal was achieved “I read the vices of consent from the civil law manual” (p15), overachieved “I read the book and I also took notes for the exam. […]” (p3), partially achieved “Today I have only found one job offer on UpWork which I liked” (p1), still pursued “I have started working on the projects, but there is still work left” (p6), or not achieved “I have not read anything today” (p9).

7.3.2.3. Goal-Related Affect
During goal pursuit, some participants used the journal to express subjective experiences related to their goal striving, most often related to their success or failure. Our data reflected dichotomous emotional valence, namely satisfaction “I finalized the paper and I am very satisfied about the results” (p2) and dissatisfaction “I overcame one exam, but I did not study enough, and I am not content with myself. Tomorrow, I have another exam and still did not study enough […]” (p18). Also, some participants wrote about motivational aspects “To become what we want to be or what we could be is all that matters” (p13) or about their underlying beliefs for not achieving the desired outcome “I have read a quarter of the book. From Friday I felt sick and it was my excuse for sleeping all day.” (p20), “Today I made use of the learnt principle, I had an insight about positive thinking, and I achieved much more than I already planned for” (p11).

7.3.2.4. Performance Orientation
When the participants set their goals, they sometimes specified different criteria for goal completion. These ranged from self-others comparison, for example: “[my goal is] to study for the upcoming exam and be the best” (p12), objective measurable goals “to get at least an 8 at the pharmacology exam” (p13), or vaguely framed “to get high grades during the exam period” (p5).

8. Discussion
8.1. Commitment Making and Identification with Commitment Increased After Using the InstaGoal App
The quantitative results of the study suggest that the processes of commitment making and identification with commitment increased after using the app for four weeks. These results provide indication that the app might have helped young adults set meaningful career goals which better aligned with their values and beliefs system, leading to becoming more certain about their future career plans. This result builds upon Sharon and Zandbergen's findings (2017) who through a qualitative approach found that self-trackers construct their identity by crafting a personal narrative based on the meaning derived from their self-generated data. In our case, InstaGoal was designed to facilitate the setting of meaningful high goals using reflective questions about the underlying motivations of setting the goals, in line with Lee et al. (2015) and through subjective self-tracking. We believe that by providing young adults with the necessary tools for self-tracking, namely a goal history and journal, they could better diagnose what aspects of their goal pursuit should be optimized (Rooksby et al., 2014) and hence set subsequent goals which are better aligned with their values and capabilities. This is also in line with Doherty and Doherty's (2018) work on the three selves. Possibly, by providing the necessary tools to record their thoughts, feelings, and beliefs related to the pursued career goal in real time, and later use this information to self-reflect, the dissonance between the selves is reduced, resulting in better, more aligned goals (Doherty and Doherty, 2018). Moreover, it is important to note that changes associated with the use of InstaGoal app were found on both cycles of identity development, namely identity formation (i.e., commitment making) and identity evaluation (i.e., identification with commitment). This points to the fact that the app might have helped young adults not only to strengthen their commitment to goals, but also that these goals were in fact evaluated as self-meaningful, as their identification with commitment also increased.

8.2. Exploration In-Depth, Ruminative Exploration, and Performance Orientation
The quantitative analysis also found positive correlations between the performance orientation goal appraisal and the identity processes of exploration in depth and ruminative exploration, after using the app. This result might be explained by the fact that exploration in depth involves consulting with others about the commitments one has already made to gain a deeper understanding (Luyckx et al., 2006). Ruminative exploration has been previously found to be linked with performance goals (Flunger et al., 2016), which in turn revolve around comparing one's results on a goal with others’, providing precedent to our findings. In the next section, we will discuss the results of the thematic analysis and will look at the content of the goals in more detail, focusing on the tendency of some participants to set performance-oriented goals.

8.3. How do young adults use InstaGoal's features to define, pursue, monitor, and subjectively experience their career goals?
To better understand if InstaGoal's features were used as intended and how they could be improved in the future, a thematic analysis was conducted on the self-set goals of the users and on the journal entries. We charted users' subjective experience of goal-setting, in order to track goal themes that can inform future versions of the app. More specifically, we aimed at depicting a preliminary exploratory thematic map of young adults' career goals, which can inform the development of personalized tips for career goal management for future versions of the app. We looked at young people's goals and journal entries attached to their goals on two dimensions: goal content and goal characteristics. The goal content revealed that young adults viewed their careers as something that can be constantly improved by tweaking their habits, routines, and engaging in experimenting different work roles. Goals were related to young adults’ university studies, work- related tasks, and professional development. From a goal characteristic perspective, we identified that some participants set performance-oriented goals where the desired outcome was sometimes measurable (e.g., getting over 8 at an exam), sometimes focused on comparing oneself with others (e.g., be the best), but sometimes also vague (e.g., get a good grade at an exam). As psychology theories on goal-setting (Latham and Locke, 2007) emphasize that people perform better on well-defined high goals, a more refined version of the app could consider features that would help young adults define their goals even better, possibly including tips or reflective questions about measurable success criteria for the goals. Additionally, the thematic analysis revealed that young adults used the journal to track their progress, write down about the status of their goals, and sometimes write about their feelings related to the goal pursuit. These results showed that the journal was used both to track progress related feelings associated with their goal pursuit (i.e., satisfaction or dissatisfaction), but also objective measures of progress. Writing about objective measures of progress might have helped young adults boost their commitments by making them feel more accountable for their goal pursuit. This idea is also supported by the fact that the feelings of satisfaction or dissatisfaction were expressed in the same journal entries where progress, goal achievement, or goal failure was reported. These feelings were reported by young adults in conjunction with higher, more personally meaningful goals, which is in line with psychology findings that outline that high and meaningful goals bring more satisfaction when achieved than lesser goals (Wiese and Freund, 2005).

8.4. Theoretical and Practical Implications for HCI
Considering the previously discussed results, the present study brings important theoretical and practical contributions to the field of HCI. First, it brings into the attention of HCI the dual-cycle model of identity construction (Luyckx et al., 2006, Luyckx et al., 2008), which can be used as a framework for investigating the influence of apps or other apparatuses on individuals’ personal identity. Through the DIDS scale (Luyckx et al., 2006, Luyckx et al., 2008), this quantitative framework can be added to the existing toolset of qualitative methodologies already used in the HCI field to investigate the self in relation to computers. Second, using DIDS to test InstaGoal, the present study provides indication that apps may be created to help young adults develop their identity.

Third, the requirements for designing apps for identity elaborated during this study can be used as a starting point by other researchers or developers interested in this field. With respect to designing apps focused on increasing identity commitments, it is important to include features that enable users to self-reflect and think deeper about their motivations when setting a goal. In our case, we asked young adults to type and appraise their goals during goal commitment, to help them think deeper about the goal, thus filtering out meaningless alternative goals and focus on higher goals. In addition, InstaGoal featured a journal both to record young adults’ thoughts, feelings, and beliefs in real time and to provide the ability to read through and review the contents of the journal and goal history at any later time. This was designed to afford self-tracking and self-reflection and is in line with theories about the dissonance and drive to reduce dissonance between the three selves (Doherty and Doherty, 2018).

Fourth, through our thematic analysis we observed that young adults linked their most meaningful goals to emotional experiences. The thematic analysis also revealed that young adults used the app to track a variety of goals, ranging from short-term tasks related to work or their university studies to long-term career milestones, such as getting their first job or completing their studies. Therefore, the results indicate that online self-tracking apps, such as InstaGoal, may be used by young adults as an aid in addressing offline developmental tasks (i.e., preparing for a career or finding a job). For this reason, HCI research should consider further investigating identity processes in relation to digital technologies, potentially resulting in the creation of career counseling apps.

8.5. Limitations and Future Research
This exploratory study constitutes a first step towards designing a self-tracking app for strengthening young adults’ identity commitments, yet we recognize that the approach of the study has several limitations. First, even though young adults’ commitments were stronger after the app use period, the study can only report indications that InstaGoal app strengthened the identity commitments of young adults, due to the lack of a control group. Second, some features of the app such as setting goals and journals can also be afforded by a low-tech solution such as a physical pen-and-paper journal. The present study did not compare the efficacy of the app with a low-tech solution, but even if no significant difference was found, given that young adults use smartphones extensively (Gardner and Davis, 2013, Gordon et al., 2019; Livingstone, 2011; Third et al., 2017; Turkle, 2017), an app should at least be more convenient. Third, the present study used a convenience sampling method which resulted in a mostly female distribution of students all using Android smartphones. Thus, the results cannot be generalized, as we do not know if the findings would be the same on different distributions of young adults (e.g., non-female, non-students, or iOS users). Fourth, the requirements for the design of the app were theory-driven and decided by the research team without being validated through a user-centered design methodology, such as an iterative process where user feedback would be integrated into the app's design (Albert and Tullis, 2013). Also, the study did not employ any methods of assessing which requirements or features were the most important for achieving the goal of the study. Thus, the guidelines for design put forward by this study should be viewed only as a starting point with more work needed to refine them.

In light of the outlined limitations, future studies could improve on this work by employing an iterative user-centered design approach to refine and validate the guidelines put forward by the present study. Additional work could include employing interviews or focus groups with the app users and applying established usability assessments such as the USE Questionnaire (Lund, 2001), or reaction cards (e.g., ASSURANCE; Veral and Macías, 2019) to further iterate and refine on the design. In addition, a more diverse sample could be used to explore if different requirements should be considered for different user demographics. The results of the present study did not find any significant changes in identity exploration after using the app, thus a future study might also be interested in investigating how apps could be designed to also facilitate identity exploration and not only identity commitments. In the present study, mastery or performance motivations for pursuing career goals were only employed as goal appraisals to facilitate deeper thinking when setting goals. Future studies might want to expand on this by creating features specifically designed to encourage users towards a mastery or performance orientation for learning goals (Latham and Brown, 2006; Latham and Locke, 2007). Additionally, the present study only investigated creating apps for the career identity domain, leaving other domains such as romantic-relationships, family, friendships, educational, political, religious, or spiritual identity not investigated. Future studies could attempt to investigate if apps for other identity domains need to consider different design requirements or approaches. Additionally, InstaGoal was designed to only allow participants to pursue one goal at a time. This is not often the case in real life, where people usually follow multiple goals concurrently (Austin and Vancouver, 1996; Heckhausen et al., 2010, Kim et al., 2016, King, 2001, Kocielnik et al., 2018). Future studies might investigate if this feature of InstaGoal has a positive effect on identity commitment processes, in comparison to a version of the same app which allow multiple goals to be pursued at the same time.

9. Conclusion
This exploratory study contributes to the HCI research field by being the first to develop a self-tracking app for monitoring career personal goals and investigate its potential impact on identity commitment processes. The InstaGoal app included features designed to enable and encourage self-reflection, such as goal appraisals, reminders to engage, journal, and log of past use. The study included a quantitative analysis investigating identity processes and a thematic analysis focused on exploring the content and subjective meanings of young adults’ personal goals. Results showed that the identity processes of commitment making and identification with commitment increased after using the InstaGoal app, indicating that self-tracking apps represent a promising avenue for enhancing adaptive identity processes. The journal section aided participants to track goal's progress and to express their personal experiences and insights. The thematic analysis results also showed how versatile the InstaGoal app is, being used to track a variety of different goals and allowing users to log their thoughts and feelings along the way. By combining the identity processes theory from psychology and HCI research on self-tracking, this study brings to the fore a new lens of thinking about self-tracking apps focusing on identity processes.