This article explores cooperative communications for drone swarms which become an essential part of space-air-ground integrated networks (SAGINs), since drones (also called unmanned aerial vehicles) have the advantage of fast and flexible deployment. However, the rapid spread of drone applications leads to a dramatic increase in the spectrum and energy demand for drone communications, resulting in a shortage of spectrum and energy resources. Moreover, the inherent broadcast nature of radio propagation makes the air interface of drone communications extremely vulnerable to jamming and eavesdropping attacks, especially considering the fact that an unknown drone may sneak into a swarm for the purpose of intentionally interfering with or tapping confidential transmissions of the legitimate drones. As a consequence, a cooperative networking architecture is proposed for drone-swarm-aided SAGINs. A heterogeneous spectrum sharing mechanism is presented for drone communications to alleviate the spectrum shortage by dynamically identifying and accessing idle spectrum resources with the aid of spectrum sensing and inference. Physical-layer security is also examined for cooperative drone communications with limited energy supply. Finally, a wide range of potential applications of drone communications are pointed out, including emergency wireless networks, beyond 5G and 6G systems, and smart grid.
Introduction
Due to the exponentially growing wireless data traffic, cellular mobile networks have evolved to the fifth generation (5G) since their inception, continuously pursuing higher capacity and lower latency [1], [2], and play an irreplaceable role in the modern information society. However, terrestrial network infrastructures are fragile to natural disasters including earthquakes, typhoons, hail, and so on [3]. Moreover, during some large-scale meetings (e.g. important holidays, concerts, and sports events), the wireless data traffic is prone to experience temporarily explosive growth, which may cause network paralysis. Therefore, space-air-ground integrated networks (SAGINs) emerge as an effective means by comprehensively exploiting space, air, and terrestrial infrastructures to achieve ubiquitous communications, anytime and anywhere. In addition to global communications service, SAGINs are also expected to provide the capability of remote sensing, surveillance, navigation, positioning, timing, and so on.

Recently, drones, also called unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), are envisioned to play an important role in SAGINs. UAVs have a unique advantage of fast and flexible deployment for a variety of complex terrain environments [4]–[5][6]. In order to improve the network coverage of a single UAV, a swarm of massive drones (referred to as a drone swarm) is capable of providing wide area coverage with high capacity through cooperation among spatially distributed drones. Moreover, when some drones are destroyed by an adversary or malfunction (e.g., due to battery exhaustion), the remaining drones can continue to perform communications and networking tasks with the aid of self-organizing networks. Although drone swarm networks have promising prospects in broad application areas, there are many emerging problems to address. First, the exponentially growing UAV applications cause a dramatic increase in the spectrum demand for drone communications, which results in a shortage of spectrum resources for UAVs. Second, drones are usually powered by batteries, and the energy supply is very limited for drone swarm networks. Third, it is difficult to monitor unknown flying UAVs that may sneak into a drone swarm and launch physical-layer attacks (jamming, eavesdropping, etc.) on legitimate drone communications.

To be specific, with emerging UAV applications in military and civil fields, the demand for radio frequency resources has been growing explosively, causing the spectrum shortage problem for drone communications. To this end, a spectrum sensing and sharing enabled drone network is considered to alleviate the spectrum shortage by dynamically identifying and accessing idle spectrum resources [7], [8]. In wideband spectrum sensing, the amount of spectrum sampling data by the Nyquist sampling theorem is excessively huge to process. As a consequence, the compressed sensing theory was examined for wideband spectrum sensing by undersampling an observed spectrum at a lower sampling rate, where sparse signal estimation is needed to reconstruct the observed spectrum [9]. More recently, in [10], spectrum inference was studied as a promising means of predicting the future state of radio spectrum from the history of spectrum measurements by exploiting the temporal correlation of the spectrum with the help of machine learning algorithms.

In order to make full use of the limited UAV spectrum and energy resources, cooperative relay and beamforming techniques are employed for drone communications to improve the transmission reliability and throughput of drone swarm networks. For example, a UAV relay-based throughput optimization problem was formulated in [11] by jointly considering the motion trajectory and power allocation of cooperative drones. Due to the inherent broadcast nature of radio propagation, drone communications is vulnerable to wireless jamming and eavesdropping attacks, especially considering the fact that an unknown flying drone may sneak into a swarm, which would intentionally interfere with or tap confidential transmissions of the legitimate drones. In recent years, physical-layer security has received extensive research attention, emerging as a promising paradigm to achieve reliable and secure communications from an information-the-oretic perspective [12], [13]. There are also some research efforts devoted to physical-layer security for drone communications. In [14], a UAV-en-abled mobile relaying scheme was proposed to improve the secrecy of wireless communications, where the secrecy outage probability was analyzed.

Against this background, we are motivated to investigate cooperative drone communications for SAGINs. The main contributions of this article can be summarized as follows. First, a cooperative networking architecture is proposed for drone-swarm-aided SAGINs. Second, dynamic spectrum sharing is presented for drone communications, with an emphasis on spectrum sensing and inference. Moreover, energy-efficient secure drone communications are analyzed in the face of malicious unknown flying drones, in which the UAV trajectory optimization as well as the joint cooperation and cognition methods are discussed.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. We present cooperative networking for drone-swarm-aided SAGINs. Then drone-assist-ed cooperative spectrum sensing and inference strategies are discussed, where the predictability of spectrum state evolution is also analyzed. We focus on energy-efficient spectrum sharing for drone communications. Next, the physical-layer security is examined for drone swarm networks, where a wide range of potential applications of drone communications are presented. Finally, some concluding remarks are provided.

Cooperative Networking for Drone-Swarm-Aided SAGINs
Currently, SAGINs have evolved into the heterogeneous coexistence of various wireless systems, including not only cellular mobile networks such as 2G/3G/4G/5G, but also satellites and drone networks. In general, each of these wireless systems has different advantages and disadvantages. Specifically, terrestrial cellular networks provide wide area coverage with high data rates, which, however, are extremely vulnerable to natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes, typhoons, hail) and unable to deploy for sea environments. In contrast, satellite networks are capable of offering global network access, but with limited system capacity. Moreover, drone swarm networks are expected to provide wide area coverage with high capacity, but face an energy shortage problem due to the limited battery capacity of drones. In order to take advantage of different wireless systems, it is of great interest to examine effective integration of space, air, and ground networks, namely SAGINs.

Figure 1 demonstrates a cooperative networking architecture for drone-swarm-aided SAGINs consisting of space, air, and ground segments. As shown in Fig. 1, space satellites are networked via inter-satellite links, which not only offer global navigation, positioning, and timing services to air drones, terrestrial nodes, and ocean users, but also supply them with narrowband low-rate communications via space-to-ground links in open environments without severe shadowing from obstacles. Meanwhile, terrestrial base stations are employed to provide broadband high-rate communications for terrestrial users only. The air segment is composed of highly dynamic drones interconnected via inter-drone links, which offer broadband network access for complex terrains and oceans in which terrestrial base stations are unable to be deployed. The swarm size and topology of drones are adjusted according to the coverage requirement of ground users. It needs to be pointed out that the satellites and drones are generally connected to public or private networks via ground control centers that are also responsible for the operation and management of SAGINs.

Figure 1. - Cooperative networking architecture for drone-swarm-aided SAGINs.
Figure 1.
Cooperative networking architecture for drone-swarm-aided SAGINs.

Show All

In view of the above observations, the goal of seamless and broadband global communications is achieved through the cooperative networking of satellites, drones, and terrestrial systems. Typically, the performance of SAGINs can be improved by exploiting the cooperation among different heterogeneous wireless networks. For example, the so-called internetwork cooperation among heterogeneous networks is used to enhance the energy efficiency of wireless transmissions. Under the required data rate and outage probability constraints, it has been shown that the energy efficiency of internetwork cooperation is significantly improved as compared to intranetwork cooperation. Moreover, multi-antenna communications can also be utilized for the heterogeneous integration network architecture to further enhance the coverage of drone-swarm-aided SAGINs.

Generally, the overlapping coverage by utilizing drone-swarm-aided SAGINs significantly improves the system capacity and alleviates outage problems caused by the temporary surge of communications service or natural disasters. The SAGINs in Fig. 1 consist of various highly heterogeneous wireless networks, leading to an extremely complex electromagnetic environment. It is necessary to develop a seamless heterogeneous network architecture that supports cooperative sharing of network resources for the sake of realizing the three-dimensional wide area coverage. By considering topology dynamics of distributed drones as well as the spatial deployment of ground control centers, the heterogeneous network resource sharing of drone-swarm-aid-ed SAGINs should be developed and optimized under the quality of service (QoS) requirements of ground users. Furthermore, given that the same spectrum resources are shared among different wireless systems in SAGINs to improve the spectrum utilization, the co-channel interference has to be minimized below a tolerable level. In SAGINs, line of sight (LoS) propagation paths are often available for space-to-air, space-to-ground, and air-to-ground channels, which are characterized by the shadowed Rician model. Different from the non-LoS (NLoS) propagation characteristics in terrestrial networks in which the co-channel interference decays quickly with an increase of the propagation distance, the LoS propagation path causes the co-channel interference to attenuate at a much slower rate. It is thus of interest to explore the relationship between the network interference of SAGINs and QoS of users as well as to seek interference suppression and coordination methods to improve the performance of SAGINs. To this end, combining multi-antenna beamforming and millimeter-wave communications for drone swarms is an effective way to alleviate co-channel interference, since sidelobe interference can be substantially suppressed with multi-antenna beamforming, especially operated in millimeter waves.

Drone-Assisted Cooperative Wideband Spectrum Sensing and Inference
This section is focused on the fast and reliable spectrum sensing and inference achieved by exploiting drones for the sake of accurately identifying the so-called spectrum hole. In general, the spectrum sensing accuracy is improved with more spectrum measurements (e.g., by increasing the spatial density of sensing nodes). However, overly dense sensing nodes result in redundant spectrum observations to be reported to a fusion center, which would consume precious bandwidth resources. Moreover, due to the fact that the radio spectrum state (RSS) varies with time, spectrum sensing is only used to acquire the current state of the radio spectrum. After obtaining the RSS through spectrum sensing, some relevant system parameters of wireless networks are subsequently optimized but with outdated RSS, since the status of the observed spectrum may encounter a new change due to its time-varying nature. In this way, the optimization process of wireless communications systems relying on spectrum sensing cannot obtain the latest RSS in time. In view of the aforementioned facts, it is of interest to study drone-as-sisted cooperative compressed spectrum sensing by exploiting the multidimensional sparseness of the wideband spectrum in a joint spatial, time, and frequency domain to minimize the amount of drone spectrum samples under the constraint of spectrum sensing accuracy. Also, it is important to investigate the predictability of the RSS evolution as well as the spectrum reasoning and inference methodologies through the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning.

Figure 2 shows a system model of drone-as-sisted cooperative spectrum sensing, where an LoS propagation path is typically available in an air-to-ground link. In contrast, severe shadowing is often encountered at a ground receiver due to the NLoS propagation effect. As shown in Fig. 2, a terrestrial wireless network consists of a number of base stations, access points, and user terminals. In order to obtain RSS measurements in 3D space, one not only can exploit the drones to collect spectrum observations through air-to-ground links, but also make full use of the ground user terminals for acquiring spectrum states. The spectrum measurements from both the air-to-ground and ground-to-ground links are jointly processed in a fusion center to estimate the spectrum occupancy. Considering the low spectrum usage in practical systems, most of the spectrum bands are idle at a certain time, which implies that the wideband spectrum is sparse in terms of the occupancy state. In addition, the base stations of Fig. 2 are usually distributed at few places, which means that the spatial distribution of radio signal sources from the base stations is also sparse. Therefore, exploiting multidimensional sparsity of the spectrum at both the air and ground receivers is capable of achieving a trade-off between the sensing accuracy and observation redundancy.

Figure 2. - Illustration of drone-assisted cooperative spectrum sensing.
Figure 2.
Illustration of drone-assisted cooperative spectrum sensing.

Show All

Different from the spectrum sensing module, spectrum inference utilizes historical spectrum measurements to predict the future RSS by exploiting the intrinsic correlation among the spectrum states, through which a wireless system is able to obtain the RSS in advance and adjust its own parameters in time to track the RSS dynamics. Typically, the RSS evolution is mainly affected by the human behavior of using the radio spectrum, which possess randomness in nature and may be modeled by the Markov chain. To quantitatively analyze the predictability of RSS dynamics, it is necessary to investigate the measurement theory of dynamic spectrum changes by jointly taking into account the predictable regularity and unpredictable random factors. In [10], the predictability of RSS dynamics was explored in some popular spectrum bands, including a TV band from 614 to 698 MHz, an industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) band from 2400.1 to 2483.3 MHz, an uplink band for the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) from 1710.2 to 1784.8 MHz, and a GSM downlink band from 1820.2 to 1875.4 MHz. Despite the built-in human behavior randomness of using the radio spectrum, it was shown in [10] that the predictability probability is more than 90 percent for real-world RSS dynamics over the aforementioned TV, ISM, and GSM bands. Furthermore, the spectrum inference and predication can be achieved using machine learning algorithms (e.g., Bayesian network reasoning and multi-layer neural networks), which generally need a massive amount of training data and high computational complexity for an improved sensing accuracy.

In addition to identifying the spectrum occupancy state, it is also of interest to extract the radio signal characteristics from electromagnetic observations, including the radio frequency fingerprint, carrier frequency, bandwidth, waveform, modulation mode, and so on. These inner characteristics of radio signals are often built in the space, time, and frequency domains. In order to extract the radio signal characteristics effectively, one may need massive training datasets, using which the original electromagnetic spectrum observations can be distinguished with the help of convolutional neural networks. In the case without training data, deep learning may be employed to realize fast and reliable extraction of key features of heterogeneous electromagnetic signals.

Energy-Efficient Drone-Enabled Spectrum Sharing Communications
This section discusses energy-efficient spectrum sharing for drone communications to improve the spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency. Typically, there are two main spectrum sharing strategies [7], namely overlay spectrum sharing (OSS) and underlay spectrum sharing (USS). To be specific, in the OSS mechanism, a drone swarm network first detects whether a frequency band is occupied or idle through spectrum sensing and inference. If a spectrum hole is detected, the drone network can transmit over the detected spectrum hole. Otherwise, the drone network continues to monitor the frequency band until an available spectrum hole is found. However, due to the presence of adverse factors such as multipath fading, interference, and noise, the mis-detection and false alarm of a spectrum hole are inevitable in the spectrum sensing and inference. For example, when a transmitter emits a radio signal over a frequency band to be detected, the corresponding observed signal at a drone receiver may be too weak to be detectable (e.g., due to a deep shadowed fading), which misjudges the detected band as a spectrum hole. In this way, the drone network would start signal transmission at the falsely detected spectrum hole, which leads to mutual interference between the spectrum sharing systems.

In contrast, the USS mechanism allows the spectrum sharing systems to transmit over the same frequency band simultaneously with the aid of power control for limiting the mutual interference. For instance, a drone network and a cellular network can access a spectrum band at the same time, as long as the interference induced by the drone network is below a tolerable level for the QoS guarantee. As a consequence, for both the OSS and USS strategies, a certain mutual interference would occur between the spectrum sharing systems. As aforementioned, the drone communications network usually has LoS propagation paths, which are adverse to the attenuation of spectrum-sharing mutual interference, posing new challenges for the interference suppression in drone-enabled spectrum sharing systems. Typically, mutual interference can be suppressed using multi-antenna beamforming with reduced leakage of sidelobe interference. Considering the fact that drones are generally powered by batteries with limited energy supply, the drone network is also an energy-constrained system. In view of the above issues, it is of interest to explore joint optimization of the energy efficiency and spectrum efficiency for drone spectrum sharing networks while guaranteeing the transmission QoS.

As shown in Fig. 3, a spectrum sharing system is composed of ground device-to-device (D2D) users and an aerial drone-enabled mobile relay that is used to assist the data transmission between a ground transmitter and receiver. Moreover, the ground D2D pairs may share spectrum resources with the drone relay for the sake of improving spectrum efficiency. It is pointed out that the available spectrum resources, wireless interference, and propagation path loss change over the time, space and frequency domains in such a drone mobile communications environment. Therefore, by optimizing the trajectory of drone motion in Fig. 3, drone-enabled mobile relay dynamically moves to a favorable place with relatively abundant spectrum resources, weak interference, and small path loss for the sake of achieving a better trade-off between spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency. In this manner, an optimal trajectory of the drone mobile relay is found for energy-efficient spectrum sharing communications.

Figure 3. - System model for a drone spectrum sharing communications system.
Figure 3.
System model for a drone spectrum sharing communications system.

Show All

In addition to the optimization of drone trajectory, both the cooperation and cognition technologies can be jointly applied to improve the energy efficiency of drone communications with a given QoS guarantee. Compared to the pure cooperation and pure cognition methods, the joint cognition and cooperation scheme is capable of reducing energy consumption. It needs to be pointed out that most of the existing work is focused on the energy efficiency of cooperative cognitive communications for conventional cellular networks, which also has great potential in the drone communications network. It is of interest to explore energy-efficient cooperative and cognitive communications in drone-enabled spectrum sharing systems, with an emphasis on the spectrum sharing interference modeling and suppression in LoS propagation environments.

Secrecy Energy Efficiency of Cooperative Drone Networks
In this section, physical-layer security is investigated for cooperative drone networks with energy constraints. Drones can be deployed rapidly in complex terrains to provide wireless emergency communications, which are widely used in various industries, including geological exploration, smart agriculture, disaster recovery and relief, and so on. With the popular application of drones in daily life, unknown flying drones emerge endlessly, which are difficult to effectively monitor. Meanwhile, unknown flying drones may initiate malicious attacks on legitimate drone networks. Specifically, an unknown flying drone may sneak into a legitimate drone swarm and wait to launch physical-layer attacks (e.g., wireless jamming and eavesdropping), which affects the reliability and confidentiality of information transmissions among the legitimate drones. Moreover, a drone jammer not only degrades the reliability of legitimate drone transmissions, but also artificially makes a change to the radio spectrum state, which further generates negative effects on the spectrum sensing and inference of legitimate drones.

In addition, although cooperation among spatially distributed drones is capable of forming virtual antenna arrays and thus improving the throughput of drone communications, it would pose potential security and privacy threats to legitimate drone transmissions. For example, a legitimate drone joining a cooperative drone network may be captured by an adversary, and such an infected drone node would easily tap (even tamper with) confidential transmissions of the other cooperative drones. Existing research efforts on wireless physical-layer security are devoted to employing advanced signal processing techniques (e.g., multiantenna beamforming, multiuser scheduling, and cooperative relaying) for improving the secrecy capacity in fading environments. However, physical-layer security has not been studied for highly dynamic drone networks against jamming and eavesdropping attacks launched by unknown flying drones. Therefore, it is necessary to examine physical-layer security attacks and countermeasures for cooperative drone spectrum sharing systems in the presence of malicious unknown flying drones.

Figure 4 illustrates an ad hoc drone network coexisting with a ground wireless network in the face of hybrid eavesdropping and jamming attacks launched by unknown flying drones, where the aerial drone network shares the spectrum resources with the ground network. As shown in Fig. 4, the ground wireless network includes a base station equipped with multiple antennas and N single-antenna user terminals. Moreover, the aerial drone network is composed of M drone pairs in the face of two malicious unknown flying drones. In the aerial wireless network, M drone transmitters cooperate with each other and send their confidential information to respective legitimate drone receivers. Due to the inherent broadcast nature of radio propagation, an unknown flying drone eavesdropper may overhear signal transmissions from the legitimate drones, while a drone jammer is able to emit interference for worsening the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) of the legitimate drone receivers. In order to improve the physical-layer security of aerial drone communications, artificial noise can be designed in the null space of the legitimate channel spanning from a drone transmitter to its desired receiver, which is capable of interfering with the unknown flying drone eavesdropper without affecting the drone receivers. Following the physical-layer security literature [12], a sum secrecy rate of the ad hoc drone communications network of Fig. 4 is given by
Rs=B∑m=1M[log2[(1+γs,m)−log2(1+γe,m)],(1)
View SourceRight-click on figure for MathML and additional features.where B denotes the transmission bandwidth, and γs,m and γe,m represent the SINR of the legitimate Mth drone receiver and that of the drone eavesdropper, respectively. Moreover, a secrecy energy efficiency in bits per Joule is defined as a ratio of the sum secrecy rate of the ad hoc drone network to the total transmit power of drones, namely
η=Rs∑m=1MPs,m+MPmin,(2)
View Sourcewhere M is the number of drone pairs, Pmin represents the minimum power consumption needed to drive the basic circuit of a drone transmitter, and Ps,m denotes the transmit power of the Mth drone transmitter. A secrecy energy efficiency optimization problem is constructed under a constraint of the maximum allowable total transmit power of drones for maximizing the secrecy energy efficiency subjected to the total power consumption constraint, that is,
∑m=1MPs,m≤Pmax,
View SourceRight-click on figure for MathML and additional features.where Pmax denotes the maximum allowable total transmit power of M drone transmitters. Such an optimization problem can be addressed through the use of semi-definite programming and relaxation as well as convex optimization. Compared to equal power allocation, the secrecy energy efficiency of the cooperative power allocation solution to the aforementioned optimization problem is expected to be significantly improved.

Figure 4. - An ad hoc drone communications network in the face of hybrid eavesdropping and jamming attacks launched by unknown flying drones.
Figure 4.
An ad hoc drone communications network in the face of hybrid eavesdropping and jamming attacks launched by unknown flying drones.

Show All

Potential Applications of Drone Communications
This section is focused on the discussion of UAV applications for emergency communications networks, B5G/6G systems, and smart grid. Also, some potential challenges in these drone communications scenarios are presented along with the corresponding countermeasures.

Emergency Communications Networks
Emergency wireless networks are considered as an effective means to guarantee real-time communications for certain environments with insufficient network infrastructures or even without any infrastructures (e.g., post-disaster areas). Presently, the deployment of wireless emergency networks mainly relies on communications vehicles and satellites. However, it is extremely challenging to deploy emergency communications vehicles in complex terrain environments, such as earthquake-stricken regions and flood areas. In contrast, space satellites are capable of offering global communications for any terrain, but their system capacity per unit area is very limited, and cannot meet the demand for broadband emergency communications requirements. Considering the fact that drones have the advantage of fast and flexible deployment for complex environments, a swarm of drones is generally recognized as a promising aerial platform to provide broadband wireless network access.

In order to offer wide area coverage with high data rate, a large number of spatially distributed drones should be networked in an effective manner. Cellular networking as a centralized design paradigm is efficient and widely adopted in mobile communications systems, where the same frequency is repeatedly reused among spatially separated cochannel cells located in different geographical areas. As long as spatial distances between the cochannel cells are far enough, the cochannel interference is considered to be negligible. It is pointed out that the LoS propagation path is often available for drone communications, which makes co-channel interference decay with the propagation distance in drone networks at a much slower rate than that in terrestrial mobile networks with NLoS propagation, where LoS propagation is rare. This brings a severe cochannel interference issue in drone networking, which can be alleviated by using millimeter-wave communications, since millimeter waves attenuate very rapidly with respect to the propagation distance.

Cellular Mobile Systems
Cellular mobile communications systems have evolved to 5G, whose standardization process has been finalized. To date, the commercial deployment of 5G has started in many countries, including China, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Finland, and so on. Although 5G is able to provide a peak data rate up to 10 Gb/s [15], it still cannot support global communications and ultra-high data rate services such as virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR). To this end, beyond 5G (B5G) and next-generation (6G) cellular networsk are expected to be ultra-dense and extremely heterogeneous offering a peak data rate up to 1 Tb/s and global network access by integrating space satellites with the terrestrial infrastructure. A drone communications network, as an essential component of SAGINs, has great potential for enhancing the network coverage of future B5G and 6G systems.

To meet the ultra-high data rate requirement, terahertz communications is considered as a promising technique to potentially be adopted by B5G/6G, since terahertz spectrum contains a very broad frequency bandwidth approximately spanning from 0.1 THz to 10 THz. Typically, as the radio frequency increases, increasing path loss is encountered. As a result, the coverage area of a terahertz-enabled base station is narrow due to the fast attenuation of terahertz wave propagation, which can be extended with the aid of a drone node acting as a relay station. Also, drones are employed as aerial base stations to provide extra network coverage for capacity boosting in order to address the issue of temporarily surging data traffic (e.g., in certain big meeting events of holiday gatherings and concerts).

Electrical Power Grid
Nowadays, the current electrical power grid is expected to evolve into the emerging smart grid, which integrates the communications infrastructure with sensing and energy management technologies. Drones can be leveraged in the smart grid for improving the efficiency and reliability of electrical power systems. There are two specific application scenarios, namely drone-assisted power line inspection and power emergency communications. The former considers the employment of drones to collect images of electrical power line components for inspecting and monitoring the power transmission system, while the latter utilizes drones acting as mobile aerial base stations to offer wireless network coverage for the power grid.

More specifically, drone-assisted power line inspection includes power transmission tower screening, power line corridor checking, and power network damage assessment. Despite the use of drones having the benefits of improving inspection efficiency and reducing personal injury risk, there are some open challenges in drone-as-sisted power line inspection, such as the safety of drone navigation, prolonging drone endurance, and drone image recognition. To this end, the drone cruising trajectory is optimized to maximize the energy efficiency according to the distribution of inspected power lines. Meanwhile, deep learning can be used to enhance the accuracy of power line fault diagnosis based on the images captured by drones. Additionally, drones also play an important role in electric power emergency communications systems. A swarm of drones is utilized to construct a wireless network in electric power systems for ensuring communications requirements of the smart grid, where the spatial deployment of drones is determined by maximizing the network coverage with the constraint on energy consumption of drones.

Conclusion
In this article, the cooperative drone communications is studied for SAGINs with limited drone energy and spectrum supply. A cooperative networking architecture is first proposed for drone-swarm-aid-ed SAGINs. Then the drone-assisted cooperative spectrum sensing and inference are discussed along with the predictability analysis of the radio spectrum state evolution. Next, energy-efficient drone-enabled spectrum sharing communications is examined by allowing the drones to dynamically identify and access idle spectrum resources, where the drone trajectory optimization is taken into account for improving the energy efficiency of drone communications with a given QoS guarantee. The secrecy energy efficiency is maximized for cooperative drone networks in the face of malicious unknown flying drone attacks. In the future, it is expected to explore drone swarms for emergency communications networks, cellular mobile systems, and electrical power grid.