The aerial platform based wide-area Internet of Things (WAIoT) can effectively settle wireless information interactions in emergency scenarios. However, it confronts lots of unprecedented service requirements and technical challenges. To solve these issues, this article establishes an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based WAIoT deployment framework by considering three typical scenarios including power outage, massive user connections, and information island relief. Serving as an aerial base station or mobile relay, the UAV provides simultaneous information and energy transfer for IoT users with the consideration of user distribution range, massive user connections, and quality of service (QoS) requirements. For each scenario, the joint UAV deployment and resource allocation scheme is designed to improve the system performance, and some numerical results are presented for validation. This article aims to provide continuous services for users in the emergency scenario through optimizing the aerial platform deployment.

Introduction
With the emergence of technologies such as intelligent transportation, smart cities, Industry 4.0, and virtual and augmented reality, the Internet of Things (IoT) has become the driving force of industrial technology innovation. In the future, IoT will need to support greater access capabilities, higher resource efficiency, and wider service areas. These pressing needs not only entail the promotion of computer science and Internet technology, but also rely more on advanced wireless communication technologies and network architectures [1]. Although the fifth generation (5G) network can solve crucial IoT technical issues such as wide-area coverage, spectrum efficiency, and massive connections by actively promoting cognitive radio, millimeter-wave (mmWave), beamforming, uplink/downlink decoupling, and other technologies, large-scale 5G network deployment is costly and incurs expensive infrastructure expenditure due to dense base station (BS) deployment, backhaul network construction, and so on. At the same time, it is also difficult for the ground-based network to cover inaccessible areas such as extremely remote areas, oceans, sky, and even deep space. Accordingly, the 5G network has difficulty in meeting the ubiquitous communication needs of a vastly expanded network space. One of the 6G visions is to establish an integrated space-air-ground network with coverage expansion [2]. As the intermediate layer between the space-based and ground-based networks, the air-based network, formed by high-altitude platforms and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), plays an important role in coverage enhancement, enabling edge services and flexible network reconfiguration. Thanks to the reduced cost, fast networking, high agility, and enhanced airborne equipment, the on-demand deployment of UAV-based wide-area Internet of Things (WAIoT) for emergency scenarios has become a consensus in academia and industry.

Different from the ground-based wireless network, the three-dimensional freedom of UAVs as the aerial platform provides a brand-new dimension in designing and modeling WAIoT. Currently, the existing research efforts mainly focus on the UAV flight path optimization with system throughput and outage probability as the performance metrics [3], [4]. However, the harsh communication environment in emergency scenarios brings technical challenges to the information interaction of IoT between the afflicted area and external BS. Firstl, power outage after severe disasters will lead to failure of energy-limited IoT devices in communication and endurance, resulting in a negative impact on rescue efforts. In recent years, it has been confirmed to be feasible that the directional energy beam formed by large-scale antenna arrays can be used for wireless energy transfer (WET) to small mobile devices [5]. Meanwhile, large-scale mmWave antenna arrays can be mounted on a UAV at a very small size, and perform WET by energy beamforming due to the high directivity and short wavelength of mmWave [6]. Then, to collect a great deal of information from the afflicted area, massive connections should be performed subject to the limited spectrum. Fortunately, non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) has been proposed to enhance spectrum efficiency and user connections by allowing multiple users to occupy the same resource block simultaneously [7]. Finally, the afflicted area will degrade into a weak communication area or even an information island. In this case, it is important to establish a relay link between the afflicted area and external BS by deploying UAVs. Especially in the scenario of vehicle mobile rescue, it is necessary to consider the mobility of the IoT terminals in UAV deployment. Nevertheless, most of the existing works have focused on static users without considering user mobility, thus not conforming to a realistic scenario.

In view of pressing needs on reliable endurance, system capacity, information relaying, and user mobility in an afflicted area without power supply, this article proposes a UAV-based WAIoT deployment architecture for emergency scenarios. First, three typical scenarios including power outage, massive user connections, and information island relief are considered to collect information from IoT users in emergency communication. Then we establish the UAV-based network models for the three scenarios by considering WET, NOMA, multi-UAV collaboration, and UAV relaying in WAIoT, and give some simulation results to verify the model performance. Finally, we look ahead at the technical challenges and open issues in UAV-based WAIoT, and then conclude the article.

UAV-Based Wide-Area IoT Deployment Architecture
We consider awful situations where the terrestrial communication infrastructure in an afflicted area is completely destroyed, and ground users can only communicate with the external BS through UAV. For convenience, we use user to represent a user, device, or terminal of an IoT system. The proposed UAV-based WAIoT deployment architecture is demonstrated in Fig. 1, which comprises the following three typical scenarios.

Figure 1. - General UAV-based WAIoT architecture.
Figure 1.
General UAV-based WAIoT architecture.

Show All

Power Outage Scenario
According to the user distribution range, the power outage scenario is divided into two cases.

Case 1: Dense User Distribution
The coverage of this scenario is small, where one UAV is capable of serving the afflicted area. To achieve more flexible resource allocation, the UAV leverages subcarriers for simultaneous wireless information and energy transfer (SWIPT) to the users, while the users send the collected data to the UAV with the harvested energy.

Case 2: Wide-Area User Distribution
The coverage of this scenario is large, where multiple UAVs should be dispatched to cover the afflicted area. These UAVs send wireless signals simultaneously to the users, while the users harvest energy from the signals and send the collected data to the UAV with the harvested energy.

Although WET may extend user endurance, the practical effect of WET also depends on the communication protocol and network configuration. If multiple UAVs are deployed in Case 1, not only will the WET efficiency be reduced, but also severe co-channel interference will be generated. Therefore, a multicarrier-based single UAV can be deployed to enhance the granularity and flexibility of resource allocation and improve system efficiency. If a single UAV is deployed in Case 2, the long-distance UAV flight will result in a large service delay for a far user, which is inappropriate for the demands of emergency communication. In contrast, multi-UAV collaboration for serving users can not only shorten the service delay but also improve the QoS of edge users (EUs), which is conducive to comprehensive information collection in the afflicted area.

Massive User Connections Scenario
Case 3: Massive User Connections
As a power outage occurs, the UAV needs to handle a large amount of user connection requests. Thus, the UAV deployment must satisfy the needs of massive user connections for reliable information collection. Similar to the power outage scenario, energy transfer and information collection are performed in the subslots of downlink and uplink, respectively.

The subslots should be allocated reasonably to strike a balance between energy harvesting and information collection. Due to the limited spectrum, orthogonal multiple access (OMA) is incapable of providing exclusive resource blocks to massive numbers of users. In contrast, NOMA will improve spectral efficiency substantially by sending the signals of different users with different power levels over the same resource block. Since the decoding complexity of NOMA increases linearly with the number of users, the limited airborne digital signal processing (DSP) capability will greatly restrain NOMA performance. Moveover, in emergency scenarios, user fairness must be considered instead of the overall performance improvement. Hence, a clustered NOMA (C-NO-MA) strategy is expounded later.

Information Island Relief Scenario
Case 4: Information Island Relief
When the afflicted area is far away from the terrestrial infrastructure, it will become an information island without line-of-sight (LoS) links with the external BS due to terrain and obstacles. Hence, a UAV relaying link should be established between the afflicted area and the external BS. The BS sends information to the UAV, and then the UAV forwards the information to the users.

In the first two cases, the UAV is deployed over the afflicted area to serve as an aerial BS. In Case 3, the UAV is deemed a mobile relay to forward the information between the afflicted area and the external BS. In the case of mobile vehicle rescue, UAV relay for mobile users should be adopted. Motivated by this, Case 4 considers that the UAVs may serve multiple mobile users moving along specific routes and use subcarriers to perform flexible user scheduling and resource allocation.

In the following sections, we offer four paradigms to present the UAV-based WAIoT deployment architecture. Then we demonstrate the superiority of the proposed schemes to the benchmark counterparts.

Power Outage
In Cases 1 and 2, single and multiple UAVs are utilized to serve users distributed in different ranges, respectively. The UAV transfers wireless power to the users in the downlink, while the users send the collected data to the UAV in the uplink. Our goal is to maximize the minimum uplink rate of all the users. By setting appropriate parameters, some numerical results are presented to verify the system performance.

Single-UAV-Based Wireless-Powered Multicarrier IoT
System Description
As demonstrated in Case 1 of Fig. 1, a UAV serves multiple users without energy storage during the flight period T. The maximum flying speed is denoted by Vmax. Assume that the UAV and users are mounted with a single antenna. The UAV flight altitude H is restricted by the following facts:

H should be within the maximum allowable distance for WET.

H should be larger than the maximum height of the terrain and obstacles.

Path loss needs to be reduced as much as possible.

To facilitate analysis, T is divided into N time slots using the discrete linear state space approximation technique, and each time slot is further divided into two subslots for uplink and downlink, respectively. By setting N to a large value, the position and channel state of the UAV can be approximately considered to be known and fixed in each time slot. The UAV sends the signals over M subcarriers to the users in the downlink subslot for simultaneous energy and information transfer, and then the users send the collected data to the UAV with the harvested energy.

Numerical Results and Discussions
The parameters are set as follows. Four users are randomly located in an area of 250×250 m2. T=20 s, N=50, H=200 m, Vmax=50 m/s, and M=16. The UAV adopts an initial circular flight path. Numerical results are presented in Fig. 2. As demonstrated in Fig. 2a, to enhance channel gains and improve the achievable rate, the UAV always flies to each user by the flight path optimization. As illustrated in Fig. 2b, the achievable rate for each user notably improves except for user 3. Although the rate of user 3 has a slight decrease, the rate of other users significantly increases.

Figure 2. - Simulation results: a) Optimized flight path; b) Uplink achievable rate.
Figure 2.
Simulation results: a) Optimized flight path; b) Uplink achievable rate.

Show All

Multi-UAV Based Wireless-Powered IoT
System Description
As shown in Case 2 of Fig. 1, two UAVs serve K users. To fully utilize spectrum resources, the UAVs and users share the same frequency band. The UAVs transfer power to the users in the downlink and suffer from co-channel interference in the uplink. We design a cyclic time-division multiple access (TDMA)-based user scheduling protocol. In one uplink subslot, each UAV is only associated with one user, and each user is allowed to send information to its associated UAV. In addition, the minimum distance dmin between the UAVs for collision avoidance should be satisfied.

Numerical Results and Discussions
The parameters are set as follows. K=6 users are randomly distributed in an area of 1×1 km2.T=50s, N=50, Vmax=50 m/s, and dmin=10 m. The transmit power budget of the UAVs is P=0.1 W. The circle packing method is adopted to determine the initial UAV flight path.

Figure 3a presents the optimized UAV flight path. It is observed that the UAV not only tends to reduce the communication distance from its associated user from slot 35 to slot 50, but also expands the distance from the other UAV from slot 25 to slot 35 in order to mitigate co-channel interference. Figure 3b illustrates the actual speeds of the UAVs. To improve the channel gain of the associated user, UAV 2 decreases the speed when it approaches the served users at slot 12 and slot 30, especially from slot 42 to slot 47, it hovers over user 6 by reducing the speed to 0. In addition, UAV 1 can sufficiently approach user 1 and user 2 by augmenting the values of T or Vmax. Figure 3c illustrates the uplink achievable rate for each user. Although the achievable rates for user 3 and user 6 decrease, the minimum rate substantially increases from 0.028 b/s/Hz to 0.678 b/s/Hz, and the sum rate of all the users increases from 3.077 b/s/Hz to 4.7156 b/s/Hz, which indicates a significant system performance improvement.

Figure 3. - Simulation results: a) Optimized UAV flight path; b) Actual UAV flying speed; c) Uplink achievable rate.
Figure 3.
Simulation results: a) Optimized UAV flight path; b) Actual UAV flying speed; c) Uplink achievable rate.

Show All

Further Discussions
The two schemes aforementioned are designed for extreme situations in terms of network architecture, communication protocol, and resource allocation. If there is a surviving BS with available wireless backhaul in the afflicted area, the UAV can be deployed to serve EUs for energy and information transfer. In [8], multiple UAVs were deployed to improve the throughput of EUs, and an enhanced K-means user clustering scheme was proposed to guarantee each cluster to be served by one UAV. The backhaul capacity between the UAV and the terrestrial infrastructure is significant to solve the UAV-based networks, which needs to be investigated in the future work.

Massive User Connections
Since the WAIoT needs to support millions of users per square kilometer, the available spectrum resources for WAIoT are becoming increasingly scarce. The traditional OMA such as frequency division multiple access (FDMA) is incapable of satisfying the need of WAIoT for massive connections due to its exclusive occupation of resource blocks. With the development of DSP technology, NOMA is deemed as a promising technology to achieve massive connections. Compared to the OMA, power-domain NOMA (PD-NOMA) is easy to implement with superior performance for the dense uplink connection scenario.

UAV-Based Wireless-Powered IoT with Cluster NOMA
System Description
A cluster NOMA (C-NOMa) strategy is presented to decrease the decoding complexity at the receiver while ensuring the system performance. As shown in Fig. 4a, all the users are divided into P clusters, each of which contains Q users. The intra-cluster users use NOMA to improve multi-user access capability and inter-cluster users adopt OFDMA to ensure the fairness between clusters. Our goal is to maximize the uplink sum rate of all the users subject to the rate constraint for each time slot.

Figure 4. - System model and simulation results: a) System model; b) Optimized UAV flight path; c) Uplink sum rate for different optimization schemes; d) Uplink sum rate for different multiple access schemes.
Figure 4.
System model and simulation results: a) System model; b) Optimized UAV flight path; c) Uplink sum rate for different optimization schemes; d) Uplink sum rate for different multiple access schemes.

Show All

Numerical Results and Discussions
The parameters are set as follows. K=6 users are randomly located in an area of 250×250m2.P=3,Q=2, T=25s, N=50, Vmax=30m/s and RT=2.5bps/Hz. The maximum transmit power of UAV is P=0.1W. The system bandwidth is B=3 MHz and the bandwidth for each cluster is 1MHz. The UAV adopts an initial circular flight path. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 4.

The optimized UAV flight path is illustrated in Fig. 4b. It can be seen that the UAV reduces the flight radius due to the constraints of flight period and maximum speed, but it still fly close to each user to improve channel conditions. Figure 4c compares the uplink achievable sum rate between the following optimization schemes. Scheme 1: C-NOMA based joint optimization scheme; Scheme 2: UAV flight path optimization for the fixed subslot duration; Scheme 3: subslot optimization for initial circular flight path; Scheme 4: initial circular flight path for the fixed subslot duration. For Scheme 2 and Scheme 4, we set the length of downlink and uplink subslots to be half of the system time slot. It is evident that the proposed Scheme 1 outperforms the other schemes. Figure 4d illustrates the uplink sum rate for different multiple access schemes. It is clear that the proposed C-NOMA is significantly superior to OFDMA.

Further Discussions
Besides NOMA, device-to-device (D2D) technology also offers a novel design aspect for the WAIoT with massive user connections [9]. Essentially, when the UAV is deployed to serve users, the network performance is restricted by the user with the weakest channel condition. Fortunately, D2D technology supporting direct communications of adjacent users can effectively reduce the traffic load of the UAV. By developing the routing protocol between D2D devices elaborately, the user with good channel condition can be selected as the “source user.” The UAV just communicates with the associated source user, while other users with weak channel condition can receive the desired data by sharing information with the neighboring source user. Therefore, the UAV will connect with all the users by communicating with a small number of source users, which expands the user connections in an indirect way. Furthermore, the combination of NOMA and D2D can give play to their respective advantages. Wang et al. [10] proposed D2D-enhanced UAV-NOMA network to support data distribution services. The UAV distributes data blocks to D2D users using NOMA, while the D2D users share the data to expand the user connections. As the future work, the joint optimization of user clustering, data sharing and UAV flight path is a challenging task for UAV-NOMA based D2D networks.

Information Island Relief
When the afflicted area become an information island, the UAV based relaying link will become one possible way for the information interaction between the afflicted area and external infrastructure. We build a UAV-enabled relaying link from the external BS to the afflicted area for serving multiple affected users. In particular, the user mobility and relaying information causality are taken into account in the UAV relaying system.

UAV-Based Relay for Mobile IoT Users
System Description
As shown in Case 4 of Fig. 1, a UAV relaying system consists of one BS, one UAV, and K mobile users. It is assumed that there is no LoS link between the afflicted area and the external BS. The UAV cyclically flies over the ground between the afflicted area and the BS. The UAV leverages subcarriers to perform user scheduling and fine-grained resource allocation. During the flight period, the UAV will track to serve the users by adjusting the flight path according to the user mobility. Our goal is to maximize the downlink sum rate of all the users by jointly optimizing UAV flight path, subcarrier power, and user scheduling.

• Numerical Results and Discussions
The parameters are set as follows. The BS is located at the origin of a 3D Cartesian coordinate system, and K users are randomly distributed in a circle tangent to the x-axis and y-axis with a radius of 1000 m. N=40,M=16, and Vmax=50 m/s. We assume that the maximum transmit power for the BS and the UAV is P=Psum=10 dBm. At the initial stage, the UAV flies along a straight line from (0,1000,100) to (2000,1000,100) at an altitude of H=100 m. Figure 5 illustrates the numerical results.

Figure 5. - Simulation results: a) Optimized UAV flight path for $K=\mathrm{T}$; b) Optimized UAV flight path for $K=3$; c) Jain's fairness index for the system.
Figure 5.
Simulation results: a) Optimized UAV flight path for K=T; b) Optimized UAV flight path for K=3; c) Jain's fairness index for the system.

Show All

Figures 5a and 5b provide the optimized UAV flight path for K=1 and K=3, respectively. From Fig. 5a, the UAV flies toward user 1 far away from slot 1 to slot 23; in slot 23, there is a fair channel gain between the UAV and the user, and thus the UAV reverses its direction and flies toward the BS to enhance the system sum rate. This indicates that the UAV will balance the information rate between the receiver and the transmitter by considering the information causality constraint. Compared to Fig. 5a, Fig. 5b adds two users with directions opposite to user 1. It can be seen that the UAV tracks user 2 and user 3 after slot 27 by adaptively adjusting its flight path according to the users' mobility. Figure 5c shows Jain's Fairness Index for different flight modes (mode 1: the optimized flight path, mode 2: the initial flight path, and mode 3: hovering) with different flight periods. It can be seen that the proposed scheme (mode 1) has the best system fairness for the same flight period. In addition, the increase of the UAV flight period is beneficial for the system fairness.

Further Discussions
There are two deficiencies for UAV flight path optimization that impede its application in practice. First, we assume that the users are stationary or the movement trajectory is known. Second, the simulations only present offline optimization results. One solution to these issues is to use reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms [11], [12]. In [11], an enhanced multi-agent Q-learning (MQL) algorithm was proposed for the UAV to perform adaptive online tracking of user movement. Considering both the current and historical movements of users, the UAV will adopt the RL algorithm to learn the imperative tracking actions via the reference point positioning. However, the training process of the RL algorithm requires massive prior knowledge and has high complexity, which makes it difficult to achieve real-time user tracking. Therefore, the real-time tracking performance of the UAV will be improved from both the training data acquisition and low-complexity RL algorithm in future studies.

Future Research and Conclusion
It has been observed from the existing works that the optimized UAV flight path often consists of a series of broken lines with sharp turns, which implies that the UAV needs enormous acceleration to change its flight altitude. As a result, a lot of limited on board energy is consumed for flying other than information transfer. We have to rethink a very practical issue: how to design the UAV flight path to transmit more information with the limited onboard energy, or how to enhance the energy efficiency of a UAV system. This issue has significance in WAIoT scenarios. Currently, several scholars have done pioneering research works on the energy efficiency of UAV systems. Zeng et al. [13] derived the mathematical expression of propulsion energy consumption for the fixed-wing UAV, and defined the physical constraint of flight energy consumption for the first time. In fact, the energy efficiency maximization subject to the limited onboard energy makes the joint resource optimization problem more complex and more challenging to solve.

Due to the openness of the channel, the UAV is susceptible to malicious attack and eavesdropping as well as other security threats. Therefore, information security is another challenge in UAV communications. The conventional data encryption and distortion technologies encrypt the data at the transmitter for secure information transmission. In the case of massive user connections, however, frequent denial-of-service attacks would bring about network congestion or even paralysis. In recent years, much attention has been paid to the physical-layer security of UAV communications [14]. In addition, by improving wireless environment and signal quality, reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) has demonstrated tremendous potential for UAV-based secure communications [15]. However, the existing RIS models based on the perfect channel state assumption make adaptation to the real communication environment difficult.

To meet the communication requirements in emergency scenarios, this article has proposed a UAV-based wide-area IoT deployment architecture. We have established the system models for three typical scenarios and proposed the corresponding model optimization schemes. We have presented numerical results to verify the model performance. The proposed UAV-based WAIoT architecture has been shown to be effective for reliable energy and information transfer. We also discuss possible improvements concerning the techniques involved in this article and look forward to future research work.