Recent advances in wireless communication and solid-state circuits together with the enormous demands of sensing ability have given rise to a new enabling technology, integrated (radar) sensing and communication (ISAC). ISAC captures two main advantages over dedicated sensing and communication functionalities: integration gain to efficiently utilize congested wireless/hardware resources, and even more interesting, coordination gain to balance dual-functional performance or/and perform mutual assistance. Triggered by ISAC, we are also witnessing a paradigm shift in the ubiquitous IoT architecture, in which the sensing and communication layers are tending to partially converge into a new layer, namely, the signaling layer. In this article, we first attempt to introduce a definition of ISAC, analyze the various influencing forces, and present several novel use cases. Then we complement the understanding of the signaling layer by presenting several key benefits in the IoT era. We classify existing dominant ISAC solutions based on the layers in which integration is applied. Finally, several challenges and opportunities are identified. We hope that this overview article will serve as a primary starting point for new researchers and offer a bird's-eye view of the existing ISAC-related advances.
Introduction
When the concept of the Internet of Things (IoT) first emerged, its additional sensing capabilities were identified as a critical paradigm shift from computer networks [1]. From then on, sensing and communications (S&C), two fundamental functionalities, have been recognized as indispensable in the design and implementation of ubiquitous IoT devices, ranging from autonomous vehicles, wearable electronics, and Wi-Fi to drones and satellites. In the current hardened-in-to-fixed IoT data processing pipelines, S&C are individually accomplished by black-box-like modules, which do not necessarily share any external knowledge of their internal workings. This modularized IoT architecture encourages S&C driving on two parallel layers (i.e., the sensing layer and the communication layer) with limited hardware intersection, little mutual assistance, and therefore, rare integration.

Meanwhile, an unprecedented proliferation of new IoT services, such as extended reality (XR), digital twins, autonomous systems, and flying vehicles, expresses a huge desire for novel sensing solutions. Wireless sensing capability enabled by analyzing received RF signal patterns and characteristics has the potential to become an essential component of the sensing solution. On the other hand, the combined use of high frequencies and large antenna array results in striking similarities between communication and radio sensing systems in terms of the hardware architecture, channel characteristics, and information processing pipeline. Consequently, sensing and communication systems can be jointly designed, optimized, and dispatched to assist each other or transmitted via the same hardware platform, common spectrum, joint signal processing strategy, and unified control framework.

With the various influences exerted from the technical and commercial perspectives, we anticipate that the sensing layer and communication layer are changing from separation to integration, which results in a paradigm shift in the IoT architecture. As a consequence, a new signaling layer enabled by integrated (radar) sensing and communication (ISAC) is emerging, with the advantages of low hardware cost, power consumption, and signaling latency as well as a small product size and improved spectral efficiency. Moreover, ISAC technology can provably endow current communication infrastructures with sensing functionalities while requiring minimal standard modifications, allowing existing communication networks to provide sensing and surveillance services for civilians. As a result, many new use cases can be made available in the contexts of autonomous vehicles, smart cities, smart homes, and cellular networks for 5G and beyond.

In this article, we attempt to contribute to the concept of ISAC and to complement the understanding of the role played by the signaling layer in the IoT architecture. We start by introducing our definition and understanding of ISAC by presenting fundamental principles and several key benefits. Then we analyze the various forces influencing ISAC, followed by many novel use cases. In addition, we categorize and classify existing dominant ISAC solutions based on the layers in which the integration takes place. Throughout the above, we also investigate and highlight related innovations and landmark advances reported from academia, industry, and standards associations in fields ranging from solid-state circuitry, microwave theory and techniques, signal processing, and communications to mobile computing. Finally, we overview and enumerate the practical challenges and open questions in this area.

Why Integrate S&C?
An accelerating growth of research interest in ISAC is witnessed, as shown on the left of Fig. 1.

Figure 1. - An illustration of ISAC-related research activities. The number of peer-reviewed publications is shown on the left. Several notable activities in contexts such as theory, design, implementation, overviews, and standardization are indicated on the right. We also divide these landmarks in accordance with the categories given later. The publication data was collected from IEEE xplore in january 2021.
Figure 1.
An illustration of ISAC-related research activities. The number of peer-reviewed publications is shown on the left. Several notable activities in contexts such as theory, design, implementation, overviews, and standardization are indicated on the right. We also divide these landmarks in accordance with the categories given later. The publication data was collected from IEEE xplore in january 2021.

Show All

What is ISAC?
ISAC refers to a design paradigm in which (radio) sensing and communication systems are integrated to efficiently utilize congested wireless/hardware resources and even to pursue mutual benefits, as well as the corresponding enabling technologies for this paradigm. We define “integration” as any combined use of two or more systems in whole or in part. For example, a wireless sensor network relies on hardware integration between sensing modules and communication modules in a distributed manner, a secondary surveillance radar system involves signaling integration between a surveillance radar and a communication transponder, and cognitive radar operating in the communication band requires spectrum integration. Although ISAC can improve the hardware, spectral, temporal, signaling, and energy efficiency of systems, the specific aspects where integration is applied determine which resources can be saved.

Levels of Integration
The rationale of ISAC is that a radio emission can simultaneously convey information from the transmitter to the receiver and extract information from the scattered echoes. Therefore, the unified communication and sensing waveform is considered to be the most tightly integrated configuration, in which all types of efficiency improvements can be achieved. Still, depending on the level at which the integration is taking place, as shown in Fig. 1, there are various benefits to be gained, including improved size, hardware, spectral, and energy efficiency, and lower latency/signaling cost. Such looser configurations have also drawn a great deal of attention from both industry and academia.

Some Terminology
Several terms have been used to describe the related research output, such as joint radar communications/joint communications radar (JRC/JCR) [2], joint communication and radar/radio sensing (JCAS) [5], dual-functional radar communications (DFRC) [8], radio-frequency (RF) convergence, and radar-communication (RadCom) [9]. From our perspective, the aim of DFRC is to design novel waveforms to enable both radar and communication functionalities. RF convergence refers to broader radio integration that includes positioning, navigation, and timing systems. RadCom mainly focuses on endowing radar equipment with communication capabilities. JCAS is more concerned with the incorporation of sensing functionalities into the infrastructure side, particularly in cellular networks. In a sense, ISAC is interchangeable with the first two, but it focuses more on the paradigm shift of the network architecture and the effects on the electronics, the involved objects, or the user equipment side. Moreover, ISAC also emphasizes resource efficiency, while the others do not.

Why Do We Need ISAC in IoT?
Influence of Technical Trends
Although the emergence of the ISAC concept can be traced back to the 1960s [3], when coded pulses were employed to convey information from a ground radar to a space vehicle, there was a paucity of further developments in the following decades. We tend to attribute this observed stagnation to the use of dedicatedly designed RF circuits at the time, meaning that previous RF devices tended to be specific to the domain of either radio (radar) sensing or communications.

Hardware
With recent advances in solid-state circuits and microwave technology, however, the hardware feasibility of leveraging radio sensing in tiny IoT products tends to no longer be a barrier. For example, a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) radar system on chip (SoC) constructed from 192 virtual receivers has been reported to achieve a±1∘ angular resolution and a 0.099 km/h Doppler resolution within silicon areas of only 14 mm2 for 12 millimeter-wave (mmWave) transceivers and 71 mm2 for the overall SoC [4]. These key performance indicators already meet the requirements for various radio sensing use cases, as shown in Fig. 2. Thus, it is safe to infer that the integration of S&C circuits at the chip level (i.e., ISAC SoCs for mobile devices or ISAC baseband processors) will emerge in the next few years.

Figure 2. - Seven scenarios and 34 use cases of ISAC. The required key parameter indicators, such as the maximum velocity, range/doppler/temporal/angular resolutions, and data rate resolution, are marked in the legends. The beam colors indicate the maximum ranges in the various use cases.
Figure 2.
Seven scenarios and 34 use cases of ISAC. The required key parameter indicators, such as the maximum velocity, range/doppler/temporal/angular resolutions, and data rate resolution, are marked in the legends. The beam colors indicate the maximum ranges in the various use cases.

Show All

Signal Processing
The combined use of mmWave frequencies and massive MIMO technology results in striking similarities between communication and radio sensing systems in terms of the hardware architecture,1 channel characteristics, and information processing pipeline. Moreover, with the development of mmWave technology and beam-domain signal processing strategies, it has become possible to straightforwardly extend several radar missions, such as angle of arrival (AoA) estimation, angle of departure (AoD) estimation, and moving target tracking, to address emerging communication challenges (e.g., beam management [6]). It is reasonable to envision that the reuse of signaling strategies between the S&C functionalities can lead to mutual benefits.

Mobile Computing
Current Wi-Fi sensing applications require the extraction of multipath channel information from the raw channel state information (CSI) measurements, since this multipath information is the principal component that captures how the surrounding environment changes. In general, the raw CSI measurements have been compensated in Wi-Fi baseband processors, for example, by means of the sampling time offset (STO), to synchronize the oscillator clocks of the transmitter and receiver. However, such offsets are hidden in a communication black box and are therefore unknown to the sensing modules. Consequently, time and frequency offsets create ambiguity when a sensing module calculates range/velocity estimates and increase the false alarm probability when recognizing human activities. To address this issue, an additional processing procedure of fitting and then removing the clock/frequency offsets is employed. However, these offsets can instead be straightforwardly removed by breaking the cross-system isolation and exchanging the necessary information between the S&C functionalities in the baseband processor.

Influence of Commercial and Regulatory Forces
Novel ISAC applications have already gone far beyond academic studies, particularly in regard to Wi-Fi sensing applications.

Commercial Progress
The CSI measured in Wi-Fi networks has been widely analyzed to support various short-range sensing tasks in a device-free2 manner. For example, Wi-Fi devices can detect the presence of humans in a conference room (with an accuracy of 97–100 percent); recognize human activities (with an accuracy of 73–100 percent, depending on the set of activities considered) such as walking, running, and exercising; and even imaging surrounding objects (with an imaging error of <4.5 cm/±1∘). Furthermore, according to Intel, WLAN sensing is recognized as a key direction of development toward Wi-Fi 7.

Spectrum Regulatory Aspect
Another strong force driving ISAC forward is exerted by the vast commercial requirements on radio sensing. Unfortunately, novel civilian radio sensors bear a disproportionate regulatory burden. For instance, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) granted the spectrum allocation request of the Soli project only after a year-long discussion, and at present, Soli is still not allowed to operate in many major countries, such as Japan, India, and China. Moreover, radio sensing and communication functionalities in large IoT devices tend to operate in shared and often congested or even contested spectra, for example, 5G-based IoT devices vs. military radar in the 3.5 GHz band and mmWave automotive radar vs. mmWave 5G communication in the 60 GHz band. To help overcome these conflicts, ISAC can conveniently enable communication devices to sense the environment while sharing the same spectrum [5].

A Number of Use Cases
ISAC-enabled IoT devices are expected to promote many new applications. We illustrate seven scenarios and 34 use cases in Fig. 2, where their key parameter indicators are also marked. Their descriptions and challenges are shown in Table 1.

Leveraging ISAC in IoT: A Paradigm Shift
In a conventional IoT information processing pipeline, environmental information is collected by sensors, exchanged via communications, and fused by processing units to support environment-aware decision making and intelligent human-computer interaction. Consequently, a generic IoT architecture consists of three layers:

A sensing (perception) layer, to collect, process, and digitize environmental information to obtain voluminous data

A communication (transport) layer, to convey the sensing data to the network or the application layer

An application layer, to employ computing techniques to extract valuable information collected by the current device itself or transmitted from other devices

Table 1. Descriptions of use cases and challenges.

Data mining and machine learning are usually applied in the application layer to achieve autonomy of IoT devices. Traditionally, radio sensing belongs to the sensing layer, and wireless communication occurs in the communication layer. This communication-after-sensing design philosophy fetters the combined usage of S&C, particularly for information sharing and co-designed signaling strategies.

Due to their ISAC-related advantages, joint signaling strategies are provably able to overcome interlayer constraints and enable optimal co-design and operation [2]. As such strategies represent the most tightly integrated setting, it is reasonable to envision that the sensing and communication layers are currently tending to partially converge toward signaling-level integration, particularly between wireless sensing and wireless communication, via waveform unification.

Signaling Layer
The resulting operation layer is named the signaling layer, as shown in Fig. 3. Compared to the conventional IoT architecture, the new signaling layer is intended to handle radio emission and related post-processing signaling strategies, including S&C functionalities, and thereby perform the information extraction and data transmission tasks as well as was possible originally. Joint signal processing for both S&C should be conducted in this layer to allow full access to all necessary information.


Figure 3.
To illustrate the paradigm shift driven by ISAC, we mark the communication-specific architecture in yellow, the sensing-specific architecture in blue, and the architecture shared between S&C in green. The left side of this figure shows the four signaling strategies discussed later. Xs and Xc denote the resources allocated to the S&C functions, respectively.

Show All

Benefiting from the abandonment of interlayer isolation, the signaling layer permits the efficient exchange of useful information between the S&C functions. Moreover, without the constraints imposed by dedicated functionalities, more design degrees of freedom (DoFs) can be accessed via co-design to flexibly optimize operation parameters, balance resource allocation, and even mutually assist in improving the capabilities of the radio sensing and communication functionalities.

In particular, Wi-Fi devices equipped with an antenna array could achieve fine-tuning of the beamwidth and beam direction to form a sharp, pencil-like sensing beam focusing only on a certain object of interest. Such a highly directional beam could lessen the floor/wall reflections affecting human activity recognition, thereby allowing the sensing signal to convey pure activity information to the receiver side. Consequently, compared to the original black-box-like sensing and communication layers, the new signaling layer can serve as a more adaptable and robust backbone to support high-layer applications.

Features of ISAC in IoT
Although a number of studies to date have offered descriptions of ISAC-related designs and applications, few attempts have been made to systematically quantify the advantages of ISAC. Here, we briefly discuss the main potential advantages of ISAC in the IoT era.

Integration Gain
Integration gain is the fundamental reason for the superiority of ISAC over separate S&C functionalities, especially for IoT devices. In essence, the integrated operation in ISAC means that the components or resources used for the S&C functionalities can be coupled to achieve more efficient resource utilization. Depending on the level at which integration is applied, there are various benefits to be gained, including improved hardware, spectral, and energy efficiency, as well as lower latency and signaling costs.

For example, ISAC can be achieved via signaling layer integration while splitting the antenna array and RF chains into two groups: one for radar and one for communication. Compared to a shared antenna array (i.e., a more tightly coupled ISAC setting), the reduced spatial DoFs, lower angular resolution, and additional interference management constraints impose extra expenses for both S&C [7]. However, when we compare this separated antenna setting with the case of entirely separate sensing and communication layers (i.e., a more loosely coupled setting), it shows improved energy and hardware efficiency.

Spectral efficiency can be pursued readily by means of various spectrum sharing approaches (e.g., cognitive radio). Indeed, interference management [2] using a joint signaling strategy is precisely the signaling layer integration approach for spectrum integration. Moreover, signaling strategies can be coupled more tightly to allow S&C to be performed simultaneously over a single radio emission. In this way, a dual-mission signal can be conceived in which the two functionalities are allocated over non-overlapped resources [8], [10], or are even achieved with a fully unified waveform [9].

Coordination Gain
Both communication and radio sensing require the acquisition of situational awareness concerning the surrounding radio environment and equipment, commonly in the form of CSI, the directions of the desired users, targets, or interferers, and even a map of the surrounding channel knowledge. Depending on the level of integration, various types of information can be conveniently shared in a cross-function or cross-user manner, such as in a shared memory or in the same processor, to jointly design signal processing strategies for balancing performance or achieving mutual assistance. Benefiting from this, ISAC practically permits full exploitation of the design DoFs, while the performance of other waveforms is constrained by standards, for example.

For example, conventional roadside units (RSUs) are equipped with mmWave massive MIMO vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication systems and sensors (e.g., cameras or radar) and are willing to serve passing high-mobility vehicles with reliable and large-capacity data transmission. Due to the high directionality of narrow “pencil-like” mmWave beams, beam misalignment can readily occur and severely compromise the communication transmission rate [11]. If a frequency-independent representation of the spatial signal paths from sensor to vehicle3 can be obtained, this situational information can be reused by the communication system to improve beam tracking performance, even though the S&C systems are only loosely coupled in such a case.

Things become more interesting when the S&C functionalities are coupled more tightly; that is, the knowledge of the transmitted communication symbols is synchronized with the sensing function. In essence, such a shared communication signal plays the role of prior knowledge in the sensor's post-processing procedure (i.e., a reference signal), which could be employed to construct a partially matched filter and perform pulse compression to improve the detection probability for sensing. Additionally, when an ISAC transceiver emits unified waveform to a communication receiver, the CSI information may be estimated and inferred from sensed echoes, resulting in a pilot-free signaling strategy and thus making it possible to take advantage of reduced latency and signaling costs [6].

Dominant ISAC Solutions
In this section, we attempt to bridge the new IoT architecture paradigm discussed above with the current dominant ISAC solutions.

Hardware Layer Integration
Software-Defined Radio
The idea of running different transmit/receive strategies on the same device is not new. Thanks to the development of software-defined radio (SDR) in the mid-2000s, signal processing can now be handed over from special-purpose RF circuits to general-purpose processors. From then on, hardware reuse for S&C can be accomplished by means of SDR for large IoT devices such as autonomous vehicles. In such a case, the radio system dynamically generates complex signals adhering to different standards or even signals that are not standardized. However, reconfiguration operations for SDR are typically time-consuming and independent of any particular function. Thus, the lack of co-designed hardware/signaling strategies leads to rare coordination gain.

ISAC System-on-Chip/In-Package
Multi-channel RF transceivers and high-performance analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) could be integrated as a radar or communication SoC. Moreover, antenna array has been realized by a radar or communications system-in-package (SiP) solution in several tiny IoT devices. It is safe to envision that S&C functionalities would be integrated in a chipset via SoC/SiP to pursue high integration gain as well as coordination gain.

Signaling Layer Integration
When S&C functions share the same spectrum, the communication propagation characteristics are akin to those of radio sensing. Thus, although they have drastically different purposes, the existing signaling strategies for S&C show several common features, especially in terms of waveform and beamforming designs. Inspired by multi-access technology, it is natural to consider that these two functionalities can be harmonized into a single emission via orthogonal/non-overlapped resource allocation (e.g., time/frequency/spatial division). As a step further, fully unified waveform tends to be a more favorable design, which is able to more efficiently utilize wireless resources and thereby improve the integration gain. Below, we elaborate on these two aspects.

Non-Overlapped Resource Allocation
Time Division
The most straightforward ISAC approach is to schedule S&C waveforms in different time slots, where the two functionalities are loosely coupled. Indeed, the time-division ISAC solution has been widely employed to add sensing capabilities to existing communication protocols, such as the 802.11p and 802.11ad standards [11], and has shown great potential to empower cellular IoT devices with sensing functions in a fast and inexpensive manner [5]. Notably, most Wi-Fi sensing approaches rely on pilot signals, which are transmitted in a time-division fashion in conjunction with payload data.

Spectral Division
An alternative strategy is to allocate the S&C waveforms to different subcarriers or different frequency bands. A subcarrier selection indicator with elements taking values of 0 or 1 can be employed to map the sensing waveform and communication waveform to each subcarrier. Typically, frequency-division-based ISAC solutions can be employed in existing commercial orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems with only minor modifications.

Spatial Division
Another widely investigated signaling strategy is to form multiple spatial beams for simultaneously serving communication receivers and performing sensing tasks such as target detection. In general, spatial division can be realized by selecting a sensing waveform that lies in the other system's null signal space. However, the null space of the channel is determined by the radio propagation environment and cannot be controlled by the designer. Therefore, interference management is essential for both waveform and spatial filter design.

Fully Unified Waveform
As the most tightly integrated setting, the design of a fully unified ISAC waveform with the shared use of wireless resources is the most desirable case, as it offers the potential for the highest integration and coordination gains. In general, the unified waveform can be designed following three philosophies, namely, sensing-centric design, communication-centric design, and joint design.

Sensing-Centric Design
In the event where the primary function is sensing (e.g., to equip a radar sensor with communication ability), ISAC can be implemented on existing sensing waveforms or infrastructures, which requires embedding communication data into a radar waveform over different signal domains. A classical ISAC waveform design is to modulate communication symbols onto chirp carriers, where amplitude/phase/frequency shift keying (ASK/PSK/FSK) data can be embedded in the time-frequency domain [6]. Furthermore, direct spread spectrum sequences (DSSS) for code-division multiple access (CDMA) communications can be naturally combined with phase-coded radar waveforms to produce code-domain ISAC waveforms [6]. More recently, the spatial domain is exploited for ISAC, where the useful information can be represented by the sidelobe level of a radar beampattern or by the antenna indices of a MIMO radar [8]. Nonetheless, sensing-centric design can only be applied to limited communication scenarios, as it suffers from low transmission rate, which is tied to the pulse repetition frequency (PRF) of the radar.

Communication-Centric Design
Communication-centric design refers to exploiting existing communication waveform directly for radio sensing. In principle, any communication waveform can be leveraged for mono-static ISAC signaling, as the transmitted data and waveform are known a priori at the transmitter. A pioneering communication-centric design is to employ OFDM communication waveform for target detection, where the range and Doppler parameters can be readily obtained via inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) and FFT [9]. Since the communication waveform is not tailored for radar, its sensing performance is rather limited, where sophisticated signal processing techniques are needed to compensate for the performance loss. Moreover, communication waveform needs to be carefully shaped to satisfy specific sensing constraints, including low peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR), good correlation properties, reliance on clutter interference, and so on.

Joint Design
Instead of relying on existing S&C waveforms, one may also conceive a joint ISAC waveform from the ground up, such that a flexible performance trade-off can readily be achieved. This method is known as joint design, for which the sensing-centric and communication-centric designs can be viewed as two extreme cases. Joint ISAC waveform design can be typically formulated as a mathematical optimization problem, where the objective function is sensing/communication performance metrics, with the constraints to guarantee the performance of the other functionality. As an example, in [7], the MIMO radar beam pattern is optimized, subject to per-user signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) constraints for communications.

Application Layer Integration
Combining the S&C functions in the application layer mainly allows each function to exploit the output data of the other to obtain insightful information for mutual assistance. In a typical sensing-after-communication or communication-after-sensing processing pipeline, such application layer integration usually operates in a serial fashion and thus is loosely coupled.

Table 2. An overview of open challenges in ISAC.
Table 2.- An overview of open challenges in ISAC.
Human Activity Recognition
The widely investigated Wi-Fi sensing approach is a typical example of application layer integration. In current real-world Wi-Fi sensing methods, the raw CSI measurements are first transferred to an additional signal processing unit for data augmentation (e.g., noise reduction and outlier removal). Second, the target signal is extracted from the augmented CSI measurements by means of thresholding, filtering, or signal compression to remove redundant signals. Finally, model-based or learning-based algorithms are used to analyze the cleansed data to perform human activity detection or recognition.

Coordinated S&C Control
In S&C systems that are coordinated by a unified control center, one system can learn from and react to the risks that the other system has encountered. For example, benefiting from the coordinated cognitive risk control framework [15], the tracking accuracy of a vehicular radar system can be improved based on the situational information shared by a coordinated communication system, while in turn, the communication system can be made more efficient and reliable against attacks. Further coordination gain may be achieved by employing advanced data mining and cognitive-related techniques to control and optimize sensing or communication performance, replying on the other's output.

Open Challenges and Future Directions
We overview recent ISAC open challenges in Table 2, and then elaborate several of them in the following.

Fundamental Limitations and Trade-Offs of ISAC
A theoretical performance analysis is critical for evaluating the superiority of current ISAC solutions. A unified upper bound and its achievability are now required to provide a general analysis framework and design objective for S&C. One possible direction of investigation is to bridge information theory with detection theory. Due to the inherent relation between mutual information and the minimum mean square error (MMSE), it is expected that a closed-form expression can be derived to reveal the relationship between the performance of sensing estimation and the communication channel capacity, possibly in the form of a connection between the channel capacity and Cramér-Rao lower bound (CRLB).

Practical ISAC Parameter Adjustment
In practice, the signaling layer is the back-end that generates data for use in the application layer. It is reasonable to infer that better data quality leads to better application performance. For good sensing performance, the sensing beam should be fully focused on the target of interest to avoid redundant signal paths (e.g., reflection from the floor). From the communication perspective, however, more reflection paths are necessary to achieve a multiplexing gain. Thus, the balance between S&C performance is subject to many practical constraints. For example, the parameters of the sensing function should be adjusted depending on the shape of the target while respecting communication quality concerns. In addition, the pulse repetition frequency determines the temporal resolution (i.e., the frame rate), which is of critical importance in several scenarios, such as gesture recognition.

ISAC Receiver Solutions
In an ISAC receiver, distinguishing sensing echoes from received communication signals is a challenging task, particularly in a rich scattering environment such as an indoor scenario. Most existing estimation technologies cannot be straightforwardly applied for this purpose. One possible solution is to allocate sensing echoes and uplink data to different time slots by employing a proper ISAC protocol.

Networked ISAC
Intuitively, multiple ISAC IoT devices can function as a multistatic radar to perform joint sensing of a target or a specified area. In this way, several sensing tasks, such as imaging, may be accomplished. For such cases, the information exchange and cooperative sensing processes between nodes have yet to be investigated. Moreover, the assignment and management of S&C beams are also critical tasks in practice, particularly for ubiquitous IoT devices.

Conclusion
In this article, we present our understanding and definition of ISAC. To this end, we start by analyzing the forces driving the development of ISAC, followed by illustrations of many new use cases. It was shown that ISAC may lead the communication and sensing layers to partially converge into a new signaling layer. In this way, several advantages can be achieved, such as low hardware cost, power consumption, and signaling latency as well as a small product size and improved spectral efficiency. After that, we highlight the gains that may be achieved with ISAC, including integration gains in terms of resource efficiency and coordination gains in terms of mutual assistance. We also discuss several major ISAC solutions, ranging from hardware layer integration and signaling layer integration to application layer integration. Finally, key challenges, opportunities, and directions of future research related to ISAC implementation are discussed, yielding the conclusion that ISAC will play an essential role in the IoT era.