The Ubiquitous IoT (UIoT) is a three-dimensional network that spans space-air-ground. It contains multiple network elements such as satellites, terrestrial cellular networks, terrestrial gateways, and data centers. Due to the need for openness and sharing among different operators, it is necessary to research wireless spectrum sharing. The new technologies of blockchain and the 6G hybrid cloud pose a potential solution. We propose to migrate the spectrum sharing system of 6G to the hybrid blockchain. Subdividing the granularity of the spectrum resources of UIoT devices in multiple dimensions can enable reliable and secure random access to a large amount of UIoT terminal data. Cloud computing and smart contract technology can effectively ensure the interconnection of massive data and the authenticity of externally perceived data.
Introduction
Sixth-generation (6G) mobile communication technology can flexibly meet the specific needs of services in different scenarios and will bring various innovative applications to vertical industries, driving socio-economic efficiency improvements and cost reductions [1], [2]. After more than a decade of development, the Internet of Things (IoT) based on cellular mobile networks has been widely used. However, the existing IoT not only lacks perception depth and breadth, but also lacks resource sharing and immediacy [3]. To improve upon the existing IoT, Ubiquitous IoT (UIoT) in 6G has end goals of holographic perception, ubiquitous connection, open sharing, and fusion innovation.

The construction of a UIoT system has numerous benefits: it can promote the ubiquitous interconnection of platform and user, realize the depth perception of user state, and gather all kinds of resources to participate in system adjustment. It can promote regional resource autonomy while better supporting resource allocation, business coordination, and risk control. Ning et al. introduced the layering system for Unit IoT and UIoT, including the perception layer, network layer, and application layer [4]. Song et al. proposed the smart collaborative tracking scheme in the Ubiquitous Power IoT (UPI) and established the system model [5]. Zhao et al. pointed at the Object Life Cycle (OLC) in the U2IoT, which is established with security requirement considerations [6].

Before these benefits can be realized, an efficient spectrum sharing solution is required to improve the utilization of 6G UIoT ultra-wide spectrum resources and reduce the high latency caused by spectrum resources competition. 6G dynamic spectrum sharing, which fuses IoT, blockchain, and 6G hybrid clouds, is a promising solution [7]. The goal of 6G dynamic spectrum sharing is to realize sharing across high-, medium-, and low-frequency spectra. It ensures that military and civilian radio equipment, which is increasing geometrically, makes full use of increasingly crowded radio spectrum resources. Spectrum sharing means that different wireless communication networks share the same frequency band. This technique can achieve flexible, feasible, and much more efficient UIoT spectrum allocation, and thus becomes one of the promising 6G UIoT technologies.

From the millimeter-wave spectrum era of 5G to the terahertz spectrum era of 6G, higher frequency bands also mean greater path loss, smaller coverage radius, and bigger network construction costs [8]. These challenges make it necessary to conduct research on wireless spectrum sharing. Subdividing the granularity of the spectrum resources of space-air-ground UIoT equipment from multiple dimensions will allow reliable and secure random access to a large amount of UIoT terminal data. From the perspective of demand and cost, co-construction and sharing will become an important direction for future 6G UIoT network construction. With the increasing density of networks and the development of new technologies, 6G UIoT is trending toward a smarter and more distributed spectrum sharing access technology with dynamic spectrum sharing technology based on blockchain [9]. However, as far as we know, blockchain-based dynamic spectrum sharing discussions for 6G UIoT are currently in their infancy.

Blockchain and 6G are both new technologies, and there is enormous potential in combining the two for UIoT dynamic spectrum sharing [10]. Blockchain is a distributed database that can be updated safely without a central intermediary. Blockchain can be used as a low-cost support solution for dynamic spectrum sharing technology, instead of being supported by a centralized database. This can not only reduce the management cost of the dynamic spectrum access system and improve the spectrum efficiency, but also further increase the access level and access users.

In addition, 6G UIoT drives the massive adoption of smart devices, which means that block-chain will have more data than ever before, and these data will greatly promote the globalization of technology [11]. Blockchain's decentralization, traceability, historical record immutability, and transaction information privacy protection are all key improvements over the current poor privacy and security of 6G UIoT. 6G can guarantee the integrity, comprehensiveness, and speed of traceable data transmission. Blockchain can guarantee the trustworthiness of traceable data.

Figure 1. - Integrated space-air-ground UIoT.
Figure 1.
Integrated space-air-ground UIoT.

Show All

In actual deployment, the blockchain platform or application can be deployed on the hybrid cloud server to provide support for different application scenarios [12]. Hybrid blockchain edge cloud services, in collaboration with core cloud services and terminal management services, enable the implementation of blockchain in 6G UIoT.

Returning to physical channels in current broadband systems, spectrum sharing often causes mutual interference between channels. To prevent physical channel interference between systems, it is necessary to propose efficient and smart access rules to avoid collisions. Therefore, a reasonable artificial intelligence (AI) algorithm can support 6G UIoT dynamic spectrum sharing. Successful spectrum sharing is defined by no interference to other users, so AI can greatly improve the accuracy of identifying energy fluctuations in the radio spectrum. With its smart scheduling and precise cognitive capabilities, AI will support the process and analyze 6G ultra-wide spectrum resources and massive UIoT data. In the future, there will be more coexisting network standards in UIoT, such as 5G/6G, satellite communications, and military systems. This makes the peaks of network traffic more unpredictable. The AI algorithm can readjust the system capacity among multiple formats according to actual traffic requirements so that UIoT devices in hybrid networking always maintain optimal performance.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. We introduce the space-air-ground integrated architecture and application areas of UIoT. Based on this, the importance of dynamic spectrum sharing and blockchain technology in UIoT is emphasized. We propose a dynamic spectrum sharing method for UIoT devices based on the hybrid blockchain on the 6G cloud platform. We propose the smart contract spectrum management method for UIoT.

Ubiquitous IoT
This article proposes an integrated space-air-ground UIoT based on satellites, high altitude platforms (HAPs), unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), floating platforms, terrestrial communication networks, ground receiving stations, mobile communications, satellite mobile communications, and wired networks to make UIoT truly interconnected with everything, as shown in Fig. 1. UIoT expands to cover not only the world, but also the sky and space, and places where human beings need to conduct data collection and scientific research to build a smart space UIoT.

The network system composition of this IoT is divided into space-based networks, air-based networks, and ground-based networks.

The space-based networks consist mainly of satellites at different orbital altitudes. According to different orbital altitudes, it can be divided into geostationary Earth orbit (GEO) satellites, medium Earth orbit (MEO) satellites, and low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites [13]. There are four GEO satellites at an altitude of 35,786 km, which can provide communication support with an end-to-end delay below 500 ms and a capacity of 50 Gb/s. The 12 MEO satellites distributed at an altitude of 2000-20,000 km can provide communication support with an end-to-end delay of less than 150 ms and a capacity of 15 Gb/s. The number of LEOs is the largest. There are currently 710 LEOs distributed at a high altitude below 2000 km, which can provide communication support with end-to-end delay below 30 ms and a capacity close to 32 Tb/s. In space-based networks, GEO satellites, MEO satellites, and LEO satellites can communicate with each other [14]. It realizes the interconnection of things between mixed orbits in space and information exchange between satellites, and serves the UIoT on the ground and on aerospace devices.

Figure 2. - The applications of UIoT.
Figure 2.
The applications of UIoT.

Show All

The air-based networks mainly consist of HAPs and UAVs. The HAPs provide communication services by placing wireless transceiver devices on aircraft and airships that stay at high altitudes for a long time. Aircraft in flight can communicate with satellite networks to achieve HAPs UIoT coverage. On the other hand, as mobile aerial base stations, UAVs use existing communication technologies to communicate directly with ground mobile users, which can effectively enhance the coverage and capacity of wireless UIoT networks.

The ground UIoT networks are mainly composed of terrestrial communication networks, cellular wireless networks, satellite communications, ground receiving stations, wired networks, and ground data processing centers. The ground UIoT network achieves heterogeneous network fusion through IP technology. Among them, the cellular wireless network exhibits wide coverage and high data rate, which can provide various communication services for users. Currently, the 5G mobile communication technology supports massive connections, while providing users with higher data transmission rates and lower transmission delay services.

It can be seen that UIoT is no longer flat, but multi-dimensional. It can not only integrate WiFi, Zigbee, NB-IoT, and eMTC, but also integrate future 6G communication technologies, which can be continuously improved and extended.

UIoT has a wide range of applications and can be roughly divided into the following three categories: economic development construction, public affairs management, and public social services. The detailed application areas of UIoT are shown in Fig. 2. Each secondary field in Fig. 2 can also be subdivided. For example, smart agriculture can be subdivided into smart agricultural machinery, smart farm credit, smart farm management, smart vegetable greenhouses, smart aquaculture, and smart poultry farming. According to different application requirements, UIoT requires the introduction of convergence protocols and standard specifications.

UIoT has a huge number of end users, and a single satellite can cover a range of 103-104 km. The number of terminals within the coverage area is very impressive. Furthermore, UIoT contains multiple network elements such as satellites, satellite-ground links, and terrestrial cellular networks, which involve diverse nodes such as terrestrial gateways, data centers, edge computing, as well as openness and sharing among different operators. There are many heterogeneous communication systems in UIoT, with complex communication environments, different business characteristics, and different security requirements. The management and control of spectrum resources are dynamic.

An effective and reliable satellite communication protocol can be used to solve the problems of weak signals, large communication link latency, and limited terminal storage capacity caused by long-distance communication. However, it is far from enough to deal with the complex UIoT network environment. Blockchain, as a distributed architecture, is a technology with high requirements on storage resources, computing resources, and network resources. It guarantees tamper-proof data of the nodes on the chain at the expense of storage efficiency. It can also use its distributed structure to offload the computing load of UIoT mobile devices when performing dynamic wireless resource allocation. It is foreseeable that the introduction of blockchain technology in the dynamic spectrum sharing of UIoT networks can provide a reliable and efficient network interface for each node.

Blockchain-Based UIoT Spectrum Sharing in 6G Hybrid Cloud
In the context of UIoT, spectrum sharing, which fuses modern advanced technology [11], such as blockchain, big data, hybrid cloud, and 6G, is a new development trend of traditional IoT. Furthermore, a UIoT system can be realized that can fully perceive the system status and efficiently process information. In recent years, blockchain has achieved initial success in application fields such as trade finance and industrial Internet with its distributed data storage, consensus mechanism, encryption algorithm, and other new computer technologies.

Generally, the blockchain system is composed of six layers from the bottom up, which are the data layer, network layer, consensus layer, incentive layer, contract layer, and application layer. Among them, the data layer, network layer, and consensus layer are the necessary factors for building blockchain applications.

Table 1. Comparison of three different forms of blockchain.
Table 1.- Comparison of three different forms of blockchain.
The data layer encapsulates the underlying data blocks, basic data, and algorithms such as related data encryption and timestamps. The network layer includes a distributed networking mechanism, data propagation mechanism, and data verification mechanism, among others. The consensus layer encapsulates various consensus algorithms of network nodes. The incentive layer integrates economic factors into the blockchain technology system, including the issuance and distribution mechanisms of economic incentives. The contract layer enables various scripts, algorithms, and smart contracts, which are the basis for the programmable features of blockchain. The application layer encapsulates various application scenarios and cases of blockchain. Among the blockchain models, the most representative innovative technologies are the timestamp-based chain block structure, consensus mechanism of distributed nodes, economic incentives based on consensus arithmetic, and flexible programmable smart contracts.

Blockchain and the 6G hybrid cloud are both new technologies, and there is enormous potential in combining the two for UIoT dynamic spectrum sharing. We propose to move the spectrum sharing system of 6G to the hybrid blockchain technology (HBT) for extra reliability and security.

In this model, a spectrum demander sends a spectrum application on the node of the HBT, which decides and feeds back the spectrum price to the spectrum demander. Transactions are completed on the hybrid cloud. By leasing the spectrum resources to the spectrum demander without affecting its use, the purpose of sharing the resources can be achieved, and the spectrum provider itself can also get the maximum benefit.

HBT Structure for UIoT
Blockchains are classified as public, private, and consortium blockchains according to their degree of openness. The comparison of these three different forms of blockchain is shown in Table 1.

The public blockchain is completely open, and anyone can participate in the maintenance of the system without any dominant central power, which makes public blockchain open source and anonymous. Bitcoin and Ethereum are the most well-known public blockchains, where anyone can read and write data through transactions or mining. The private blockchain is completely closed and limited to the internal use of enterprises, institutions, or individuals, which does not solve the problem of trust. Its typical representative is Mul-tichain.

The consortium blockchain is semi-open and is limited to consortium members. Consortium blockchains can be as large as country-to-country or between different institutions and enterprises. Consortium blockchain often requires pre-com-petition to elect some nodes to accounting roles, and the number of accounting nodes is relatively small. The generation of the block is jointly decided by all pre-selected bookkeepers. Other nodes can trade, but they have no right to book. A notable example, Ripple blockchain, provides cross-border payment services for banking and financial institutions belonging to consortium members, hoping to create a unified global network financial transmission protocol.

Since most of the private blockchain underlying platforms are highly exclusive, and scalable technology and business ecology have never been considered, the problem of siloed block-chain data is increasing. The vast majority of public and consortium blockchains focus too much on consistency and do not consider the complexity brought by the heterogeneity of access chains, reducing compatibility and flexibility.

HBT is a hybrid grid architecture compatible with private, public, and consortium blockchains. As shown in Fig. 3, each HBT participant has their private blockchain, and they can transact through the consortium blockchain. HBT internally uses the consortium blockchain to provide efficient and credible authentication for both mapped data and target data. HBTs rely on the public block-chain with a higher security level to deposit and supervise all of the network blocks to ensure the legitimacy of the changes. According to the HBT node deployment shown in Fig. 3, technologies such as network function virtualization enable ordinary enterprise nodes to act as distributed hash table nodes and blockchain nodes while also being responsible for the maintenance and management of their own internal information database. The aggregated polycentric technology in HBT ensures security while also ensuring the privacy of contracts and solving the problem of inefficient cross-chain transactions. Thus, each participant in HBT will have the efficiency of a private blockchain and the tamper-proof features of a public blockchain.

The traditional radio access network (RAN) is faced with a rapidly growing number of users, leading to sluggish allocation of spectrum resources. In addition, as wireless networks shift to a distributed solution in the future, operators will deploy thousands of cells, and millions of users will communicate with each other. Under increased demand, the fixed spectrum allocation methods and operators' central node allocation algorithms will not be able to fulfill users' needs.

Figure 3. - HBT structure for UIoT.
Figure 3.
HBT structure for UIoT.

Show All

Therefore, based on the introduction of block-chain into frequency spectrum resource management, a distributed spectrum shared method can effectively improve the overall throughput of the system, frequency spectrum utilization efficiency, robustness of the system, and extensibility of future networks. It can also provide a more efficient solution for spectrum sharing and resource management. By using distributed blockchain network architecture, users can directly carry out point-to-point communication to improve security and reduce transmission cost. Blockchain distributed ledger storage technology is adopted to save complete data in blockchain nodes to ensure the integrity and security of users' transaction data. Taking spectrum providers as consensus nodes and spectrum demanders as lightweight nodes, all nodes are served in the blockchain. Therefore, blockchain technology can be used to solve the security problems of spectrum sharing in cognitive wireless networks.

6G HBT Cloud Service
6G and the hybrid cloud are two new technologies that complement each other. On one hand, the hybrid cloud can provide distributed computing support for 6G, and on the other hand, 6G can guarantee massive data interaction in the hybrid cloud. A 6G network will integrate terrestrial wireless, drones, and satellite communications to connect the world completely. 6G is not simply an increase in network capacity and transmission rate; it can achieve the ultimate goal of interconnecting everything.

Hybrid clouds, which mix public and private clouds, have been the main development direction for cloud computing in recent years. When users need to use services in both public and the private spaces, the hybrid cloud is suitable. This public-private characteristic of hybrid clouds fits perfectly with HBT. By deploying blockchain platforms or applications on hybrid cloud servers, the highly secure and confidential computing function of the blockchain can help customers protect their most sensitive data in the hybrid cloud.

The main benefit of the hybrid cloud is to alleviate congestion in the wireless network through distributed and multi-tiered cloud-based servers, which will play an important role in reducing latency in 6G networks. Thus, the hybrid cloud can provide timely and efficient computing support for mobile blockchain platforms in 6G networks. Blockchains in 6G hybrid clouds solve the problem of limited and non-traceable computing resources in the mobile environment. By deploying the blockchain on a distributed hybrid cloud platform, spectrum sharing of UIoT devices can be achieved easily.

As shown in Fig. 4, in the dynamic spectrum sharing framework based on 6G HBT cloud services, the hybrid blockchain is carried on multiple public or private cloud servers. Any mobile user can access the attributed HBT cloud server and use the powerful computing resources of the cloud to execute the blockchain consensus process. At this point, the mobile user is regarded as a light node running a copy of the blockchain in the accessed blockchain system. That is, the mobile user only needs to complete transactions with the help of some data in the blockchain, without having to care about global data. Therefore, the dynamic spectrum sharing framework based on 6G HBT cloud services minimizes the computing demands on mobile users by offloading spec-trum-sharing computing tasks to the cloud.

The blockchain-based hybrid cloud framework contains three layers: users, hybrid cloud networks, and blockchain. In the system, the 6G hybrid cloud server acts as a dual gateway. First, it acts as the gateway between the private and consortium blockchains in the hybrid blockchain to realize the data interaction and information transfer between different organizations. Second, it acts as the gateway between the enterprise network and core network to realize the network interconnection. The blockchain is used as an overlay system to provide management and control functions for the underlying hybrid cloud system.

Figure 4. - Dynamic spectrum sharing framework based on 6G HBT cloud service.
Figure 4.
Dynamic spectrum sharing framework based on 6G HBT cloud service.

Show All

Figure 5. - Smart contract spectrum management in UIoT.
Figure 5.
Smart contract spectrum management in UIoT.

Show All

Smart Contract for Spectrum Management in Ubiquitous IoT
Smart contracts are a specific protocol that can automatically verify the contract data, execute the contract terms, and distribute the programming. Since they are highly consistent with the characteristics of blockchain technology, such as weak trust, decentralization, open autonomy, and trusted traceability, smart contracts have become the carrier for the application of blockchain in various fields. The user invokes the contract by making a transaction request to the appropriate contact address, with advantages such as the following:

The execution terms, trigger conditions, and default rules in the smart contract can be negotiated by the parties.

Natural language can be encoded into computer language and encapsulated in the blockchain distributed ledger.

In UIoT, there is no foundation of trust between users. It is possible to generate spoofing behavior and thus lose the security of spectrum trading. Illegal frequency use in a wireless network not only causes interference to the main users but also increases the difficulty of radio supervision. To ensure the authenticity of external perception data, a spectrum management scheme based on smart contracts can be adopted. Figure 5 shows that a smart contract is a programmable solution to the above problem, as it can strictly execute contract terms, and establish rights and obligations for both parties to agree on.

First, the spectrum manager deployed on the edge server regularly performs spectrum data collection tasks including time requirements, frequency band range restrictions, and geographic area restrictions. The spectrum data collection task is visible to all servers and nodes in the spectrum device network. In addition, the spectrum management server pre-stores corresponding spectrum coins as a reward for completing the spectrum data collection task while publishing the collection task. Second, the distributed sensing node decides whether to respond to the spectrum data collection task according to its current state and action plan. The node that accepts the task completes the registration on the smart contract. Then the smart contract completes node screening based on information such as the location, price, and reputation of different nodes, and at the same time informs the selected sensing node. Finally, the sensing node completes the spectrum sensing task and reports the result to the smart contract. The smart contract completes the verification of the data, confirms whether the perception task meets the contract requirements, and issues rewards according to the contract.

Integrating smart contracts into radio resource management will avoid infraction of laws and regulations in the process of spectrum trading. It is necessary to weigh the commercial fairness from the aspects of transaction initialization, payment, withdrawal, refund, and so on. To achieve a true “face-to-face” transparent transaction of spectrum resources, we must study the fair payment protocol based on smart contracts.

In spectrum cooperative management, one must not only consider the fairness of transactions, but also build a reliable smart contract management system in combination with supervision from authorities. There should be environmental monitoring nodes in the network to monitor the surrounding radio environment, master the use of the local spectrum, and broadcast the whole network by consensus. On one hand, users can subscribe to the broadcast information from monitoring nodes for the latest spectrum occupancy status. On the other hand, environmental monitoring information has important implications for regulators in terms of assessing the real use of the spectrum (including illegal occupation) in a highly transparent manner.

Conclusions
UIoT is based on terrestrial IoT, which integrates public networks, private networks, hybrid orbiting satellite communication networks, and inter-constellation interconnection communication networks. It can integrate the future 6G communication technologies and networks, which are sustainable to improve and extend. It combines the advantages of satellite networks, HAP/UAV networks, and terrestrial networks to help operators achieve low-cost global ubiquitous coverage. In addition, due to the heterogeneity of UIoT, different communication services can be provided for different QoS requirements of users, thus realizing global ubiquitous access for users, which is an important trend for future 6G network development.

Dynamic spectrum sharing is one of the key components of 6G UIoT services. This article proposes integrating hybrid blockchain technology into a 6G cloud to enable dynamic spectrum sharing between UIoT devices. In this structure, the combination of smart contracts and the hybrid cloud can provide additional reliability and security, effectively improving the overall spectrum utilization efficiency.