The proliferation of smart devices has led to a huge amount of data streaming in the Internet of Things (IoT). However, the resource-limited devices cannot satisfy the demands of computing-in-tensive but delay-sensitive applications. The data delivery among devices may be tampered with by malicious users. These pose new challenges to provide secure and intelligent services in IoT. Blockchain and reinforcement learning (RL) are promising techniques for establishing a secure environment and intelligent resource management. In this article, we introduce a novel software defined networking (SDN)-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing to support secure and intelligent services in IoT. We first introduce the SDN-enabled architecture by integrating cloud computing, edge computing, and IoT networks. Then we provide several applications of SDN-enabled architecture in edge-cloud orchestrated computing. Next, we propose the blockchain and RL envisioned solutions to implement secure and intelligent services in IoT. Moreover, a case study of blockchain- and RL-enabled secure and intelligent computing offloading is presented to validate its effectiveness. We finally provide our conclusion and discuss several promising research directions.

Introduction
The rapid advancement of the Internet of Things (IoT) has paved the way to connecting billions of devices [1]. It supports the interconnectivity of real-world objects and provides convenient services for human beings, such as healthcare and intelligent logistics. By leveraging mobile devices' perception, storage, and computing abilities, various applications are expected to meet mobile users' requirements [2]. However, due to the explosive growth of diverse devices, such as smartphones and wireless sensors, big data streaming has increased exponentially in IoT. As a result, the conventional centralized cloud architecture suffers from heavy loads for processing real-time data analysis due to limited bandwidth and long-distance transmission. Therefore, an on-demand state-of-the-art computing framework is needed to enhance the capacity of IoT.

To support the increasing service requirements, several new networking frameworks have emerged as a powerful computing paradigm to improve the efficiency, scalability, and connectivity of IoT [3]. In particular, the distributed architecture of mobile edge computing (MEC) has been developed by leveraging the available computing resources of edge nodes in mobile environments. Lots of data centers and servers are migrated from cloud to the edge of network, such that the data transmission delay can be further decreased due to the short distance between edge servers and mobile devices. Furthermore, edge servers with caching and computing capacities are able to provide content delivery and task computing for mobile users. Therefore, cooperation and integration between cloud and edge constitute a promising approach to maintain quality of service (QoS) for various applications [4].

The evolution of communication networks, such as 5G and beyond 5G (B5G) networks, has been driven by increasing connected devices and the growing requirements for various applications. Although MEC architecture has been considered as an effective solution for improving computing efficiency, it still faces security threats; for instance, malicious users may tamper with data packets or interrupt data delivery [5]. Nevertheless, the blockchain platform works as a decentralized ledger, which can store data records for protecting data security. The cryptography technique and hash function are adopted to guarantee that stored data are tamper-resis-tant and traceable, and the consensus protocol can ensure data consistency. Moreover, block-chain technology can be integrated seamlessly to the MEC environment to solve the security problem without considering central entities. On one hand, the computing process of mining can be executed by edge servers to improve mining efficiency. On the other hand, the robustness of a blockchain network can be improved by consolidating more miners in the networks. To this end, the application of blockchain is feasible for ensuring the security of MEC.

The recent success of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques (machine learning and deep learning) has spurred a promising learning paradigm for complex policies in high-dimension-al environments. Although machine learning has shown promising prospects in network optimization problems, it requires previously labeled training data in real-life scenarios. This motivates reinforcement learning (RL) techniques to address multiple decision making problems in IoT. RL has significant ability to empower intelligent resource management and orchestration in time-vari-ant, uncertain, and complex environments [6]. It exhibits great potential in resource sharing to implement intelligent services. Furthermore, software defined networking (SDN) decouples the data plane and control plane in IoT, in which the controllers have the ability to regulate the network flow by taking the resource usage conditions of cloud and edge servers into consideration [7]. Thus, the integration of SDN and RL is promising to effectively revolutionize network resource management.

However, due to untrusted behaviors of users, malicious attacks may destroy normal services, and service efficiency may be low without considering the network resource allocation. These emerging challenges motivate us to research the security service and resource management with high intelligence. In this article, we develop a novel SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing to promote secure and intelligent services in IoT. The proposed SDN-en-abled architecture coordinates the cloud computing, edge computing, and IoT networks to support emerging applications. We introduce the block-chain and RL envisioned solutions to achieve secure and intelligent services. Then a case study of blockchain- and RL-enabled secure and intelligent computing offloading is presented to validate the effectiveness.

The rest of this article is organized as follows. In the following section, we present the SDN-en-abled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing and applications in IoT. The block-chain and RL envisioned secure and intelligent services in IoT are then introduced. Following that, we propose a case study of blockchain- and RL-enabled secure and intelligent computing off-loading. We finally conclude this work and discuss future directions in the final section.

SDN-Enabled Architecture for Edge-Cloud Orchestrated Computing and Applications in IoT
This section first introduces the SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing in IoT. Then several applications are provided in detail.

SDN-Enabled Architecture for Edge-Cloud Orchestrated Computing in IoT
The SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing in IoT is shown in Fig. 1. It is an integrated tier network architecture. The big data generated by IoT networks needs to be processed. The continuum between edge computing and cloud computing is able to provide powerful computing capacity and improve resource utilization. The SDN technique decou-pies the control plane and data plane, enabling network centralized management through a centralized controller to support network operations. The SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing leverages blockchain as an immutable metadata store to support network ownership and authenticity. The RL operates in SDN controllers to schedule network resources and improve resource utilization in IoT.

Figure 1. - SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing.
Figure 1.
SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing.

Show All

Cloud Computing
With powerful processing and storage capacities, a large number of servers are deployed at remote clouds. These cloud servers include multiple virtual machines for executing computation-intensive and delay-sensitive tasks. The blockchain network establishes reliable communication for cloud servers and mobile devices. Moreover, it allows users to securely store and process their data in cloud servers. However, due to the long distance between cloud servers and mobile devices, cloud computing faces several problems such as high transmission delay and low bandwidth.

Edge Computing
In comparison to the centralized framework, a lot of distributed edge nodes, such as roadside units (RSUs), access points (APs), and small base stations (SBSs), are deployed at the edge of networks. They can pre-process many tasks to achieve load balancing between cloud computing and edge computing. These edge servers operate in a decentralized manner and can act as blockchain entities to securely connect to cloud servers and mobile devices via a blockchain network. Moreover, the distributed architecture of edge servers can implement high bandwidth and rate for mobile devices to significantly reduce the latency.

IoT Networks
The complex infrastructures, such as cellular networks, ad hoc networks, and underwater networks, lead to heterogeneity of IoT networks. A huge number of smart devices connect to the IoT networks and generate big data, resulting in loads of data processing. To achieve secure service improvements, intelligent management (e.g., data caching, storage, and processing techniques) for the emerging big data is needed. Moreover, each smart device is required to register with the blockchain network and owns an identification and blockchain account address.

SDN Architecture
The SDN architecture is divided into data plane and control plane. The data plane is co-located in IoT networks, which is responsible for data collection, data routing, data storage, and data fusion. The control plane is integrated in cloud computing and edge computing to implement control synchronization, control decision, and resource management. In order to provide realtime and efficient network control, SDN controller supports network centralized management. This enables mobile network operators (MNOs) to program the network resources through the SDN controller for providing intelligent services.

Blockchain Platform
Although resource sharing is regarded as an effective method to improve network services, it faces the challenge that data sharing by other organizations is required to be authentic and trusted. Blockchain technology makes this possible for edge-cloud orchestrated computing through self-governing and self-super-vision, which has the ability to be an immutable metadata store to provide ownership, authenticity, and integrity properties. The network resources along with their hash and metadata can be recorded as the transactions in the blockchain. The SDN-enabled architecture serves as a block-chain-based edge-cloud orchestrated computing platform to securely and intelligently manage decentralized applications in IoT. Through the smart contract and consensus mechanism, the data and transaction information can be stored in the blocks to protect it from malicious attacks.

Reinforcement Learning
The intelligent network control and data processing through RL are expected to be the key technologies in future wireless networks to support scalability, massive capacity, and connectivity. In RL, a learning agent interacts with the network environment and receives an immediate reward by conducting an action and observing network state. The learning agent seeks to obtain optimal actions to maximize rewards. Moreover, the RL algorithms can be run in network operators to effectively manage and coordinate network resources in the complex and time-variant environment. In the proposed SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing, the RL algorithms are deployed in SDN controllers to intelligently coordinate the network resources.

Applications of SDN-Enabled Architecture for Edge-Cloud Orchestrated Computing in IoT
Based on SDN and edge computing techniques, many applications have emerged to provide intelligent services for human beings. By leveraging the SDN controller and edge computing, the SDN-enabled architecture can implement realtime control, improve computing efficiency, and facilitate application management. The most typical applications, smart city and autonomous driving, are introduced as follows.

Smart City
In smart city, numerous sensors are deployed to collect environmental data, such as crowd distribution and air pollution. Through data processing and computing, this information can be utilized for facilitating the city services [8]. Specifically, based on SDN, data collection, data storage, data routing, and data fusion are performed in the data plane. The control plane coordinates the network resources and guides decision making for city management, such as traffic control and pollution evaluation.

As shown in Fig. 2, the city service platform comprises multiple SDN controllers. The block-chain guarantees the security management in smart city by immutably recording the metadata information. Smart city developments can be described as follows: The sensing information is first collected and transmitted to the city service platform through wireless or wired links. Then the data analysis is executed in the SDN controller to offer services to citizens.

Figure 2. - Application of SDN-enabled architecture for smart city.
Figure 2.
Application of SDN-enabled architecture for smart city.

Show All

Autonomous Driving
The development of autonomous driving technologies can greatly improve people's driving experiences. Through intelligent operation technologies, including collision avoidance and traffic sign detection, autonomous cars can significantly alleviate the burden of drivers. Moreover, edge computing enables autonomous cars to efficiently process data and make decisions. It can eliminate some traffic accidents caused by human error to provide people with reliable and safe driving services [9].

Figure 3 illustrates the scenario of SDN-enabled architecture for autonomous driving. The sensing and computing capacities for autonomous cars implement real-time data processing, and the SDN controller can efficiently manage traffic streaming, lessen traffic congestion, and improve travel efficiency. Moreover, in the blockchain-enabled transportation system, the traffic information can be tracked and audited in the blockchain platform, which achieves a secure and intelligent transportation system (ITS) for vehicular networks.

Figure 3. - Scenario of SDN-enabled architecture for autonomous driving.
Figure 3.
Scenario of SDN-enabled architecture for autonomous driving.

Show All

Blockchain and RL Envisioned Secure and Intelligent Services in IoT
This section first introduces the open issues for edge-cloud orchestrated computing in IoT. Then the motivations for blockchain and RL techniques are provided. Next, the blockchain and RL envisioned secure and intelligent services are presented.

Open Issues for Edge-Cloud Orchestrated Computing in IoT
Security Threats
Although SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing in IoT has attractive features for data processing, several security threats emerge, which influence the reliability of IoT networks. In particular, network nodes may not trust each other due to the existence of malicious users. The data information may be tampered with by malicious attacks. For instance, the transaction data may be modified by malicious users to obtain more profits. As such, secure and trusted network services for SDN-en-abled architecture are required.

Resource Allocation and Utilization
Offloading computing-intensive tasks to edge servers is regarded as an effective approach to improve mobile devices' computing efficiency. However, on one hand, when edge servers process numerous tasks simultaneously, it may cause extra energy consumption and time delay. On the other hand, since mobile users have different requirements for computing services, it is hard to satisfy the demands of all mobile users. Moreover, in the blockchain platform, the efficiency of mining and consensus processing by these computing-limited servers is inefficient, which leads to a resource allocation issue for edge computing.

Motivations for Blockchain and RL
Blockchain-Based Security
Blockchain is a decentralized public ledger to store transaction records, where the data blocks are copied and published over the blockchain network to guarantee data integrity and security. In the blockchain organization, it comprises transaction information, transaction record blocks, and a consensus mechanism. The transaction information can be data types, data tags, and a timestamp of transaction generation. The transaction is encrypted and signed with signatures to ensure authenticity.

To guarantee the blockchain consistency, a consensus mechanism is developed to reach an agreement for the block orders and validate the transaction's correctness. Through the consensus mechanism, mobile nodes can easily discover false transactions injected by malicious attackers and discard false transactions via voting.

RL-Based Resource Orchestration
With increasing service requirements, the data generated by various devices emerges at an exponential growth. AI is a promising technique that can be integrated into edge computing to achieve intelligent resource orchestration. In resource orchestration, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) exhibits great potential for improving service efficiency by utilizing such data. Specifically, DRL can accurately obtain network features, such as idle computing resource, energy consumption, and channel state, to determine a resource allocation strategy. In the proposed SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing, SDN controllers can improve resource utilization by leveraging DRL algorithms.

Blockchain and RL Envisioned Secure and Intelligent Services
Security and intelligence are important attributes to promote mobile users' quality of experience (QoE). To establish a secure and intelligent system in the proposed SDN-enabled architecture, blockchain and RL are integrated for edge-cloud orchestrated computing. As shown in Fig. 4, the blockchain and RL envisioned secure and intelligent services (i.e., content caching and delivery, and computing off-loading) are provided as follows.

Figure 4. - Blockchain and RL envisioned secure and intelligent services: a) Content caching and delivery; b) Computing offloading.
Figure 4.
Blockchain and RL envisioned secure and intelligent services: a) Content caching and delivery; b) Computing offloading.

Show All

Content Caching and Delivery
Edge servers with caching resources are able to store various contents, which is a promising solution to reduce transmission delay and data loads of centralized networks [10]. However, on one hand, requesting contents may involve sensitive and personal information; hence, mobile users are unwilling to obtain contents from untrusted edge servers. On the other hand, the efficiency of content delivery may be low without considering resource allocation of edge servers. Figure 4a shows the scenario of blockchain and RL envisioned content caching and delivery. Edge servers can predict the content requesting through DRL algorithms and cache contents from MNOs in advance, thus improving the caching hit ratio. Moreover, the blockchain platform can prevent untrusted users' behaviors and enable mobile nodes to trade with edge servers securely. When a transaction record is created, it is packaged and connected to the blockchain to guarantee legitimate transaction.

Computing Offloading
Since resource-constrained mobile devices are unable to process computing-intensive tasks, an effective approach to improve the computing efficiency is to offload tasks [11]. As such, the computing delay and energy consumption of mobile devices can be reduced. Figure 4b depicts the scenario of block-chain and RL envisioned computing offloading. Computing tasks are offloaded to nearby edge servers. The edge servers with sufficient computing resources can perform tasks and deliver data to mobile devices, where the DRL algorithm is adopted to determine offloading decision and resource allocation. Moreover, the data records are stored in the blockchain platform to ensure transaction security and data consistency.

Case Study of Blockchain- and RL-Enabled Secure and Intelligent Computing Offloading
This section presents a case study of blockchain- and RL-enabled secure and intelligent computing offloading. We first introduce the system model and blockchain model. Then we propose computing offloading based on the actor-critic approach. The numerical results are finally provided to validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

System Model
The system of blockchain- and RL-enabled secure and intelligent computing offloading includes a number of edge servers and mobile devices, and a blockchain platform. The details are introduced as follows.

Edge Servers
Edge servers are deployed by MNOs at the edge of networks, and the set is denoted by I. By leveraging the computing resources, edge servers can be used to execute task computing to reduce computation delay of mobile devices. Furthermore, in the blockchain platform, through equipping them with the mining-based application, edge servers can act distributed computing nodes to solve the proof-of-work (PoW) puzzle.

Mobile Devices
Mobile devices held by mobile users can support various services, such as sensing and navigation, and the set of mobile devices is denoted by J. Due to limited computing capacities, mobile devices can offload their tasks to edge servers. Edge servers are responsible for providing computing data for mobile users.

Blockchain Platform
The blockchain platform is regarded as a medium in the system, which is responsible for broadcasting the mining results and consensus process. Moreover, it can record data and transaction information, and link blocks to the chain to protect the system security.

Blockchain Model
In the blockchain system, a smart contract is introduced to describe the transaction information when completing offloading tasks between edge servers and mobile devices. The smart contract is a set of digital commitments signed by edge servers and mobile devices, and it is stored in the blockchain platform.

Participant Registration
An edge server and a mobile device register with the blockchain platform to verify their identification Πi and Πj, respectively. After completing registration, the registration certifications Ξi and Ξj of the edge server and mobile device are created. Moreover, the public and private key pairs are given by (ℵi,Ri) and (ℵj, Rj), and their account addresses are Ωj and Ωj, respectively.

Smart Contract
The smart contract is designed by the blockchain platform for edge servers and mobile devices to reach consensus. Each participant needs to sign its private keys in the smart contract. It can be the timestamp, account address, and transaction price.

Consensus Mechanism
The consensus mechanism is to guarantee the security of the block-chain system. Each participant can be considered as a consensus node by voting on the validity of transactions. The consensus results are broadcasted by the blockchain platform to the system.

Computing Offloading Based on Actor-Critic Approach
In the proposed SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing, the SDN controllers run a DRL algorithm to regulate and allocate computing resources of edge servers. In order to obtain the optimal offloading strategy, we use the actor-critic DRL approach to implement computing resource allocation. The following parameters are introduced to describe the process of computing resource allocation.

State
The system state S consists of the idle computing resources and the queue of computing tasks.

Action
The action A includes the tasks' offloading decisions.

Reward
The agent conducts an action a in state s; then it obtains an immediate reward r from the system. The reward function can be defined as the difference between the price of computing tasks and the cost of energy consumption for edge servers.

In the actor-critic process, the learning agent includes two parts: the actor (i.e., policy) for policy improvement and the critic (i.e., value function) for policy evaluation. To evaluate the continuous state and action variables, we aim to find the policy to maximize the expectation reward E(r) of computing offloading.

Policy Improvement
The policy gradient algorithm [12] is adopted to search for the maximum reward E(r) by ascending the gradient of policy π.

Policy Evaluation
The critic is used to evaluate the state-action values. The state-action value function Qπ(s, a) is parameterized by the state-action features. We use the temporal difference (TD) error [13] to estimate the value function based on the given policy. As such, according to the approximated state-action value function and the transition sample, TD-error can be obtained. In the actor-critic learning process, the policy is updated according to the output of the critic. The critic updates its parameter based on the TD error. The optimal strategy can be derived when the learning process converges.

Numerical Results
We evaluate the performance of the proposed DRL-based approach for computing offloading through simulations. We consider the scenario where 5 edge servers and 10 mobile devices are distributed in a 300 m×300 m area. The task size is taken from [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] GB. The bandwidth for task offloading is determined by [20, 25, 30, 35] MHz [14]. The idle computing resources of edge servers are randomly taken from [10, 15, 20, 25, 30] GHz [15]. The effectiveness of the proposed DRL-based approach is compared to three baseline strategies, described as follows.

Popularity-Based Caching and Local Execution (PCL)
Edge servers cache computing tasks based on the maximum number of requests under the caching capacity. The computing resources of edge servers are equally distributed to each mobile device that requests a computing task. Unrequested tasks will be executed locally by mobile devices.

Popularity-Based Caching and Full Offloading (PCO)
All computing tasks are offloaded and performed with the maximum available power at edge servers.

Random Caching and Offloading (RCO)
The computing tasks are randomly cached in edge servers. The offloading decisions and resource allocation are randomly determined by edge servers.

Figure 5a illustrates the performance of computing delay vs. the number of tasks. It can be seen that as the number of tasks increases, the computing delay tends to increase since the total computing loads of edge servers become large. The proposed DRL-based approach can achieve the lowest computing delay compared to other approaches, because the proposed approach takes the resource allocation and offloading decision into account.

Figure 5. - Comparison on the performance of the proposed DRL-based approach: a) Computing delay vs. the number of tasks; b) System cost vs. computing resource of the edge server.
Figure 5.
Comparison on the performance of the proposed DRL-based approach: a) Computing delay vs. the number of tasks; b) System cost vs. computing resource of the edge server.

Show All

Figure 5b demonstrates the effectiveness of system cost vs. the computing resource of the edge server. It can be seen that with the computing resource of edge server increasing, the system cost tends to decrease. The proposed DRL-based approach achieves the best performance, which means that the DRL approach can implement better resource allocation to reduce energy consumption. These features validate the effectiveness of our proposed DRL-based approach.

Security Analysis
In the blockchain-based edge-cloud orchestrated computing system, we design the smart contract to record the data and trading information in a block truthfully. The hash chain is adopted to protect the security of the blockchain system, in which the hash value is determined by the prior block and the next block. If an attacker modifies data in a block, the hash values of all the blocks will change. Since the mining process for PoW is costly, it is impossible for attackers to tamper with the transaction records. Therefore, malicious attacks can be prevented to protect the security services in IoT.

Conclusion and Future Research Directions
In this article, we propose a novel SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing to promote secure services in IoT. We first introduce the SDN-enabled architecture by integrating the cloud computing, edge computing, and IoT networks. Then we provide several applications of SDN-enabled architecture for edge-cloud orchestrated computing. Next, we discuss the open issues for edge-cloud orchestrated computing in IoT. After that, we present a case study of blockchain- and RL-enabled secure and intelligent computing offloading. We finally provide numerical results to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed DRL-based approach. Promising research directions are discussed as follows.

Integrated Space-Terrestrial Networks with SDN
Layered space-terrestrial networks integrating satellites, aerial networks, and infrastructures can further enhance network capacity. With wide coverage and seamless connectivity, it is considered as a novel network architecture to provide various services. However, the interoperability of the integrated networks may be constrained, which leads to complexity for management. Therefore, the combination of the integrated space-terrestrial networks with SDN is needed to configure the network architecture with interop-erability.

Privacy Preservation for Mobile Crowdsensing
With the popularization of mobile devices, mobile crowdsensing networks pave the way to collecting sensing data by exploiting enormous sensing devices. However, sensing data provided by mobile users contains their sensitive information, which exposes the privacy of data owners. Therefore, privacy protection for sensing data is needed to improve mobile users' QoE.

Intelligent Resource Orchestration in 6G Networks
6G networks have remarkable features, such as ultra-low delay and ultra-high bandwidth. However, the time-variant wireless channels, the diverse requirements of applications, and complex systems make 6G networks more challenging to support high-performance services. AI has the ability to handle the problems with time-variant and complex features. Developing AI algorithms can further implement resource management and orchestration intelligently.