Abstract
Recently, the concept of “immersive VR news” has been proposed in the news media field. However, unlike traditional video news, the user experience and media effects of immersive VR news have yet to be verified. To examine the influence of VR technology on the news media field, we designed an immersive VR news product to further discern differences in user experience and media effects among traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction. The results show that traditional video news excelled in terms of empathy and nervousness, whereas VR news with interaction was superior in terms of immersion, interest, accuracy, and credibility. VR news without interaction performed the poorest in all categories. Based on the observed user behaviors during the experiment, we present a detailed discussion of the reasons for these differences and offer guidelines for the design and application of immersive VR news.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Virtual reality (VR)

Human-computer interaction

Immersive news

User experience

Media effects

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the continuous reduction in the price of various smart sensor devices and the development of natural human-computer interaction technology, virtual reality (VR) technology has developed rapidly. The basic features of VR can be summarized with three “Is”, i.e., immersion, interaction and imagination (Bowman, 2004). Immersion refers to the user being immersed in a computer-generated virtual space and being able to obtain perceptions that are identical or similar to those of the real world thereby experiencing “presence” or “telepresence”. Interaction refers to human-computer interaction that enables the user to interact with a multidimensional virtual information space with gesture recognition, speech recognition, eye-tracking, brain-computer interface, and other natural interaction technology through hardware and software, which gradually approximate real world interactions. Imagination refers to users’ ability to imagine future progress in a virtual world through various thinking processes, such as logical thinking, reasoning, and associating, based on acquired information as well as their behaviors in the system. In recent years, VR technology has recently attracted worldwide attention and has been successfully applied to many fields such as education, emergency exercise, real estate development, industrial design, aerospace development, medicine, games, and entertainment.

In addition to these applications, VR technology has been used in the field of journalism, where the concept of immersive VR news has been proposed (Peña, 2010; Shin, 2018a; Shin, 2018b). So-called immersive VR news refers to a news product that enables viewers to experience certain events and specific circumstances of the news reports from a first-person perspective. The basic idea is to allow viewers to enter a virtually reproduced scenario of a news story as a digital avatar to experience the story. As opposed to traditional 2D video news, immersive VR systems (e.g., head-mounted displays and online VR) provide the audience with unprecedented, rich and diverse experiences that enhance their multichannel perceptions (visual, auditory, tactile, and even olfactory and gustatory perceptions). Such immersive storytelling is conducive to heightening the emotional participation of the audience in the current news event and is thus a form of deep immersive news (Peña, 2010).

However, despite the fanfare, strong response, and sensational effect at its advent, immersive VR news nonetheless remains a novel journalist paradigm. As the research on its narrative framework deepens in academia and industry, the following issues regarding immersive VR news have gradually emerged:

(1)
Due to the interactive nature of VR technology, users are no longer passive recipients of content; rather, to a certain extent, they have autonomy and can actively explore news content to a certain extent. Users’ perception and intent can significantly impact their experience of immersive VR news (Shin et al., 2018b). Traditional video news is conducive to mostly one-way information communication whereas immersive VR news is characterized by two-way human-computer interaction. Thus, the two news experiences may conflict with each other.

(2)
Compared with traditional 2D video news, due to the fading of the physical barriers of information transmission, immersive VR news exposes users to a virtual environment. Users may thus become obsessed with the element of “experience” as they are immersed in the news, and they may consequently ignore important pieces of information that the news event is designed to convey. Therefore, the question of how to coordinate the relationship between the “output information” of news and the “immersion” of VR is one of the difficulties facing immersive VR news.

(3)
When using immersive VR technology to reproduce a news site, the fairness and credibility of the news itself can be affected by various factors, such as the inappropriate screening and collecting of information and biased perspectives or emotional tendencies in reconstructing the news scene. For example, in an ultra-real “mimetic environment”, users tend to confuse the virtual world with reality and believe that “seeing is believing.” If the content producer has clear subjective intent, users’ cognition tends to lose objectivity and the ability to comprehend the information presented.

In summary, many issues regarding the application process of immersive VR news remain unresolved. Some scholars (Riva et al., 2007; Hardee, 2016; Sirkkunen et al., 2016; Vázquez-Herrero et al., 2017; Hardee et al., 2017; Laws 2017; Tse et al., 2017; Sundar et al., 2017; Seo, 2019) believe that immersive VR news has the advantage of providing an unprecedented multisensory experience for audiences, which helps strengthen their emotional involvement in news events. However, other scholars (Nolan, 2003; Kent, 2015; Kool, 2016; Wang et al., 2018) have argued that the virtual reproduction of news has negative impacts on the fairness, authenticity, and comprehensiveness of the presented content.

To address the above problems, we conducted an empirical study to examine users’ experience (e.g., immersion and empathy) and media effects regarding the accuracy, credibility, and emotion of audiences’ acquired information through immersive VR news, an emerging method of news reporting, in the context of new media.

In this paper, we first review related work and introduce the objectives of this study and then present our experimental process and results in detail. Next, we analyze the results and generate design guidelines for immersive VR news. Finally, we summarize the limitations of this study and suggest directions for future studies.

2. Related work
Immersive news is a new form of news. Since its introduction by Peña et al. (2010), it has attracted extensive attention from academia and the news industry and has spurred many practical explorations and trials (Kent 2015; Kool, 2016; Sirkkunen et al., 2016; Hardee, 2016; Hardee et al., 2017; Pérez-Seijo, 2017; Sundar et al., 2017; Vázquez-Herrero et al., 2017; Shyam et al., 2017; Laws, 2017; Soler-Adillon, 2018; Bösch et al., 2018; Shin, 2018a; Shin, 2018b; Seo et al., 2019). Depending on the adopted technologies, immersive news can be divided into 360° panoramic video news and VR news. Another technology that has been used for immersive journalism is augmented reality (AR) (Pavlik et al., 2013; Singh et al., 2015; Sirkkunen et al., 2016; Robert 2020). AR news requires the integration of real-world objects and virtual scenes, while VR news, also called deep immersive news, reproduces the news scene through 3D-scene and character modeling based on computer graphics and human-computer interaction technology. Peña et al. suggested that a VR system is particularly suitable for presenting news stories from a first-person perspective and that relative to traditional newspaper or other 2D audiovisual materials, immersive VR news offers an opportunity to re-examine different levels of news stories. Many academic researchers have investigated the user experience and media effects of immersive VR news and have made significant achievements.

First, in terms of user experience, immersion and empathy are two focal points in the study of immersive VR experience (Villani et al., 2009). The term immersion is broadly used. Slater (2003) and Bowman et al. (2007), for example, considered immersion to be the objective level of the sensory fidelity of a VR system provided from a technological standpoint. This notion of immersion depends solely on the system's rendering software and display technology (e.g., stereoscopy, field of regard, field of view, display size, frame rate, refresh rate). In contrast, Brown et al. (2004) argued that immersion is indeed used to describe the degree of involvement with a VR environment from a psychological standpoint. This understanding can be identified as three distinct levels – engagement, engrossment, and total immersion. Engagement is the first level of immersion and explains how and why applications are attractive to people (Sutcliffe, 2010). It is a quality of the user experience and can be affected by many factors such as stereoscopy, display fidelity, aesthetic appeal, novelty, the usability of the VR system, the co-presence of others, and the user's overall evaluation of the salience of the experience (Freeman et al., 2000; Haywood et al., 2005; McMahan et al., 2012; Boyle et al., 2012; Lugrin et al., 2013; O'Brien et al., 2013; Arapakis et al., 2014). Therefore, immersive VR news stories and their presentation should increase the sense of presence and attract, involve, and occupy users’ attention.

Other scholars have also argued that immersion, as a subjective experience, cannot be measured based on technological features or industry intentions (Witmer et al., 1998; Burns et al., 2015). Some research, such as Teng (2010), André et al. (2014), and Shin (2019), argued that immersion is a user experience that is similar to engagement and concentration and often occurs at a certain moment. Jennett et al. (2008) summarized that immersion is concerned with the specific experience of engaging with a virtual environment and includes with the following features: 1) lack of awareness of time, 2) loss of awareness of the real world, and 3) involvement and a sense of being in the task environment. They also suggested that immersion can be measured both subjectively, i.e., focusing on users’ fair understanding of what it means to be immersed through questionnaires, and objectively, i.e., focusing on user responses produced automatically and without much conscious deliberation (e.g., task completion time and eye movements). Here, we argue that the technological qualities of the VR systems are fundamental in achieving place illusion. However, the immersion of immersive VR news cannot rely only on such qualities. In addition, these qualities may not be the most relevant when we evaluate the weight of the narrative in an immersive VR news experience. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on discussing the subjective aspect of immersion.

Many researchers believed that high levels of immersion, whether subjective or objective, can cause an increased sense of presence (Bowman et al., 2007; Jennett et al., 2008; Hardee et al., 2017), which refers to a user's psychological sense of being in a virtual environment (Slater et al., 1994). The sense of presence may vary among users when they experience the same VR system or even among different visits to the same system by the same users. This is because the sense of presence primarily depends on a user's state of mind, emotions, and other factors (Bowman et al., 2007). To date, the term presence is still under considerable debate and can be measured in different ways depending on different definitions (Kim et al., 2016, Schwind et al., 2019, Slater and Steed, 2000, Witmer and Singer, 1998, Zahorik and Jenison, 1998). Therefore, we adopt a more practical method to investigate the effects of immersive VR news experiences on users with a subjective measurement questionnaire seen in Jennett et al. (2008). Although VR technology has been widely used to convey news stories in immersive news, the way in which an audience experiences such stories and their real life context remain unclear. McGloin et al. (2015) proposed that implementing an immersive experience is an important goal in a computer-mediated environment. Similarly, Shin et al. (2018b) argued that immersion can be used to characterize the technical support of the VR environment, and higher audience satisfaction, greater credibility, and a superior interactive experience can be achieved using VR interactive devices capable of triggering a high degree of immersion. They also note that immersion largely depends on the user's characteristics, intent and context rather than the definition by the media, and immersion affects the user's perception and view intention regarding the news story.

Empathy, also called compassion or sympathy, refers to an individual's ability to perceive the inner worlds of others. An important role of immersive VR news is to re-invoke the audience's emotional involvement in the current event (Peña et al., 2010). VR can convey another person's experience or feelings to users, and users tend to regard a digital avatar's behavior as their behavior (Ahn et al., 2016). In a VR environment, the audience can feel empathy by experiencing others’ actual emotions or situations through making close contact with a certain character in the same space (Sutherland, 2015). Riva et al. (2007) confirmed the effectiveness of VR as an emotional medium and demonstrated the interaction between presence and emotion: on the one hand, in the “emotional” environment, the feeling of presence is stronger; on the other hand, the emotional state is also affected by the degree of presence. Experimentally, Shyam et al. (2017) revealed that compared to traditional media such as text and images, VR and 360° video results in higher credibility regarding the sources of the story, a stronger intention of story-sharing, and greater empathy.

Second, in terms of media effects, accuracy at the cognitive level and trust and emotional strength at the psychological attitude level are topics that have been widely discussed. Regarding accuracy, Tse et al. (2017) found that 35% of subjects mentioned the experience of fear of missing information in immersive environments, while 33% of subjects mentioned that immersive media distract them from the content of the story itself.

In terms of trust, some researchers believe that immersive VR news may damage the credibility of news and weaken its ability to present facts to the audience. However, Peña et al. (2010) hold a different opinion. They suggest that the purpose of immersive journalism is not merely to present the facts but rather to offer an opportunity to experience them. Their results show that immersive VR news with a high level of telepresence has higher credibility, and the experience feedback of the audience that used VR interaction devices capable of triggering a high level of immersion indicates a higher level of trust in the news content. Zhou et al. (2018) conducted an investigation using text versions, 360° panoramic video versions and VR versions of two pieces of news material. They found that (1) the audience of immersive VR news, who are more prone to overlook the details, exhibit a lower degree of information acceptance than those who read the text; (2) immersive VR news is more emotionally intense compared with text reading, though there was no statistically significant difference between the 360° panoramic video news and text reading; and (3) the audience's trust in immersive news content is higher than text news and 360° panoramic video news.

Audiences’ attitude has always been an important dependent variable in mass communication research (Perry, 2002) and has been extensively studied. Attitude is typically divided into three independent aspects (i.e., cognitive, affective and conative), and the “cognitive-affective-conative” (CAC) framework has been widely used in communication studies to measure audiences’ attitudes (Chia, 2006; Kalyanaraman, 2006; Kang, 2009; Luther, 2009; Park, 2010; Lin, 2014). Therefore, in this study, the media effects of immersive VR news were also measured with this framework.

Other related studies have also been conducted from various perspectives. For example, in reference to the Pulitzer Prize category, Hardee et al. (2017) classified news into breaking news, public service news, investigative reports, and explanatory reports. After analyzing the immersive technology and news features, they argued that immersive VR technology is suitable for investigative news and explanatory news. Bösch et al. (2018) noted that currently, immersive VR news faces two major challenges. The first challenge concerns how to balance the role of audiences, whether as first-person active participants or third-person passive observers. The former uses a nonlinear news narrative structure (i.e., VR news with interaction) in which users’ behavior can change the narrative rhythm of the news (e.g., having a conversation with characters in the story or interacting with virtual objects in the scene), while the latter is based on the traditional linear structure of news reporting (i.e., VR news without interaction) in which users’ behavior cannot change the original narrative rhythm of the news. Both forms of the narrative framework have advantages and disadvantages. Second, VR news lacks a unified framework. In traditional audiovisual media, news producers must consider the limitations of 2D TV screens, computers, or mobile phones, but in a VR environment, these frameworks and constraints disappear, and users need not adopt the content publisher's lens and perspective and thus are more free to choose and accept their perceived information. However, this change also poses a new challenge for media publishers, i.e., how to effectively direct users’ attention to the content that the news publisher wants to convey within a less constrained framework. Hardee (2016) proposed a narrative design framework for immersive news that includes four elements: VR presence, narrative, cognition, and journalistic ethics. Similarly, Soler-Adillon et al. (2018), after analyzing previous studies, also proposed a theoretical framework focusing on the technical features and user experience of immersive news that includes the elements of storytelling, empathy, immersion, and interactivity, which differ from those of Hardee (2016). Namely, Soler-Adillon et al.’s (2018) framework emphasizes the important effect of interactivity on user experience and immersive news narrative effectiveness. They argued that VR news that lacks interactive features is not VR news in the true sense. Most studies have focused on VR news without interaction, rarely examining applications of VR news with interaction. In the future, the need for interactivity in immersive VR news will be better integrated into the system.

In addition to intense academic debates on the narrative framework of immersive news, the news industry has been constantly working on immersive news projects to explore the narrative form of immersion news and has launched many immersive VR products. For example, in 2014, the BBC and other news agencies began attempting to integrate immersive VR in news reports and has since created many typical immersive VR news products, including Use of Force (2014)1, Kiya (2015)2, Across the Line (2016)3, We Wait: A Migrant Story (2016)4, Remembering Pearl Harbor (2016)5, Easter Rising: Voice of a Rebel (2017)6, After Solitary (2017)7, and Home: A VR Spacewalk (2018)8.

In summary, while immersive technologies are advancing, the understanding of their effects on the news consumer remains inadequate. Moreover, the current mainstream immersive VR news continues to focus on non-interactive products that only allow users to “visit” or experience news events from a bystander's perspective. Generally, users are only allowed to look to certain directions within a virtual scene (e.g., the games Use of Force, Kiya, Across the Line, We Wait, Remembering Pearl Harbor, After Solitary, and Home mentioned above). However, this type of user control of the viewpoint does not afford the same degree of agency that users usually have when interacting with the real world objects. The user experience and media effects of interactive immersive VR news have rarely been investigated. We found that the narrative frameworks adopted in different studies differ markedly from those of traditional news coverage. News production is moving away from linear and planned storytelling. The mode of viewing an event from the perspective of an omniscient narrator is not suitable for all news topics, and the viewing perspectives are beginning to diversify such as making eye contact with the protagonist and even experiencing the feelings of other parties as the protagonist. The degrees of participation and interaction of viewers in different cases differ. In this paper, interactive VR news refers to a news delivery mechanism that gives users the ability to interact with the news content. More specifically, users can interact with the virtual scene, with objects appearing in a news story, or with other characters through activities such as eye contact and pointing. Compared with traditional video news, the users in immersive VR news are afforded the ability to make choices or select different paths or story timelines just as what they do when surfing the Internet.

Based on the above analyses, we designed and developed an immersive VR news product and examined the user experience and media effects through usability testing. Based on the results of usability testing, we also developed design and application guidelines for VR news.

3. Research motivation and choice of news topics
3.1. Research motivation
Existing studies on immersive VR news have focused on two aspects, user experience and media effects. However, those studies examined mainly traditional text, 2D images, and video materials; and 360° panoramic videos or VR news without interaction. To our knowledge, a quantitative study of the user experience and media effects of interactive immersive VR news has not been undertaken. Interactivity is an essential characteristic of VR (Villani et al., 2009), and any discussion of VR excluding interactivity is incomplete. Based on our literature review, we propose the following hypotheses:

H1: Compared with traditional video news, immersive VR news enhances audience immersion and more profoundly in the interactive case than in the non-interactive case.

H2: Compared with traditional video news, immersive VR news is more likely to generate empathy in the audience and more profoundly in the interactive case than in the non-interactive case.

H3: Compared with traditional video news and interactive immersive VR news, non-interactive immersive VR news reduces audiences’ comprehension of news content.

H4: Compared with traditional video news, users’ emotional swings are more extensive in immersive VR news (both interactive and non-interactive cases).

H5: Compared with traditional video news, users’ trust in secondarily processed immersive VR news (both interactive and non-interactive cases) is lower.

H1 and H2 address the immersion and empathy dimensions of user experience, and H3, H4, and H5 address the accuracy, emotion, and trust dimensions of media effects.

3.2. Choice of news topics
To choose news topics for this study, we first consulted previous research on immersive VR journalism applications. Then, we conducted a brainstorming session in which five journalists (stakeholders), two university teachers with more than 10 years of experience in journalism, and ten randomly sampled ordinary audiences were invited to discuss the news topics and narrative forms of immersive VR news. The session was conducted for approximately 4 hours in a usability lab. By collecting and analyzing the news event cases that were proposed in previous studies (Peña et al., 2010; Kent 2015; Kool, 2016; Sirkkunen et al., 2016; Hardee, 2016; Hardee et al., 2017; Pérez-Seijo, 2017; Sundar et al., 2017; Vázquez-Herrero et al., 2017; Shyam et al., 2017; Laws, 2017; Soler-Adillon, 2018; Bösch et al., 2018; Shin, 2018a; Shin, 2018b; Seo et al., 2019), we recognized that immersive VR news is a valuable expansion of traditional news that can be used to complement traditional news. However, due to its limitations, VR news cannot yet replace traditional news and must maximally conform to the news reporting principles of truthfulness and fairness. However, because of its high technical difficulty and production cost, immersive VR news has certain requirements for news subjects and is unsuitable for breaking news and time-sensitive news. However, it is suitable for social news and disaster news, which have distinct characters and complete story timelines and are difficult for ordinary people to access or experience. Because such works can be used repeatedly for a relatively long period and are not prone to becoming outdated, they are focused on human nature in a more general sense and life experience whereas in the case of ordinary news events, the application value of immersive VR news is insignificant.

Based on the above analyses, we chose “Beijing: blocking action on severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)”, an investigative news report broadcasted on the China Central Television (CCTV) news channel on April 26, 2003, as the news material for this user experience study. The reasons for the choice are as follows:

•
This news topic has high social and humanistic values and represents the news type we have previously targeted.

•
The video was produced by CCTV, which is a national Chinese TV station, and its news reports have been influential and authoritative, earning high credibility, thus reflecting the typical news narrative of traditional mainstream media.

•
The video content is mainly a section in which a reporter visits patients in the SARS epidemic ward of Beijing You'an Hospital, which would be difficult for ordinary people to otherwise experience. Moreover, the scene information and live audio contained in the video are complete, which is conducive to reproducing the corresponding VR scenes.

•
Although SARS had a tremendous impact on mainland China, the epidemic is fading into the distant past. Most subjects in this study are college students who possess only vague ideas about the SARS epidemic and thus limited knowledge of the event, which is conducive to a more accurate measurement of the media effects of immersive news.

This news takes the form mainly of reporter's dialogues with doctors and patients while conducting interviews. The script of the entire news story encompasses three scenes, a clean area (disinfection room), a partially contaminated area (corridor) and a contaminated area (ward). In the disinfection room, a doctor introduces and demonstrates the cleaning and preparation procedures before entering the partially contaminated area, including wearing protective clothing, headgear, protective glasses, and shoe covers, and explains the differences among the three areas (the clean area, the partially contaminated area, and the contaminated area). In a corridor, the doctor explains the functions of the protective shoe cover and disinfectant and then introduces the specific procedures of treating SARS patients. In the ward, the reporter interviews a SARS patient to understand her condition and treatment plan. In addition, the reporter chats with a doctor, asking why the doctor is risking his life to treat these patients.

After further screening and collating, under the same precondition of presenting consistent news content, we created three sets of news material in different forms, i.e., traditional video news, non-interactive immersive VR news, and interactive immersive VR news. Of these, the traditional video news segment lasted 6 minutes and 52 seconds, and the other two forms of immersive VR news reproduced the news scenes of all the news stories of the CCTV video news with computer modeling technology under the premise of consistent information. The entire VR scenes and character models, related animations, and interaction control modules of the scenes were developed and produced using 3D modeling software such as Unity 3D and Maya. In addition, the audio of the two forms of immersive VR news versions was copied directly from the original video news version without any cuts or edits. Thus, we are able to retain the content and key information of the conversation among the reporter, doctors, and patients during the interviews in a way that is consistent with the original news story.

4. Research methods
4.1. Experimental design
Among the five hypotheses, H3 aims to address the evaluation of media effects such as the accuracy of information acquisition. To avoid the influence of the order of different experimental treatments on the learning effect on the subject, we adopted a between-subjects design method in which three experimental treatments, i.e., traditional video, VR without Interaction (VR-I) and VR with Interaction (VR+I), were created. For each treatment, different stimuli were used. The subjects of the traditional video group were asked to view traditional 2D video news on a computer, and those in the VR-I and VR+I groups were asked to wear the provided VR headset to experience the VR news scenes, which were reproduced based on the traditional 2D video news segment. The subjects in the VR-I group were only allowed to passively view the set narrative main line of the story whereas those in the VR+I group were allowed to view the story by selecting different narrative main lines and interacting with the virtual scene. For example, a subject could pick up protective glasses and put them on or open a disinfectant in the disinfection area. The head-mounted display (HMD) helmet relayed the results of the interaction in real time.

4.2. Subjects
The subjects were recruited through advertisement, WeChat, and Weibo. Based on the information collected in the pretest questionnaire survey, individuals who had full knowledge of the content of the news material used in this experiment or who exhibited strong personal opinions and emotional attitudes were excluded during the recruitment process to avoid any influence of subjects’ biases on the accuracy and reliability of the experimental results. Ultimately, 131 subjects (55 males and 76 females) of various backgrounds, such as electrical engineering, computer science, journalism, interaction design, biomedical engineering, history, law, and clinical medicine, aged 20 to 38 years (M = 28.12, SD = 4.27), were included. Before participating in this experiment, none of the subjects had watched the original news video or experienced immersive VR news.

4.3. Experimental equipment
The experiment was conducted in a usability laboratory (Fig. 1) equipped with a PC, an Oculus Rift VR headset, and an Oculus Touch controller. To enable the Oculus Rift to render VR scenes, the PC was equipped with a 2.2 GHz i7 CPU, 16 GB memory, and an 8G GeForce 1070 graphics card and installed with the immersive VR system we had developed that processes subjects’ input actions and transmits the contents of the VR news scene to the Oculus Rift headset in real time. During the experiment, we also used a webcam and voice recorder to record the behaviors and voices of the subjects when watching the news to help us later analyze the subjects’ mental models and subjective experiences.

Fig 1
Download : Download high-res image (189KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Test environment.

4.4. Test procedure
Before the formal test, we invited 20 undergraduate and graduate students majoring in journalism and communication to participate in a preliminary test. The objective of the preliminary test was to solicit participants’ feedback regarding the length and content of the news material, the operation of the test equipment, the user experience of the test equipment, the number of items on the questionnaire, and the validity and reliability of the questionnaire from the perspective of news communication. Based on the participants’ suggestions, the corresponding experimental elements were revised to ensure the success and effectiveness of the formal test.

In the formal test, all the subjects were introduced to the background, objectives, tasks, and procedure of the test and then were asked to carefully read and sign the informed consent form. Next, the 131 subjects were randomly divided into three groups: Group A (44 subjects), Group B (44 subjects), and Group C (43 subjects).

After the subjects completed the test, they were asked to complete a questionnaire that contained items regarding user experience and media effects. We adopted Jennett et al.’s (2008) immersion scale to measure immersion and Spreng et al.’s (2009) Toronto Empathy Questionnaire (TEQ) to measure empathy. The questionnaire we adopted in this study for VR system assessment has been used by other researchers (Burns et al., 2015; Lackey et al., 2016; Tse et al., 2017; Petukhov et al., 2017; Otkhmezuri et al., 2019; Leighton et al., 2019; Dickinson et al., 2020; Fairclough et al., 2020). This immersion questionnaire aims to measure the participants’ subjective experiences of immersion, including 1) cognitive absorption metrics developed from Agarwal et al. (2000), including temporal dissociation, focused immersion, heightened enjoyment, control, and curiosity; and 2) immersion metrics derived from Brown et al. (2004), including emotional involvement, transportation to a different place, attention, control and autonomy (Brown et al., 2004). The TEQ was chosen to measure the participants’ empathy, including metrics related to the emotional dimension of empathy such as emotional contagion (e.g., “When the patient is feeling excited, I tend to get excited too”), emotional comprehension (e.g., “I can tell when the patient is sad even when she does not say anything”), sympathetic physiological arousal (e.g., “It upsets me to see the patient being treated disrespectfully”), and con-specific altruism (e.g., “When I see the patient being taken advantage of, I feel kind of protective toward her”). For media effects, we generated six questions on the six elements of news (i.e., 5W1H: who/when/where/what/why/how) to measure the subjects’ perception of news information and its accuracy (e.g., “What precautions do doctors generally need to prepare before entering the partially contaminated area?”). Six items were selected from the original 20-item PANAS adjective checklist (Watson et al., 1988) to measure emotion, including scared, interested, nervous, inspired, distressed, and excited. To measure reliability, we also used the five major reliability indicators from Meyer (1988), including fair, unbiased, tells the whole story, accurate, and can be trusted. After all the subjects completed the questionnaire, our laboratory personnel conducted one-on-one semi-structured interviews with each subject to understand the subject's views and suggestions concerning the entire system, particularly how the subjects’ mental model affects their preferences for different experimental treatments. Each subject took 60 to 90 minutes to complete the test (Fig. 2).

4.5. Experimental results
We examined the reliability and validity of the questionnaire in terms of the reliability of the questionnaire structure and the accuracy of the measurement scale. The results of the analysis using the SPSS software package (version 22; IBM Corporation) showed that the Cronbach's α coefficients of the five dimensions of the questionnaire used in this study were all greater than 0.7, indicating that the questionnaire had high internal consistency reliability. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olson (KMO) test statistics for all variables were greater than 0.8 and statistically significant, indicating that the questionnaire had high structural validity. Below, we present detailed results regarding the five dimensions in terms of user experience and media effects.

Fig 2
Download : Download high-res image (395KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Test procedure: (a) the developed VR system; (b) the investigator conducting a semi-structured interview with the subject. 

4.5.1. Immersion
In terms of immersion, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 5.114 (SD = .786), 5.168 (SD = .920), and 5.465 (SD = .706), respectively (Fig. 3). On average, VR news with interaction had the highest score, and traditional video news had the lowest score. We then performed the Kruskal-Wallis test to analyze the differences between multiple independent samples. The results showed that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 4.493, p = .106) (Fig. 3).

Fig 3
Download : Download high-res image (91KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Comparison of results for immersion.

4.5.2. Empathy
Regarding empathy, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 5.597 (SD = .733), 5.197 (SD = 1.178), and 5.357 (SD = .778), respectively (Fig. 4). On average, traditional video news had the highest score, and VR news without interaction had the lowest score. The Kruskal-Wallis test results showed that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 2.463, p = .292) (Fig. 4).

Fig 4
Download : Download high-res image (92KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Comparison of results for empathy.

4.5.3. Accuracy
In terms of accuracy, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 5.386 (SD = .655), 4.318 (SD = 1.029), and 5.047 (SD = 1.045), respectively (Fig. 5). On average, traditional video news had the highest score, and VR news without interaction had the lowest score. The Kruskal-Wallis test results showed statistically significant differences among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 24.729, p = .000). We further conducted pairwise comparisons using the post hoc test, and the results showed that VR news with interaction was significantly better than VR news without interaction (p = .002), and traditional video news was also significantly better than VR news without interaction (p = .000), while VR news with interaction exhibited no significant difference from traditional video news (p = .523) (Fig. 5).

Fig 5
Download : Download high-res image (89KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Comparison of results for accuracy.

4.5.4. Emotion
In terms of emotion, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 3.898 (SD = .812), 3.765 (SD = .815) and 3.864 (SD = .772), respectively (Fig. 5). On average, traditional video news had the highest score, and VR news without interaction had the lowest score. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 1.112, p = .573) (Fig. 6).

Fig 6
Download : Download high-res image (89KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Comparison of results for emotion.

However, when we further compared the six indicators of emotion, we found some noteworthy results:

1)
In terms of fear, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 3.61 (SD = 1.351), 3.11 (SD = 1.543), and 3.26 (SD = 1.774), respectively. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 2.891, p = .236).

2)
In terms of interest, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 4.66 (SD = 1.180), 5.07 (SD =1.129), and 5.26 (SD =1.136), respectively. The Kruskal-Wallis test results revealed a statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2(2, n=131) = 6.363, p = .042). The results of pairwise comparisons using the post hoc test showed that subjects were more interested in VR news with interaction than in traditional video news (p = .035), but there was no statistically significant difference between traditional video news and VR news without interaction (p = .561) or between VR news with and without interaction (p = .697).

3)
In terms of nervousness, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 4.45 (SD = 1.372), 3.59 (SD = 1.352), and 3.79 (SD = 1.807), respectively. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated a statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2(2, n=131) = 7.388, p = .025). The results of pairwise comparisons using the post hoc test indicated that traditional video news was more likely to produce nervousness in subjects compared with VR news without interaction (p = .023), while there was no statistically significant difference between VR news without interaction and VR news with interaction (p = 1.000) or between traditional video news and VR news with interaction (p = .216).

4)
In terms of inspiration, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 4.02 (SD = 1.532), 3.91 (SD = 1.507) and 4.00 (SD = 1.234), respectively. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = .079, p = .961).

5)
In terms of distress, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 4.39 (SD = 1.351), 4.45 (SD = 1.591) and 4.42 (SD = 1.367), respectively. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = .137, p = .934).

6)
In terms of excitement, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 2.25 (SD = 1.557), 2.45 (SD = 1.372) and 2.47 (SD = 1.403), respectively. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated that there was no statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 1.456, p = .483).

4.5.5. Credibility
In terms of credibility, the average scores for traditional video news, VR news without interaction, and VR news with interaction were 4.491 (SD = .915), 4.927 (SD = .934), and 4.976 (SD = .958), respectively (Fig. 7). On average, traditional video news had the lowest score, and VR news with interaction had the highest score. The Kruskal-Wallis test results indicated a statistically significant difference among the three treatments (χ 2 (2, n=131) = 5.596, p = .032). The results of pairwise comparisons using the post hoc test indicated that VR news with interaction and VR news without interaction were significantly better compared with traditional video news (p = .019 and p = .030, respectively), while VR news without interaction did not differ significantly from VR news with interaction (p = .826).

Fig 7
Download : Download high-res image (94KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Comparison of results for credibility.

4.6. Analysis of the Experimental results
In this study, we found that the three treatments exhibited significant differences in terms of certain measurement indicators, but not others. Based on these results and the interviews with the subjects, we analyze the reasons for the results below.

In terms of immersion, although the scores of VR news with interaction or VR news without interaction were higher than the traditional video news score, the three scores were not significantly different (p = .106). Therefore, H1 was not validated, i.e., the “interactivity” advantage of VR was not proven. Nevertheless, we found a notable pattern in the experiment: as the sample size increased, the p value exhibited a significant downward trend. When the sample sizes were 80, 105, and 131, the p values were .769, .316 and .106, respectively. According to the G*Power calculation9, for a sample size of 254, there will be a significant difference (p < .05).

In terms of empathy, the traditional video news score was greater than the scores for VR news with and without interaction, but the three scores were not significantly different (p = .573). Therefore, H2 was not validated, and in fact, we found the opposite trend. On average, traditional news outperformed immersive VR news. Through the interviews, we learned that in traditional video news, characters and scenes were all real, and as the news story unfolded, the subjects were unconsciously introduced to a depressing atmosphere and thus felt strong empathy. In contrast, VR is a virtual environment. Although we tried to reproduce the news story in the news video, we were unable to completely reproduce the news video shot through the lens in terms of various factors, such as the character model, scene model, scene tone, lighting, and shadows, due to the limitations of the existing modeling capabilities. Therefore, the subjects could not be fully introduced to the scene and thus could not feel strong empathy.

In terms of accuracy, VR news with interaction performed significantly better than did VR news without interaction (p = .002), and traditional video news performed significantly better than did VR news without interaction (p = .000). The performance of VR news with interaction did not significantly differ from that of traditional video news (p = .523). Therefore, H3 was validated. Through experimental observations and interviews with the subjects after the experiment, we found that the subjects were easily distracted by other things in the scene in the case without VR interaction. Compared with traditional third-person perspective video news, even though VR news without interaction provided a first-person perspective, it did not change the one-way dissemination mode of news information. In the news narrative, many subjects were attracted by the new form of VR and looked around while wearing the HMD headset, thus distracting them from the main message that the news story aimed to convey. However, in the case of VR news with interaction, the situation was different, as the subjects could actively explore key hotspot information in the news scene based on their interests. The subjects’ attention was focused on important information, which was later examined by the questions on the six elements of news in the questionnaire. Accordingly, the accuracy of the acquired information was greatly improved.

In terms of emotions, the three treatments did not exhibit significant differences. Thus, H4 was not validated. However, further analysis revealed that the three significantly differed in terms of interest and nervousness, but not in terms of fear, inspiration, distress, and excitement. First, in terms of interest, VR news with interaction proved most effective among the subjects because it made full use of a new narrative framework that is distinct from that of traditional news, i.e., a first-person perspective and open-ended outcomes of multiple storylines. These elements can simultaneously satisfy the conflicting needs of news production and the participation and competition mechanisms of VR, giving the framework advantages in terms of user experience and customer relationship node activation, which are in turn conducive to inciting audience interest and generating a new narrative perspective in the news production and planning processes. Second, in terms of nervousness, traditional video news was more likely to induce nervousness in the subjects than was VR news without interaction, for the same reasons as in the case of empathy. Because traditional video news is more realistic, it is easier to generate emotional nervousness.

In terms of credibility, the scores of VR news both with interaction and without interaction were greater than the traditional video news score, and there was a significant difference among the three (p = .032). This result is contrary to H5 and beyond our expectations. Because the video news was produced by CCTV, a mainstream media organization, whereas VR news with or without interaction were secondary products manually designed and developed, we speculated that the subjects might assign a higher score to traditional video news. However, through the interviews after the experiment, we learned that subjects generally thought that the VR experience offered greater immersion and novelty, so the subjects were more inclined to believe the credibility of VR news.

5. Mental model observations
In this section, based on the interview results after the trial, we discuss how the users’ mental model affects their preferences concerning different experimental treatments.

(1)
The reasons for the subjects to support the traditional video are as follows:

• Compared to immersive VR news, it is easier to clearly observe the facial expressions of the characters and perceive and understand characters’ actual emotions in traditional video news.

• The production techniques of immersive VR news are in an early stage of development, with high production difficulty and cost, making them difficult to implement.

• It is more efficient and convenient to watch traditional video news on personal mobile phones.

• In traditional video news, the lens can be used to guide viewers whereas in VR, viewers tend to get lost in the three-dimensional space.

• Traditional video news is more aligned with our existing news reading habits.

(2)
Subjects supported VR news without interaction for the following reasons:

• The non-interactive “camera + story” communication paradigm is more suitable for highly time-sensitive real-time news, while the interactive communication paradigm is more suitable for news that must “be archived” compared with highly time-sensitive real-time news.

• The main role of news is to convey information, thus generating a bias toward consuming (objective) news content and eliminating the need for interaction.

• Adopting the bystander's perspective enables us to gain more comprehensive knowledge, particularly of news events.

(3)
Subjects supported VR news with interaction for the following reasons:

• It enables actively exploration of desired information rather than passive consumption.

• Traditional video news and VR news without interaction are viewed from an omniscient perspective in which users experience no sense of presence, which greatly weakens the feeling of telepresence.

• VR news with interaction enables users to have a strong sense of participation whereas acting as a bystander makes users feel less engaged.

• VR news with interaction is more suitable for news that interests viewers and makes a more profound impression on viewers, so we desire to know, experience, and understand more.

• In the course of experience, this form of news can minimize distractions and thus encourage focus.

• Among the three modes of news presentation, VR news with interaction is the most fun to experience.

6. Discussion
In this section, based on the results of the experiment and user interviews, we offer design and development guidelines for immersive VR news.

(1)
From the perspective of news topics, the cost of VR news production and consumption determines that VR news must be selectively applied to certain news types. At this stage, it seems infeasible for media organizations to pursue VR news production on a large scale. Therefore, scenes of disaster events and major historical events and scenes that are difficult for ordinary people to access or experience are generally prioritized as VR news topics. Such stories, which are not prone to expiration, can be used repeatedly for quite a long time and cover topics related to human nature in a more general sense and life experience. It would not be meaningful to heavily invest in immersive VR news production of other common news events.

(2)
From the perspective of interaction, in VR news with interaction, users take a strong initiative, and their perceptions and intents can significantly impact the immersive news experience, so the interaction provided by the system can guide users to focus their attention on the information news content producers that aim to convey such that the levels of concentration and immersion can be improved. Moreover, interaction also provides users with multiple opportunities to obtain information, and they can avoid overlooking important information due to temporary distraction. In addition, through active interactions, particularly those from the first-person perspective, users may have expectations regarding the result of the interaction; thus, they can obtain information more efficiently and relate to it emotionally, thereby generating more profound perceptions of the news content.

Another interesting finding is the impact of interaction on news credibility. In our study, the participants were more prone to trust immersive VR news rather than traditional video news. Through the post-study interviews, we learned that the participants generally thought that the interaction supported by the VR system offered an opportunity to actively and physically examine and experience the whole news event, rather than simply passively watching the news event with eyes in the traditional way. This point is very important and valuable, especially when technologies such as deep fake videos are so common that “seeing is believing” becomes questionable. As a result, the participants were more inclined to believe the credibility of the interactive VR news. Some participants addressed this issue as follows:

“I don't doubt the truth of the news. Even when I saw how weak the patient was, I felt the urge to hug her even though the system doesn't support this interaction.” [P2 in the VR+I group]

“When I was wearing protective clothing and goggles before entering the partially contaminated area, I felt that the SARS virus was just around me, which made me feel real and nervous.” [P7 in the VR+I group]

Another reason for the higher news credibility for VR+I than traditional video news may be attributed to the fact that the VR+I conveys much more detailed information in a more effective way. As the participants observed:

“The VR+I requirements for more real and richly detailed information (e.g., wearing protective clothing) pushes the news producers to review and present information in a more effective way, which consequently leads to an increase in authenticity and credibility.” [P13 in the VR+I group]

“Without interaction, VR news is just another form of video news. It's easy to get distracted if you just watch the news story on the sidelines. For example, I was attracted to the old-fashioned cell phone next to the patient's pillow.” [P5 in the VR-I group]

“The interaction and first-person substitution prompted me to pay attention to the doctor's advice. Also, I felt that I must remember the important information, for example, how to wear the protective clothing correctly and wash my hands before and after meals in my daily life, because the outbreak (SARS) was happening right next to me.” [P18 in the VR+I group]

We believe that our findings add greatly to the nascent field of immersive VR journalism by guiding the perspectives of system designers and developers.

(3)
From the perspective of social acceptance, the credibility of VR news depends on multiple factors and parties, including the application policies of VR news, the consumption power and media consumption habits of audiences under various institutional environments, and news content producers and VR news producers. The first two factors can ensure that the news maximally approaches the truth. However, in addition to the reproduction of the truth by the news, viewers’ perception and acceptance of the news credibility are also affected by their abilities, which in turn affects the production of immersive VR news.

(4)
From the perspective of application, immersive VR news is similar to news games and is a valuable expansion of and supplement to traditional news. However, due to its limitations, VR news cannot replace traditional news and retains the basic connotations of news, so it must comply with the news reporting principles of truthfulness and fairness. In fact, concerns about the credibility of news reporting are relevant to not only immersive VR news but also traditional news and have always existed. Therefore, we believe that regarding the credibility of VR news, we can learn from traditional news and develop a set of authoritative and universal standard industry norms for VR news.

7. Conclusion and future work
With the continuous development of computer hardware and software technology, immersive VR technology has made great progress and is widely used in various areas with great success such as simulation, gaming, industrial design, education, and medical care. In recent years, academic and industry researchers have attempted to combine immersive VR technology and news communication and have proposed the concept of immersive VR news. Currently, however, there is still insufficient clarity on the effects of immersive VR technologies have on news consumers. Furthermore, mainstream immersive VR news applications and technologies offer limited interactivity, which is in fact a defining characteristic of VR. For this reason, we conducted an empirical study to examine the differences of three different news communication paradigms (traditional video news, VR news without interaction and VR news with interaction) in terms of user experience and media effects. Based on the experimental results and observations of user behaviors during the experiment, we presented a detailed discussion of the causes of these differences and guidelines for the design and application of immersive VR news. The main findings of this study are as follows: 1) traditional video news excels in terms of empathy and nervousness; 2) VR news with interaction is superior in terms of immersion, interest, accuracy, and credibility; and 3) VR news without interaction performs the poorest in all categories. We believe that our study makes a significant contribution to the literature because our research will provide a valuable reference for VR-based immersive news product design studies and will help designers create a better user experience.

Future work should focus on four aspects. First, the application scenarios of immersive VR news can be expanded to further generalize the conclusions of this study. Second, a larger-scale test regarding the effectiveness should be conducted with more subjects. Third, based on the results of short-term effectiveness, such as information access and perception, an in-depth tracking study of the long-term effects, such as attitude changes and behavioral predictions, should be performed. Fourth, presence questionnaires can also be considered for measuring the degree of presence subjectively experienced. Furthermore, more research is needed with a good control over factors such as the visual fidelity and aesthetic appeal of the actual news content to obtain a deeper understanding of the usability and fidelity issues.