Abstract
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is a major cause of death worldwide. In the USA, there are approximately 0.8 million persons suffering from AMI annually with a death rate of 27%. The risk factors of AMI include hypertension, family history, smoking habits, diabetes, serenity, obesity, cholesterol, alcoholism, coronary artery disease, and so forth. In this study, data acquired from a subset of the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan were used to develop a clinical decision support system (CDSS) to predict AMI. The integrated genetic algorithm and support vector machine (IGS) and deep neural network (DNN) were both applied to design the predictive models. A balanced dataset (6087 AMI patients and 6087 non-AMI patients) and an imbalanced dataset (6,087 AMI patients and 12,174 non-AMI patients) with each patient record including 74 features were retrieved to design the predictive models. Tenfold cross-validation was used to obtain the optimal model with best prediction performance during training. The experimental results showed that the CDSSs reached a prediction performance with accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 79.75–84.4%, 68.29–83.7%, 82.45–92.07%, and 0.8424–0.9089, respectively, for models designed based on the balanced dataset, as well as 81.86–86.27%, 52.65–81.22%, 84.29–96.47%, and 0.8503–0.9098, respectively, for models implemented based on the imbalanced dataset. The IGS and DNN algorithms and a combination of age, presence of related comorbidities, and other comorbidity-related features, including diagnosed age and annual physician visits of individual comorbidities, have been shown to be promising in designing strong predictive models in detecting patients who are more likely to develop AMI in the near future as well as for realizing mobile-health (m-Health) systems in managing their comorbidities to prevent occurrence of AMI events. Future work will focus on realizing an ensemble model by combining the model designed based on the long-term NHIRD dataset and the model based on the short-term EMR data and the real-time IoT sensor data, as well as implementing a transfer learning model by transferring the knowledge learned from the long-term model for training the short-term model, so that the predictive performance can be enhanced.

Introduction
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is ranked as the leading cause of death globally by the World Health Organization (WHO) [1], and, following cancer, is listed as the 2nd leading cause of death in Taiwan [2]. Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is one of the major causes of death among CVD patients. In the USA, there are approximately 0.8 million (M) people who have experienced an AMI event annually and 0.2 M of them died [3]. AMI is associated with poor lifestyle (smoking, alcohol consumption, and physical inactivity), family history or genetic factors, comorbidity (diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol, and poor cardiovascular health), stress, and anthropometric factor (BMI and waist circumference) [4,5,6,7].

Clinical decision support systems (CDSSs) provide useful messages and professional knowledge to improve the diagnosis performance, treatment outcome, and healthcare quality in the clinical setting, and have been widely applied to provide medical alerts and event reminders as well as to optimize drug dose and prescriptions [8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17]. Our previous studies designed CDSSs using the support vector machine (SVM) technique in predicting successful ventilator weaning for patients admitted to respiratory caring centers [11] and classifying different types of pap smear cells for discriminating normal from abnormal cells [18]. Later, the algorithm which integrated genetic algorithm and SVM (IGS) has been used to design the CDSS predictive models based on the patient data included in the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) to predict fractures for patients prescribed with corticosteroids [19], readmissions for patients admitted with all-cause conditions [20], and erectile dysfunctions (EDs) for men comorbid with various comorbid diseases [21]. NHIRD has also been adopted for designing CDSS models for predicting liver cancer [22] and lung cancer [23] as well as for validating models of coronary artery disease (CAD) prediction [24]. Hence, a predictive model designed based on the NHIRD able to detect high-risk patients with related comorbidities is believed to be promising in supporting healthcare providers to administrate appropriate interventions for long-term prevention of AMI and, consequently, reducing its morbidity and mortality rates.

State-of-the-art studies of AMI prediction
Models in predicting heart diseases or AMI events reported previously were mostly designed based on the short-term clinical data or bedside physiological signals acquired from patients referred to inpatient wards or presenting at emergency departments. In general, the predictive performance of these models was high, because the data used for model training were acquired from patients with severe symptoms. For example, models constructed based on the UCI heart disease datasets, including Cleveland, Hungarian, and VA Long Beach datasets, achieved a predictive accuracy of 81.58–98.6% [25,26,27,28]. The patient data in these datasets include 14 features (demographics, symptoms, laboratory tests, radiological examinations, and so forth), obtained when patients were visiting the hospitals.

Several novel machine algorithms were proposed to design predictive models for the prediction of CAD using the UCI Cleveland dataset [25,26,27] as well as UCI Hungarian and VA Long Beach datasets [28]. In [25], nested ensemble nu-support vector classification (NE-nu-SVC) model combining traditional machine learning algorithms was adopted to design the model for predicting CAD, with an accuracy as high as 98.6%. Additionally, in [26], the authors proposed an optimized stacked SVM method by integrating 2 SVM models for irrelevant features elimination and prediction, respectively, obtaining an accuracy up to 92.22%. A model, which integrated procedures of data imputation, data division, feature extraction, and data normalization, was created to predict CAD in [27], achieving an accuracy of 93.44% [27]. Moreover, models combining heterogeneous hybrid feature selection method and four different classifiers, i.e., decision tree, Gaussian Naive Bayes, random forest, and XGBoot, were also proposed for CAD prediction using 2 different UCI datasets, i.e., Hungarian and VA Long Beach datasets, reaching an accuracy of 83.94% and 81.58%, respectively [28].

Additional datasets acquired from other clinical settings were also applied for designing models to predict MI or AMI [29, 30]. In [29], in addition to the 12 features in UCI heart disease datasets, 7 other features including BMI, smoking status, family history, and related comorbidities (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, airway disease, and thyroid disease) were also adopted for designing the AMI predictive model with neural network technique, achieving an accuracy as high as 89.5%. The data used for training the model were acquired from AMI patients visiting hospital with severe symptoms. In [30], the predictive model was trained with a specially designed machine learning algorithm (MI3) using paired troponin I concentrations, measured when patients presented to emergency department and at early flexible time, accompanied with age and sex. The predictive performance achieved 97.8% and 96.7%, respectively, in sensitivity and specificity. Again, the data were acquired from patients attending emergency department and presenting obvious MI symptoms. The aforementioned models are applicable only in inpatient or emergency department settings for short-term decision-making, which are not suitable for long-term prediction. In our pilot study, the IGS algorithm was applied to design models for AMI prediction using the NHIRD dataset [31]. The predictive performance achieved an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.8649–0.8738 for the ones built in the training phase and 0.8602–0.8935 for those obtained in the testing phase [31]. Table 1 compares the machine learning method proposed, dataset used, and predictive performance achieved among various state-of-the-art studies.

Table 1 Comparison of state-of-the-art studies
Full size table

Motivations and contributions
As mentioned above, most recent studies have focused on constructing models based on the short-term and bedside datasets collected from inpatient or emergency department settings to predict MI or AMI events [29, 30, 32, 33]. Since the patients admitted to inpatient wards or attending emergency departments are generally acute with obvious symptoms, the predictive models designed based on these short-term clinical data and bedside acquired data, i.e., laboratory tests, physiological signals, and radiological examinations, are expected to achieve higher predictive performances. However, these predictive models are only applicable in the inpatient [29, 32, 33] or emergency department [30] setting for detecting possible AMI events. They are not useful in general preventive medicine settings for administrating interventions years in advance to avoid occurrence of AMI events. In contrast, in our current study, long-term datasets collected from Taiwan national health insurance program, spanning a period of 12 years from January 2002 till December 2013, were adopted for designing the AMI predictive models. AMI was observed to be associated with other comorbidities [4,5,6, 31] and, if not managed properly, a related comorbidity could induce an AMI event several years later; hence, the features used for designing the CDSS included patients’ comorbidities and comorbidity-related variables, such as the ages when individual comorbidities diagnosed, as well as their follow-up durations and annual physician visits. A predictive model designed based on the aforementioned features included in the long-term dataset may be effective in detecting patients who are more likely to acquire AMI several years later. The preventive intervention can be administrated several years in advance to prevent deterioration of the related comorbidities, which, in turn, will reduce occurrence of AMI events.

In our pilot study, only 12 comorbidities were adopted for designing the models [31], other comorbidities, such as ED, gout, sleep disorder, anxiety, depression, and atopic dermatitis, reported to be associated with CVD and AMI [34,35,36,37,38], were not considered. In [34, 35, 39], gout, sleep disorder, and depression were associated with ED, which, in turn, is believed to be a precursor of CVD [36, 37]. Moreover, Shen et al. demonstrated anxiety as an independent factor that predicts MIs in men [38]. Additionally, atopic dermatitis was also shown to be associated with ischemic stroke, angina, coronary vascular disease, MI, congestive heart failure, and peripheral vascular disease [40,41,42]. Hence, the current study aimed to design the AMI predictive models based on the NHIRD dataset with more comorbid diseases and comorbidity-related features.

The major contributions of this study include: (1) we designed strong predictive models based on significant risk factors related to comorbidities as well as their follow-up durations and annual physician visits using the IGS and DNN algorithms; and (2) in contrast to short-term data adopted in other previous studies, we adopted long-term dataset retrieved from the NHIRD to design the prediction models for detecting patients who are more likely to develop AMI so that preventive interventions can be administrated several years in advance to prevent occurrence of AMI events.

Materials and methods
Data
The raw data adopted in this study consisted of 1 million (M) patient data randomly sampled from the NHIRD containing data of approximately 23 M Taiwanese citizens enrolled in the national health insurance (NHI) program. The NHIRD includes data of medical facility registries, inpatient orders, ambulatory cares, prescription drugs, and physicians providing services. Widespread researches have been conducted using the NHIRD to investigate the health status of Taiwanese citizens and the association between different diseases. Until July 2016, approximately 4000 research papers have been published using datasets in the NHIRD [43].

In addition to the balanced dataset, this study also adopted an imbalanced dataset with 1:2 positive-to-negative sample ratio for training, validating, and testing the predictive models. In order to simulate the real-world situations, most datasets retrieved from the NHIRD for investigating public health issues and association among different diseases are imbalanced that positive sample (minority) to negative (majority) sample ratio ranges from 1/2 to 1/5 [19]. Minority cases refer to rare cases, unusual patterns, or abnormal behaviors which are difficult to detect but are important. When adopting the accuracy as fitness value to design the predictive models using imbalanced dataset, the decision hyperplanes tend to bias toward the majority class [19]. Although the classification accuracies are generally satisfactory, their sensitivities are too low to be applied in clinical settings, in which diagnosing a positive case as negative often costs much more than diagnosing a negative case as positive. Therefore, as shown in Eqs. (1)–(3), alternative fitness functions, including weighted sum of accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, as well as area under ROC curve (AUC) and g-mean were adopted for cost-sensitive learning to increase sensitivity while still keeping accuracy good enough.

The positive cases included patients aged 20 years old and older, diagnosed with AMI (ICD-9-CM Code 410.x) by physicians between January 2002 and December 2013, and confirmed for at least three outpatient visits or at least one inpatient admission. The negative cases were those without a history of AMI who were randomly chosen from the NHIRD and were 1:1 and 1:2 frequency-matched, by age and index year, with the AMI patients to prepare the balanced and imbalanced dataset, respectively. The balanced dataset consisted of data of a total of 12,174 cases, including 6,087 positive cases (AMI patients) and 6,087 negative cases (non-AMI patients). Comparatively, the imbalanced dataset included data of 18,216 patients, including 6,087 AMI patients and 12,174 non-AMI patients.

Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses of the retrieved data were conducted using the SPSS statistical software package version 17.0 (SPSS Inc.). Means and standard deviations (SD) were calculated to describe characteristics of the continuous variables and the number of events was counted to describe the nominal variables. The differences of continuous and nominal variables between the AMI and non-AMI groups were compared by using a Student’s t test and Chi-square test, respectively. The significance level was defined as p < 0.05.

Feature selection and CDSS design
We considered the main risk factors and comorbidities of AMI reported in the literature [4,5,6] and the key factors suggested in our previous studies [19, 20]. As living habits, physiological signals, and family histories of patients were not available in the NHIRD, they were not included in the current study. Table 2 lists the ICD-9-CM codes of 18 comorbidities (risk factors) included for analyses and considered for designing the CDSSs.

Table 2 ICD-9-CM codes of included comorbidities
Full size table

IGS The SVM is regarded as one of the effective data classification and regression methods [44, 45]. The effectiveness of an SVM model depends on the selection of the kernel parameter (r) and soft margin parameter (C). The wrapper method integrating a genetic algorithm (GA) and SVM, namely IGS, was demonstrated to be an effective algorithm for recursively training predictive models, selecting data features, and adjusting model parameters at each iteration until the optimal model has been obtained [46,47,48]. Our recent studies have demonstrated that the IGS algorithm is effective in designing models to predict fractures for patients taking corticosteroids [19], hospital readmissions for those admitted with all-cause conditions [20], and ED for men with other comorbidities [21]. Figure 1a shows the structure, chromosome pattern, and flow chart of the IGS algorithm, in which GA was used to select the optimal SVM parameters (C and r) and significant features for constructing the SVM models.

Fig. 1.
figure 1
Structures of a IGS and b DNN algorithms

Full size image

In clinical applications, the cost of false negative predictions is commonly much higher than false positive predictions; therefore, the IGS algorithm emphasized obtaining models with higher sensitivity [21]. For the models trained using imbalanced datasets with negative cases outnumbering positive cases, the decision hyperplanes are always biased toward the majority cases, making their sensitivity much lower than their specificity. To address this problem, as indicated in Eqs. (1)–(3), instead of accuracy, Accuracy–|Sensitivity–Specificity|, AUC, and g-mean, respectively, were used as the objective functions to obtain models with sensitivity closest to specificity, while still keeping their prediction performance optimal [20, 21]. During the training phase, tenfold cross-validation and three objective functions were used to train and validate the CDSS models designed by the IGS algorithm.



(1)



(3)

To model CDSSs with big data, the training phase, even when running under a high-performance PC system, often needs plenty of time to obtain an optimal model. In this study, in order to reduce the training time, cross-validation was used to obtain the model parameters and salient features, which were then applied in the training datasets of the ITT experiments. This ensured that the decision hyperplanes could be quickly adjusted to obtain optimal models for further testing. In tenfold cross-validation, the balanced and imbalanced dataset, respectively, were both under-sampled to 2,029 positive cases and 2,029 negative cases, and divided into tenfold with any combinations of ninefold data used for model training and the rest 1 for validation. The procedure of the IGS algorithm is detailed in Algorithm 1.

DNN As shown in Fig. 1b, deep neural network (DNN) was also adopted for training models for AMI prediction. Tenfold cross-validation was adopted for training and validating the DNN models. The training dataset was divided into tenfold, in which a combination of ninefold data was used for model training and the rest one for validation in each training–validating step to obtain a validated model. The obtained validated model was then tested using the testing dataset. The procedure repeated for 10 times and the predictive performance was obtained by averaging 10 test results. Detailed procedures of the DNN method are shown in Algorithm 2.

As shown in Fig. 1b, the DNN model was structured with 74 input nodes followed by three hidden layers with 32-16-8 nodes, the rectified linear activation function (ReLU), and one output node with sigmoid activation function based on previous studies [49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60]. Furthermore, parameters of epochs and batch size were set to 100 and 60, respectively. The DNN models and performance analyses were implemented using RStudio with the Keras package.

figure a
ITT experiments and performance evaluation
In this study, six independent training and testing (ITT) experiments [18] were performed to verify the prediction performance of CDSSs designed with a balanced dataset (E1) and two imbalanced datasets (E2: training set not under-sampled and E3: training set under-sampled). Detailed data information of the ITT experiments for the balanced dataset and imbalanced dataset is summarized in Table 3. As denoted in the table, the training and testing datasets of the 1st, 2nd, and 5th ITTs were exchanged to be adopted as the testing and training data of the 3rd, 4th and 6th ITTs, respectively.

figure b
Table 3 Details of ITT experiments
Full size table

As denoted in Eqs. (4)–(6), accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity were calculated to evaluate and compare the prediction performances, in which TP, TN, FN, and FP indicate true positive, true negative, false negative, and false positive, respectively [18]. Additionally, after the ROC curve had been plotted, the AUC was obtained to quantify predictive performance of the CDSS model. A model with AUC equal to 0.5 denotes it is similar to an outcome of random chance, while a model with AUC equal to 1 is perfect. Models with AUC ≧ 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9 indicate good, strong (very good), and excellent models, respectively [61,62,63,64].


 

(4)


 

(5)


 

(6)

Experimental results
Since the statistical characteristics of the imbalanced dataset are similar to the balanced dataset, only the statistical results of the latter were presented. As shown in Table 4, a total of 74 features to be considered for designing the CDSSs are compared between non-AMI and AMI patients. Among the 18 comorbidities, excluding ED, sleep disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, anxiety, and atopic dermatitis, 13 comorbidities in the AMI patients exhibit significantly higher prevalence rates than the non-AMI patients (p < 0.05). Moreover, except cancer, ED, sleep disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, depression, and atopic dermatitis, most comorbidities were developed at a significantly younger age (p < 0.05) in patients with AMI than those without AMI. Furthermore, compared to the non-AMI patients, the frequency of annual physician visits in the AMI patients was significantly lower (p < 0.01) in 10 (excluding shock, cancer, ED, obstructive sleep apnea, depression, anxiety, and atopic dermatitis) comorbidities and marginally significantly lower (p = 0.053) in one comorbidity (pulmonary edema). Regarding the follow-up durations, when compared with the non-AMI patients, AMI patients exhibited significantly longer duration in some comorbidities (diabetes, pulmonary edema, and chronic renal failure) but significantly shorter duration in others (coronary artery disease and cancer) before AMI events occurred.

Table 4 Comparisons of demographic information, comorbidities, and comorbidity-related features between non-AMI and AMI patients
Full size table

The comorbidities and other comorbidity-related features selected for designing the CDSS models using the IGS algorithm accompanied with three different objective functions (OB1, OB2, and OB3) are also shown in Table 4. Notably, although age was exactly matched without difference between the AMI and non-AMI groups, it was still selected and adopted as an important factor for designing 3 predictive models based on these 3 objective functions. Moreover, although the feature combinations were different among these 3 models, the presence of comorbidities and their comorbidity-related features were mostly selected.

Models based on the balanced dataset
The predictive performances of the CDSSs constructed using the IGS and DNN methods with the balanced dataset (E1) are shown in Table 5. As indicated in the table, after

Table 5 Comparison of predictive performance of models designed with balanced dataset (E1) for AMI prediction
Full size table

cross-validation, the obtained accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC of the IGS models were 78.61–82.08%, 78.36–78.80%, 78.61–85.36%, and 0.8451–0.8865, respectively, whereas the corresponding performance measures of the DNN model were 83.52%, 82.23%, 84.82% and 0.8997, respectively. After cross-validation, the accuracy, sensitivity, and AUC of the DNN and the specificity of the IGS with OB3 were highest among these four CDSSs.

With regard to the ITT experiments, the obtained accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC were 79.75–84.40%, 70.49–83.70%, 83.25–89.15%, and 0.8424–0.8990, respectively, for the IGS models, as well as 80.18–84.10%, 68.29–83.28%, 82.45–92.07%, and 0.8832–0.9089, respectively, for the DNN models. All models exhibit strong predictive power with AUC > 0.8 for AMI prediction. Among these four designed CDSSs, the highest average accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC of the six ITTs were 83.04%, 81.22%, 88.41%, and 0.8919 for the models designed using the IGS with OB1, IGS with OB1, IGS with OB2, and DNN, respectively.

Models based on the imbalanced dataset
Tables 6 and 7 present the predictive performances of the CDSS models constructed based on the imbalanced dataset without under-sampling (E2) and with under-sampling (E3), respectively. As indicated in Table 6, in tenfold cross-validation, the accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC are 78.80–80.90%, 78.31–78.80%, 78.80–83.14%, and 0.8519–0.8763, respectively, for the IGS models as well as 86.20%, 75.64%, 91.48%, and 0.9071, respectively, for the DNN model. The DNN model exhibits the largest accuracy, specificity, and AUC, while the IGS model with.

Table 6 Comparison of predictive performance of models designed based on imbalanced dataset without under-sampling (E2) for AMI prediction
Full size table

Table 7 Comparison of predictive performance of models designed based on imbalanced dataset with under-sampling (E3) for AMI prediction
Full size table

OB1 fitness function shows the largest sensitivity in cross-validation. In ITT experiments, the accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC are 82.97–86.27%, 63.23–75.24%, 88.62–94.06%, and 0.8518–0.9002, respectively, for the IGS models, as well as 81.86–86.03%, 52.65–78.02%, 87.58–96.47%, and 0.8748–0.9098, respectively, for the DNN model. It can be observed that the sensitivity was far lower than the specificity in the ITT experiments for both IGS (63.23–75.24% vs 88.62–94.06%) and DNN (52.65–78.02% vs 87.58–96.47%) models, indicating the decision hyperplanes bias toward the majority class. The best average accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC are 84.73%, 72.58%, 92.03%, and 0.8927, respectively, obtained from IGS-OB3, IGS-OB1, DNN, and DNN, respectively.

Comparatively, regarding the models trained with negative cases of the training dataset under-sampled (E3), the accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC are 82.29–86.02%, 69.66–79.53%, 86.45–90.42%, and 0.8503–0.9047, respectively, for the IGS models, and 83.27–85.66%, 62.65–81.22%, 84.29–93.86%, and 0.8730–0.9081, respectively, for the DNN model. The best average accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC are 84.46%, 77.31%, 88.95%, and 0.8894 obtained from IGS-OB1, IGS-OB1, DNN, and DNN models, respectively. Figure 2 illustrates the ROC curves with the smallest and largest AUCs of the ITT experiments for models designed with E1 (a), E2 (b), and E3 (c) datasets. Again, all the models exhibit strong predictive power with AUC > 0.8.

Fig. 2.
figure 2
ROC curves with the smallest and largest AUC of the models designed based on a E1, b E2, and c E3 datasets

Full size image

Discussions, future works, and conclusions
Discussions
As shown in Table 4, although the positive and negative cases were age-matched in this study, age was still chosen as a salient feature to design the predictive models using three objective functions, indicating that age is associated with AMI development. The mean frequency of annual physician visits of most comorbid diseases for patients in the AMI group is significantly lower than the non-AMI group, mimicking that less frequent physician visits or worse disease management is associated with deterioration of comorbidities, which in turn resulting in a higher probability of AMI development. This result is consistent with our previous study, showing that patients with ED exhibited significantly lower annual physician visits on comorbid diseases than those without ED [21].

As listed in Table 4, although follow-up durations of five comorbidities only present significant differences between AMI and non-AMI patients, the presence (13), diagnosed ages (12), and annual physician visits (10) of comorbidities all exhibit significant differences between AMI and non-AMI groups for most of the 18 comorbidities, again consistent with the models for ED prediction [21].

Comparisons between models designed based on the balanced dataset and imbalanced dataset From Tables 5, 6, and 7, it can be observed that the average accuracy for the models designed using E2 and E3 datasets are slightly higher than those designed based on E1 with (aACC2–aACC1) of 1.63%, 2.73%, 2.76%, and 2.02%, respectively, and (aACC3–aACC1) of 1.42%, 2.44%, 2.46%, and 1.87%, respectively, for the IGS models with OB1, OB2, and OB3, and the DNN model. As compared between Tables 5 and 6, the models designed using the imbalanced dataset resulted in higher specificity and lower sensitivity. The differences between average specificity and average sensitivity (aSPE–aSEN) for IGS-OB1, IGS-OB2, IGS-OB3, and DNN models are 3.64%, 12.93%, 12.81%, and 8.64%, respectively, when designed using the E1 dataset; 18.17%, 21.84%, 21.53%, and 22.94%, respectively, when designed using the E2 dataset; and 10.71%, 13.26%, 12.64%, and 14.15%, respectively, when designed using the E3 dataset.

Interestingly, the differences between the average specificity and average sensitivity (aSPE–aSEN) for the IGS-OB1 models designed using E1, E2, and E3 datasets are smallest compared to IGS-OB2, IGS-OB3, and DNN models. This result is caused by the fact that OB1 is defined to reduce the difference between sensitivity and specificity while still keeping satisfactory accuracy. In addition, it can be observed that the difference between specificity and sensitivity (3.64%) is less in the IGS-OB1 model designed using the balanced dataset (E1) compared to IGS-OB1 models designed with imbalanced datasets (E2 and E3). This again supports that models designed with imbalanced datasets tend to bias toward the majority class.

Furthermore, as shown in Tables 5, 6, and 7, the average sensitivities of IGS-OB1 models are highest among models designed using both balanced and imbalanced datasets. In clinical applications, we prefer a CDSS to have higher sensitivity than specificity to detect more positive cases so that patients can benefit from early treatments and reduce healthcare costs. Therefore, using the OB1 and the balanced data for constructing the prediction model may reach the aim of higher sensitivity accompanied with smaller difference between specificity and sensitivity.

In general, the average AUC of the DNN models is larger than the IGS models designed based on balanced (0.8919 vs 0.8646–0.8829) or imbalanced (E2: 0.8927 vs 0.8676–0.8782; E3: 0.8894 vs 0.8754–0.8818) datasets. Although AUC is adopted as the fitness function for training the IGS-OB2 model with imbalanced dataset, its predictive performance (AUC) is still inferior to the DNN model in which accuracy is adopted as the fitness function. This mimics that the DNN is less influenced by the bias caused by great difference in sample number between majority and minority groups in the imbalanced dataset.

Comparisons of AMI predictive models Our experiment results demonstrated that designing predictive models using the IGS algorithm and DNN method based on patients’ long-term data with features including the presence of comorbidities and other comorbidity-related features can obtain strong models (AUCs greater than 0.8) in predicting patients who are more likely to develop AMI in the future. As reported in the previous literature [4,5,6], in addition to associated comorbidities, further improvement in predictive performance may be achieved by including features derived from physiological signals, lifestyle factors, anthropometric variables, and family history, which were not available in the NHIRD. Other features, such as CVH metrics [6], may also be included.

Table 1 compares models designed in previous studies for CAD or AMI prediction [25,26,27,28,29,30,31] with our current study. When compared with the models designed based on the UCI datasets, the predictive performance of both IGS and DNN models in our current study is superior to the models designed by combining heterogeneous hybrid feature selection with decision tree, Gaussian Naive Bayes, random forest, and XGBoot classifiers [28], but inferior to the models designed using NE-nu-SVC [25], stacked SVM [26], and MIFH [27] methods. For models designed using other datasets, the neural network model [29] exhibited a little better predictive accuracy and the MI3 model [30] demonstrated higher sensitivity and lower specificity than our models. However, different from our study, all of the models reported in previous studies were designed based on the short-term datasets acquired from severe AMI patients with obvious symptoms [25,26,27,28,29,30]. These models are only applicable for short-term bedside prediction. In contrast, our models were designed based on the long-term dataset acquired within a long period of time and are suitable for long-term prediction and for administrating intervention to prevent comorbidity deterioration and in turn AMI events.

NHIRD CDSS model for AMI prevention The designed predictive models can be applied in the clinical setting by embedding it into the physician order entry (POE) system. During the physician visit, the patient data stored in the electronic medical records can be input to the model for calculating probability of future AMI events, so that patients at high risk can be detected. And then, the healthcare providers may administrate appropriate interventions by actively providing treatment advices and suggestions, conducting regular health educations, and monitoring disease progression for managing-related comorbidities through e-Health or m-Health systems, thereby reducing the risk of acquiring AMI.

Models designed based on long-term and short-term datasets The datasets used for designing the CDSS models can be divided into three categories based on data collected in long-term period, short-term period, or real-time. In Taiwan, the NHI program provides health care to 99% of the 23 M citizens and maintains contracts with 97% of the healthcare institutions. Due to its good accessibility, comprehensive population coverage, short waiting time, and low costs [65], most citizens tend to migrate around hospitals to seek popular physicians for best treatment [66]. Hence, collecting long-term medical data of an individual patient in a single hospital is almost impossible or very difficult. A patient’s healthcare data are generally distributed around the EMRs of various hospitals situated in different regions. However, in order to claim reimbursements, all the healthcare organizations must provide necessary diagnostic and therapeutic data of the patients covered by the NHI program to the NHI bureau, aggregating more than 20 years of healthcare data for most citizens. As mentioned above, long-term NHIRD patient data have been used to design models for predicting diseases and medical events [19,20,21,22,23]. Unfortunately, only administrative-claimed data are included in the NHIRD, other data, such as laboratory test results, radiological examination images, daily lifestyles, and social determinants of health available in the EMR, are absent.

Short-term EMR patient data have also been adopted for designing models in the prediction of hospital readmissions [67, 68] and some [68, 69] outperformed the model based on the NHIRD [20]. However, an article reviewing 16 models for identifying patients admitted with AMI reported that none could identify AMI patients with high-risk readmissions in real time [70]. With the advancement of IoT technology, wearable devices are also becoming increasingly popular for collecting various types of real-time physiological data for daily care purposes [71]. In addition to continuous monitoring health status, real-time patient data can also be incorporated into the EMR to design short-term predictive models. For example, features derived from ECG signals and blood pressure measurements acquired from wearable IoT sensors accompanied with demographic information, laboratory test results, and radiological examination findings extracted from the EMR have been adopted for designing models to detect patients at higher risk in developing AMI and other heart diseases with great accuracy [29]. In [72], a modified deep convolutional neural network (MDCNN) was proposed for designing the predictive model to diagnose heart diseases. The open health datasets, including UCI Cleveland, Framingham, and Public Health datasets were used for training and testing the MDCNN models. In addition, a sensor dataset integrating sensor data (ECG and blood pressure) received from the IoT, patient’s age and sex, as well as other simulated features (chest pain, serum cholesterol, and glucose level) generated using pseudo number, were acquired for training and testing the MDCNN model, which achieved an accuracy as high as 98.2% and outperformed models reported in other studies [72].

According to the above discussions, it suggests that a model which integrates the model designed based on long-term data (NHIRD), and the model based on short-term data (EMR) together with real-time sensor data may have the potential to enhance predictive performance of the CDSS models.

Future works
Proposed models Recently, the Health Information Technology’s Interoperability Rule has been finalized by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and approved by the Congress for providing patients with more control on their personal health data and for eradicating information blocking. This would empower electronic personal health information (ePHI) development, and penalize persons who involve in information blocking of health data exchange [73]. Although Taiwan has similar legislation for patients to request their detailed health records from health organizations, it is still very difficult to integrate a patient’s long-term, short-term, and real-time data. We propose a novel method by integrating the long-term data (NHIRD), short-term data (EMR), and real-time data (wearable sensor data) to design models for enhancing predictive performance. The ensemble model will return the probability of developing AMI by weighted summing the predictive results of 2 models, that is long-term model and short-term model. A predictive model constructed based on the NHIRD dataset can take the advantage of patients’ long-term health trends to compensate for the deficiency of the models built based on the EMRs, which mostly only reflect short-term health status of patients.

Justification Two approaches, i.e., ensemble and transfer learning algorithms, can be considered to justify feasibility of the proposed models designed based on long-term dataset, short-term dataset, and real-time data. In the ensemble approach, long-term model can be designed using the NHIRD dataset, as presented in the current study. Similar to the model proposed in [72], the short-term model can be designed based on integrated patient data collected in the EMR and real-time data acquired from the IoT sensors. In contrast to the long-term model which can be trained, validated, and tested with NHIRD, the short-term model have to be designed based on the patient data recorded in the EMR of a hospital (or more hospitals). When the long-term and short-term models have been constructed, a patient’s comorbidities and comorbidity-related features can be input to the long-term model, while one’s laboratory test results, radiological examination findings, and other clinical data can be input to the short-term model. The return predictive results can then be weighted-ensemble to obtain the final prediction.

Transfer learning has been widely used for improving predictive performance of the target domain model by transferring the knowledge learned in the source domain [74]. In [75], a multi-view transfer learning algorithm was proposed to transfer activity knowledge between heterogeneous sensor platforms. This algorithm can be applied to justify our proposed model by transferring the knowledge from the source long-term NHIRD model to the short-term EMR model as the feature space is heterogeneous for the long-term NHIRD and short-term EMR models.

Conclusions
The designed CDSSs achieved strong performance in predicting patients who have a higher probability of acquiring AMI. Most comorbid diseases and their related features were significant in discriminating AMI from non-AMI patients. Moreover, a combination of age, presence of related comorbidities, and other comorbidity-related features, including diagnosed age and annual physician visits of individual comorbidities, is useful in designing AMI prediction models. Future studies will focus on aggressively screening patients who are more likely to acquire AMI, so that effective m-Health interventions can be administered to promote health education and monitor acquired comorbidities, thus preventing occurrence or recurrence of AMI.