Abstract
Quantum dot cellular automata (QCA) are emerging nanotechnology that offers few significant advantages like faster speed, higher circuit density, and lower power dissipation. Comparator is a fundamental and essential block in QCA logic circuit family. In this article, a single-layered and straightforward design of a QCA-based one-bit magnitude comparator has been proposed. The proposed design is 6.38%, 6.67% and ~ 10% more efficient in cell complexity, cell area and total area measurement, respectively, in comparison to prior reported designs. Furthermore, the energy dissipation of the proposed circuit has been calculated using QCADesigner-E and QCAPro tools to check the energy efficiency of the proposed circuit. The total energy dissipation of the reported magnitude comparator is 19.50 meV when measured using the QCADesigner-E tool. Similarly, according to the QCAPro tool, it has ~ 71% less energy dissipation than the existing designs.

Introduction
Quantum dot cellular automata (QCA) are a popular technology for nanocomputation that has three main advantages: higher speed, lower power dissipation and smaller area requirements [1]. The complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology faces lots of issues in sub-micron level circuit designing. For example, the short channel effects, change in surface properties, increased cost in the lithography process, heat generation, the upsurge of power dissipation, etc. are the main sub-micron level concerns in CMOS-based circuits [2]. Researchers came up with the perfect alternative to overcome such problems, which is QCA [1]. This technology promises low power dissipation with higher speed or minimal delay and higher component density [3]. Therefore, QCA technology is a good choice for computing at the nanoscale [2]. Furthermore, it is identified that QCA are appropriate for designing different computational circuits and devices. In other words, QCA technology is suitable to design logical circuits for nanocomputation. Contributions of many research work strengthen the QCA literature, which includes basic logical gates and circuits [4], multiplexers [5], demultiplexers [6], adders [7, 8], subtractors [9], decoders [10], multipliers [11], flip-flop and memory [12], etc. In this article, a single-layered energy-efficient QCA magnitude comparator has successfully been proposed, and it has been compared with existing designs for better performance assessment.

QCA basics
Fundamental of a QCA cell
The idea of quantum dot cellular automata (QCA) was first suggested by Lent et al. in 1993 [1]. The basic construction of QCA includes a zero-dimensional quantum cell [1]. A QCA cell contains four quantum dots in a square-shaped semiconductor sheet occupied by two electrons [2]. As shown in Fig. 1, an individual QCA cell has three states: an unpolarized state and two polarized states [1]. The two states of polarization are P = ‘ + 1’ (binary ‘1’) and P = ‘'− 1’ (binary ‘0’), as shown in Fig. 1. The cells occupy maximum distance through diagonal positions because of Coulomb’s repulsion among them [1]. Each electron can tunnel into any of the quantum dots within a cell when the tunnelling barrier is low [2]. Due to the presence of Coulomb’s repulsive force, the arrangements of the adjacent cells get significantly affected [3].

Fig. 1
figure 1
QCA cells a unpolarized cell, b polarization ‘− 1’ and c polarization ‘ + 1’

Full size image

QCA logic primitives
There are three basic building blocks of QCA technology: QCA wire, QCA majority gate or QCA majority voter and QCA inverter or QCA NOT gate [4]. QCA wire is a set of QCA cells placed one after another in a line, and it is used as a connector, as shown in Fig. 2. Three inputs QCA majority gate or majority voter follows the equation given below:



(1)

Here, A, B and C are the three inputs; Y is the output, as shown in Fig. 3. QCA inverter is also known as QCA NOT gate, which complements the input logic, shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 3
figure 3
QCA three inputs majority voter or majority gate

Full size image

Fig. 4
figure 4
QCA inverter or QCA NOT gate

Full size image

QCA clocking
QCA clocks provide the energy for proper information transfer within a circuit. In addition, QCA clocks allow adjustment in the tunnelling barrier between quantum dots for the movement of electrons within a cell and help electrons to adjust their alignments in predefined positions [2]. There is a total of four clock phases or zones in a QCA clock cycle. Data flow starts from clock-0, and it reaches clock-3 through clock-1 and clock-2 and again to clock-0 [3]. As shown in Fig. 5, each clock cycle has four stages: rising edge, high level, falling edge and low level; and they are known as switch phase, hold phase, release phase and relax phase, respectively[4].

Fig. 5
figure 5
QCA clocking

Full size image

Prior reported works
Magnitude comparator is an essential block in modern digital signal processors and microcontrollers. Many research works on magnitude comparators strengthened the QCA literature previously. In this section, a summary of a few of the already reported 1-bit magnitude comparators has been discussed.

In 2012, B. Ghosh et al. presented 73 QCA cell-based magnitude comparator with a total area of 0.053 μm2, which had a latency of 1-clock cycle [13]. Bahar et al. implemented a comparator using 47 QCA cells in 2017 [14]. The total occupied area was 0.042 μm2, and the circuit had a latency of 0.5-clock cycle [14]. In 2018, Erniyazov and Jeon proposed a digital magnitude comparator with QCA cell complexity of 85, and the total occupied area was 0.064 μm2 [15]. The delay of the design was 1.5-clock cycle [15]. Umira et al. reported 58 QCA cell-based digital comparator with 0.049 μm2 occupied area and 0.75-clock cycle latency in 2018 [16]. In the same year (2018), Jun-wen and Yin-shui reported a comparator consisting of 31 QCA cells, 0.110 μm2 occupied area and 0.75-clock cycle latency [17].

This article proposed a simple single-layer-based comparator, which has a minimal area requirement. The calculation of energy dissipation has been carried out to confirm the proposed circuit is energy efficient. In addition, a rigorous comparison has been made with prior reported designs for a complete performance evaluation of the proposed comparator.

In particular, the proposed 1-bit QCA magnitude comparator has the following features:

1.
It utilized 0.014 µm2 cell area, 0.038 µm2 total area, and it has area usage of 36.80% in QCA technology.

2.
It is a single-layer design, and it has a latency of 1-clock cycle.

3.
At 2 K temperature, it dissipates 44.78 meV total energy (for γ = 1.0EK) using QCAPro tool, and it dissipates a total of 19.50 meV of energy using QCADesigner-E (QDE) tool.

Proposed work
A novel design of the area and energy-efficient coplanar QCA 1-bit magnitude comparator has been proposed in this work. In nanocomputing, a comparator is very important to compare the magnitude of two binary bits. It is a combinational logic circuit, and the smallest comparator size is one bit (1-bit). It has two input lines, and each line processes 1-bit data. It produces the output after comparing those two single-bit inputs. These two input bits may be equal, or one bit may be greater than/less than the other bits. The outputs of the comparator have three lines according to three possible outcomes (equal, greater than and less than). If A and B are the two bits at the input and three output lines are Y1, Y2 and Y3, then the logical expressions are given as:

The logical circuit diagram of the proposed 1-bit comparator is shown in Fig. 6, which comprises of two input lines A and B, two NOT gates, two AND gates, a NOR gate, and three outputs as Y1, Y2 and Y3. It can be observed from Table 1 that if the input combination AB = 01, then output Y1 (A < B) will be at logic 1, and here the inverted input of A and original input B are passed through an AND gate. Similarly, when the input combination AB = 10, then output Y3 (A > B) will be at logic 1, and the inverted output of B and original input A through an AND gate give Y3. Finally, if the input combinations are AB = 00 or 11, then output A = B is at logic high state and other outputs are at logic low state. This is possible if Y1 and Y3 pass through a NOR gate, giving the required output Y2.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Logical circuit diagram of proposed 1-bit comparator

Full size image

Table 1 Logical input–output operation table of the 1-bit comparator
Full size table

QCA implementation
The QCA layout of the comparator circuit mentioned above has been implemented using QCADesigner Tool [18], with the same two input lines (A, B) and three output lines (Y1, Y2 and Y3). The signal flow direction of the proposed block is depicted in Fig. 7. The majority gate or majority voter-based schematic diagram of the proposed 1-bit comparator is shown in Fig. 8. It is clear that here three inverters (NOT gates) and three majority gates have been used. Two majority gates act as AND gates, and the other majority gate works as OR gate. The XNOR function has been implemented using OR operation and NOT operation of Y1 and Y3, as shown in Fig. 8. The QCA layout of the proposed 1-bit magnitude comparator is shown in Fig. 9. The proposed comparator layout has been realized using 44 QCA cells; therefore, cell complexity or cell count is 44. It utilized 0.014 μm2 cell area and 0.038 μm2 total area; thus, the area usage is 36.84%. Four clocks are required to successfully transfer data from the input to the output for the proposed digital comparator; hence, the latency of the proposed comparator is 1-clock cycle. The proposed circuit layout is a single-layer coplanar design without using any crossover. The output of the proposed 1-bit comparator in standard form and bus form using the QCADesigner tool is shown in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively.

Fig. 7
figure 7
The signal flow direction of the proposed design in the QCA layout

Full size image

Fig. 8
figure 8
Majority gate-based schematic diagram of proposed 1-bit comparator

Full size image

Fig. 9
figure 9
The QCA layout of the proposed 1-bit comparator designed in the QCADesigner tool

Full size image

Fig. 10
figure 10
The output of the proposed 1-bit comparator in standard form in QCADesigner

Full size image

Fig. 11
figure 11
The output of the proposed 1-bit comparator in bus form in QCADesigner

Full size image

Analysis
A detailed analysis of the proposed comparator for the parameters, such as energy dissipation, occupied area, cell complexity, latency, quantum cost, has been performed successfully to confirm the performance of the proposed design.

Design parameter details
The most critical design parameter is cell complexity or cell count. It is the number of QCA cells necessary to design the layout. The cell complexity or cell count of the proposed multiplexer is 44. The total occupied area is the total rectangular area required to design the architecture. For the proposed circuit, the total area is 0.038 μm2. The cell area is calculated by the multiplication of complexity with individual cell area; therefore, the occupied cell area of the proposed comparator is 0.014 μm2. Hence, the area usage of the proposed design is 36.80%, and it is a good value from a design perspective. To transfer the signal from input to output, here, four clock phases or clock zones are necessary; therefore, the delay or latency of the proposed design is 1-clock cycle. It is worth mentioning that 1-clock cycle is equal to four clock zones or four clock phases. Another important parameter is quantum cost (QC). It is calculated as area × (latency) 2. A lower QC is desirable, and QC for the proposed design is 0.0380 × 10–12. In addition, the proposed QCA layout utilized three inverters and three majority gates. It is a coplanar-based single-layered QCA design.

Calculation of energy dissipation using QDE
In QCADesigner-E or QDE energy estimation tool [19], energy in QCA cells is considered as ‘bath’ of energy [20]. It is a coordinates-based energy estimation process [19]. If the energy of a QCA cell is EIO, it is expressed as EIO = EIN − EOUT, where the input and the output energies are represented by EIN and EOUT, respectively [20]. The minor error during energy estimation may be expressed as ERR = EEV —(ECK + EIO), where the energy transferred to the environment is EEV, and the clock energy is ECK [20]. If EEV, EIO and ECK are negative, energy has been transferred from the environment [20].

As introduced in QDE, the QCA cell at the lowest array position receives the ‘coordinates ‘[1][1]’ for the proposed design, whereas the highest location of the comparator is ‘[13][6]’. As a result, the total energy consumption of the comparator is 19.50 meV, and a minor error of −1.91 meV is generated during the energy estimation. Similarly, the proposed circuit has an average energy dissipation per cycle of 1.78 meV with a minute error of − 0.174 meV.

Kink energy calculation
The kink energy can be calculated using following Eq. (5) if two electrons, ‘q1’ and ‘q2’, are located at a distance ‘r’ [21].


 
 
 

(5)

where 
 
 = 9 × 109 and electronic charge = q1 = q2 = 1.6 × 10−19 J. Consider each output (Y1, Y2 and Y3) separately for calculation and imagine that the centroid of the effect of the entire circuit is that particular output cell. Let us consider the output Y1 first and consider the portion of the circuit as shown in Fig. 12, where the effect is dominant, ignoring the long-distance cells from Y1. Now the kink energy between each of the electrons (e1, e2, e3, e4, e5 and e6) and electrons (M and N) of the output cell (Y1) is calculated. The same process is repeated, that is, the kink energy between each of the electrons (e1, e2, e3, e4, e5 and e6) and electrons (R and S) of the output cell (Y1) is calculated. Two arrangements are shown in Fig. 12a, b, one for the same polarization and another for opposite polarization. Similar calculations for Y2 and Y3 and the cell arrangements are shown in Figs. 13 and 14, respectively. The final value of kink energy for each output is calculated using the following equations, where ‘SP’ and ‘OP’ indicate the same polarization and opposite polarization, respectively.



(6)



(7)

Fig. 12
figure 12
Kink energy calculation for output Y1, a same polarization and b opposite polarization

Full size image

Fig. 13
figure 13
Kink energy calculation for output Y2, a same polarization and b opposite polarization

Full size image

Fig. 14
figure 14
Kink energy calculation for output Y3, a same polarization and b opposite polarization

Full size image

M, N, R, S are electrons, as shown in Figs. 12, 13, and 14. For the output cell Y1, EKINK-M = 3.899 × 10–20 J and EKINK-N = 12.765 × 10–20 J, therefore EKINK-SP = 16.664 × 10–20 J. Similarly, EKINK-R = 14.677 × 10–20 J and EKINK-S = 4.066 × 10–20 J, thus EKINK-OP = 18.743 × 10–20 J for the output cell Y1.

Likewise, EKINK-M = 7.112 × 10–20 J and EKINK-N = 4.967 × 10–20 J, thus EKINK-SP = 12.079 × 10–20 J for Y2. EKINK-R = 4.974 × 10–20 J and EKINK-S = 16.372 × 10–20 J, hence EKINK-OP = 21.346 × 10–20 J for the output cell Y2.

For the output cell Y3, EKINK-M = 4.075 × 10–20 J and EKINK-N = 5.229 × 10–20 J, therefore EKINK-SP = 9.304 × 10–20 J. Also, EKINK-R = 16.24 × 10–20 J and EKINK-S = 3.456 × 10–20 J, then EKINK-OP = 19.696 × 10–20 J for the output cell Y3.

The lower kink energy value of Y1, Y2 and Y3 indicates the favourable position of electrons of the output cell. The total kink energy of the output cell for the positions of the favourable electron is 38.047 × 10–20 J.

Energy calculation using QCAPro
QCAPro is a popular tool to estimate the non-adiabatic power loss of QCA circuits during switching operations for different tunnelling energy levels at a fixed temperature [22]. The energy estimation using QCAPro is based on two vectors, λ (coherence vector) and Γ (energy vector), and they are called energy vectors [22]. These energy vectors are three-dimensional (3D), and it is possible to define QCA cell activities by those vectors. The coherence vector (λ) has three vector components, λx, λy and λz. The other vector is called the energy vector and is represented by Γ. Therefore, we can express Γ as:

where ћ is the reduced Planck’s constant, γ is the tunnelling behaviour-related parameter, and ϕ is Coulomb’s force between cells [22, 23].

The expectation value per clock cycle of QCA energy is expressed as

Here, H is a Hamiltonian matrix, and the total power is expressed as below.

The total energy dissipation for clock period TCK is expressed as:

Using the QCAPro energy estimation tool, the energy is measured at a temperature of 2 K for three tunnelling levels, as shown in Table 2. The corresponding mapping of power dissipation at 2 K temperature with 0.5EK tunnelling energy is shown in Fig. 15. The dark colour is representing high power dissipation for a QCA cell. According to the power estimation analysis using QCAPro tool with a fixed temperature 2 K and three different tunnelling levels with γ = 0.5EK, γ = 1.0EK and γ = 1.5EK results leakage energy dissipations of comparator are 13.12 meV, 62.13 meV and 75.25 meV, respectively; the switching energy dissipations are 40.16 meV, 53.14 meV and 93.30 meV, respectively; and the total energy dissipations (in average) are 71.87 meV, 44.78 meV and 116.65 meV, respectively.

Table 2 Energy dissipation of proposed comparator using QCAPro at 2 K temperature
Full size table

Fig. 15
figure 15
Power dissipation mapping at 2 K temperature with 0.5EK tunnelling energy

Full size image

Comparison
For evaluating our proposed design, several parameters for comparison are given in Tables 3 and 4. Table 3 shows the design summary of the proposed 1-bit magnitude comparator, including the prior reported designs. The comparing parameter in Table 3 includes the cell complexity, cell area, total area, area usage, latency, etc., and Table 4 exclusively depicts the values of energy dissipation.

Table 3 Comparative study of the proposed and prior designs
Full size table

Table 4 Energy dissipation analysis of the proposed and prior designs
Full size table

Precisely, the proposed comparator requires ~ 7% fewer cells, ~ 7% smaller cell area and ~ 10% smaller total area compared to the best existing design reported in [14]. Moreover, the proposed comparator block has ~ 37% area usage and 1-clock cycle latency which is quite good from the perspective of QCA layout design. In addition, the proposed layout is a single-layer architecture, which is of utmost importance for QCA layout design. Furthermore, compared to the best existing design [14], there is ~ 71% improvement in energy dissipation when tested in the QCAPro tool. In addition, the proposed circuit dissipates ~ 20 meV energy if the experiment is performed in QDE tool. Therefore, two different energy dissipation experiments have been considered in this study, and the dissipated energy values are very minute in both cases. Furthermore, the calculation of kink energy has been analyzed separately for better performance assessment. Here, the calculated kink energy of the output cell for the positions of the favourable electron is 38.047 × 10–20 J.

Conclusion
This article presents a novel design of a 1-bit magnitude comparator using quantum dot cellular automata. The proposed layout is functionally verified by the QCADesigner tool. The estimation of energy dissipations has been carried out using two tools, QCAPro and QCADesigner-E (QDE). For better performance analysis, kink energy has been calculated separately. The proposed 1-bit magnitude comparator design utilizes three majority gates and three inverters. To avoid the design complexity of XNOR gate, the current procedure uses a simple majority gate-based OR gate and a NOT function. After successful comparison with prior reported designs, it has been proved that the proposed design is significantly more robust than comparators of similar build. The comparison results indicate that the proposed design achieves considerable improvements over the previously reported designs in terms of cell complexity, area requirement, cost, energy dissipation. It is possible to design higher bits QCA-comparators using the proposed 1-bit comparator by following the same method in future.

