Abstract
Familiarity design has been widely shown to be beneficial for improving players’ perception and adoption of exergames, by reducing their perceived difficulty and complexity. However, players’ perceived familiarity with exergames may differ according to their prior knowledge and experience. There still lacks a validated familiarity instrument for measuring players’ perceived familiarity with a particular exergame. Such an instrument can inform exergame designers on how well familiarity design has been incorporated into the exergame. Moreover, it helps players to choose an exergame that could induce a higher level of familiarity. In this research, we propose a 10-item psychometric familiarity instrument to evaluate a player’s perceived familiarity with exergames. The questions in the instrument are developed based on the sub-constructs of familiarity identified in prior research. To validate the proposed familiarity instrument, we rely on electroencephalogram (EEG) data, which may objectively reflect a player’s brain activity when familiarity is induced. A study involving 20 participants indicates that the total scores of the instrument is highly correlated with analyzed results from EEG. The study results suggest good validity and high reliability of our proposed familiarity instrument.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Familiarity

Exergame

EEG

1. Introduction
Exergames, combining exercise with game play, have been shown to be beneficial for all ages. It is shown that exergames can improve young adults’ health status and provide social and academic benefits (McPhee, French, Jackson, Nazroo, Pendleton, Degens, 2016, Staiano, Calvert, 2011). Studies also strongly support the positive association between increased levels of physical activity and improved health in older adults (McPhee et al., 2016). Exergame has become an attractive and fashionable way for exercises as it offers more enjoyment and increases adherence by decreasing the monotony of repeated exercises and providing instant feedback to players’ motions (Warburton, 2013). With the advances of video game technology, such as virtual reality and augmented reality, a great variety of exergames with entertaining game interfaces and tasks have been designed and developed to deliver both physical and cognitive exercises for a wide range of individuals (Bird, Clark, Millar, Whetton, Smith, 2015, Choi, Oh, Edge, Kim, Lee, 2016, De Boissieu, Denormandie, Armaingaud, Sanchez, Jeandel, 2017).

However, exergames are not perfect yet. Despite expressing high initial enthusiasm, players tend to lose interests over time (Barnett, Cerin, Baranowski, 2011, Owens, Garner III, Loftin, van Blerk, Ermin, 2011). Things could become less promising when coming to older adults. It is sometimes difficult for older adults to voluntarily take up exergames or be engaged in exergame playing due to the perceived complexity and difficulty of new technologies (Balaam, Rennick Egglestone, Fitzpatrick, Rodden, Hughes, Wilkinson, Nind, Axelrod, Harris, Ricketts, et al., 2011, Leonardi, Mennecozzi, Not, Pianesi, Zancanaro, 2008). Prior research has found that the game has to be able to adapt to players’ preferences and prior experiences to satisfy different players (Dias and Martinho, 2011). Research on older adults has found that familiarity design is beneficial for improving their adoption of exergames (Zhang, 2019). The feeling of familiarity with exergame interfaces and tasks can significantly improve older adults’ motivation to take up exergames and a self-ensured ability to play exergames (Balaam, Rennick Egglestone, Fitzpatrick, Rodden, Hughes, Wilkinson, Nind, Axelrod, Harris, Ricketts, et al., 2011, Leonardi, Mennecozzi, Not, Pianesi, Zancanaro, 2008). Moreover, familiarity design has been shown to be beneficial for general users by reducing the feeling of complexity and improving usability (Norman, 2013). The possible rationale is that familiarity is one of the key memory processes in the dual-process (recollection and familiarity) memory model (Yonelinas, 2002). Recollection is the process of retrieving details of past events. In contrast, familiarity is the feeling that the event was previously experienced (Jacoby, 1991). Familiarity reflects a more global measure of memory strength or stimulus recency (Yonelinas et al., 2005). Thus, the feeling of familiarity can help a person to recall their past emotions and experiences.

Although familiarity design has been widely shown to be beneficial for enhancing exergame players’ perception and adoption of exergames, there still lacks a validated instrument for measuring players’ perceived familiarity with a specific exergame. The instrument may benefit both exergame designers and players. On the one hand, such an instrument can help game designers to evaluate whether familiarity design has been successfully incorporated into exergames. On the other hand, a familiarity instrument can help exergame players to choose exergames that will induce a higher level of familiarity, which is especially desired for older players.

In this research, we propose a psychometric familiarity instrument for exergame players to evaluate their familiarity with two salient stimuli in exergames: interface and task (Zhang et al., 2019). Interface refers to the virtual environment and context in the exergame display. Task refers to the control of objects in the virtual environment and context by the body motions of exergame players. To measure players’ perceived familiarity with an exergame’s interface and task, we evaluate the five sub-constructs of familiarity identified in prior research (Zhang et al., 2019), which include prior experience, positive emotion, occurrence frequency, level of processing, and retention rate. The instrument consists of ten questions regarding the five sub-constructs of familiarity on exergame interfaces and tasks. All the questions adopt a seven-point Likert scale and require the respondent indicating the degree of agreement. Higher total points in this instrument indicate that the user has a higher perceived familiarity with a specific exergame.

To evaluate the validity and reliability of the proposed instrument, we refer to the research on recognition memory, in which familiarity is frequently discussed. Owing to the high temporal resolution and low cost of electroencephalography (EEG), it has been extensively used in recent attempts to detect users’ familiarity with different stimuli (Collins, Robinson, Behrmann, 2018, Thammasan, Moriyama, Fukui, Numao, 2017). For the two salient stimuli in exergame, namely interface and task, we use event-related potential (ERP) (Jäger, Mecklinger, Kipp, 2006, Rosburg, Mecklinger, Frings, 2011) and event-related desynchronization (ERD) (Calvo-Merino, Grèzes, Glaser, Passingham, Haggard, 2006, Orgs, Dombrowski, Heil, Jansen-Osmann, 2008) data to evaluate players’ perceived familiarity, respectively. A study involving 20 participants was conducted to validate the proposed familiarity instrument. Both EEG data and responses to the familiarity instrument were collected from the participants. The analysis results show that the total points of the familiarity instrument is highly correlated with the EEG data. To assess the quality of the familiarity instrument, four primary psychometric measures were evaluated, including criterion-related validity, convergent validity, sensitivity, and internal consistency. All the results support a good validity and high reliability of the instrument. Moreover, the analysis results indicate that familiarity has a higher impact on older adults than younger adults in terms of improved satisfaction with exergames.

2. Related work
This section first reviews the prior research on familiarity design for general users and older adults. Then, the research on familiarity in the field of recognition memory is reviewed, which serves as the theoretical foundation for validating our proposed familiarity instrument.

2.1. Familiarity design
Familiarity plays an important role in any product usage. Tognazzini (1991) suggested that the operation of an interactive system is best achieved by means of a metaphor or analogy, which indicates the importance of familiarity. If a user feels familiar with a product, he or she is more likely to understand its purpose and usage (Norman, 2013). Being familiar with a system means we are ready to operate it in an appropriate way based on our prior experiences (Herstad and Holone, 2012). Sufficient experiences may lead to the development of an internal model, or stereotype, about how one expects something to work (Kaplan and Kaplan, 1982).

Familiarity has been applied in several new technology designs for older adults. For example, Leonardi et al. (2008) designed WIMP (Window, Icons, Menus, and Pointing) interfaces with familiar interaction modalities to enhance user experience for older adults, such as replacing the “erase” command with scrubbing the finger. Turner (2008) conducted an empirical study involving a group of seniors learning to use a personal computer and the services provided by it. He found that familiarity plays an important role in helping older adults learn how to use technology and suggested that technology should be integrated into older adults’ everyday life to improve familiarity. Hollinworth and Hwang (2011) designed the tmail application with familiar visual objects (e.g., email messages shown in the inbox resemble paper envelopes) and behaviors (e.g., messages and images can be moved by touching and sliding). All the older participants found the visual objects in this familiar interface easy to understand and they can quickly master how to use tmail. Zhang et al. (2016) designed the Escape Room exergame for the older adults with familiar room environment as the game environment and common activities as the game tasks. Study found that participants’ perception of familiarity with the exergame affects their satisfaction with the exergame (Zhang et al., 2019).

However, prior research often used a single metric to evaluate familiarity, which is hard to standardize.Three ways were often applied: Likert scales (from very unfamiliar to very familiar) to ask users to evaluate their feeling of familiarity (Gardner, Goulden, Cross, 2015, Kaya, Behravesh, Abubakar, Kaya, Orús, 2019, Zhang, Wu, Miao, Shen, Leung, 2019); yes-no questions to ask whether the stimulus is familiar (Bruett, Leynes, 2015, Collins, Robinson, Behrmann, 2018, Naveh-Benjamin, 2000); and familiarity level determination of a stimulus according to its years of commercial availability (Boger et al., 2013). A validated psychometric instrument to measure familiarity is still missing.

2.2. Familiarity research in recognition memory
Familiarity is thought to be an unconscious, automatic process that demands minimal attention (Wagner et al., 1997). Being familiar with a system means that we are ready to interact with it in an easy and intuitive way based on our prior knowledge (Herstad and Holone, 2012). A common assumption of memory models is that the information can be triggered in two ways, either as a scalar value of familiarity or as a structured recall of an event (Hintzman et al., 1998). The distinction is illustrated by our common experience that we often recognize a person as familiar but are not able to recollect who the person is or where they were previously encountered (Yonelinas, 2002). In other words, the pre-existing representations make the known items easy to process, and more quickly retrieved, engendering a feeling of fluency which is often interpreted as familiarity (Bruett, Leynes, 2015, Ozubko, Yonelinas, 2014).

Studies have applied ERP data to examine the recollection and familiarity process. Finnigan et al. (2002) found that an N400 effect recorded over the parietal scalp varied with presentation frequency, and the effect was considered to reflect familiarity. Jäger et al. (2006) first found a double dissociation of familiarity and recollection of recognition memory through ERP. Woodruff et al. (2006) also evaluated ERP data in their experiment and found a negative-going ERP deflection that onsets around 300 ms post-stimulus varied inversely with familiarity, and this effect was maximal over the left frontal scalp. Thus, both the ERP studies have found that the left frontal scalp is associated with familiarity strength.

Research mentioned above usually evaluate participants’ ERP data towards static words or pictures. In EEG measures, action execution and observation are proved to be related to a relative decrease in power in the alpha and beta frequency bands, which is usually called event-related desynchronization (ERD) (Buccino, Vogt, Ritzl, Fink, Zilles, Freund, Rizzolatti, 2004, Grezes, Decety, 2001). Dance movement observation research found that participants’ familiarity with the observed dance significantly influences the ERD data in alpha and lower beta bands (Calvo-Merino, Grèzes, Glaser, Passingham, Haggard, 2006, Orgs, Dombrowski, Heil, Jansen-Osmann, 2008). Di Nota et al. (2017) also found a higher alpha ERD results when the participants are more familiar with the stimuli during an action observation EEG experiment. The previous investigations have shown that the ERD data of an observed action is influenced by familiarity.

Prior research has indicated that aging leads to a decrease in memory recollection, but does not influence familiarity (Perfect et al., 1995). Naveh-Benjamin (2000) showed that older adults had greater difficulty encoding and retrieving associations between items (conceptual information) than recognizing items (perceptual information). Yonelinas (2002) also indicates that aging has a negative effect on recollection, but does not influence familiarity. Anderson et al. (2008) evaluated memory mechanisms among healthy young adults, healthy older adults, and individuals with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). Their results found that recollection was decreased in older adults and participants with aMCI compared to young adults. However, familiarity did not differ among the groups. The prior research indicates the familiarity process in older adults’ recognition memory is not influenced by aging or aMCI. Therefore, it is useful to apply familiarity design for older adults to evoke their prior experiences.

3. The psychometric familiarity instrument
As familiarity can effectively influence players’ game experience to exergames, a simple and efficient familiarity evaluation instrument is useful for selecting appropriate exergames for each player. Moreover, familiarity evaluation instrument can be applied by the game designers to test whether their designed exergames are familiar to target users. Thus, a psychometric familiarity instrument is developed in this paper. The instrument uses a seven-point Likert scale, where statements are made and the respondent indicates the degree of agreement or disagreement. Prior research shows that a long questionnaire may negatively influence users’ survey experience and results in a loss of response quality (Baumgartner et al., 2019). Thus, we include one question for each sub-construct of familiarity based on the five sub-constructs of familiarity identified in prior research (Zhang et al., 2019). As two salient stimuli (Interface and Task) were proposed in exergames (Zhang et al., 2019), a total of ten questions are assembled in this instrument to evaluate player’s perceived familiarity with an exergame. The instrument is shown in Table 1. The sub-construct column indicates the corresponding familiarity sub-construct the question assessed.


Table 1. Familiarity instrument for exergames.

Game Interface:	Sub-construct
1. I have much prior experience with the displayed environment (heard of, searched for information, or have been to).	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Prior experience
2. While remembering the displayed environment, the emotions are extremely positive.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Positive emotion
3. I frequently come across the displayed environment in my daily life.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Occurrence frequency
4. Before today, I got a deep impression and fully understand the function of the displayed environment.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Level of processing
5. I came across the displayed environment very recently.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Retention rate
Game Task:
6. I have much prior experience with this task. (heard of, searched for information, owned and played).	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Prior experience
7. While remembering this task, the emotions are extremely positive.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Positive emotion
8. I frequently do this task in my daily life.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Occurrence frequency
9. Before today, I got a deep impression and fully understand the rules and skills of doing this task.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Level of processing
10. I have done this task very recently.	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Retention rate
1: Strongly disagree; 2: Disagree; 3: Slightly disagree; 4: Neutral; 5: Slightly agree; 6: Agree; 7: Strongly agree

It should be mentioned that “the displayed environment” and “this task” in the instrument can be changed based on the different design of exergames. For example, in Basketball Genius exergame (a basketball exergame we used in the validation study), we changed “the displayed environment” to “indoor basketball court” and “this task” to “playing basketball” in the questionnaires according to the designed interface and task. We currently set the same weight for each question and the total familiarity score is the summary of the results to the ten questions. Higher scores indicate that the player perceives higher familiarity with the exergame.

It can be found from the instrument that the five questions for Interface and Task are similar. Thus, the five questions can be easily altered to obtain the familiarity levels for different stimuli other than exergame interface and task. For example, the instrument can also be applied to evaluate players’ familiarity with other games and/or software. However, it is important to find out the salient stimuli in different game genres and software before the instrument can contribute to.

4. Validation study
The goal of this study is to collect indicators describing the validity and reliability of the familiarity instrument. Convergent validity, criterion-related validity, sensitivity and reliability of the instrument were assessed in a lab-based experiment. Meanwhile, we compared the effect of familiarity on improving users’ satisfaction with the exergames for younger and older adults.

4.1. Participants
Ten younger adults (Mean SD 5 males) and ten older adults (Mean  2 males) took part in this study. There are two reasons that we include both younger and older adults in this experiment. First, the universal applicability of the instrument to people in different age groups can be evaluated. Second, we would like to compare the effect of familiarity on users’ satisfaction with the exergame between different age groups. None of the participants have ever seen or played the exergames used in this study. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and none of them had any history of brain disease and injury. Informed consent was obtained from each participant before the experiment. Shopping vouchers worth 20 Singapore dollars were received by each participant after the experiment as compensation.

4.2. Exergames
Three exergames were involved in this study, including Ping Pong, Basketball Genius and Escape Room exergames. The Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY) has designed and developed the three exergames using Microsoft Kinect as the non-intrusive motion detection device to help older adults retain good upper limb capabilities. Basketball Genius and Ping Pong are designed in the themes of basketball and table tennis, respectively. The two exergames require players to simulate the motions to play basketball or table tennis to complete the tasks. The environment of Escape Room exergame is designed based on a typical home environment in Singapore and game tasks are designed as instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs). Please refer to Zhang et al. (2019) for more details on these exergames. The interfaces of the three exergames are shown in Fig. 1. From our prior experiences, we suppose that Basketball Genius and Ping Pong should be more familiar to some younger participants since more young adults frequently play or watch these sports. Escape Room is posited to be more familiar to older adults because all the older participants have lived in Singapore for more than 20 years and they should have more prior experiences to the designed environment.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (1MB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Interfaces of the exergames: (a) Basketball Genius; (b) Ping Pong; (c) Escape room.

4.3. Study design
To test the validity and reliability of our developed familiarity instrument, we collected participants’ ERP data to exergame interfaces and ERD data to exergame tasks as reference. Participants’ EEG data were collected first to avoid the testing effect. Then the participants were required to play exergames and fill out the questionnaires.

For ERP data collection, the participants were required to watch screenshots of the three exergames. Ten screenshots of each exergame were shown on the screen in a random order and each screenshot would display for five seconds. For the convenience of the experiment, the authors selected all screenshots used in the experiment and ensured the selected screenshots contain comprehensive context in each game. Participants’ final ERP data results in each exergame were obtained by averaging their ERP results to the ten pictures to reduce the effect of errors. For ERD data collection, three videos related to the task of each exergame (i.e., people actually playing table tennis, playing basketball and doing IADLs) were displayed to the participants in a random order. In each video, three sections (17 s for each section) of the same actions in different scenarios (professional and amateur) were shown orderly. Participants’ final ERD results in each exergame were obtained by averaging the ERD results to the three sections to reduce the errors.

After the EEG data collection session, the participants were invited to play the three exergames and fill out questionnaires. After completing one exergame, the questionnaire related to this exergame was completed first before playing the next exergame. Besides the familiarity instrument, we also collected participants’ overall familiarity and satisfaction levels with different exergames through a 7-level Likert scale.

To determine the quality of the familiarity instrument, four primary psychometric measures were assessed: 1) criterion-related validity, 2) convergent validity, 3) sensitivity and 4) internal consistency.

1)
Criterion-related validity refers to the extent to which results on one measure are associated with results from a separate measure, the latter being taken to be the criterion variable (Streiner et al., 2015). Because it has been proven that the EEG data can reflect users’ feelings of familiarity, the correlation between the EEG data and users’ answers to the familiarity instrument was analyzed to assess criterion-related validity. The interpretation of the correlation results r was based on Cohen (2013), who differentiates between small (), medium () and large () effects.

2)
Convergent validity is presumed when two independent evaluation methods are highly correlated (Messick, 1980). Prior studies usually apply subjective familiarity assessment with a single metric to determine familiarity. Thus, the correlation between the familiarity instrument result and the single-construct familiarity assessment result was analyzed to assess the convergent validity.

3)
Sensitivity describes the ability of the scale to distinguish between different levels of familiarity. It was assessed by comparing users’ group-means of their results to different exergames. Because Escape Room exergame is designed with familiar interfaces and tasks for our target users, a significant difference of instrument results for different exergames is to be expected when the familiarity instrument is highly sensitive.

4)
Internal consistency refers to the homogeneity of the items in the measure (Cronbach, 1951) and is the most commonly accepted measure of reliability. It was assessed by calculating Cronbach’s alpha for the instrument (Santos, 1999). An internal consistency of α > 0.8 is expected to be good and α > 0.9 is excellent (Kline, 2013).

After assessing the validity and reliability of the familiarity instrument, we compared the effect of familiarity on improving users’ satisfaction with the exergames in different age groups.

4.4. Procedure
The EEG data collection was proceeded in a quiet room in our research centre and the game playing session was conducted at a specified exergame room. After signing the consent form, the participant was first required to fill out a short demographic questionnaire. Then the investigator confirmed that the participant was seated in comfort and wore the EEG cap for the participant. Four videos were shown to the participants during the EEG data collection. One video related to the screenshots of the three exergames lasts about 4 min. and the other three videos related to game tasks last about 1 min. There was a 1-minute break in the middle of each video. In total, the participants need to wear the EEG cap for 10--15 min to collect all the data. After the EEG data collection, participants were invited to the game room and played the three exergames in a random order for 5--10 min each. When accomplishing the play session of one exergame, the participants were invited to fill out the questionnaire for that exergame. After completing all the exergames and questionnaires, the participants would receive their compensation and may leave the research centre. The experimental procedure was approved by our Institutional Review Board.

4.5. EEG recording and data processing
The EEG data was measured and continuously recorded using Emotiv Epoc+1 device and its software EmotivPro2. The headset included 14 Ag-AgCl electrodes aligned with the 10-20 system (Fig. 2) and a band-pass filter of  Hz. After collecting the data, we further applied Independent Component Analysis (ICA) (Hyvärinen et al., 2004) to remove ocular artifacts in the EEG data, and selected appropriate components from the ICA results to reduce the noise from the participants’ eye and facial muscle movement.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (482KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Position of EEG electrodes1.

ERP data processing: The ERP data from the left frontal electrode F3 channel was used in data analysis. After the data pre-processing, the cleaned EEG signals in the F3 channel were then cut into epochs that started  ms before the onset of each interface picture (0 ms), and ended 1,000 ms after the onset of the same picture. Amplitude values  ± 150μV were excluded. For each participant, 10 pictures for each exergame interface were shown during the data collection. The ERP data in F3 were summarized from the 10 onsets of the pictures for each exergame. Thus, we obtained the final ERP results from the F3 channel ranging from -100 ms to 1,000 ms onset of stimuli for each participant in three different exergames.

ERD data processing: The EEG was filtered in five frequency bands from the EmotivPro software, i.e. Theta ( Hz), Alpha ( Hz), Low Beta ( Hz), High Beta ( Hz) and Gamma ( Hz). Three sections were involved for each exergame task video. For each section, filtered raw data were partitioned into segments with a length of 8 s, starting with the visual control condition (3 s) and ending 5 s after movement video onset. Amplitudes of single trials were squared, averaged according to the experimental conditions and transformed to percentage change in band power during movement observation relative to the visual control condition (mean power within the first 3 s) (Pfurtscheller and Da Silva, 1999). The time interval between 0 and 5 s after movement onset was partitioned into five segments of 1-second duration and submitted to statistical analysis, which refers to the prior research (Calvo-Merino, Grèzes, Glaser, Passingham, Haggard, 2006, Orgs, Dombrowski, Heil, Jansen-Osmann, 2008). The final ERD results in all the segments (one control and five 1-second duration segments) for each exergames were averaged by the three sections.

5. Results
5.1. Criterion-related validity
ERP data and Interface familiarity: Most of the prior research has recognized that the left frontal (F3 channel) ERP mean amplitudes between 300 ms and 500 ms post-stimulus are sensitive to familiarity strength (Curran, 2000, Woodruff, Hayama, Rugg, 2006, Yonelinas, Otten, Shaw, Rugg, 2005). The lower familiarity strength would result in a larger negative-going mean ERP amplitudes. The study of Jäger et al. (2006) found ERP data during the time window between 300 ms and 400 ms correlates with familiarity. Thus, two time windows were tested in our correlation test. We summarized the results of the five questions to “Game Interface” in the instrument as the total Interface results. The Spearman’s correlation coefficients test was then conducted to assess the correlations between the ERP data and the Interface results. The results are shown in Table 2. The five sub-constructs all show at least moderately positive correlations with the ERP data, and all the results are significant. More importantly, the total interface result is highly correlated with the ERP data in both time windows (300-500 ms: ; 300-400 ms: ). Overall, the criterion-related validity for Interface part of familiarity instrument has been supported.


Table 2. Spearman’s rank correlations between the ERP data and interface results.

300–500 ms	300–400 ms
Prior Experience	0.656⋆⋆⋆	0.535⋆⋆⋆
Positive Emotion	0.418⋆⋆⋆	0.369⋆⋆⋆
Occurrence Frequency	0.470⋆⋆⋆	0.362⋆⋆⋆
Level of Processing	0.557⋆⋆⋆	0.444⋆⋆⋆
Retention Rate	0.577⋆⋆⋆	0.517⋆⋆⋆
Total Interface	0.680⋆⋆⋆	0.571⋆⋆⋆
⋆: p < 0.1; ⋆⋆: p < 0.05; ⋆⋆⋆: p < 0.01

ERD data and Task familiarity: The ERD data in alpha and beta frequency band was found sensitive to familiar action observation, especially during the time frame from 1 to 2 s after movement onset, and higher familiarity results in more decrease of the band power (Avanzini, Fabbri-Destro, Dalla Volta, Daprati, Rizzolatti, Cantalupo, 2012, Orgs, Dombrowski, Heil, Jansen-Osmann, 2008). Because we have separated the time interval between 0 and 5 s after movement onset into five segments of 1-s duration. We first calculate the correlations between the overall Task results (summary of the five task-related questions) and ERD results of the five segments in three frequency bands (alpha, lower beta, higher beta). The results are shown in Table 3. Significant negative correlations were found between overall Task results and ERD data on alpha and lower beta band. As the ERD data during the time frame from 1 to 2 s after movement onset has been proved to be correlated with familiarity movement (Calvo-Merino, Grèzes, Glaser, Passingham, Haggard, 2006, Orgs, Dombrowski, Heil, Jansen-Osmann, 2008), we then conducted the Spearman’s correlation coefficient test on all the task questions in the familiarity instrument and the ERD data on 1-2 s segment. The results are shown in Table 4. Most of the task questions show significant negative correlations with the ERD data. All these results support the criterion-related validity for Task part of familiarity instrument.


Table 3. Spearman’s rank correlations between overall task results and ERD data in different segments and frequency band.

Segment	Alpha	Lower Beta	Higher Beta
0-1 s			
1-2 s			
2-3 s			
3-4 s			
4-5 s			
0-5 s			
⋆: p < 0.1; ⋆⋆: p < 0.05; ⋆⋆⋆: p < 0.01


Table 4. Spearman’s rank correlations between task results and ERD data during 1 to 2 s time frame.

Alpha	Lower Beta
Prior Experience		
Positive Emotion		
Occurrence Frequency		
Level of Processing		
Retention Rate		
Total Task		
⋆: p < 0.1; ⋆⋆: p < 0.05; ⋆⋆⋆: p < 0.01

5.2. Convergent validity
Prior studies usually apply the single-metric assessment to measure familiarity, and we also included the overall familiarity question in our questionnaires. Thus, the convergent validity is measured through the correlations between the familiarity instrument results and participants’ rated overall familiarity. The results show that there are significant correlations between the rated overall familiarity with Interface (), Task () and the total familiarity results from the instrument (), which supports the convergent validity of the instrument.

5.3. Sensitivity
To assess the sensitivity of the instrument, the Kruskal-Wallis test was conducted to assess if the familiarity instrument results are able to distinguish between low and high familiarity conditions. Escape Room exergame is specifically designed to create familiar environments and tasks for our target users, which is supposed to have higher scores from the instrument. The results in Table 5 show that Escape Room exergame obtained significantly higher familiarity scores than the other two games. No significant difference between Basketball Genius and Ping Pong was found in the pairwise Mann-Whitney test (). Because older adults are our main target users, we conducted the above tests again based on the instrument results only from the ten elderly participants. The Kruskal-Wallis test results for the older age group are shown in Table 6. The results also show a significant difference between Escape Room and the other two exergames. The Mann-Whitney test found no significant difference in instrument results in the older age group between Basketball Genius and Ping Pong (). To sum up, the results suggest that the proposed familiarity instrument can distinguish between exergames with high and low familiarity with the players.


Table 5. Kruskal-Wallis test on instrument results among different exergames.

Observations	Mean Score	SD
Basketball Genius	20	43.6	2.71
Ping Pong	20	43.7	2.49
Escape Room	20	56.7	1.83
Kruskal-Wallis: 


Table 6. Kruskal-Wallis test on older participants’ instrument results among different exergames.

Observations	Mean Score	SD
Basketball Genius	10	39.8	2.59
Ping Pong	10	41.1	2.73
Escape Room	10	61	2.26
Kruskal-Wallis: 

5.4. Internal consistency
The reliability analysis revealed high internal consistency for the familiarity instrument, with Cronbach’s . The values were calculated using all the ten questions in the instrument.

5.5. Comparison between the two age groups
ERP results comparison: The summarized ERP results in the three exergame interfaces are shown in Fig. 3. For Basketball Genius exergame, younger participants’ ERP results between 300 ms and 500 ms are larger than older adults, which suggests that younger participants are more familiar with the interface of Basketball Genius exergame. Older participants’ ERP results between 300 ms and 500 ms are also lower than younger participants for Ping Pong exergame. These results are consistent with our expectations that younger adults should be more familiar with the sports exergames. For Escape Room exergame, we can find from the figure that older participants’ summarized ERP results are slightly larger than younger adults between 300 ms and 500 ms. However, the control data (ERP data between -100 ms and 0 ms) also shows larger results for older adults in this figure. Thus, the familiarity level of Escape Room interface to younger and older participants may not have a significant difference.

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (499KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Summarized ERP results: (a) Basketball Genius; (b) Ping Pong; (c) Escape room.

ERD results comparison: Because the ERD data in alpha band was found more sensitive to familiarity, we summarized younger and older participants’ ERD data on alpha frequency band during the time frame from 1 to 2 s in Table 7. The results show that young adults’ average ERD data in Basketball Genius and Ping Pong is lower than older participants, which indicates they are more familiar with the game tasks than older adults. However, the T-test results show that the ERD differences between the two age groups are not significant for both Basketball Genius () and Ping Pong () exergames. The results are contrary to our expectation that sports activities should be more familiar to younger adults. Two possible reasons lead to these results. Firstly, we are using the percentage change of the frequency band to represent participants’ ERD results. The output of a ERD analysis is sensitive to age when considering factors such as scull density, synapse count, and connectivity change in old age, which may influence the ERD amplitude results in the two age groups and increase the noise. Secondly, 10 participants for each age group were included during the data analysis, which may easily lead to insignificant results. Thus, more participants may be needed in future studies to find the difference in task familiarity between young and older adults. For Escape Room exergame, older adults’ ERD data is significantly lower () than young adults, which indicates the tasks in Escape Room exergame is more familiar to older adults.


Table 7. Mean ERD results on alpha frequency band for the participants in 1--2 s segment.

Young Adults	Older Adults
Game	Mean	SD	Mean	SD
Basketball Genius	−0.278	0.133	0.048	0.151
Ping Pong	−0.142	0.091	0.056	0.281
Escape Room	−0.202	0.136	−0.692	0.049
Questionnaire results comparison: Mann-Whitney test was mainly used in this part to compare the results from two age groups. In general, no significant difference in participants’ instrument results in all three exergames between the two age groups was found (). However, older adults rated a significantly higher familiarity scores () to Escape Room than younger adults (): . Compared to younger adults (), older adults () rated significantly higher satisfaction scores to the exergames (). However, this difference is not significant if we compared the results by each exergame (Basketball Genius: ; Ping Pong: ; Escape Room: ). There is a significant correlation between users’ familiarity and their satisfaction with the exergame (), which suggests familiarity design is effective to improve players’ game experience. We found an interesting result when we were calculating the correlation between participants’ task familiarity and their satisfaction with exergames. The correlation was only found significant for older adults (), and it was not significant for younger adults (), which indicates familiarity is more effective to improve users’ game experience for older adults than younger adults. In summary, older adults show higher familiarity feelings to Escape Room exergame and they are more satisfied with the exergames than younger adults. The influence of familiarity design, especially Task design, on users’ satisfaction with the exergames is more salient to older adults than younger adults.

5.6. Discussion
Although the effect of familiarity on improving users’ game experience to the exergames may vary between young adults and older adults, the familiarity instrument should be useful to evaluate the familiarity levels for all the users. Thus, criterion-related validity has been supported by all of our participants. To find whether the instrument validity is supported for both groups, we conducted the correlation test including only younger or older age group. The results show that the correlation between ERP data and Interface familiarity is high for both young adults () and older adults (). There is also a negative correlation between ERD data (1-2 s segment) and Task familiarity for both young adults (alpha band: ; lower beta band: ) and older adults (alpha band: ; lower beta band: ). These results show that the familiarity instrument is effective for both age groups. It may be used to evaluate all users’ familiarity with different games, applications, and software. One possible impact of the instrument for general users is to evaluate the familiarity levels of a relatively complicated system and improve the usability of it.

In the convergent validity assessment, we compared the overall familiarity rating and the total scores of the familiarity instrument. In prior research, familiarity was usually evaluated by a single-metric assessment, such as the overall familiarity rating (Gardner et al., 2015), frequency of encounter (Nosofsky et al., 2014) and duration of the objects commercial availability (Boger et al., 2013). Because frequency of encounter is one of our sub-construct (occurrence frequency) and duration of objects commercial availability are not suitable to test all the exergame Interface and Task, we finally select the overall familiarity rating during the convergent validity assessment. Relatively few methods of evaluating familiarity through questionnaires in prior research is another reason that only one external evaluation method was chosen in our study. We suggest this familiarity instrument can help to evaluate users’ familiarity levels to different exergames effectively and efficiently.

In the sensitivity assessment, we posited Escape Room was more familiar for the target users than the other two exergames, because the exergame was carefully designed with familiar game interfaces and tasks. The results of the familiarity instrument in this study revealed a similar pattern and support our hypothesis and sensitivity of the instrument. The significant difference in users’ familiarity levels to Basketball Genius and Ping Pong was not found despite more participation of basketball was reported in Singapore (Singapore, 2016). One possible reason is that the participation rates of both sports are not high in Singapore and participants who seldom played these sports before would rate low scores of the instrument, which leads the two exergames to receive similar mean familiarity scores.

When comparing two age groups, the differences between the two age groups on their familiarity levels to Ping Pong and Basketball Genius were not significant. We expected younger adults should be more actively participate in these sports and be more familiar with the two exergames. When analyzing the results, we found older adults could often remember their prior experiences vividly and still enjoyed them though they hardly participated in these sports for a long time. They could easily recognize the sports and believe they are familiar with them. Thus, their rating scores to “Prior experience”, “Positive emotion” and “Level of processing” were high. For Escape Room exergame, the game is more familiar to older participants. The possible reason is that all the older participants have lived in Singapore for more than 20 years and the game interface is consistent with their internal image of the home environment. However, some of our younger participants are international students. They are less familiar with the typical Singapore home environment. The result suggests that the feeling of familiarity is quite personalized. It is important to investigate what may be familiar to the target users when designing familiar exergames for them. The effect of familiarity design on improving players’ game experience is found more remarkable for older adults than for younger adults. The result is consistent with socioemotional selectivity theory (Carstensen et al., 1999), which maintains that people’s motivations change from being expansive and acquiring knowledge to being finite and requesting for emotion satisfaction as people age. Familiarity design can evoke older adults’ past experiences to achieve their emotional goals and improve their satisfaction with the exergames. In addition, the older adults gave significantly higher satisfaction scores to the exergames in total than younger adults did, which proves the attractiveness of exergames for older adults to take exercises.

6. Limitation and future work
Because it is difficult to collect participants’ EEG data without noise when they play the exergames, alternatively, we let the players watch screenshots and videos to simulate their brain activities in the same manner as adopted in prior studies (Calvo-Merino, Grèzes, Glaser, Passingham, Haggard, 2006, Jäger, Mecklinger, Kipp, 2006). Errors due to unsuccessful simulation may exist in the collected EEG results. However, using screenshots and videos for simulation is currently an applicable way to collect relatively noise-free EEG data. Nevertheless, we plan to conduct relevant experiments in the subsequent study to further verify the familiarity instrument. The proposed familiarity instrument aims to evaluate users’ familiarity levels to different exergames and higher summarized scores of the ten questions in the instrument represent higher familiarity levels. Another limitation of this work is that we still need an interpretive method to define the standard of acceptable familiarity scores, whether it is the average score (i.e. 35) or maybe a higher score. Interpreting scoring can be complex and further studies and analysis with more participants are needed to determine the marginal standard for good familiarity design.

Familiarity can assist users to quickly understand and interact with other new technologies and improve their user experience. We believe the familiarity design will also improve players game experience in commercial games. For example, our prior study has shown that the older adults in Singapore are more entertained by the game if games background music is familiar to them (Zhang et al., 2016). Thus, the localized songs may help the players better enjoy the rhythm games. In addition, existing commercial games also improve our understanding of familiarity design. We have already seen several commercial games trying to restore the past scenes or incorporate local culture into their game design to elevate user satisfaction, such as Total War: Three Kingdoms (Creative Assembly, 2019) and Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice (FromSoftware, 2019). In Ring Fit Adventure game (Nintendo EPD, 2019), players can proceed workout moves with just a hard-plastic ring and a leg strap. Using the ring to simulate workout moves in the gym makes the players believe the game is good for their health and can help shape their body. Thus, players may find that the familiar activities are professional and convincing.

7. Conclusion
In this paper, we first proposed a psychometric familiarity instrument to evaluate players’ perceived familiarity with different exergames. Users’ answers to the ten Likert scale questions would be collected in this instrument, which are related to the identified five sub-constructs of familiarity in Interface and Task of an exergame. The total scores of the ten questions are supposed to reflect the levels of familiarity. A validation study involving 10 younger adults and 10 older adults was conducted to measure the validity and reliability of the familiarity instrument. Criterion-related validity, convergent validity, sensitivity and internal consistency of the instrument were evaluated in the study based on prior familiarity research in recognition memory. The results indicate good validity and high reliability of the familiarity instrument.