Abstract
The problem of coverage in two-dimensional (2D) wireless sensor networks is challenging and is still open. Precisely, determining the minimum sensor density (i.e, minimum number of sensors per unit area) that is required to cover a 2D field of interest (FoI), where every point in the field is covered by at least one sensor, is still under investigation. The problem of 2D k-coverage, which requires that every point in a 2D FoI be covered by at least k sensors, where , is more challenging. In this paper, we attempt to address the 2D connected k-coverage problem, where a 2D FoI is k-covered, while the underlying set of sensors k-covering the field forms a connected network. We propose to solve this problem using an approach based on slicing 2D FoI into convex regular hexagons. Our goal is to achieve k-coverage of a 2D FoI with a minimum number of sensors in order to maximize the network lifetime. First, we compute the minimum sensor density for 2D k-coverage using the regular convex hexagon, which is a 2D paver (i.e., covers a 2D field without gaps or overlaps). Indeed, we found that the regular convex hexagon best assimilates the sensors’ sensing disk with respect to our proposed metric, sensing range usage rate. Second, we derive the ratio of the communication range to the sensing range of the sensors to ensure connected k-coverage. Third, we propose an energy-efficient connected k-coverage protocol based on hexagonal slicing and area stretching. To this end, we formulate a multi-objective optimization problem, which computes an optimum solution to the 2D k-coverage problem that meets two requirements: Maximizing the size of the k-covered area, , so as to minimize the sensor density to k-cover a 2D FoI (Requirement 1) and maximizing the area of the sensor locality, , i.e., the region where at least k sensors are located to k-cover , so as to minimize the interference between sensors (Requirement 2). Fourth, we show various simulation results to substantiate our theoretical analysis. We found a close-to-perfect match between our theoretical and simulation results.

Keywords
Wireless sensor networks
Optimization
Connected k-coverage
Hexagonal slicing
Area stretching


1. Introduction
Coverage is a fundamental step in sensor deployment, which is an important phase in the design and implementation of wireless sensor networks. In general, sensing applications may require different degrees of coverage , where   1 is a natural number. In particular, some sensing applications may need a high degree of coverage , (i.e.,  > 1). For instance, triangulation-based sensor localization requires a sensor, which wants to compute its location, to be within the range of three anchor sensors (i.e., sensors already knowing their locations). That is, the degree of coverage required for sensor localization is . The problem of coverage in two-dimensional (2D) wireless sensor networks (i.e., 2D coverage) is challenging, and is still open. More specifically, determining the minimum sensor density (i.e., number of sensors per unit area) that is required to cover a 2D field of interest (FoI), where every point in the field is covered by at least one sensor, has been investigated by several researchers. Likewise, given , the problem of 2D -coverage, which requires that every point in a 2D FoI be covered by at least  sensors simultaneously, is even more challenging. It is worth mentioning that the -coverage operation is done appropriately if the collected data by the sensors can reach the base station (also, known as the sink) for further analysis and processing. Therefore, in order to accomplish the -coverage task successfully, it is essential that network connectivity during the entire network operation, be maintained among all of those sensors that are selected to -cover a 2D FoI.

In this paper, we attempt to address the problem of 2D connected -coverage, where a 2D FoI is -covered, while the wireless sensor network being formed is connected. However, there are two major challenges to solve this problem. The first one is due the scarce energy resources of the sensors. Hence, it is essential to minimize the total energy consumption of the sensors, which depends on the number of sensors. Thus, it is important to solve the 2D connected -coverage problem using a minimum number of sensors in order to maximize the lifetime of the individual sensors. The second challenge is due to the geometric characteristics of the sensing range of the sensors, which is generally supposed to be a disk in 2D wireless sensor networks. It is important that the area of the sensing range actually utilized be maximized in order to minimize the total number of active sensors to -cover a 2D FoI. Our main goal is to extend the network lifetime, while accomplishing the target mission of the underlying sensing application.

We believe that there exists a tight relationship between coverage and paving. Indeed, the former generally yield gaps, and, thus, allows overlap to remove any gaps. However, the latter does not yield any overlaps or gaps. In order to solve the connected -overage problem in 2D wireless sensor networks, we propose a regular hexagonal field slicing-based approach, where a 2D FoI is divided into regular convex hexagons. Indeed, the latter has an interesting geometric property in that it can pave a 2D field. Our proposed solution will be discussed in subsequent sections.

Next, we define a few key terms that we use in our analysis. Then, we formulate the problem we want to investigate in this paper, and present our major contributions.

1.1. Terminology
Definition 1 Sensing Range

The sensing range of a sensor 
 is the area where any occurring event in it will be surely sensed by 
.  ■

Definition 2 Communication Range

The communication range of a sensor 
 is the area where 
 can directly communicate with any sensor 
 in it.  ■

Definition 3

-Coverage
A point in a 2D FoI is said to be k-covered if it is located within the sensing range of at least  sensors. A 2D FoI is said to be k-covered if every point in this field is k-covered.  is called the degree of coverage.  ■

Definition 4

Connected -Coverage
A set of at least  sensors in a 2D FoI form a connected k-covered network if this field is -covered and these sensors are guaranteed to be connected to each other.  ■

Definition 5 Sensor Density

The sensor density is the number of sensors per unit area.  ■

Definition 6 2D Paver

A 2D regular convex polygon is said to be a 2D paver if it can pave a 2D FoI through replication of its congruent copies without any overlaps or gaps between any pair of congruent copies.  ■

1.2. Problem statement
The major questions that are related to the connected -coverage problem in 2D wireless sensor network, and which we attempt to answer in this paper, are listed below:

–
What is the best convex polygonal shape that can be used to model the sensing range of the sensors, while maximizing its actual area being utilized to pave a 2D FoI?

–
What is the minimum sensor density that is required to -cover a 2D FoI, where ?

–
What is the ratio of the communication range to the sensing range of the sensors to guarantee connected -coverage of a 2D FoI, where ?

–
What is the most energy-efficient sensor selection approach that enables connected -coverage of a 2D FoI using a minimum number of sensors, with ?

1.3. Contributions
Our major contributions in this paper to solve the connected -coverage problem in 2D wireless sensor networks can be summarized as follows:

–
We investigate well-known regular 2D pavers, namely triangle, square, and convex regular hexagon, with a goal to find the best convex polygon to model the sensors’ sensing range and maximize its area being utilized for paving a 2D FoI. Our study is based on our proposed metric, called sensing area usage rate. This metric shows that the convex regular hexagon is the best polygonal paver of a 2D field.

–
We model the sensors’ sensing range using the convex regular hexagon. Our analysis shows that there is a close relationship between the area of the -covered region, denoted by 
 (i.e., region to be -covered by at least  sensors) and the area of the sensor locality, denoted by 
 (i.e., region where the set of at least  sensors are located to -cover 
). We find that to compute the optimum sensor density to -cover a 2D FoI, we need to solve a multi-objective optimization problem with a goal to maximize the areas of 
 and 
.

–
Based on our solution to the above-mentioned multi-objective optimization problem, we determine the relationship that exists between the communication range and the sensing range of the sensors, which is required to ensure connected -coverage of a 2D field.

–
We propose an energy-efficient -coverage protocol based on hexagonal slicing of a 2D FoI and area stretching. More precisely, this protocol exploits our solution to this multi-objective optimization problem to select a minimum number of sensors, where .

–
We generalize our proposed solution to the connected -coverage problem in 2D wireless sensor networks by accounting for a probabilistic sensing model, where the sensors’ sensing range is not necessarily a disk, as well as sensor heterogeneity, where the sensors may not have the same sensing range, communications range, and initial energy reserve.

–
We support our theoretical analysis with various simulation results.

1.4. Paper organization
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our network model along with the energy model that are used in this work. In Section 3, we review existing approaches that were proposed to address the problem of coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks. In Section 4, we study regular convex pavers, and determine the best regular convex polygonal shape that paves a 2D field, using our proposed metric, namely sensing area usage rate. In Section 5, we investigate the problem of connected -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks. More precisely, we compute the sensor density that is required to -cover a 2D field. Then, we derive the relationship that should exist between the communication range and the sensing range of the sensors in order to maintain network connectivity in 2D -covered wireless sensor networks. In Section 6, we provide a generalization of our solution to the connected -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks by considering a more general sensing model, namely a probabilistic sensing model, and sensor heterogeneity. In Section 7, we present our simulation results. In Section 8, we conclude, and discuss our future work.

2. Network and energy models
First, we specify the network model used in our study of the connected -coverage problem in 2D wireless sensor networks. Then, we describe our energy model.

2.1. Assumptions
In our study of the above problem, we made the following assumptions.

Assumption 1 Dense and Random Sensor Deployment

The sensors are densely, randomly deployed in a 2D FoI.  ■

Assumption 2 Location Awareness

The sink is aware of all the sensors’ locations using a localization technique [8]. ■

Assumption 3 Sensor Homogeneity/Heterogeneity

All the sensors are homogeneous or heterogeneous in terms of their sensing range, communication range, and energy.  ■

Assumption 4 Disk Sensing Model

The sensors’ sensing range is modeled by a disk of radius .  ■

Assumption 5 Disk Communication Model

The sensors’ communication range is represented by a disk of radius .  ■

We should mention that Assumption 3, Assumption 4 will be relaxed to make the proposed approach to solve the -coverage problem more general. These relaxations will be discussed in detail in Section 6.

2.2. Energy consumption
During their deployment, the sensors dissipate their energy reserves in various forms, namely data transmission, reception, and sensing, as well as mobility. Also, the sensors spend their energy when they are active although they are not involved in any of the above-mentioned four activities. Specifically, to quantify the energy consumption due to data transmission and reception, we refer to the energy model given by Heinzelman et al. [14]: 
where 
(d) stands for the energy consumed when a sensor 
 transmits a message of m bits over a distance d, 
 is the energy consumed when 
 receives a message of m bits, 
 is the electronics energy,   {
, 
} is the transmitter amplifier in the free-space (
) or multi-path (
) model, and  is the path-loss exponent. To account for the energy consumed by the sensors due to their sensing activity, we use the energy model proposed by Ye et al. [36]. Precisely, a sensor consumes 0.012 J when it is in the idle mode, and 0.0003 J when it is in the sleep mode. In addition, the energy consumed by a sensor to move one-unit distance, 
, is randomly selected within [0.008 J/m, 0.012 J/m] according to the energy model proposed by Wang and Tseng [31].

3. Related work
In this section, we review existing approaches for coverage and -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks. In addition, we present the unique features of our proposed study in this paper, compared to our previous work [4].

Xing et al. [34] addressed the -coverage problem in wireless sensor networks, and proposed a protocol, named connected coverage protocol. Huang et al. [17] proposed distributed protocols for coverage and connectivity. Bai et al. [5] developed an optimal deployment strategy to ensure coverage and 2-connectivity independently of the relationship between the radii of the sensors’ sensing and communication ranges. Gupta et al. [13] provided centralized and distributed algorithms for connected sensor cover, where the network can self-organize its topology when a query is issued, and activate the sensors that are necessary to process the query. Zhang and Hou [40] suggested an optimal geographical density control protocol to keep a small number of sensors active to cover a field regardless of the ratio of the sensors’ communication range to their sensing range. Zhou et al. [41] proposed a distributed algorithm using th-order Voronoi diagram to provide fault tolerance, while ensuring coverage. Abrams et al. [3] proposed a distributed algorithm to partition a wireless sensor network into  covers (i.e., sets of sensors), each of which covers an area. Zou and Chakrabarty [43] investigated the problem of sensor selection for sensing and connectivity, using a connected dominating set-based approach. Huang et al. [16] and Tezcan et al. [29] provided the conditions under which -coverage implies network connectivity. In [2], Abbasi et al. proposed a coverage control method for continuous and potentially long regions and passages. A group of autonomous mobile sensors move within boundaries to ensure optimal coverage. Deng et al. [9] addressed the problem of coverage hole in hybrid industrial wireless sensor networks, and proposed a healing approach using static and mobile sensors. The static sensors detect the coverage holes, whereas the randomly scattered mobile sensors are selected and dispatched to repair them. Gupta et al. [12] investigate the problem of coverage in three-dimensional mobile sensor networks for bounded fields of interest, which yield a border effect problem. They discuss the impact of border effects on the number of sensors for the desired coverage under several mobility models, such as random walk, waypoint mobility models. Hoyingcharoen and Teerapabkajorndet [15] computed the expected detection probability at any arbitrary point, and the expected degree of sink connectivity for any sensor node that cannot directly transmit to the sink. They show that their proposed study can be used to predict the levels of coverage and connectivity. Qin and Chen [26] proposed an area coverage algorithm based on differential evolution with a goal to obtain a given coverage ratio . The proposed algorithm exploits binary differential evolution to search for an improved node subset in order to meet the coverage demand. Sun et al. [28] suggested a -degree coverage algorithm based on optimization nodes deployment. Wei et al. [33] proposed an energy balance and coverage control algorithm to address the problem of network congestion. The latter is due to the generation of redundant data when a target is covered by  sensors. Yu et al. [38] exploited the Reuleaux triangle-based -coverage approach proposed by Ammari [4] and introduced the concept of contribution coverage area to -cover a field of interest using a small number of sensors. For optimal 2D node deployment scenarios for coverage and connectivity in wireless sensor networks, the interested reader is referred to the work done by Wang et al. [32], Gupta et al. [11], Yun et al. [39], and Bai et al. [6]. Tripathi et al. [30] provided a detailed survey regarding the issues of coverage and connectivity in wireless sensor networks.

Kumar et al. [20] proposed a probabilistic approach to compute the minimum number of sensors to achieve -coverage with high probability. They showed that this number is approximately the same for both deterministic and random sensor deployment, if the sensors fail or sleep independently with equal probability. Shakkottai et al. [27] provided necessary and sufficient conditions for 1-covered, 1-connected wireless sensor grid network. Also, they suggested various algorithms for connectivity and coverage in large wireless sensor networks. Moreover, Xue et al. [35] and Liu [22] investigated the problem of finding the critical node density for preserving connectivity. Li et al. [21] proposed distributed algorithms to optimally solve the best-coverage problem with the least energy consumption. Megerian et al. [25] combined Voronoi diagram and graph search algorithms to solve the best and worst coverage problems using optimal polynomial-time algorithms. Liu et al. [23] proposed a scheduling scheme to provide statistical sensing coverage and network connectivity using a randomized algorithm. Yener et al. [37] proposed a probabilistic Markov model to ensure connectivity and coverage, while minimizing the sensors’ power consumption.

While Kumar et al. [20] computed the minimum number of sensors to achieve -coverage with high probability, we should mention that none of the existing approaches were able to quantify the exact sensor density that is required to -cover a 2d field in a deterministic way (i.e., not a probabilistic way). To the best of our knowledge, only both of our current work in this paper, and previous one [4] attempt to compute the sensor density deterministically for 2D -coverage. Furthermore, while the work done by Liu [22] and Xue et al. [35] is to find the critical node density for preserving connectivity, our work investigates the relationship that should exist between the sensing and communication ranges of the sensors for maintaining network connectivity.

Our proposed approach in this paper is different from our previous one [4]. Specifically, this work takes into account the size of the region to be -covered, denoted by 
, as well as the region where the sensors should be located, denoted by 
, to -cover 
. We show that there is a correlation between 
 and 
. However, in our previous work [4], our focus was on 
 only.

4. Investigating two-dimensional pavers
It is well known that the only 2D regular convex shapes, which can pave the Euclidean plane without overlaps or gaps, are the equilateral triangle, square, and regular hexagon. Kershner [19], indeed, showed that a regular n-gon can pave the plane only if , 4, or 6. Indeed, the vertex angle of a regular n-gon is . Thus, an n-gon can pave the plane only if  of these vertices can meet at a point to fill . That is, we should have , or . The only positive integer (n, m) solutions of this equation are (, ) for the equilateral triangle (it has 3 vertices, ; 6 vertices meet at a vertex to fill 2, ), (, ) for the square (it has 4 vertices, ; 4 vertices meet at a vertex to fill 2, ), and (, ) for the regular hexagon (it has 6 vertices, ; 3 vertices meet at a vertex to fill 2, ).

In this section, we want to measure the quality of coverage (or paving) provided by each of the above-mentioned regular convex pavers, namely the equilateral triangle, square, and regular convex hexagon. We will leverage the results of these measurements to study the problem of connected -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks. First, we propose a paving metric to collect these measurements. Then, we identify the best regular convex paver with respect to this paving metric.

4.1. Paving metric
As per our Assumption 2, the sensors’ sensing range is modeled by a disk. However, the disk cannot pave the Euclidean plane without gaps or overlaps. To overcome this problem, we want to find the “best” shape that assimilates the disk so we can pave the plane using as least number of disks as possible. Thus, our goal is to identify the regular convex paver that maximizes the area of the sensing disk being used in paving the plane. To this end, we introduce the concept of sensing area usage rate, which is defined below.

Definition 7 Sensing Area Usage Rate

Let  be a regular convex paver whose area is denoted by . The sensing area usage rate of the sensors’ sensing disk using RCP is denoted by  and is given by: 
 
where 
 stands for the sensors’ sensing disk whose radius is equal to  and area is 
.  ■

4.2. Paving quality of regular convex pavers
We want to assess the quality of paving of each of the three regular convex pavers, namely equilateral triangle, square, and regular convex hexagon. Theorem 1 shown below determines the “best” regular convex paver in terms of the paving metric defined above, i.e., sensing area usage rate.

Theorem 1 Best Regular Convex Paver

The regular hexagon is the best regular convex paver as it provides the maximum sensing area usage rate compared to the ones that result from the equilateral triangle and square.

Proof

First, we need to compute the greatest regular convex paver that could be contained in the sensing disk of the sensors. To this end, all the vertices of a given regular convex paver should touch the perimeter of the sensors’ sensing disk, 
. Let us examine each of the three regular convex pavers, and derive the corresponding maximum area that can be included in 
.

Case 1: Equilateral triangle

Consider Fig. 1(a). We want to compute the edge length a of the greatest equilateral triangle EQT contained in 
. According to Fig. 1(a), we have: 
 
 
 
Also, we have: 
 
 
 
Thus, the edge length a of EQT is computed as: and its corresponding maximum area A(EQT) and sensing area usage rate SAUR(EQT) are, respectively, given by: 
 
 
 
 This means that less than half the sensing area (or disk) of the sensors will be used, if the sensors’ sensing disk is reduced to an equilateral triangle.

Case 2: Square

Consider Fig. 1(b). We want to compute the edge length a of the greatest square SQR included in 
. According to Fig. 1(b), we have: 
and its corresponding maximum area A(SQR) and sensing area usage rate SAUR(SQR) are, respectively, given by: 
 

Case 3: Regular Convex Hexagon

Consider Fig. 1(c). We want to compute the edge length a of the greatest regular convex hexagon RCH included in 
. According to Fig. 1(c), we have: .

and its corresponding maximum area A(RCH) and sensing area usage rate SAUR(RCH) are, respectively, given by: 
 
 
 
 As it can be seen, the regular convex hexagon outperforms both of the equilateral triangle and the square in terms of its paving quality. In fact, it possesses the highest sensing area usage rate. That is, we have: We conclude that the regular hexagon is the best regular convex paver as it ensures the maximum sensing area usage rate compared to the equilateral triangle and square.  ■

Based on Theorem 1, we found that the regular convex hexagon helps achieve the best quality of coverage (or paving) using our proposed metric, i.e., the sensing area usage rate. Our investigation of the sensor density to achieve -coverage of a 2D FoI will assimilate the sensors’ sensing disk to a regular convex hexagon. In other words, the sensing area of the sensors has to be reduced to a regular convex hexagon of edge length r, where r stands for the radius of the sensing disk of the sensors.

5. Slicing-based connected -coverage
In this section, we investigate the problem of connected -coverage of a 2D FoI. Precisely, we consider two sensor placement and selection approaches to achieve -coverage of a 2D field. First, we slice a 2D field randomly into tangential congruent regular convex hexagons to produce a 2D regular hexagonal grid, as shown in Fig. 2. For each -coverage approach, we compute the sensor density that is required to -cover a 2D field. Then, we determine the corresponding relationship that should exist between the sensing range r of the sensors and their communication range R to ensure network connectivity for every 2D -coverage configuration.

Next, we provide a mathematical analysis of the 2D -coverage problem, which leads to solving an optimization problem. Based on the solution of this optimization problem, we propose two connected -coverage approaches, which we discuss in detail in Section 5.3.

5.1. Hexagonal centroid-based approach
We assume that the sensors are randomly deployed in a 2D FoI. In this section, we consider one particular sensor relocation approach. First, the edge length of each regular convex hexagon forming the regular hexagonal grid is equal to , where  is the radius of the sensing disk of the sensors. In this approach,  sensors have to be located at the same center  of each regular convex hexagon of edge length , denoted by . It is obvious that every  is -covered. Indeed, the maximum distance between the center 
 and any point located in  is . In other words, every point in  is within the sensing range of  sensors. Thus, the entire 2D FoI is guaranteed to be -covered.

In order to achieve -coverage of a 2D FoI in every round during the network operational lifetime, the centroid of every regular convex hexagon of edge length  (i.e., ) of the hexagonal grid should have exactly  sensors. It is essential that different sets of sensors be selected in different rounds. This would help distribute the -coverage load fairly among all the sensors deployed in a FoI. These selected sets for different rounds may not be totally disjoint. For sensor relocation to take place, the sensors should have a mobility support so they can move from their current locations to the centroids of all of those regular convex hexagons that constitute the hexagonal grid of a FoI.

Lemma 1 computes the sensor density associated with this sensor placement approach.

Lemma 1

The sensor density 
 that is required to -cover a 2D FoI using a hexagonal single-point sensor placement approach is computed as follows: 
 
where  is the radius of the sensors’ sensing disk.

Proof

According to Definition 5, the sensor density 
, which corresponds to hexagonal single-point sensor placement approach, is given by: 
 
where  is the area of the regular convex hexagon of edge length r, denoted by RCH(O, r) and computed as: 
 
Thus, we obtain: 
 

From Lemma 1,  is theoretically the maximum area that can be -covered by at least  sensors. We will refer to this maximum area in Section 5.2 in order to solve our multi-objective optimization problem to compute the optimum solution for the -coverage problem.

Corollary 1 shown below states the relationship between the radii of sensor’s communication range and sensing range r and R, respectively, to ensure network connectivity.

Corollary 1 Network Connectivity

-Coverage implies network connectivity if we have: .

Proof

To ensure network connectivity, it is necessary that the two farthest sensors from each other be connected. That is, their communication range must be at least equal to the diameter of , which is equal to , i.e., .  ■

5.1.1. Optimality (-coverage, where )
It is obvious that when the requested degree of coverage by a sensing application is , the sensor density computed in Lemma 1 corresponds to the optimum sensor relocation approach to achieve 1-coverage of a 2D FoI. In other words, one sensor should be located at the centroid of every regular convex hexagon of radius , i.e.,  in the hexagonal grid of a FoI. This would lead to using the minimum number of sensors to -cover the entire 2D FoI.

5.1.2. Shortcomings (-coverage, where )
It is clear that when the degree of coverage is , this hexagonal centroid sensor relocation approach is neither realistic nor practical. Indeed, it is impossible to place  sensors all together at the same location. This is due to at least their physical properties as they occupy a space that is more than one point, not to mention all other major problems, such as interference, which may arise due to sensor closeness to each other. Moreover, this type of sensor placement does not provide sensors with any mobility support.

In order to remedy the above-mentioned problem, we consider a more practical approach for sensor selection to -cover a 2D field. Specifically, we attempt to stretch that one point (i.e., hexagonal centroid) to an area that is not confined to a single point, where  sensors could be deployed. As a consequence, this non-point area enables sensors to be located anywhere in it, and also be able to move, if needed. First, we discuss our approach for stretching a hexagonal centroid to an area, and compute the minimum sensor density to achieve -coverage. Also, we compute the ratio of the radius of the communication range to the radius of the sensing range of the sensors to ensure connected -coverage. Then, we exploit this study to present two energy-efficient random sensor selection approaches in order to -cover a 2D FoI using as small number of sensors as possible.

5.2. Hexagonal area stretching-based approach
We assume that the sensors are randomly deployed in a 2D FoI. Before we discuss our proposed hexagonal area stretching approach, we introduce the following notation. Let 
 be the largest region to be -covered by a set that has at least  sensors, and 
 be the sensor locality, where the sensors in the above set need to be located to -cover the region 
. That is, we stretch a hexagonal centroid to 
. Also, 
 stands for the size of the area of 
, whereas 
 measures the size of the area of 
.

Lemma 2 shown below states the relationship between 
 and 
.

Lemma 2

The size of the area of the sensor locality 
 is upper bounded by that of the -covered region 
, i.e, 
, and 
.

Proof

Let O and  be the centroid and diameter of the -covered region 
, respectively. Assume that are  sensors located in 
. Given that 
 is the largest -covered region, the diameter  must be at least equal to r, where r is the radius of the sensing disk of the sensors, i.e., . Indeed, because 
 is -covered, any point in 
 should be within the sensing range of each of those  sensors. Now, since 
 is the largest -covered region, the maximum distance between any of those  sensors and any location in 
 cannot exceed r. The minimum and maximum diameters of 
 are 
 and 
, respectively. Let us consider each of the three following cases, and proceed using a proof by contradiction.

Case 1: 

Assume that there is a sensor 
 that is located outside 
 and lies on the line segment that coincides with the diameter 
 
 of 
. Then, the distance between 
 and the farthest point u exceeds r. Hence, u is not covered by 
, and, thus, 
 is not -covered. This contradicts our assumption that 
 is -covered.

Case 2: 

Suppose that sensor 
 is located either at the perimeter of 
 or outside 
 and lies on the line segment that coincides with the diameter 
 
 of 
. In either case, the distance between 
 and u is greater than r, and, thus, u is not covered by 
. Consequently, 
 is not -covered. This is contradictory to our assumption that  is -covered.

Case 3: 

This case is trivial. Assume that there is a sensor 
 whose location is not the centroid O of 
 and is located on the line segment that coincides with the diameter 
 
 of 
. Clearly, at least the centroid O cannot be covered. Thus, 
 is not -covered. This violates our assumption that 
 is -covered.

We conclude that there is no such a sensor 
 located outside of 
. This implies that 
, and, thus, 
.  ■

It is clear that the maximum area 
 of the sensor locality 
 should be equal to the area of 
, i.e., 
. This scenario corresponds to the following configuration, where the regular hexagonal grid consists of congruent regular convex hexagon  whose edge length 
 is equal to r/2, i.e., 
. That is, 
. In this sensor selection approach, we select  sensors randomly inside each . That is, the maximum area 
 of the sensor locality 
 is given by: 
 
 
 

Given that the diameter of  is , every point inside  is within the sensing range of those  sensors. That is, each  is -covered, thus, -covering the entire 2D FoI. Lemma 3 shown below calculates the corresponding sensor density 
.

Lemma 3

The sensor density 
 that is required to -cover a 2D FoI using a random hexagonal-area sensor selection approach is given by: 
 
where  stands for the radius of the sensing range of the sensors, and  is a natural number, with .

Proof

Observation: It is worth noting that the exact shape of 
 should be a disk centered at O and whose radius is . Indeed, the region 
 is still guaranteed to be -covered. Given that the unit of slicing a field of interest is a convex regular hexagon, we chose the sensor locality 
 to have a similar shape instead of a circle.

Our goal is to maximize the area of the -covered region 
 (i.e., region to be -covered by at least  sensors). Now, we attempt to increase the area of the -covered region 
, and compute the corresponding sensor density. To this end, we need to decrease the area of the sensor locality 
. In order to better understand the relationship between 
 and 
, let us consider the following sample configurations:

-
Configuration 1: 
 Fig. 3 shows both of 
 and 
. Given 
, we can easily determine that 
 should a regular convex hexagon of edge length 
. That is, 
. As it can be seen, 
 is surely -covered by those  sensors located in the sensor locality 
. The corresponding sensor density is computed as: 
 
 

-
Configuration 2: 
 Similarly, given 
, the edge length of 
 is 
. In other words, 
. The maximum distance between any sensor in 
 and any point in 
 is r. Therefore, 
 is guaranteed to be -covered by those  sensors located in their locality 
. The sensor density that is associated with this configuration is given by: 
 
 

-
Configuration 3: 
 Likewise, 
 is -covered by those  sensors located in their sensor locality 
 provided that the edge of 
 is equal to 
. That is, 
. The obtained sensor density is as follows: 
 
 

Notice that 
.

Generalization: 
, where 

Here, we study a more general case, where the edge length of the sensor locality 
 is , with  is called the stretching factor. Lemma 4 given below computes the edge length of the regular hexagon representing the -covered area.

Lemma 4

Let 
 be the edge length of the sensor locality 
, with . Then, the edge length 
 of the hexagonal -covered region 
 is computed as follows: 
 

Proof

Consider the diagram given in Fig. 4. For 
 to be -covered by at least  sensors, the maximum distance between any sensor in 
 and any point in 
 should not exceed the radius  of the sensors’ sensing disk. Thus, the distance between the two farthest points  in 
 and  in 
 should satisfy the following equation: However, we have: where 
 
 Therefore, we have: 
 
 
where  is the sensors’ sensing disk radius, and  is the stretching factor.  ■

Notice that the edge of the hexagonal -covered region 
 satisfies the following inequality: 
 
In addition, one can observe that the edge lengths of the sensor locality 
 and the -covered region 
 are related by the following equation: 

The areas of the -covered region 
, and the sensor locality 
 are, respectively, given by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

On the one hand, we want to maximize the -covered region 
 (Goal 1) so as to minimize the sensor density, thus, minimizing the total number of sensors to -cover a 2D FoI. On the other hand, we need to maximize the sensor locality 
 (Goal 2) so as to minimize the impact of major problems, such as interference. To achieve Goal 1,  should be maximized, while  has to be minimized in order to achieve Goal 2. It is clear that Goal 1 and Goal 2 are conflicting goals. Thus, our aim is to find the “best” trade-off of maximum -covered area (or minimum energy consumption) and maximum sensor locality (or maximum space for sensor mobility). To this end, it is necessary to jointly consider these two goals by formulating a multi-objective optimization problem and solving it. First, we discuss a weighted scale-uniform-unit sum approach [18] that we use in solving this multi-objective optimization problem.

Overview of weighted scale-uniform-unit sum

Assume we want to maximize the following multi-objective function: 
where 
 is an objective function, for . The Weighted scale-uniform-unit sum is a simple approach that introduces a weighting coefficient 
 for each 
, where 
 is a weight selected by a network designer to reflect the relative importance of 
 and 
 is a coefficient that not only scales 
 but also helps produce a one-dimensional function . A survey on similar approaches for solving multi-objective optimization problems is in [24]. Using weighted scale-uniform-unit sum approach, a multi-objective optimization problem can be stated as follows: 
where 
 
 and  is a set of admissible solutions. It is assumed that 
.

Let us determine the optimum value 
 of the stretching factor , which maximizes the area of the -covered region 
 and the area of the sensor locality 
. Theorem 2 shown below computes this value 
.

Theorem 2

The areas 
 and 
 attain their optimum values when the value of the stretching factor is equal to 
, which is given by: 
 
where 
, 
, and 
.

Proof

Now, we use the weighted scale-uniform-unit sum approach to solve our -coverage problem. Let 
 be our multi-objective function, which we want to maximize. The values of the weighting coefficients 
 and 
, where 
 with 
, reflect the relative importance of each of the two goals, namely Goal-1 and Goal-2, respectively. Thus, our unconstrained multi-objective optimization problem for trading off the above-mentioned two metrics, namely maximum -covered area and maximum sensor locality, can be formulated as follows: 
 where 
 
 
 with 
 and 
 being the maximum -covered area, and maximum sensor locality, respectively. From Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and as stated earlier, we have: 
 
 
 Thus, we get the following results: 
 
Therefore, the function 
 can be written as follows: 
 
 
 
For instance, if 
, we have the same interest in maximizing the area 
 of the -covered region 
, and the area 
 of the sensor locality 
. Now, if 
, we are more interested in maximizing 
 than maximizing 
. However, if 
, we are more interested in maximizing 
 than maximizing 
.

We want to study our multi-objective function 
. Let 
 be a solution to the unconstrained multi-objective optimization problem stated. We have: 
 
 
As it can be seen, we should have 
. This is trivial as there must be some interest in maximizing the area 
 of 
. Now, How do we know that 
 corresponds to the maximum value of 
?

Notice that we have 
 
whenever the following inequality holds: 
 
 
Given that 
, it is clear that the value of 
 corresponds to the maximum of 
. Furthermore, varying the weights 
 and 
 from  to , where 
, would generate the corresponding maximum solutions of 
.  ■

Theorem 3 given below computes the minimum sensor density to ensure -coverage.

Theorem 3

The minimum sensor density 
 for -coverage of a 2D FoI is computed as follows: 
 

Proof

By Definition 5, the sensor density 
 that is required for -coverage of a 2D field is given by: 
 
 
where  is the radius of the sensing disk of the sensors.  ■

In our previous work [4], we found that the sensor density for -coverage is 
. Without loss of generality, if 
, then 
.

Next, we compute the relationship that should exist between the communication range  of the sensors and their sensing range  in order to maintain network connectivity. Lemma 5 shown below states this relationship.

Lemma 5

Let  be the radius of the sensing disk of the sensors. When -coverage is achieved, the communication range  and sensing range  of the sensors should satisfy the following inequality to guarantee network connectivity: 
 

Proof

All the selected sensors to -cover 
 are located inside 
. The farthest pair of sensors are located on the line segment that coincides with the diameter of 
. Thus, the maximum distance between any pair of selected sensors is equal to the diameter of the sensor locality 
, which is equal to 
. Hence, the communication range of the sensors must be at least equal to 
. That is, we should have: 
 

5.3. Proposed connected k-coverage approaches
Here, we describe our three sensor selection approaches for -coverage of a 2D FoI. The first sensor selection approach is random, whereas the other two are pseudo-random. First, we specify the pre-processing that needs to be done at the beginning of every round and before the selection of the sensors that would participate in -covering a 2D field.

5.3.1. Regular hexagonal field slicing
We assume that all the sensors are awake (listening mode) at the beginning of each round. In general, the sink is connected to a power outlet, and, hence, has an infinite source of energy. Therefore, we assume that at the beginning of each round, the sink generates a regular hexagonal tessellation by randomly slicing a 2D FoI into regular convex hexagons of edge length 
, which is computed as follows: 
 

This first step, i.e., random operation of 2D field slicing, adds dynamics to the obtained tessellation, which serves as input to the -coverage protocol. This dynamics will allow all the sensors to be evenly selected to -cover a 2D field. This randomness is achieved by randomly producing the first regular convex hexagon, 
. The latter is called reference hexagon, based on which the entire regular hexagonal slicing grid will be generated.

5.3.2. Regular hexagon-based random sensor selection
The second step, which is also run by the sink, is to identify a set of  sensors inside each sensor locality 
, which is generated randomly at the center  of each 
. The goal of this randomness is to ensure that all the sensors participate in the -coverage process of a 2D FoI. We should emphasize that both of 
 and 
 are centered at the same point  so that 
 is guaranteed to be -covered by those  sensors located inside 
. At the end of this selection process, the sink broadcasts the final schedule for the current round by including the ID’s of the sensors that have been selected for this round. Upon receiving a schedule, a sensor would check whether its ID appears in it. If so, it remains active (on state). Otherwise, it becomes inactive (off state). Regardless of its future decided state (on or off), a sensor would forward the received final schedule to its one-hop neighboring sensors.

Next, we present two sensor selection approaches based on our hexagonal area strategy discussed above. In the sequel, we assume that the degree of coverage is .

5.3.3. Hexagonal cone-based sensor selection
We propose our first sensor selection approach that is energy efficient, yet practical when the degree of coverage . In fact, it exploits the useful geometric properties of the regular convex hexagon. Now, we divide a regular convex hexagon into several parts of equal area. Specifically, the sink randomly divides the sensor locality 
 into  congruent cones, each of which is centered at , has an angle equal to , and denoted by 
, where . The motivation behind this cone-based sensor selection approach is to give all the sensors inside 
 an equal opportunity to be part of the selected set to -cover 
. Also, this approach aims at finding as disjoint sets of sensors as possible in all rounds to ensure -coverage of a 2D field. The sink randomly selects one sensor from each cone. In case a cone 
 has no sensors located in it, the sink would need to pick a sensor from the closest cone to 
 so that every 
 is -covered. Fig. 5 shows all the cones 
, where , forming a sensor locality 
 for various values of .

5.3.4. Hexagonal perimeter-based sensor selection
Here, our second sensor selection approach is straightforward. For every regular convex hexagon 
, i.e., sensor locality, we choose  sensors located on its perimeter. For fairness and balanced load distribution, it is essential that each of the six edges of 
 has /6 selected sensors. In practice, it may not be always possible to find this number of sensors at every edge. In this case, we choose sensors that are located as close as possible to each edge. In that case, some or all of those selected sensors to -cover their corresponding hexagons 
 will have to move to achieve -coverage of a 2D FoI. This sensor mobility will incur some energy consumption, which will have an impact on the network lifetime. Our simulation results showed the higher level of energy consumption caused by our perimeter-based sensor selection approach compared to our first cone-based sensor selection method.

5.3.5. Edge problem
Our goal is to reduce the number of selected sensors to achieve -coverage of a 2D FoI, thus, extending the network span. However, there are some circumstances that may lead to select an additional number of sensors to -cover a 2D FoI. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 1, it is easy to check that the regular convex hexagons 
 closer to the edges of a 2D FoI may not be complete. That is, only portions of regular convex hexagons appear at the edges of the 2D field. Nonetheless, it is essential that each of these incomplete 
 be -covered. Therefore, in practice, we expect to have an extra number of sensors compared to the theoretical results. This problem is unavoidable given the shape of the 2D field and that of the regular convex hexagon.

5.4. Discussion
In our previous work [4], we addressed the problem of connected -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks using a different approach. Our proposed solution [4] is based on a solid theorem of convexity theory, known as Helly’s theorem [7]. Also, we exploited the geometric property (i.e., constant width) of the Reuleaux triangle [1] to compute the sensor density that is required to -cover a 2D FoI. In this current work, we exploit the paving property of the regular convex hexagon. Also, we take into account the size of the region to be -covered, denoted by 
, and the size of the region, denoted by 
, where the sensors should be located to -cover 
. We found that our proposed approach in this paper is more energy-efficient, yet more practical, compared to our previous one [4], for two reasons. First, our work in this paper yields a smaller sensor density (i.e., larger space for 
) compared to [4]. Second, it leads to a larger space for 
 compared to [4]. In other words, the sensors would have more spacious region, where they could be deployed to -cover 
, thus, ensuring -coverage of a 2D FoI. This large space 
 helps reduce the effect of the interference problem that may exist between the sensors. Also, it facilitates sensor mobility, which would be needed for our perimeter-based sensor selection approach. This makes our proposed approaches more practical, yet more energy efficient compared to our Reuleaux triangle-based sensor selection method [4]. Indeed, in our previous method [4], to achieve -coverage of a 2D FoI,  sensors are required to be located within a lens, i.e., the overlap area between two adjacent Reuleaux triangles. Precisely,  sensors located in a lens guarantee -coverage of two adjacent Reuleaux triangles. First, the area of this lens is much smaller than the area of the sensor locality 
. Second, the area of two adjacent Reuleaux triangles is smaller than the area of the -covered region 
. As a consequence, our regular hexagon-based -coverage approaches in this paper, outperform our previous method [4]. The simulation results, which are discussed in Section 6.2, are in line with these theoretical results.

6. Generalization
In this section, we generalize our proposed solution to the connected -coverage problem in two-dimensional wireless sensor networks. Precisely, first, we extend our deterministic sensing model to a stochastic sensing model. Second, we take into consideration network heterogeneity, where we account for heterogeneous sensors. Next, we discuss both extensions in order to make our proposed approach more realistic.

6.1. Probabilistic sensing model
In the above study of the -coverage problem, we considered a deterministic sensing model, where a point q in a field is covered by a sensor 
 based on  (q, 
), the Euclidean distance between q and 
. This model assimilates the sensor’s sensing range to a disk, with the assumption that all the sensor’s readings are computed with certainty. In reality, those sensors’ readings are noisy, and the signal may be attenuated. Thus, it is essential to consider a more realistic sensing model, where the coverage Cov(q, 
) of a point q by sensor 
 is defined with some probability function. Hence, in our probabilistic sensing model, the coverage Cov(q, 
) is defined as the detection probability Prob(q, 
) of an event at location q by sensor 
, which is computed as follows: (1)
 where  stand for the path-loss exponent, and  represents the physical characteristic of the sensors’ sensing units. The above sensing model is motivated by the probabilistic sensing model introduced by Elfes [10], where the sensing capability of a sonar sensor is modeled by a Gaussian probability density function. A different probabilistic sensing model for coverage and target localization in WSns considers  
, where 
 < r is a measure of the detection uncertainty [42].

As stated earlier, using a deterministic sensing model, a point q in a FoI is guaranteed to be k-covered if it is within the intersection of at least  sensors’ sensing disks. In addition, an area A is said to be k-covered if every point in A is k-covered.

Definition 8

Probabilistic -Coverage
A point q in a FoI is said to be probabilistically k-covered if the detection probability of an event occurring at q by at least  sensors is at least equal to some threshold probability 
, where 0 < 
 < 1. An area A is probabilistically k-covered if each point in A is probabilistically k-covered.  ■

Here, we leverage the results of Section 5 to study the problem of probabilistic -coverage. First, we characterize probabilistic -coverage. Theorem 4 computes the minimum k-coverage probability 
.

Theorem 4

Consider our probabilistic sensing model above. Let  be the radius of the sensors’ nominal sensing range and   1. The minimum -coverage probability 
, where every point in a FoI is probabilistically -covered by at least  sensors is given by: 

Proof

Let us find the least -covered point in a FoI in order to compute 
. According to Lemma 4, the area 
 (or ) is -covered if  sensors are located in the sensor locality 
 (or ). As stated earlier, the sensors that would be selected to -cover 
 are located in 
. In the worst case, these sensors could be positioned on the perimeter of 
. Obviously, the perimeter of 
 is the closest area to the perimeter of 
. Therefore, it is clear that each of the points located on the boundary (or perimeter) of 
 is the least -covered point. For instance, according to Fig. 4, the point V located on 
 is the farthest one from the point U on 
. Therefore, the point V is the least -covered point provided that all the selected  sensors 
 are located around the point U. Thus, the distance 
 between V and each of these  sensors, is equal to the radius of 
 plus the radius of 
, i.e., 
. Thus, the minimum -coverage probability for the least -covered point V by  sensors under the probabilistic sensing model given above is computed as follows: 

To solve the probabilistic -coverage problem, we should select a minimum subset 
 of sensors, where 
, every point in a FoI is -covered by at least  sensors, and the minimum -coverage probability of each point is at least equal to a certain threshold probability 
, where 
. This allows us to compute 
, which stands for the probabilistic sensing range that provides probabilistic -coverage of a FoI with a probability no less than 
. Lemma 6 computes this probabilistic sensing range 
.

Lemma 6

The probabilistic sensing range 
 of the sensors that is necessary to probabilistically -cover a field with a minimum number of sensors and with a probability no lower than 
 is given by 
 
where  represents the physical characteristic of the sensors’ sensing units,   1, and 2    4.

Proof

First, we have this inequality: 
This implies that 
 Thus, the probabilistic sensing range 
 is computed as 
 

It follows that the minimum probabilistic sensing range, denoted by 
, is given by: 
 
We will use this lower bound on the sensors’ probabilistic sensing range 
 as one of the input parameters to solve the probabilistic connected -coverage problem based on the probabilistic sensing model discussed above.

Similarly to Lemma 4, Theorem 3, and Lemma 5, their counterpart results (Lemma 7, Theorem 5, and Lemma 8), account for the probabilistic nature of the sensing model under consideration.

Lemma 7

Let 
 be the edge length of the sensor locality 
, with . Then, the edge length 
 of the hexagonal -covered region 
 is computed as follows: 
 

Theorem 5

The minimum sensor density 
 for -coverage of a 2D FoI is computed as follows: 
 
where 
 is given by: 
 
with 
, 
, and 
.  ■

Lemma 8

Let 
 be the probabilistic sensors’ sensing range. If probabilistic -coverage is achieved, the communication range 
 and sensing range 
 of the sensors should satisfy the following inequality to guarantee network connectivity: 
 

6.2. Network heterogeneity
Sensor heterogeneity with respect to the key characteristics, namely sensing range, communication range, and energy reserves, may introduce some problems. However, it may have a positive impact on the overall network performance compared to the deployment of homogeneous sensors. In addition, the use of heterogeneous sensors is a more realistic assumption. Indeed, real-world networked sensing systems are generally heterogeneous in nature. Next, we discuss the potential problems that may arise from sensor heterogeneity and the resulting advantages.

6.2.1. Problems
In general, sensor nodes may not necessarily have the same communication range, sensing range, and initial energy supply. For a rigorous solution to the connected -coverage problem in wireless sensor networks, it is essential to account for network connectivity and sensing -coverage. The latter depends on the radius of the sensing range of the sensors, whereas the former depends on the relationship between the radius of the sensing range and the radius of the communication range of the sensor nodes. Therefore, we need to focus on the sensing range of the nodes in order to solve the problem of -coverage of a FoI using a minimum number of sensor nodes. Given that the sensors may have different sensing ranges, we distinguish two special cases: In the first case, our study focuses on the smallest radius of the sensing range of the sensors. In the second one, we focus on their largest sensing range. For each of these two cases, we describe the problem that may be introduced.

Problem 1: Over -Coverage

Let 
 be the smallest radius of the sensing ranges of the sensor nodes. In this case, the sink divides a FoI into adjacent regular hexagons of edge length 
. This would cause other sensors whose radius of their sensing range is higher than 
 to cover other regions in a FoI that are already -covered by other nodes. In fact, given that there are other more powerful sensors with larger sensing range, they may be able to reach other areas of a FoI, which are already -covered by other sensors. In other words, some of the areas would be not only sensed by some  sensors that were specifically selected by the sink for those areas, but also by some other powerful sensors whose sensing ranges were able to reach those specific areas. Thus, these areas would be more than -covered, leading to over k-coverage scenario. This problem may have a negative impact on the whole network performance if there are fewer least powerful sensors (i.e., sensors whose sensing range’s radius is 
) compared to the total number of sensors deployed to achieve -coverage. That way, heterogeneity becomes an issue and not a solution that should be exploited to help improve the overall network performance. It is worth noting that the total number of selected sensor to -cover a FoI would be large as there is a high number of regular hexagons of edge length 
. This number of selected sensors would be the same regardless of whether they are the most powerful, the least powerful, or in-between sensors (i.e., independently of the radius of their sensing range). However, a FoI is guaranteed to be -covered all the time during the whole network lifetime.

Problem 2: Under -Coverage

Let 
 be the largest radius of the sensing ranges of the sensor nodes. In this case, the sink considers the most powerful sensor nodes and divides a FoI into adjacent regular hexagons of edge length 
. Using our proposed -coverage approach discussed above, where  sensors should be located in every regular hexagon, a FoI is assured to be -covered only if all the selected sensors are the most powerful ones (i.e., their sensing range is 
). However, if there is at least one sensor whose sensing range’s radius is less than 
, a FoI cannot be completely -covered. In other words, every regular hexagon covered by these non-most powerful sensors would be less than -covered, thus yielding an under k-coverage problem. To cope with this problem, more sensors would be needed to -cover these under -covered regular hexagons. The number of extra sensors becomes larger if more non-most powerful sensors are selected to participate in the -coverage process. As it can be seen, the total number of sensors to -cover a FoI may not be the same for different -coverage rounds during the network lifespan.

It is clear that the over -coverage problem does not have any impact on the total number of sensors required to -cover a FoI, and hence is more desirable than the under -coverage problem. With the former, a FoI is surely -covered all the time during the network operational lifetime. However, with the latter, when some of the selected sensors to k-cover a FoI are not the most powerful ones, a FoI may not be fully -covered and may require the selection of additional sensors to ensure that every regular hexagon of the grid is entirely -covered. This would shorten the network lifetime and have a negative impact on the overall network performance. Thus, in order to alleviate the under -coverage problem, it is essential that the sink either avoid slicing a FoI into regular hexagons based on the most powerful sensors, i.e., using sensing range’s radius 
, or slice a FoI using 
 and select only sensors whose sensing range’s radius is 
.

Problem 3: Symmetric/Asymmetric Communications

Beside the sensing coverage (or simply coverage) concept, network connectivity is an essential concept that enables the sensors to communicate with each other. This would allow the data collected by the sensors to reach the sink, where it can be further analyzed and processed. However, sensor heterogeneity regarding their sensing ranges usually implies differences in their communication ranges. This may yield a potential problem with respect to the sensor interactions. We distinguish two cases depending on how the sink would slice a FoI into regular hexagons. Next, we investigate each of these two cases and characterize the nature of the underlying communications that may take place among the selected sensors to -cover a FoI.

Case 1: Regular Hexagons of Edge Length 

If the sink divides a FoI into adjacent regular hexagons of edge length 
, all the selected sensors are guaranteed to be symmetrically connected to each other. That is, any pair of selected sensors in any regular hexagon of edge length 
 are mutually connected to each other. In particular, the sensors whose sensing range’s radius is 
 are capable of communicating directly with all of the sensors in their respective regular hexagon of edge length 
. Any pair of selected sensors in every regular hexagon are able to communicate directly with each other. In other words, the communication links between any two sensors, which are selected to -cover a FoI, are symmetric. The set of selected sensors to achieve -coverage of a FoI form a network in which there are bidirectional communication paths between any pair of these selected sensors.

Case 2: Regular Hexagons of Edge Length 
 < r  

Assume that the sink generates a grid formed of regular hexagons of edge length r, where 
 < r  
. Now, in certain regular hexagons, some of the selected sensors to -cover a FoI are not ensured to be mutually connected to each other. More specifically, some of the selected sensors whose radius of their sensing range is smaller than 
 may not be able to connect directly with other sensors with higher sensing range’s radius. For instance, consider two sensors 
 and 
 whose radii of communication range are 
 and 
, respectively, where 
 > 
. Also, consider a scenario, where 
 is within the communication range of 
, while 
 is outside the communication range of 
. This scenario causes the communication between 
 and 
 due to the asymmetric communication links between both sensors. In fact, while sensor 
 can send messages to sensor 
, the latter cannot transmit any messages directly to 
.

6.2.2. Advantages
In general, the use of heterogeneous sensors is beneficial to the overall network performance. Next, we discuss the main advantages of heterogeneous sensor deployment, namely elongation of network lifetime, avoidance of coverage and connectivity holes, and benefiting from clustering to provide -coverage of a FoI.

Advantage 1: Network Lifetime Elongation

It is obvious that the deployment of heterogeneous sensors with different energy supplies helps extend the operational network lifetime. In fact, the sensors may fail to work properly due to their low battery power. In this case, the powerful sensors (i.e., sensors with high initial energy supplies) remain functional for a longer period of time, thus, helping delay the occurrence of sensor failures. This keeps the entire network operational for an extended period of time. In addition, those sensors equipped with higher battery supply are highly likely to be selected more often than those sensors with lower battery power to participate in the -coverage of a FoI, thus, accomplishing a given task during the network operation. As a result, those low-battery-power sensors are avoided, which helps reduce the chances of their failures due to their insufficient energy supplies.

Advantage 2: Coverage/Connectivity-Hole Avoidance

The presence of powerful deployed sensors with respect to their sensing ranges enables the coverage of farther regions in a FoI. This type of redundant coverage (or precisely over -coverage) helps reduce the chances to have areas in a FoI that are not -covered. Indeed, in case some of the selected sensors to -cover certain regular hexagons fail due to low battery power, those power sensors that can reach these regular hexagons may help -cover them. This helps cope with this type of potential energy-hole problem, called coverage-hole problem, which in turn may lead to another type of energy-hole problem, called connectivity-hole problem. Also, the presence of powerful sensors with regard to their communication ranges helps shorten the length of the communication paths among the sensors. Consequently, this leads to minimize the cost for establishing network connectivity by minimizing the number of involved sensors. This, in turn, yields significant energy savings, which contributes to network lifetime prolongation.

Advantage 3: Clustering-Based -Coverage

Earlier, we discussed the impact of the sensor heterogeneity concerning their sensing ranges on the -coverage problem. More precisely, we described the two major problems, namely under -coverage and over -coverage, which may arise when the radii of the sensors’ sensing ranges are not equal. This shows that it may not always be practical to design a centralized -coverage protocol that would be run under the control of a central entity, i.e., the sink, while deploying heterogeneous sensors. However, the deployment of powerful sensors in terms of their sensing capability has some advantages. Indeed, the existence of powerful sensors can help improve coverage efficiency. In fact, fewer powerful sensors are able to achieve -coverage of a FoI compared to using homogeneous and less powerful sensors. This definitely leads to significant amount of energy savings, which in turn helps extend the network lifetime. More importantly, those powerful sensors could be selected as leaders (or cluster heads), each of which would be responsible for the coverage of a region of a FoI. Hence the need for a clustering-based -coverage protocol, while the entire FoI is guaranteed to be fully -covered. In other words, each of these powerful sensors (i.e., cluster heads) would play the role of the sink in the above centralized -coverage protocol. Moreover, these cluster heads should cooperate to successfully achieve their target mission (i.e., full -coverage of a FoI). More specifically, due to their higher communication ranges, these cluster heads would be able to communicate directly with each other in order to ensure that the whole FoI is fully -covered. Consequently, the amount of overhead, which would be introduced by the above centralized -coverage protocol, would be reduced in this type of clustering-based -coverage protocol. Indeed, each cluster head would be in charge of just a subset of sensors and not all of the deployed sensors as it should be the case for the sink in the centralized -coverage protocol. This would minimize further the sensors’ energy consumption.

As it can be clearly seen, each of the three forms of sensor heterogeneity, namely their differences with respect to their sensing ranges, communication ranges, and energy supplies, yields significant energy savings, which helps elongate the operational network lifetime. In our simulation study, we consider these various forms of sensor heterogeneity to assess their impact on the performance of our proposed -coverage protocol for 2D wireless sensor networks.

7. Performance evaluation
In this section, we specify the simulation setup. Then, we discuss the simulation results of our proposed approaches to the problem of connected -coverage in wireless sensor networks, i.e., cone-based and perimeter-based approaches.

7.1. Simulation setup
Without loss of generality, our FoI is a square of edge length 300 m. We assume that there are 1000 sensors randomly deployed in this FoI. Also, we assume that the radii of the communication range and sensing range of the sensors are 50 m and 25 m, respectively. Moreover, we use the energy model developed by Ye et al. [36], where the energy consumption by a sensor due to data transmission, data reception, idle mode, and sleep mode are estimated to be equal to 60 mW, 12 mW, 12 mW, and 0.03 mW, respectively. Furthermore, all simulations are repeated 100 times and the obtained results are averaged, using a high-level simulator written in C. We suppose that the initial energy of each sensor is 70 J. We use the IEEE 802.11 distributed coordinated function with CSMA/CA as the underlying MAC protocol. Furthermore, we consider a radio interference model given the pervasiveness of other 2.4 GHz radio sources. As stated in the energy model, which is discussed in Section 2.2, we take into consideration the four forms of energy dissipation, namely data transmission, data reception, data sensing, sensor mobility, active state (a sensor is in on state, but, not it is not involved in any of the above four activities), and control messages. The latter are indispensable for the correct operation of both of our proposed -coverage protocols, namely cone-based and perimeter-based sensor selection approaches. We provide simulation results to compare these two approaches with respect to some evaluation metrics, such as the total number of sensors required for -coverage and network lifetime.

7.2. Simulation results
7.2.1. Cone-based vs. perimeter-based -coverage
As it can be seen in Fig. 6, both of our cone-based and perimeter-based -coverage approaches require the same number of sensors to -cover a FoI. In fact, both curves coincide. However, Fig. 7 show that our cone-based -coverage approach outperforms our perimeter-based sensor selection approach. Indeed, the perimeter-based method yields higher energy consumption. This extra energy consumed is due to sensor mobility so sensors are located on the edges of the sensor locality 
. In Fig. 8, we set the coverage degree , the radius of the sensors’ sensing disk , and vary the stretching factor  as a function of 
 and 
, where 
. It shows that the sensor density 
 decreases for larger values of . Indeed, increasing  leads to increasing the area of the -covered region 
, thus, decreasing 
.

7.2.2. Comparison with existing approaches
As discussed above, our cone-based -coverage approach outperforms the perimeter-based -coverage approach (see Fig. 7). In the sequel, we compare the least performing one of the above -coverage approaches, namely perimeter-based -coverage approach, against the coverage configuration protocol (CCP) proposed by Xing et al. [34], which is the -coverage closest protocol to ours.

Fig. 11, Fig. 12, Fig. 13 show that our perimeter-based -coverage approach outperforms the -coverage protocol in [4]. Indeed, Fig. 11, Fig. 12 show that the total number of sensors needed to -cover a FoI using our perimeter-based approach is smaller than the one needed by our Reuleaux triangle-based approach [4]. Thus, based on Fig. 7 as discussed earlier, this implies that our cone-based -coverage approach has better performance than the one discussed in our previous work [4]. Also, as shown in Fig. 13, given that the total energy consumption depends on the number of sensors that participate to -cover a FoI, our perimeter-based approach helps to extend more the network lifetime compared to its counterpart proposed in [4]. Notice that as our previous approach in [4] requires a degree of coverage  that is at least 3, i.e., , we set  in our comparison study.


Download : Download high-res image (193KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Comparing sensor density using r (against Helly-based k-coverage protocol).


Download : Download high-res image (195KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Comparing sensor density using  (against Helly-based k-coverage protocol).

7.2.3. Using probabilistic sensing model
Figs. 16, 17, and 18 show the impact of the degree of coverage  on the minimum probabilistic sensing range 
 for different values of the path loss exponent (, 3, 4), and the detection probability (
, 0.8, 0.9). As it can be seen, 
 increases with . Indeed, the sensors need to be more powerful in terms of their sensing range to -cover a FoI. Moreover, 
 decreases as the detection probability increases. In fact, to achieve the same degree of coverage , higher detection probability requires less powerful sensors, and, thus, smaller radius of their sensing range. Furthermore, 
 tends to decrease as  increases. In other words, the free space model (i.e., ), which is characterized by the absence of any obstacles, offers the highest sensing power of the sensors. Next, we provide more results based on the minimum probabilistic sensing range 
, the path loss exponent , the sensor characteristic , and the detection probability 
, whenever possible.

Figs. 19, 20, and 21 show the changing behavior of the probabilistic sensor density 
 based on the degree of coverage , threshold probability, 
, and path-loss exponent, . The plot shows that the density increases with 
 and . In fact, any increase in 
 requires more active sensors in order to provide the same degree of coverage . We should mention that the proposed probabilistic -coverage does not seem to be adequate for a degree of coverage  for a path loss exponent  regardless of the value of the detection probability, and also for  and 
. As it can be seen from Fig. 19, the sensor density for  and  is the highest one compared to the other cases, where the degree of coverage . Also, Fig. 20 shows that the sensor density for  and 
 is higher than that for , 3. However, for , the trend of the plot in Fig. 21 is normal and meets our expectations. In fact, as the degree of coverage  increases, the probabilistic sensor density increases proportionally to .


Download : Download high-res image (209KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 19. Probabilistic sensor density 
 vs.  (  2).

The plots in Figs. 22, 23, and 24 show the impact of the probabilistic sensing range 
 on the corresponding sensor density 
, where the degree of coverage  takes on the values . Recall that 
 depends on . As stated in Theorem 5, the probabilistic sensor density 
 that is necessary for full k-coverage of a FoI is inversely proportional to the probabilistic sensing range 
 of the sensors. However, 
 is higher for smaller detection probability. Therefore, it is expected that 
 is smaller for smaller detection probability regardless of the value of the path loss exponent . When , the sensor density seems to be higher for  compared to . This shows that our proposed probabilistic connected -coverage approach does not handle 1-coverage appropriately (i.e., ). Also, for each of the values of the detection probability for , 
 has a minimum value for a specific value of its probabilistic sensing range. For instance, when 
, 
 reaches its minimum for 
 m. When , the probabilistic sensor density 
 increases with the probabilistic sensing range 
, except for 
, where a coverage degree  requires more sensors compared to , 3. For , 
 increases proportionally to 
, and reaches its minimum for .


Download : Download high-res image (212KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 20. Probabilistic sensor density 
 vs.  (  3).


Download : Download high-res image (217KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 21. Probabilistic sensor density 
 vs.  (  4).


Download : Download high-res image (207KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 22. Probabilistic sensor density 
 vs. 
 (  2).


Download : Download high-res image (211KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 23. Probabilistic sensor density 
 vs. 
 (  3).


Download : Download high-res image (203KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 24. Probabilistic sensor density 
 vs. 
 (  4).

The plots in Figs. 25, 26, and 27 show the achieved coverage degree  versus the total number of deployed sensors, while we vary both of the threshold probability 
, and path-loss exponent . As it is expected, a larger number of deployed sensors yields a higher degree of coverage . Likewise, any increase in 
 and  needs a higher number of sensors to achieve the same degree of coverage . Both experiments show a good match between simulation and analytical results.

The plots in Figs. 31, 32, and 33 shown below consider the same degree of coverage , and path-loss exponent , while it varies the threshold probability 
, i.e., 
, 0.8, and 09. It shows the impact of 
 on the network lifetime to provide 3-coverage of a FoI. As it is discussed earlier, larger values of 
 necessitate higher numbers of active sensors to -cover a FoI, which in turn yields higher energy consumption for the correct network operation regarding satisfying the -coverage requirement.

7.2.4. Deploying heterogeneous sensors
Here, we study the impact of heterogeneity on our solution to the connected -coverage problem. The plots in Figs. 34, 35, and 36 provide a comparison between two versions of each of our proposed -coverage protocols, namely cone-based -coverage approach and perimeter-based -coverage approach, where all the sensors are randomly deployed. While the first version uses homogeneous sensors, the second one deploys heterogeneous sensors. For the homogeneous version, we assume that the sensing range of all the sensors is  m and that the initial energy of each sensor is 70 Joules. However, for the heterogeneous version, we assume that the sensing range of the sensors is between 
 m and 
 m with mean value equal to 25 m, and the initial energy of each sensor is between 60 Joules and 80 Joules with mean value equal to 70 Joules. As can be seen from Fig. 34, the heterogeneous version of the cone-based -coverage approach outperforms its homogeneous counterpart as it requires less number of sensors for any coverage degree . Obviously, the presence of more powerful sensors helps ensure -coverage of a field with less number of active sensors. Also, Fig. 35 shows that the heterogeneous version of the perimeter-based -coverage approach outperforms its homogeneous counterpart. In fact, the former needs smaller sensor density compared to the latter to -cover a FoI. Moreover, as it is the case for the homogeneous case, Fig. 36 shows that the heterogeneous version of the cone-based -coverage approach outperforms its counterpart of the perimeter-based -coverage approach. This show that sensor heterogeneity-based deployment has better results than sensor homogeneity-based deployment.

8. Conclusion
8.1. Summary
In this paper, we investigated the problem of connected -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks using regular convex hexagons. First, we studied all 2D regular convex pavers to determine the best paver that maximizes the area of the sensors’ sensing range utilized based on our proposed sensing range usage rate metric. We found that the regular convex hexagon is the “best” paver as it yields the maximum sensing range usage rate. Second, we computed the sensor density for 2D -coverage. Our study showed that there is a close relationship between the area of the -covered region, denoted by 
, and the area of the sensor locality, denoted by 
,. We found that to compute the optimum sensor density to -cover a 2D field, we need to solve a multi-objective optimization problem so as to maximize the areas of 
 and 
. We used a weighted scale-uniform-unit sum approach to compute the optimum values of the edge lengths of 
 and 
. We found that these values depend on the weights 
 and 
, which define the level of interest in maximizing 
 and 
, respectively. Third, we derived the corresponding ratio of the communication range  to the sensing range  of the sensors. Fourth, we proposed an energy-efficient sensor selection approach that ensures 2D connected -coverage. It is based on slicing the 2D field into congruent regular convex hexagons 
, and slicing the sensor locality 
 into  congruent cones. Fifth, we generalized our proposed solution to solve the problem of connected -coverage in 2D wireless sensor networks. We considered a probabilistic sensing model, where the sensing capability of the sensors is not modeled by a disk. We computed the minimum -coverage probability 
, where every point in a FoI is probabilistically -covered by at least  sensors, and the corresponding lower bound on the probabilistic sensing range. Also, we accounted for sensor heterogeneity, where the sensors do not necessarily have the same characteristics in terms of their communication ranges, sensing ranges, and energy supplies. We showed the positive impact of deploying heterogeneous sensors on energy savings, thus helping extend the network lifetime. We found a close match between our simulation and theoretical results.

8.2. Future directions
Our future work is six-fold. First, we plan to investigate the problem of connected k-coverage in sparse wireless sensor networks, which may require sensor mobility in order to k-cover any region of interest in a 2D field. Second, we focus on building an energy-efficient and unified framework, where both of connected k-coverage and data collection are jointly considered. Third, we want to account for the presence of obstacles and their effects on our proposed k-coverage approaches. Fourth, we consider node deployment on the complex geographic surface, and investigate its impact on the performance of our cone-based and perimeter-based k-coverage approaches. Fifth, we need to investigate various clustering techniques to achieve k-coverage using heterogeneous sensors, where the most powerful sensors act as cluster heads. Sixth, we aim at implementing our cone-based and perimeter-based k-coverage approaches using a sensor testbed in order to study their feasibility and practicality using real-world scenarios.