Abstract
Cyber–physical system (CPS) is the incorporation of physical processes with processing and data transmission. Cybersecurity is a primary and challenging issue in healthcare due to the legal and ethical perspective of the patient’s medical data. Therefore, the design of CPS model for healthcare applications requires special attention for ensuring data security. To resolve this issue, this paper proposes a secure intrusion, detection with blockchain based data transmission with classification model for CPS in healthcare sector. The presented model performs data acquisition process using sensor devices and intrusion detection takes place using deep belief network (DBN) model. In addition, the presented model uses a multiple share creation (MSC) model for the generation of multiple shares of the captured image, and thereby achieves privacy and security. Besides, the blockchain technology is applied for secure data transmission to the cloud server, which executes the residual network (ResNet) based classification model to identify the presence of the disease. The experimental validation of the presented model takes place using NSL-KDD 2015, CIDDS-001 and ISIC dataset. The simulation outcome pointed out the effective outcome of the presented model.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Cyber–physical system

Security

Blockchain

Intrusion detection

Deep learning

1. Introduction
Recently, Cyber–physical system (CPS) has gained maximum attention which has been assumed as an advanced model. It is the integration of processing and communication abilities globally. CPS is meant to be basic research that has been carried out by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and preferred by US President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. CPS depends upon sensing, computation, and networking. The current innovations of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), medical sensors, and Cloud Computing (CC) tend to make CPS an effective module for clinical applications such as healthcare and home patient care [15]. Such advances are applicable for observing the patient health status in remote site and provide better treatments. A manageable study has been processed on clinical sensors. The sensors are used for collecting the patient details which is highly confidential. The accumulated data is passed to access through the wireless communication medium. Also, wired sensors are applied; hence, WSN offers elasticity and makes it comfortable for physicians and patients. The data gathered by sensors are saved in a server and it can be accessed by physicians [1].

Security is the most significant one where the patient’s details are highly confidential from both legal and ethical sides [6]. Thus, at the time of developing CPS structure medical domains, maxi-mum attentions have to be provided for data security [13], [14], [19]. Database management models have to be effective and scalable. The clinical data is applicable to offer appropriate insight into treatments which is highly essential to save the user’s life, in which the data is available and accessible to legal medical officer whenever required. Additionally, medical applications need maximum computing resources for making smart decisions on the basis of huge patient’s data. Hence, the data which is collected by WSN is highly experienced with limited energy, computing, and memory storage.

The CC model is applicable to offer effective solutions for the problems involved in this study. The recent studies are endeavoring to apply state-of-the-art CC models for CPS that enhances the reliability of the network and activate actual data analysis. Furthermore, CC is said to be a Computing Infrastructure which is applied by a consumer organization whenever required. It offers the service like processing, saved, networking, and software “as a service”. [6] presented CC in the following: “cloud is a parallel and distributed computing (DC) is composed of interlinked as well as virtualized systems are supervised dynamically and projected as diverse computing resources based on the service-level agreements (SLA) that are implemented with a negotiation among service giver and consumers”. Hence, as per the name, it is considered that the cloud is composed of given as follows: (1) self-service, (2) per-usage metering as well as billing, (3) flexibility, and (4) customization.

The 2 factors of CC are highly applicable to end users. Initially, individuals are applying personal information with the help of system with Internet connection. Secondly, software applications are not essential for user’s PC and accessible on the cloud. Additionally, CC offers different software services, APIs, and development devices to researchers. This service activates the users to transform the processing structure to the cloud. The CC is a result of recent models like DC, Internet models such as service based structural design, web services, scheme organization which is autonomic computing, and hardware such as virtualization, multicore chips. The integrated sensor–cloud structure is an interior portion of CPS, in which the cloud maintains the cyber actions and the sensors maintain the external events. A progressive study on sensor–cloud is defined in [2]. Since the CPS method is novel, the problems are resolved effectively. Concurrent computation, data query, memory, and security are some of the problems.

In CPS, the concatenation of active user input like smart feedback scheme, electronic details of patient information, and passive user input like biosensors and smart tools in clinical platforms supports the data acquisition for making effective decisions. The integration of data acquisition and decision making scheme has been explored crucially for medical applications and these integration gains maximum attention. The options of applying CPS in medical sector encloses the establishment of coordinated interoperation of independent and applicable tools, also the novel approaches to manage and operate healthcare physical systems under the application of calculation and manage, reduced implantable smart tools, body area networks, systematic tools, and novel fabrication concepts.

Though massive CPS structures are existed, only less CPS architectures are available for medical domains. Hu et al. [11] have presented a service-oriented architecture (SOA) relied medical CPS method; hence, it suffers from incomplete structure. Wang et al. [26] implied a trusted CPS structural design for medical sector that applies WSN-CC combined approach. Banerjee et al. [5] applied a modeling and investigation of medical CPS. Thus, it experiences the issues of security and privacy. Rajkumar [18] stated that the challenges of CPS can be resolved in future where the outcome in a science of CPS as well as technological solutions can be provided. Similarly, real-time, affordable, and consistent CPS can be placed in massive applications. In Rajhans et al. [17] deployed an abstraction and verification of this strategy, and a structural approach for CPS which has been projected by applying structural as well as semantic mappings for assuring reliability and activate scheme-level validation. In Vamvoudakis et al. [23] introduced a game-based method for evaluating binary arbitrary parameter according to the sensor values without any corruption. The CPS management can be processed, using wireless manage and event-based control, Demirel et al. [8] carried out a study in wireless control loops along with sensor readings that are unwanted and energy-based multihop wireless network. Finally, a modular design model has been deployed and optimized the data transmission strategies as well as managing rules.

In [21], the event-oriented state evaluation issues are known in which sensors are stimulated by a fusion model when it is a better prediction value and should not exceed the applied threshold. Also, the cases of CPS are identified. Then, CC is extensively employed recently. Thus, it can accomplish with best outcomes. Baliga et al. [4] offered a comprehensive power application diagnosis for CC. It assumes the public and private clouds with power utilization by switching, transmission, data computation as well as data storage. Warneke and Kao [27] applied dynamic resource assignment to effective parallel information procedure in CC. Khazaei et al. [12] examined the pool management method to CC centers. In [12], network virtualization as well as software-based networking for CC has been consolidated.

Xiao et al. [28] used an attribute-based approach for the study of security and privacy issues in CC. Also, the well-known CC environments like Amazon, Google, and IBM, has been applied in diverse applications like smart transportation systems, developing organization. In [25], a context-aware vehicular CPS with cloud support has been projected and 2 important service elements like vehicular social networks as well as context-aware vehicular security have been deployed. In Wan et al. [24] provided a novel structure named as VCMIA by combining vehicular CPS with mobile CC, and offers portable services for effective users like drivers and passengers to use the mobile traffic clouds. A new RGB based share creation model using elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) method has been presented in [20] to attain privacy and safety. The presented model generates a set of shares for an individual image which further undergoes encryption and decryption using ECC [3].

To resolve cybersecurity issue in CPS, this paper introduces secure intrusion detection with blockchain based data transmission with classification model for CPS in healthcare sector [9]. The presented model comprises different stages namely data acquisition, intrusion detection, data transmission and classification. In the beginning, the medical data is acquired by the use of sensor devices. Next, deep belief network (DBN) model based intrusion detection process takes place to identify the anomaly data in the gathered data. Simultaneously, multiple share creation (MSC) model is applied, which creates a set of shares of the captured image. Then, the blockchain technology is employed for secure data transmission to the cloud server, which executes the residual network (ResNet) based classification model for the identification of the existence of the disease. The experimental validation of the presented model takes place using skin lesion dataset and the simulation outcome pointed out the effective outcome of the presented model. In short, the paper contributions are summarized as follows.

•
Propose a new secure intrusion detection with blockchain based data transmission with classification model for CPS in healthcare sector

•
Involves several processes namely data acquisition, intrusion detection, encryption, data transmission and classification.

•
Employ DBN based intrusion detection process for the identification of anomalies

•
Introduce MSE with blockchain technology for secured data transmission

•
Finally, ResNet based classification model is applied for disease diagnosis

2. The proposed model
The working principle of the presented method is depicted in Fig. 1. As shown, the medical data is gathered from the physical space namely hospital, patient, and drug suppliers. Next, the user sensors are utilized to gather the patient data in different dimensions. Then, cyber security intrusion detection model is executed using DBN model to identify the presence of intrusion in the medical data. Next to that, MSC model creates multiple shares of the image and is encrypted by SC. Followed by, blockchain technology is employed for secure data transmission and ResNet101 based classification model for the identification of the existence of the disease.

2.1. DBN based intrusion detection in CPS
Once the input data is captured by the physical devices in CPS, the intrusion detection process takes place using DBN to identify the existence of intrusions in the captured data. To perform intrusion detection, DBN model is applied with three stages namely pretraining, updating and fine tuning stages. Generally, RNN is mostly utilized for forecasting the time series data testing.

Essentially, NN with several layers is represented as Deep Neural Network (DNN) [16]. The suitable method of DNN based on Back Propagation (BP) is extremely difficult. Several learning technologies equivalent to DNN such as pre-training, drop out were developed. It comprises various techniques of DNN like DBN, CNN and so on. In DBN, it can be ordered with numerous RBMs, and it is executed a training technique of layer-by-layer for overcoming the problems. Also, the CNN training technique is not suitable to multi-layer trained network. A total training function of DBN has been classified as pre-training and tuning stages. Fig. 2 illustrates the design of the DBN method.


Download : Download high-res image (312KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Overall Process of proposed model.

2.1.1. Pre-training stage
Due to the fact that it can be deep structure and significant feed forward network, the DBN has been employed. The samples are applied from input to the resultant layer utilizing huge hidden layers with further layers. According to the DBN method and the hidden unit’s classifier the method itself, creates activation purposes. Besides, Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) has been arranged for overcoming the issues of feasible activation function generation. RBM is a class of Markov random which is created of a single layer of stochastic hidden units with a particular layer of stochastic visible units. The accurate unit’s  is applied to the function of training RBM vector as given below. (1)
The maximization of Eq. (1) is given as follows. 
 signifies the programmatic interaction among visible unit 
 and hidden unit 
, ,  are signified to as bias terms, ,  exhibits the amount of visible and hidden units. A follows log possibility of a training vector concerns a weight of inconsistency. In case of hidden units from RBM, it does not give a direct response that helps achieve optimal impartial sample from (
, 
)
 (2)
where  is the logistic sigmoid function. 
 
, 
, 
 is the unbiased sample.

2.1.2. Updating process
The updating process a complex stage is given as follows. (3)
Now, RBM is well trained. The divergent RBM is stacked above a frame utilized of multilayer model. Besides, a unique RBM can be defined which has been stacked. If the input visible layer is ordered as a vector, the qualities to units are made capably together with RBM layers, and utilize shared techniques in current weights and biases. Thus, the end layer endures training individually and locked in a novel RBM. The achieved DNN weights are embedded with the fine-tuning stage.

2.1.3. Fine tuning phase
In this process is performed on the basis of BP method. To classify the clinical photographs into 2 stages, the resultant layer is ordered from top of DNN. Furthermore,  number of input neurons and 3 hidden layers have been utilized in DL technique. An improved weight has to be achieved in the training stage utilizing a training dataset, as BP technique is initialized with the weights obtained from the pre-training level. While an outcome, use of Eq. (1), the lower error value has been estimation; and higher accuracy of DL classifier will be achieved utilizing optimized weights.

2.2. Multiple Share Creation (MSC) scheme
Once the intrusions are determined in the captured data, the secure image transmission process to the cloud server will begin. Initially, the MSC model is applied to create four shares of every individual image obtained from the physical devices. The presented MSC model transmits the image to the cloud server in a secured and confidential manner. The image is sent as shares and all the shares are integrated together to reconstruct the original input image. The MSC model creates the shares from the pixel values. It extracts the pixel values from the image and are utilized to generate many shares. Finally, the shares are split into blocks and the blocks are securely transmitted using blockchain technique. The processes involved in the MSC model aregiven as follows. The pixel values of the original image are extracted and the RGB value is separately determined in the structure of matrix (
, 
, 
). The size of the matrix is similar to the size of the input image (P*Q). An actual pixel value of the input image is defined as (4)where  represents the total of the entire values of the 
, 
 and 
.

2.2.1. Share creation
All pixels exist in the input image are considered in the structure of  transformed methods, called as shares. Every share comprises a group of sub-pixels of the RGB image. The R, G and B shares are according to the pixel values that exist in the RGB image. The share for RGB is individually signified as 
, 
 and 
 and defined below. (5)
(6)
(7)
 where  and  denotes the position of the matrix, 
 and 
 refers to the shares of RGB, 
 are the elements of the image pixels. The RGB pixel values are obtained from the original image and reserved as separated matrices. Next, the shares are formed depends on the separation of the image into different portions. The MSC method aspires for encrypting the image into a several meaningless share images. The shares do not determine some helpful data unless each of the shares is combined [20].

Prior to sharing creation, the basic matrices are required to be derived depending upon the count of shares to be formed. Also, an arbitrary key is given interms of the block size of the input image. Generally, the block size is established to be 4 × 4 or 8 × 8. The share count is defined as 2
, if the . The basic matrix is achieved if the RGB values in the pixel are divided by S. Next, the share is developed by implementing XOR function of basic matrixes on different combinations.

2.2.2. Share reconstruction
Once the shares are generated and transmitted to the cloud server, share reconstruction process takes place where all the shares are integrated together to get back the actual image. The reconstructed image can be generated as follows. (8) 
 Once the shares are reconstructed, the input image is retrieved successfully. Then, the obtained image undergoes classification process to identify and classify the existence of the diseases.

2.3. Block chain based secure data transmission
The MSC based share generation process generates multiple shares for every image. Then, the shares are split into blocks and the blocks are securely transmitted to cloud server using blockchain technique. The blockchain is a group of blocks, where all blocks are composed of 4 portions namely, transaction details (bitcoin, ethereum), hash value of recent block and existing block, as well as timestamp. Blockchain is a decentralized, shared, and public digital ledger which has been applied for storing the transaction in different modes. Hence, an intruder record cannot modify as each block is composed of a cryptographic value of the exiting block. During blockchain model, each transaction is cryptographically signed through a hash value and validated by the miners. It contains a repeated measure of whole ledger and blocks of every transaction as shown in Fig. 3. Blockchain offers the capability to distribute the ledger of data in decentralized, shared, safe, and trusted manner.

Decentralized storage is a type of blockchain and applied for saving maximum data that has been connected to recent block and former block using smart contract code. Swarm, LitecoinDB, MoneroDB, SiacoinDB, IPFS, BigchainDB, etc, were applied for the decentralized database recently. The Interplanetary File System (IPFS) is defined as Point to Point, decentralized, and shared database which has been linked and forwards typical files. IPFS is a significant saved that is utilized by a blockchain model for IoT functions to acquire maximum throughput [10].

2.4. CNN based ResNet101 for classification
Once the cloud server successfully received and reconstructed the input image, it executes the CNN based ResNet101 model to perform classification process and identify the existence of multiple classes from the applied image. As a supervised learning model, CNNs are highly beneficial with some parameters and rapid training speed than deep ANN. It is pointed out that, it has vital merits in image segmentation, prediction, and classification. The feature map of the first layer is attained by convolving the input, and 6 convolutional (Conv) kernels have been employed. The Conv kernel is a size of 5 × 5 and a stride is 1. The size of a feature map could be acquired using the function provided in the following: (9)
 
where 
 denotes a size of feature map; 
 implies input size;  denotes the padding score;  defines the kernel size and  shows the stride value. The common notion of a Conv task is as follows: (10)
where 
 denotes a result of  Conv layer; 
 indicates the Conv kernel of  Conv layer; 
 implies the result of  th Conv layer; 
 refers bias of Conv layer;  signifies activation function of  Conv layer. For sub-sampling, the pooling task has been applied. The size of pooling kernel is always 2 × 2 and a stride is 2 for pooling function. Typically, activation purposes like sigmoid, tanh, and ReLU are applied. The features obtained using Conv layers are forwarded to FC layer at end layer to image classification. Besides, a CNN is composed of various layers with particular features like Conv layers, activation layers, pooling layers, FC layers as well as SoftMax layers.

2.4.1. Convolution layer
The Conv layer is composed of a filter that convolves over width and height of input volume. Followed by, the result of a Conv layer has been attained by a dot product process among the filter weight content and exclusive location of an input image. It provides 2D activation map as a result that offers responses of that filter at the spatial position. Diverse parameters are employed in many filters; filter size and weight contents, stride, and padding. These parameters would show the size of the output.

2.4.2. Pooling layers
Pooling layers highly concentrate on eliminating overfitting issues and with the application of non-linear down-sampling on activation maps, the dimension and difficulty are reduced and enhance the processing speed. Some of the attributes involved in the procedure are filter size and stride, while padding is not employed in pooling since it is converse for limiting the dimension of an input. Moreover, pooling is used on all input channel uniquely. Similarly, the count of output and input channels would be symmetrical. It is also composed of 2 diverse pooling layers like max pooling as well as average pooling. The fundamental task of pooling layer is as same as the Conv layer. A major variation is that, rather than using a dot product of input and a filter, higher neighboring score is applied from a position in the input image. It is carried out in every channels of input image. In case of average pooling, the average of every value is placed from unique position in an input image.

2.4.3. Fully connected layers
The FC layer is also named as hidden layer employed in a regular neural network. Prior to this, the input range is transformed into 1D vector with the help of a flattening layer. As per the name, in a FC layer nodes in the input are linked for all other nodes present in the final outcome.

2.4.4. Softmax layer
Softmax activation utility has been utilized in the resultant layer of a CNN to show a classical shared over labels and offers the possibilities of all inputs which belong to a label.

2.4.5. ResNet 101 model
ResNet method applies a remaining block for resolving the degradation and gradient diminishing issues in CNNs. The remaining block deepens the network depth, and enhances the network function. In specific, ResNet systems are applicable to make better functions in the ImageNet [16] classifier operation. The remaining block in ResNet shows a remaining by including the input of remaining block and result of a remaining block.

ResNet network is composed of various residual blocks where the Conv kernel size of a Conv layer is various. The difference between two layers and three layers deep is shown in Fig. 4. The traditional formation of RestNet contains RetNet18, RestNet50, and RestNet101. The fundamental architecture of ResNet101 is proposed in Fig. 5. Features obtained by the ResNet are fed into FC layer to image classification. The softmax function is often employed as a classifier.

3. Performance validation
The simulation results of the presented model have been examined under several aspects. The intrusion detection performance of the DBN model in the CPS has been assessed using two benchmark dataset namely NSL-KDD 2015 and CIDDS-001 dataset [7]. The former NSL-KDD dataset comprises a set of 125973 instances, 41 attributes and 2 classes. Next, the latter CIDDS-001 dataset includes 1018950 instances with 14 attributes and 2 classes as shown in Table 1. For experimental validation, 10 fold cross-validation technique is applied to partition the dataset into training and testing parts.

Besides, a skin lesion dataset is used to examine the classification performance of the ResNet101 model. The dataset comprises 21 images from Angioma, 46 images from Nevus, 41 images from Lentigo NOS, 68 images from Solar Lentigo, 51 images from Melanoma, 54 images from Seborrheic Keratosis and 37 images under Basal Cell Carcinoma classes. A sample set of test images with masked output is illustrated in Fig. 6.

3.1. Analysis of intrusion detection results
Table 2 and Fig. 7 investigate the intrusion detection results offered by the DBN model on the applied two dataset. On the applied NSL-KDD 2015 dataset, the DBN model identifies the intrusions with the maximum precision of 98.94%, recall of 98.76%, accuracy of 98.95%, and F-score of 97.62%. Similarly, on the applied CIDDS-001 dataset, the DBN model performs effective intrusion detection with the maximum precision of 98.92%, recall of 98.81%, accuracy of 98.94%, and F-score of 98.13%.

Table 3 and Fig. 8 show the comparative study of the results offered by DBN with other models [7] interms of accuracy. The figure indicated that the CS-PSO model is found to the ineffective detection model which has attained a minimum accuracy of 75.51%. The Gradient Boosting model has resulted in a slightly higher accuracy of 84.25%. Also, the Gaussian process and DNN-SVM models exhibit even better and closer accuracy values of 91.06% and 92.03% respectively. Besides, the Fuzzy c-means model has surpassed previous methods with the accuracy of 95.3%. Moreover, the GA-Fuzzy and cuckoo optimization models have resulted in the near identical results of 96.53% and 96.88% respectively. Then, the behavior based IDS model leads to competitive performance with the high accuracy of 98.89%. At last, the presented DBN model has attained a maximum accuracy of 98.95%.


Table 2. Performance evaluation for applied intrusion detection dataset for proposed method.

Measures	NSL-KDD 2015	CIDDS-001
Precision	98.94	98.92
Recall	98.76	98.81
Accuracy	98.95	98.94
F-score	97.62	98.13

Table 3. Performance of proposed DBN with state of art methods for applied dataset in terms of accuracy.

Methods	Accuracy
Proposed DBN	98.95
Cuckoo Optimization (2018)	96.88
CS-PSO (2019)	75.51
Behavior Based IDS (2019)	98.89
Gaussian Process (2015)	91.06
DNN+SVM (2018)	92.03
GA+ Fuzzy (2018)	96.53
Fuzzy C-Means (2018)	95.30
Gradient Boosting (2018)	84.25

Table 4. Visualization of Multiple Share Creation (MSC) scheme.


3.2. Analysis of encryption results
Table 4 provides a qualitative analysis of the presented MSC model. The table indicated that the input image is effectively divided into four shares and is proficiently reconstructed at the final image without any variation.

Table 5 and Fig. 9 show the performance analysis of the CNN-ResNet 101 model with existing methods [22] on the applied dataset. The figure implied that the model presented by Li et al. is said to be the worst detection model that has reached sensitivity and specificity values of 82% and 97.80%. Similarly, the model applied by Yuan et al. has shown better sensitivity and specificity of 82.50% and 97.50%. Moreover, the researchers deployed by AI-Magni et al. has implemented moderate sensitivity and specificity values of 85.40% and 96.69%. Followed by, the ResNet-50 model has been more effective than the compared models by reaching the sensitivity and specificity values of 90% and 61%. Also, the method found by Halil et al. has exhibited reasonable results with sensitivity and specificity values of 90.82% and 92.68% correspondingly.


Download : Download high-res image (210KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Accuracy analysis of DBN with existing methods.

Followed by, the VGG-19 approach resulted in competing function the maximum sensitivity and specificity of 95% and 68%. Finally, the projected CNN-ResNet 101 approach has accomplished higher sensitivity and specificity values of 96.12% and 98.02%. The figure also portrayed that the ResNet-50 approach is said to be poor detection model which has accomplished an accuracy value of 75.50%. Likewise, the VGG-19 model has ended up with moderate accuracy of 81.20%. Moreover, the author deployed by Li et al. has showcased gradual results with accuracy value of 93.20%. On the other side, the technique used by Halil et al. has surpassed existing methods with an accuracy value of 93.39%. Additionally, the method applied by Yuan et al. has showcased better results with accuracy value of 93.40%. Followed by, the developer AI-Magni et al. has presented as competing function with a maximum accuracy of 94.03%. Finally, the proposed CNN-ResNet 101 model has achieved higher accuracy value of 94.85%.


Download : Download high-res image (277KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Comparison analysis of CNN-ResNet 101 model with existing methods.


Table 5. Comparison of CNN-ResNet 101 with state of art methods.

Methods	Sensitivity	Specificity	Accuracy
CNN-ResNet 101	96.12	98.02	94.85
VGG-19	95.00	68.00	81.20
ResNet-50	90.00	61.00	75.50
Yuan et al.	82.50	97.50	93.40
Li et al.	82.00	97.80	93.20
AI-Magni et al.	85.40	96.69	94.03
Halil et al.	90.82	92.68	93.39
4. Conclusion
This paper has developed secure intrusion detection with blockchain based data transmission with the classification model for CPS in the healthcare sector. The proposed model involves a series of processes namely data acquisition, DBN based intrusion detection, MSC based encryption, blockchain based data transmission, and ResNet 101 based classification. The performance validation of the presented model takes place on NSL-KDD 2015, CIDDS-001, and ISIC dataset. The simulation outcome indicated that the presented DBN model has achieved a detection rate of 98.95% and 98.94% on the applied NSL-KDD 2015 and CIDDS-001. Furthermore, the presented ResNet 101 model has demonstrated effective classification performance by achieving maximum sensitivity of 96.12%, specificity of 98.02%, and accuracy of 98.45%. The experimental outcome ensured that the proposed model is found to be a secure tool for CPS in the healthcare sector. In the future, the performance of the proposed models can be improvised by the use of hyper parameter tuning techniques and learning rate schedulers.