Abstract
Energy cloud systems continue to shape the future of the energy sector. The complexity of energy cloud systems stems from their widespread and distributed aspects such as renewable energy sources, energy storage, customers engagement, social media and the advancements in communication and computing technologies. The unprecedented large-scale growth of energy cloud systems requires a crucial and dramatic paradigm shift in managing and optimizing the available energy assets in order to satisfy the increasing customers’ requirements. This paper proposes and evaluates an edge computing based framework that aims to efficiently manage and optimize energy cloud systems while increasing their reliability, safety, and security. The proposed framework exploits the current expansion in computing capabilities of the edge computing and the Fifth Communication Generation (5G) technology. The evaluation of the proposed framework shows that an edge computing infrastructure improves the service efficiency by 22.6% compared with a cloud infrastructure. In addition, the latency is reduced by 69.1%. The proposed framework provides threat detection capability by using the edge layer as an extra layer for defense against energy cloud system attacks. However, this defense mechanism incurs 10.9% overhead and 9.6% extra delay per service request on average.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Energy cloud

Edge computing

5G

Energy cloud security

Reliability

1. Introduction
Energy cloud is a new energy platform that aims at replacing the current, centralized, static and “one-way hub-and-spoke” power grid. It relies on conventional energy generation resources like fossil fuel, hydro, or nuclear power plants with a dynamic and decentralized grid. The energy cloud is promoting new, clean, and distributed renewable energy resources such as solar, wind, heat power plants, energy storage, natural gas based generators and electrical vehicle charging infrastructure [24]. Many of the distributed energy resources (DERs) have showed an exponential growth in the past few years which is expected to continue in the near future. The advancement in the DERs is accompanied by more active and socially connected customers who have different energy management requirements and consumption patterns [23], [35], [36].

The old conventional customer-utilities relationship is going through a dramatic change. The one way relation, where a customer only consumes generated energy from the utility service providers, is changing to become a two ways interaction. The role of customers in the two ways interaction paradigm includes the consumption and generation of the energy. Additionally, customers sell the excessive generated energy to the power grid. The two ways interaction is driven by the emerging techniques like demand-side management [19], [32], smart metering [12], behind-the-meter energy management systems [1], and social media [10]. In addition, the extended customer engagement within the energy framework opens new frontiers for new services and products where customers are the main actors of these new services and products in residential areas [26]. One crucial aspect of the energy cloud is the unprecedented business opportunities that result from moving towards a full energy cloud framework. Energy cloud is estimated to create more than $1 trillion in added value through investment in new technologies and assets to the power grid by 2030 [24], [28]. Energy cloud technology comes with a great opportunity for utility providers to achieve a long time sought objective to efficiently manage and control their assets and daily operations. Achieving this goal will enable a higher return on investment and reduce the operating costs. Utilities are expected to support the investment of distributed energy resources and other supporting technologies that enable power grid reliability, users demand fulfillment, customers and assets safety, high level of security, and grid data protection.

Recently, edge computing emerged as a new computing paradigm that is expected to change how we are deploying large scale, distributed and data intensive services such as Internet of Things (IoT) and smart cities services [29], [31], [40]. Edge computing provides processing and storage capabilities for users of the services without relying on a centralized cloud system [8], [30], [33]. It offers many advantages over cloud computing making it more appealing for service providers to use edge resources. Edge computing presents new services and products that will create a new business model for both service providers and edge systems owners. This can be achieved through low network latency and the availability of processing resources in the edge computing. A new category of services and applications is emerging which is called the edge native applications. These applications and services will be optimized to harness the computing and storage benefits provided by the edge system in contrast to the cloud native applications [31], [39]. The availability and the distribution of edge computing infrastructure require a reliable communication system that can handle the communication and the data flow between the users (e.g. users devices like mobile phones and wearable devices), edge servers, service providers and the management and controlling entity. The Fifth Communication Generation (5G) is new wireless communication technologies that will be connecting billions of people, machines and devices. 5G will enable massive data bandwidth rates with very low latency. Edge computing is considered one of the basic enabling technologies for 5G. Other enabling technologies for 5G include Software Defined Networking (SDN) and the Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [17]. Edge computing and 5G are targeting large scale deployment of latency sensitive applications like Augmented Reality (AR) and Content Delivery Network (CDN) [2], [5], [16]. Energy cloud orchestration system requires a low latency, high bandwidth and context-aware applications. These requirements are provided by edge computing and 5G. The applications and services will be deployed in close proximity to the energy cloud system users (e.g. customers, DERs providers and utilities). This proximity alleviates the backhaul and core network delay [7], [37].

This paper aims to provide a novel integrated framework for energy cloud using the capabilities of edge computing and 5G. The proposed model supports reliable, efficient, cost effective, safe and secure energy cloud systems. The proposed framework addresses three core challenges in designing energy cloud system which are: (1) The highly physical distribution of the energy cloud components, (2) the large amount of data that needs to be exchanged between the components, and (3) the low latency requirements for exchanging and processing data within the energy cloud system. Data communication between energy cloud system components should be fast and secure. The current communication technologies (e.g. LTE and the internet backhaul) cannot match the required low latency and secure communication in energy cloud system. Exploiting 5G capabilities will help in reducing latency in the energy cloud network of networks model [15], [25].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed overview of the energy cloud systems, its components and the stat of the art of the enabling technologies. The proposed model is articulated in Section 3. The experiments and results are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper and presents a future work.

2. Related work
2.1. Energy cloud systems
Recently, the conventional one way power grid that is designed as a centralized power generation resources (e.g. power plants) is being transformed into a multi-ways network that consists of large scale installations of DERs. The new network of networks of energy systems around the globe has customers and DERs providers at the core of this emerging energy systems. In addition, metering technologies (both energy generation and storage) are being developed in an unprecedented pace and becoming essential components of today’s power grid [9], [27]. An energy cloud system provides a redefined energy sector platform that represents the future power grid where new products and business opportunities are promising. It relies on clean, decentralized and intelligent grid architecture. The transition from the old power grid infrastructure into the energy cloud platform will require the orchestration of its entities to achieve its objectives (e.g. reliability, safety and security). The energy cloud platform effectively addresses the current challenges within the energy sector where safety and cost concerns are continuously increasing [6], [18], [23]. Building an efficient energy cloud system is a complex process that includes multiple challenges which are:

•
Large scale of energy cloud system deployment, orchestration and management complexity: The large scale distribution of the energy cloud system components, especially the DERs, increases the complexity of system management. DERs, storage and utility providers are connected with each other using conventional networks (i.e. network of networks) that are shared with normal Internet traffic with no priority. This increases the latency of information exchange between different energy cloud components. Utility providers maintain a centralized datacenter system that will be used to process and store large amount of data collected from the energy cloud system components. Managing energy cloud system components requires an intensive orchestration efforts to coordinate the large number of elements in the energy cloud system [20].

•
Energy cloud users data security and privacy: The large amount of data generated by the energy cloud system requires its movement from the energy cloud system components (e.g. DERs) into processing (for instant decision making) and storage (for future needs) systems. Exchanging data between energy cloud system components uses conventional Internet networks. This increases the risk of critical data breach.

•
Customers engagement and inclusion: Energy cloud enables a customers-centric system where the customers have the possibility to contribute to their energy needs decision and provide the customers with the opportunity to generate their own energy and to sell the excessive energy back to the grid. Its also an efficient demand-side management system [32].

•
Regulations and Energy Policies Updates: The new energy cloud ecosystem will need to be supported by appropriate regulations and policies that define the interaction between utilities, DERs and consumers.

Energy cloud core objective is to provide a reliable, secure, safe, and cost effective service to the energy sector stakeholders (consumers, utilities and DERs providers). However, the widespread nature of energy cloud system components, the decentralized management, and the control of these systems are major challenges. An effective energy cloud components orchestration and integration will help in the revolutionizing of the energy sector into a full digitized and intelligent era. Fig. 1 shows the energy cloud system and its components.

2.2. Edge computing and 5G
With the widespread of latency- and bandwidth-sensitive mobile applications, it is crucial to develop new telecommunications standards that support high capacities (e.g., 1000x) to enable a massive number of connections with diverse requirements. Such new standards must be capable of serving large number of devices, especially mobile and wearable devices, with the best quality-of-experience (QoE) including highly crowded areas. The 5G standard improves data rates compared to 4G, and provides a viable solution to fulfill the aforementioned needs. The 5G promises a paradigm shift in telecommunication systems and services. This is achieved by focusing not only on providing high speed connections with higher data rates, but also in serving a large number of devices/users while maintaining a high QoE. 5G is capable of satisfying the resource requirements for the emerging mobile applications such as virtual and augmented reality, vehicular networks (VANETs), and the internet-of-things (IoT) applications. 5G supports emerging communications including machine-to-machine (M2M) communications with low cost, low latency, high bandwidth, and energy efficiency. The deployment of 5G-based systems, which is expected to be available by 2020, may require the integration of multiple new technologies to achieve its goals. Such technologies include edge comping, wireless networks virtualization, software defined systems/networks (SDNs) and network function virtualization (NFV). Also methodologies for resource manipulation and sensing as well as optimized allocation to achieve high performance and maximize the QoE of the end-users. Due to the non-linearity of the QoE model, the resource manipulation with solution provision within the context of SDN for mobile edge computing (MEC) devices should be solved concurrently so that the associated performance can be assessed and evaluated. The inclusion of MEC, SDN, and NFV, along with their possible support for 5G systems, is emerging as one of the highly active research areas that need improvements in many directions. One specific aspect of a great importance is the continuously increasing processing, caching and storage capabilities that are required by the emerging applications such as IoT and virtual reality.

Mobile and wearable wireless devices have been widely used and integrated within many applications and services [3], [22]. This fact leads the users to be increasingly dependent on their mobile devices in order to accomplish many tasks with different computing requirements. More complex and resource demanding tasks, that require high computational capacity and network bandwidth connectivity to cloud services, are added to the long list of tasks that can be accomplished using mobile devices [41]. The increasing number of users and devices (in many cases one user can have multiple mobile devices) will usually require to be always connected to the cloud services to accomplish diffident types of tasks. The cloud infrastructure scalability provides the required computing capacity to match the increased demands. However, network latency, reliability and the need for high bandwidth connections using different technologies such as cellular networks (e.g. 4G and LTE), Wi-Fi, Wi-MAX, etc., were the main challenge for the extension and adoption of such services by users [30]. Due to the large number of applications, the increasing demands, the imposed communication overheads, and the heterogeneity of wireless infrastructure, traditional communication solutions between mobile devices and cloud resources are becoming unacceptable [2].

Edge computing were introduced to address the latency and the networking issues of the cloud computing. It uses a reasonably sized computing resources (e.g. edge servers or edge data centers) that can be stationed in close proximity to the users and to have a direct communication with users’ mobile and wearable devices (e.g. edge devices). Resource-demanding tasks and services are offloaded to the edge servers from edge devices. The processing is carried out by edge servers instead of edge devices. This will greatly improve the lifetime of the edge devices battery while performing the required tasks. The edge servers are also connected to cloud services for a long-term storage and to process highly demanding tasks that cannot be handled by edge servers. Users should not be concerned about where exactly their tasks are being executed. Fig. 2 shows the edge computing system integration with the energy cloud system.

In this work, the capabilities of edge computing and 5G are used to solve the challenges in the development of efficient energy cloud system. The proposed framework enables the orchestration and management of energy cloud system components while using the 5G capabilities to provide a low latency and a high availability communication platform. In addition, it supports users’ data privacy and protection.


Download : Download high-res image (454KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Edge computing and energy cloud system integration.

3. Energy cloud deployment using edge computing and 5G
An envisioned large scale energy system cloud deployment cannot be achieved without a supporting infrastructure that enables an efficient communication between its components. This communication system should provide the ability to connect a large number of components such as smart meters, DERs and utilities with high speed communication links. The communication in the energy cloud system could use Wi-Fi links or cellular communication like 4G and LTE. Energy cloud network can be a part of a large scale smart city ecosystem where energy cloud services and products can be offered to the smart city citizens like any other services. Utility providers will need to setup large datacenters that are able to process and store the energy cloud system data. In a realistic energy cloud system services deployment, the smart meters, DERs and utilities will generate a large amount of data with different types, size, and rates. Transferring such data using the conventional Internet and backhaul network will be very challenging for many reasons. First, connecting millions of users, meters and sensors that generate a huge amount of data will overwhelm the current communication infrastructure. Second, the possibility of a high latency of data movement will cause a delay in the decision making process which is performed by a centralized data centers operated by the utilities. Finally, data privacy and security issues will be main concerns for costumers. To overcome these challenges, energy cloud system will require a high speed communication infrastructure and a closer processing capacity to the data sources instead of the centralized datacenters.

The proposed deployment for energy cloud system considers two new and promising technologies which are: edge computing and 5G. In the proposed energy cloud platform, edge servers will be distributed and installed in different locations that are close to the energy cloud stakeholders (e.g. the customers, DERs providers and utility providers). Fig. 2 illustrates how the energy cloud system components will be directly connected to edge servers that are installed at 5G base stations.

The initial installation of edge servers within the 4G and the LTE environment where proposed to be within the eNodeB base station [2]. The base station is capable of delivering processing, storage and caching services for all entities that can communicate with the eNodeB base station. This enhances the delivery of real-time services and creates new set of products offered by mobile service providers. Edge servers will be able to receive, process and store the energy cloud system components data. Low latency and high bandwidth applications are becoming more dominant right now, and they consume most of the available networking resources [31]. 4G and the LTE networking are expected to be insufficient to handle these demands with plethora of new and future applications. This justifies the need for the 5G technology in the proposed energy cloud platform.

Algorithm 2 explains the procedure for data exchange between the energy cloud system components and the edge server. It shows also the collaboration between edge servers and cloud updates. The objective of this algorithm is exploit the edge servers resources in order to provide the processing and the storage capabilities needed by the energy cloud entities.


Download : Download high-res image (104KB)
Download : Download full-size image
The proposed framework in Algorithm 2 works as follows: Each energy cloud entity  is associated with one edge server  that is responsible of processing its services and storage requests. The  will push a service or a storage request to the  using the ECE.Push() function in line 4 of the algorithm. The  then executes the service or the storage request. The  shares the request status with other edge servers using the ES.Share() method in line 6 of algorithm. The centralized cloud system gets updated with a system state periodically using the UpdateCloud() method in line 8.

The adoption of cloud services were always challenged by the fact of users losing the control over their data once its uploaded to the cloud. In a similar way, energy cloud system users will be concerned about the privacy of their data once they are connected directly to the cloud. Moving to edge computing does not serve in reducing the users fears from using smart cities services that are provided by the edge infrastructure [4]. Many efforts have been proposed to address the security and data privacy issues at the edge [11], [14], [42]. Other studies show how edge computing might serve as a privacy protection tool for IoT services [13]. The “Privacy Mediators” framework provides the means for addressing privacy requirements for IoT applications using edge computing (e.g. cloudlets) [13]. Privacy mediators are a specialized software components that can be plugged in edge servers to enforce and update privacy policies dynamically. The edge device is associated with one edge server that is responsible of protecting users data. Being closed to the edge devices and within the same control domain, edge servers are more trusted than the cloud [11], [38]. The proposed framework is extending its edge server cooperation to insure better data privacy and security by enabling a secure data transfer for users and secure data storage whenever is needed (given that edge devices are moving and communicating with different edge servers). Also, it provides a trusted communication channel for edge servers to exchange cyber threat information (CIT) sharing [21].

Algorithm 3 shows how the edge servers preserve user data security and privacy. It depicts how to enable privacy mediators at edge servers and the cooperation among edge servers to protect energy cloud users data.


Download : Download high-res image (130KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Algorithm 3 variable set includes  as the energy cloud entities,  as the privacy and security policies that are configures at the edge server. The  represents the requested service to be provisioned.  represents the set of edge servers in a cluster.  represents the CIT that is shared with other edge servers. Finally, the  represents the life time for the policies before they get updated. The algorithm works as follows: The energy cloud entities configure security and privacy policies within an edge server using the User. Inject(Policies) method in line 2 of Algorithm 3. These policies are valid for a certain time that is defined by the policies life time . Each edge server keeps checking and sharing any available CIT via the ESL.CIT flag in line 6 of the algorithm. If the flag is , the  sharing process will start, and the flag  will be changed to  which requires the edge device to push new policies. The policies have a predetermine life time defined in . When the  is greater than or equal to the , the flag  will be changed to  which requires the edge device to push new policies.

4. Experimental evaluation and results
The objective of the experimental evaluation is to measure how edge servers can improve the latency and the number of service requests in an energy cloud system compared to cloud only framework. For the evaluation, an extended version of the EdgeCloudSim simulation platform [34] is used. EdgeCloudSim simulation tool is a discrete event simulation platform that includes the required components of an edge computing with realistic load scenarios for an energy cloud system. The energy cloud entities (DERs) request different type of services and storage from edge servers. The EdgeCloudSim tool is extended to handle the 5G communication scenario that is used in the evaluation. An edge cloud entity is able to communicate with edge servers using the available 5G network where a 5G base station hosts edge servers. Any edge server can communicate with other edge servers and with different energy cloud entities using 5G. Additionally, an edge server can communicate with cloud datacenters through a backhaul network.

4.1. Experiments setup and evaluations parameters
The experiments consist of different number of servers (ranged from 5 to 25 servers) that are connected to one cloud datacenter. The system provides different processing and storage services that might be requested by any of the energy cloud entities. Energy cloud entities and edge servers are distributed in the simulation environment. Each energy cloud entity can request different services and generate different sizes and types of data. The proposed system is evaluated using different numbers of edge servers and user requests in terms of service latency and the percentage of completed requests by edge servers and/or cloud datacenters. Each energy cloud entity is connected to one edge server. Each energy cloud entity request is processed as described in algorithm 2. Table 1 presents the simulations parameters and their values. The selected simulation values represent a city with up to 5000 users.


Table 1. Simulation parameters.

Simulation parameter	Value (s)
Number of users	5000
Number of service requests per user	1, 2, 3
Communication range	500 m
Simulation time	1000 s
Communication type	5G (NR base stations (gNBs))
Number of edge servers per cluster	5, 10, 15, 20, 25
Simulation area	2000 m by 2000 m
4.2. Results and discussion
The simulation starts by defining and building the experiments based on the simulation parameters detailed in Table 1. Some of the parameters, like the area, are fixed for all experiments. Other parameters, such as the number of edge servers deployed, vary from one experiment to another. The maximum number of requests per user is set to be 50 requests during an experiment time. To evaluate how edge servers improve the reliability of energy cloud systems, two aspects were considered which are: the percentage of the service requests completed by edge servers and the average delay to complete each service request.

Fig. 4 shows the percentage of completed requests by the cloud using an edge only scenario and an edge collaboration with 10 servers. The cloud only scenario has no edge servers and hence, the entire traffic will be sent to the cloud using the 5G base station, and then using the backhaul network, it will be sent to the centralized data center. Edge servers have two possible scenarios: either independent edge servers or collaborated edge servers were edge servers exchange information regarding energy cloud entities. The experiments were conducted using different workload intensity (5k, 10k, 15k, 20k and 25k) requests. As shown in the figure, the number of completed requests has increased by 16% in the edge only case and by 22.7% in the edge collaboration scenario.

The impact of increasing the number of edge servers on the system efficiency is shown in Fig. 5. The figure shows five different edge server numbers (5, 10, 15, 20 and 25) with 25k requests. The experiments consider the two edge scenarios: with collaboration and without. As shown in the figure, increasing the number of edge servers improves the system performance (the percentage of completed requests) by 15.6% in the case of edge only, and by 8.8% in case of edge collaboration.


Download : Download high-res image (373KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Percentage of completed tasks using 10 edge servers.

The next experiment considers different workload intensity (5k, 10k, 15k, 20k and 25k) requests to calculate the total processing time for each request. The total time includes the communication and processing time per request. Fig. 6 demonstrates that using both cases of edge servers decreases the total processing time per request by 69.1%.


Download : Download high-res image (288KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Percentage of completed requests using different number of edge servers and 25k requests.

The evaluation of the average delay time to complete a service request when increasing the number of edge servers without collaboration is shown in Fig. 7. The number of edge servers are: 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25. The number of requests is 5k, 10k, 15k, 20k and 25k. Results show that for a highly dense environment (25k requests), increasing the number of edge servers from 5 to 25 servers reduces the delay per request by 56.6% on average.


Download : Download high-res image (230KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Processing time per request (ms) using 10 edge servers.

The proposed framework impact on the communication latency in the 3 cases is evaluated while considering different workload intensity (5k, 10k, 15k, 20k and 25k). The communication time percentage from the total time to complete a request is shown in Fig. 9. The percentage of the communication time per request is reduced by 65.1% compared to the cloud only case. Also, it improves the latency by 31.8% in the case of high intensity workload.


Download : Download high-res image (134KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Average delay (ms) with edge collaboration.

To evaluate the proposed security framework impact on the energy cloud system performance, the average service delay with and without the proposed security measures are considered. Additionally, the percentage of the completed requests with different workload intensity (5k, 10k, 15k, 20k and 25k) using 10 edge servers are studied. Fig. 10 shows the impact of the proposed security solution on the percentage of the completed service requests with different policies life time . On average, the overhead of the security solution is about 10.9%. Reducing the value of  adds an extra overhead on the system resources and results in more service requests to be dropped. Fig. 11 shows the impact of the security solution on the average delay per request with different number of edge servers. The security solution overhead for the energy cloud system results in 9.6% extra delay.


Download : Download high-res image (286KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Communication time percentage from the total time.

5. Conclusions and future work
A new framework for improving the management of the emerging energy cloud system is proposed. The framework aimed at increasing the energy cloud system efficiency, safety and security by using the edge computing system with the support of 5G network. It has been showed that the edge servers collaboration improves the ability to serve more energy cloud entities requests when compared to a cloud only solution. Moreover, privacy mediators that enable sharing of cyber threat information were used to solve data privacy and security. The proposed energy cloud framework was evaluated using the EdgeCloudSim simulation environment. The experimental evaluations showed that edge servers improve the management and the performance of energy cloud systems. As a future work, the framework needs to be extended to study the impact of using SDN and NFV in a large scale energy cloud system that spans multiple cities and controlled by multiple energy producers. This will enable a county size setup for energy cloud systems.

