Abstract
Despite the rapid development of mobile-based Augmented Reality (AR) apps, little is yet known about how we can facilitate immersion and learning in AR contexts. This study investigated the hypothesis that greater coupling between physical space and the narrative of the AR learning activity can result in increased levels of immersion and students’ conceptual learning gains. Prior studies investigating the coupling effect are limited, inconclusive and primarily focused on adult populations. The present study investigated the effects of two types of coupling (strong/loose) on middle school students’ experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains, in the context of a narrative-based AR science education intervention. Forty-five middle school students participated in this study: Students in Condition 1 (n = 22) participated in an AR activity with strong coupling between narrative and the physical space, while students in Condition 2 (n = 23) participated in a loose coupling version of the activity. The data corpus consisted of baseline data, questionnaires investigating students’ immersion and conceptual learning gains, and post-activity interviews. Findings showed higher conceptual learning gains and increased immersion for the students participating in the strong coupling condition than for the students in the loose coupling condition. We discuss these findings and their implications, and we highlight questions for future research.

Previous
Next 
Keywords
Mobile-based AR apps

Semantic coupling

Immersion

Learning

Narrative

Locality

1. Introduction
During the past decade, we have witnessed a surge of interest in the development of mobile-based Augmented Reality (AR) apps, due to burgeoning advances in mobile and communication technologies (Avouris and Yiannoutsou, 2012; Bronack, 2011). Narrative-based AR apps constitute a particular kind of mobile-based apps, which aim at augmenting specific environments with digital narratives that unfold in the real space, often enhanced with gamification aspects (Colás et al., 2016; Karapanos et al., 2012; Rueb, 2008). Narrative-based AR apps are largely embraced in the fields of gaming and education, due to their affordances to provoke increased levels of immersion, as they can provide users with highly-engaging narrative-based experiences that are situated in the real world (e.g., Dede, 2009; Bunting et al., 2012).

Immersion is a powerful experience and is widely discussed in the literature of mobile-based AR apps as an important experience of interaction (Georgiou and Kyza, 2017a; McCall et al., 2011; Wagner et al., 2009; Reid et al., 2005, 2005). Immersion is defined as a gradated process of cognitive and emotional involvement (Brown and Cairns, 2004; Cheng et al., 2015; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017a), which can result to “the participant's suspension of disbelief that she or he is ‘inside’ a digitally enhanced setting” (Dede, 2009, p.66). Researchers also argue that high levels of immersion can define the extent of learning around an AR experience (Bressler and Bodzin, 2013; Dunleavy et al., 2009; Georgiou and Kyza, 2018, 2017b). However, despite such reports, little is yet known about the underlying mechanisms, which can contribute to more engaging narrative-based AR activities (Kyza and Georgiou, 2019a, b; Wetzel et al. (2011); Weber and Dickinson, 2018), leading to higher levels of immersion and learning.

A hypothesized contributor to users’ immersion, is semantic coupling, defined as the degree of connection between the physical space and the digital narrative (Reid et al., 2005). Semantic coupling in mobile-based AR activities is an aspect of great significance, given that mobile-based AR is an inherently spatial medium (Rosenbaum et al., 2007) as it is grounded on the combination and blending of the virtual (digital narrative) with the real world (physical environment). According to Dunleavy and Dede (2014) the way a mobile-based AR activity is interweaved with the physical environment is one of the more critical design decisions reported in the literature. They further argue that how the physical environment is used and balanced within mobile-based AR educational activities has multiple cascading effects on learning objectives and outcomes, as well as on the overall learning experience. However, despite these arguments, little is yet known about the effects of semantic coupling on experienced immersion and subsequent learning.

According to Reid (2008) a stronger coupling between the digital narrative and the physical space may result in increased levels of experienced immersion. However, other empirical studies present mixed findings (Karapanos et al., 2012) or even support that loose forms of coupling, between the digital narrative and the real world, may be more beneficial than strong coupling for users’ immersion (Rossitto et al., 2016). Researchers also argue that there is a lack of research systematically examining this coupling phenomenon (Karapanos et al., 2012). Overall, evidence on the topic is still inconclusive, while existing empirical studies focus on adult populations and neglect the learning dimension, as these studies did not pursue questions of interest to learning.

The exploration of the coupling phenomenon's effects on experienced immersion and mobile-based AR learning is motivated by two gaps observed in the educational research and industry. Firstly, an increasing corpus of educational reviews highlights that prior research is focused on qualitative and descriptive accounts of how the AR learning process unfolds during field trials or on comparisons of AR learning with conventional or low-tech learning environments (Akçayır and Akçayır, 2017; Bacca et al., 2014; Cheng and Tsai, 2013; Ibáñez and Delgado-Kloos, 2018). There is a general lack of empirical studies investigating how the learning experience occurs in contexts of varying instructional designs (e.g., mobile-based activities of low or high semantic coupling), which in turn could inform the successful development of future AR-based learning environments (Cheng and Tsai, 2013; Ibáñez and Delgado-Kloos, 2018; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017b; Kyza and Georgiou, 2019b). According to Harley et al. (2018), beyond knowing whether mobile-based AR activities provide additive educational value when compared to alternative learning activities, we should also investigate the instructional designs best suited to leveraging the affordances of AR technologies. Secondly, while there is an increasing corpus of studies investigating the learning effectiveness of mobile-based AR, there is a paucity of empirical research exploring the role that positive emotional experiences, such as immersion, can play in supporting learning (Wu et al., 2013; Poitras et al., 2019). As Harley et al. (2016) posit, according to Pekrun and Perry (2014) “there is a lack of theory-driven empirical research that evaluates outcomes of AR applications with the purpose of iteratively improving their design guidelines to improve learning outcomes by fostering positive emotions, which are known to predict learning outcomes” (p. 361).

Overall, there is a need for comprehensive evaluation of mobile-based AR instructional designs grounded in the theoretical frameworks of learning and engagement (Harley et al., 2019; Harley et al., 2016). Acknowledging these recommendations, this study compares two instructional designs of mobile-based AR activities, to investigate the effects of semantic coupling on students’ immersion and learning. In particular, we examine the effects of two types of coupling (strong/loose) on middle school students’ experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains, in the context of a narrative-based AR intervention for learning science. Forty-five middle school students participated in this study: Students in Condition 1 (n = 22) participated in an AR activity with strong coupling between narrative and the physical space, while students in Condition 2 (n = 23) participated in a loose coupling version of the activity. The data corpus consisted of baseline data, questionnaires investigating students’ immersion and learning gains, and post-activity interviews. Before providing further information on the methodological aspects as well as on the empirical findings derived, we present the theoretical background, the research hypotheses as well as a prior study (Study 1) we have conducted guiding the present work.

2. Theoretical background
2.1. Defining immersion for learning in mobile-based AR apps
Immersion is a popular term in the field of Augmented Reality (AR). Kim (2013) points out that while immersion in VR apps and traditional digital games is based on sensorial affordances, immersion in mobile-based AR apps is mostly based on contextual affordances. In particular, mobile-based AR apps are assumed to enhance immersion due to a set of unique, context-related characteristics, as they: (a) employ mobile and location-based interfaces, (b) combine physical and digital spaces, thus creating blended spaces, (c) extend the activity outside the limits of traditional digital space -the screen- into the physical space, and (d) afford rich interactions, especially interactions with the physical world and with virtual elements augmenting it (De Souza E Silva and Delacruz, 2006; Dunleavy et al., 2009).

The highest levels of immersion is comprised by the optimal states of “flow” – a sense of full absorption in the AR activity (Czikszentmihalyi, 1990; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017a) – and “presence” – a sense of feeling surrounded by a blended, yet realistic physical/virtual environment (Cheng and Tsai, 2013; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017a). According to Cabiria (2012), when highly immersed, “students quickly enter a state of suspended disbelief, accept the blended real and digital environment, give their attention over to it, and engage in the variety of options available to them to access content related to the topic being addressed” (p. 240).

Taking into account their immersive affordances, narrative-based AR apps are, therefore, argued to provide greater opportunities to engage students in transformative ways of learning (Dede, 2009; Dunleavy et al., 2009; Squire and Jan, 2007). Immersion is also defined as one of the main driving forces behind students’ learning in such technology-rich AR-based educational environments (Georgiou and Kyza, 2017a). Dede (2009) states that immersion can enhance learning in science in, at least, three ways, by supporting: (a) multiple and complementary insights of complex scientific phenomena, (b) situated learning, and (c) the transfer of skills in real world situations. Studies also provide evidence that heightened levels of immersion in digitally-enhanced educational environments (Cheng et al., 2017; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017b, c, 2018; Rowe et al., 2011; Schrader and Bastiaens, 2012) can promote student learning.

However, high levels of immersion in mobile-based digital activities should not always be taken for granted, as immersion in the context of mobile-based AR apps is often difficult to achieve and maintain (McCall et al., 2011). As several researchers report, various challenges might prevent users’ total immersion, such as external distractions (e.g., noises or physical barriers), GPS errors and hardware problems, or weather-related adversities, such as the screen being too bright in outdoors activities (Cheng and Tsai, 2013; Dunleavy et al., 2009; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017b; Efstathiou et al., 2018; Kyza et al., 2019; Nilsson and Svingby, 2009). Despite these challenges, researchers emphasize that the successful blending between the physical and the digital space can produce digitally enhanced spaces capable to induce high levels of immersion (Benford et al., 2011; Reid, 2008).

2.2. Immersion for semantic coupling
Reid et al. (2005) were the first ones to argue that the semantic coupling between the physical space and the narrative may affect the external realism of the narrative, resulting in different levels of immersion in narrative-based mobile apps. Reid et al. (2005) distinguish between three “levels of significance to a place”: (a) Arbitrary linkage, (b) Physicality, and (c) Particular location. At the first level (Arbitrary linkage), there is no connection between the physical space and the mediated experience. At the Physicality level “there are certain features of a place that are significant, but the actual geography is not important”, and at the “Particular location” level “the actual location and physical artifacts in a place are significant and meaningful” (Reid et al., p. 28) to the experience. Based on this distinction, Karapanos et al. (2012) propose that, from a design perspective, this may result in (a) location-aware narratives with a strong coupling, as they are enacted at the original location that is directly related to the narrative, and (b) location-aware narratives with a loose coupling, as they are enacted at a location that simply induces the same atmosphere with the narrative.

Likewise, Wetzel et al. (2011) also discuss that mobile-based AR apps can be distinguished into (a) loosely-coupled and (b) contextual. According to them, when loosely-coupled, mobile-based AR apps are enacted without, or with little relation to a given location; as such they can be enacted at various locations. In contrast, contextual, mobile-based apps have a strong relation to the location they are enacted, and as such, are typically hard to move to different locations. Of course, while it is easier to develop loosely-coupled mobile-based AR apps, which can be enacted almost anywhere, a pending question is which one of the two forms can actually lead to higher levels of experienced immersion.

Existing studies, primarily from the Human-Computer Interaction field, investigating the coupling phenomenon are relatively limited. Table 1 presents the empirical studies on the topic and provides an overview of the research scope, type of locative media and location aware narratives used, methods (e.g., sample, and data collection) and main findings.


Table 1. Overview of research providing empirical evidence on semantic coupling.

Authors	Scope of study & Evidence about learning	Type of locative media & Location aware narratives	Methods [Sample & Data collection]	Relevant findings
Reid et al., 2005b	UX study: Investigated the factors contributing to users’ experienced immersion.
Evidence about learning: The study did not investigate learning.	“Riot!1831”: Situation-based interactive drama, which was based on the actual riots that took place in a public square in Bristol, England in 1831, employing a location-aware mobile app.	Log data and post-activity survey data were collected from 700 participants (both adults and children). Thirty interviews and four in-depth ethnographic case studies were also conducted.	Participants’ immersion was highly increased during those “magic moments”, where there was an unexpected strong coupling between the physical world and the narrative events unfolded in the virtual space.
Reid, 2008
Colás et al., 2016	UX study: Focus on user experience (exploration mode, story comprehension, and immersion) in relation to narrative design, physical space and interaction.
Evidence about learning: The study did not investigate learning.	YoWay: A locative narrative app presenting three intertwined historical fiction cases with strong coupling between the Glòries area of Barcelona and the virtual narrative representation of Glòries in 1919.	Log data and post-activity survey data were collected from 20 adult participants.	Participants achieved a good understanding of the story and engaged with the experience. They achieved a medium-high sense of immersion, supporting the effectiveness of the strong coupling.
Ballagas et al., 2008	UX study: Focus on a formative evaluation of an advance prototype of a mobile pervasive game prior to its release.
Εvidence about learning: Even though the game aimed at providing historical information, the study did not have a clear focus on learning, nor did it evaluate the users’ learning gains.	REXplorer: A mobile, pervasive game designed for tourists. The game creates player encounters with spirits of historical figures that are associated with significant buildings, to inform players about the history of Regensburg.	Log data, videotaped data of the gaming sessions and focus group data were collected from 18 adult participants.	The integration of real-world landmarks into the game's narrative added authenticity to the game play that contributed to the players’ immersion, as well as to the development of connections between the monuments and the historical information. While most participants found the information presented interesting, others reported that the content did not contain enough information about the city.
Paay et al., 2008	UX study: Obtained feedback on user experience with a prototype system of a mobile location-based app.
Evidence about learning: The study did not investigate learning.	Who Killed Hanne Holmgaard: A prototype system of a mobile location-based app, which uses physical surroundings and physical props as a backdrop for storytelling, as the users move around the urban environment of Aalborg, Denmark.	Video recordings, in-situ observations and post-activity interviews were collected from five pairs of adult participants.	The use of landmarks from the physical surroundings tied into the storyline; the use of physical props added tangible, playful and at the same time realistic aspects to the immersive experience.
Karapanos et al. (2012)	Quasi-experimental study: Compared the immersive experience in the context of a location-aware narrative, enacted at three locations: (a) the original location which contained physical cues from the narrative world, (b) a different location which portrayed a similar atmosphere, and (c) a location with neither physical cues nor a similar atmosphere.
Evidence about learning: The study did not investigate learning.	iLand: A location-aware video narrative aiming at exposing the rich oral culture and tradition in the island of Madeira. The same location-aware video narrative was deployed in all three conditions:
(a)
original location condition,

(b)
same atmosphere condition and (c) control condition.

Data were collected via a post-activity survey consisting of measures of narrative immersion, presence, affect and imaginative empathy. A subset (16 out of the 45) of the tourist participants were also interviewed.	The condition with the highest coupling between the storyline and the actual location had higher levels of narrative-based immersion; however, there were no statistically significant differences regarding feelings of presence between the three conditions.
Rossitto et al. (2016)	UX study: Focus on user experience (e.g. engagement and interaction with the narrative and the physical space) during a location-based interactive drama.
Evidence about learning: The study did not investigate learning.	Maryam: An interactive audio drama facilitated by a location-based application. The design of the mobile drama was characterized by loose coupling between the locative media and the physical space.	A total of 45 adult participants were observed while they walked around to experience the play, and 12 of them were interviewed after the activity.	The loose coupling between mobile media and physical places resulted in creative imagination and open interpretation of
the potential interrelations between the digital narrative and the physical world. Participants’ efforts to interweave place and locative media resulted in a highly immersive experience.
As Table 1 shows only seven studies provided empirical findings related to the coupling phenomenon. Six of these studies have the form of user-experience (UX) studies focusing on the evaluation of various location-aware mobile apps, as these were perceived by the users. In their vast majority these studies provide empirical evidence supporting that a strong semantic coupling between the digital narrative and the physical world can result in highly immersive experiences (Ballagas et al., 2008; Colás et al., 2016; Paay et al., 2008; Reid et al., 2005b; Reid, 2008).

More specifically, the findings of these studies suggest that users’ immersion is highly increased during moments of strong coupling between the events in the narrative plot, as it unfolds in the virtual space, and the physical world. As argued by Reid et al. (2005), during these moments of high immersion “the senses are heightened to the coincidence of the event and it feels almost supernatural, as if events in the virtual world have somehow moved across into the physical world” (p. 291). In another UX study, Rossitto et al. (2016) present an evaluation of a location-based AR drama activity with 45 tourists. According to their findings, even though the narrative of the activity was loosely-coupled in relation to the physical location where it unfolded, the users were able to imagine possible ways for interweaving the story with the place. Based on these findings, Rossito et al. (2016) conclude that this process of interpretation and sense-making between the narrative and the space can result in a highly immersive experience, even during this loosely-coupled activity.

Beyond the aforementioned UX studies, only one study was identified as examining the coupling phenomenon via a quasi-experimental study more systematically. In particular, Karapanos et al. (2012) compare the extent of immersion and presence of 45 tourists using location-aware narratives at three locations, as follows: (a) the original location which contained physical cues from the narrative world, (b) a different location which portrayed a similar atmosphere, and (c) a location with neither physical cues nor a similar atmosphere. According to their findings, the condition with the highest coupling between the storyline and the actual location, supported higher levels of narrative-based immersion; however, Karapanos et al. (2012) did not find statistically significant differences regarding the participants’ feelings of presence between the three conditions. They explained this finding by pointing to the methodological limitations of the study, such as the use of a non-standardized scale with a single-item for measuring presence, or the short (3 min) duration of the narrative-based activity.

Overall, the overview of the empirical studies resulted in mixed findings about the evidence basis of the relation of semantic coupling to users’ immersion. Furthermore, all identified empirical studies focused on the evaluation of location-aware narratives with adult populations, mainly tourists, in the context of informing them about the history of a monument or a place, in a playful manner. Based on our literature review, we have not found any empirical studies investigating the coupling phenomenon in the context of narrative-based AR activities for learning.

3. Research hypotheses
Taking into account that existing evidence on how semantic coupling influences immersion is inconclusive, and is primarily focused on location-aware narratives for adult populations, the present study compares the effects of two types of semantic coupling (strong/loose) on middle school students’ experienced immersion and learning, in the context of a narrative-based AR intervention for learning in science. In particular, this study formulated and investigated two research hypotheses, as follows:

3.1. Immersion hypothesis (H1)
Reid et al. (2005), were the first who proposed that the semantic coupling between the physical space and the virtual narrative may affect experienced immersion, arguing in favor of a strong semantic coupling when designing a location-based mobile activity. While this argument has not received systematic evaluation, subsequent UX studies focusing on the design and evaluation of various location-aware mobile apps, have suggested that the integration of real cues related to the virtual narrative, such as, for instance, real objects and landmarks, may result in a stronger coupling between the virtual and physical world, which in turn may increase users’ immersion (e.g., Ballagas et al., 2008; Paay et al., 2008; Reid, 2008). These findings can be interpreted via the lens of the embodied cognition theory, as the use of real objects for achieving a stronger coupling, may provide multiple opportunities for embodied interactions, which in turn can induce highly immersive experiences. Existing research has supported, for instance, that the ability to interact and to modify the environment, can create a sense of “doing there” in a given digitally-enhanced space, and this has been indicated as a key feature of highly immersive experiences (Floridi, 2005; IJsselsteijn and Riva, 2003; Seegert, 2009). Spagnolli and Gamberini (2005) contended that immersive affordances are associated with the affordances of acting in and interacting with the surrounding environment, also highlighting the crucial role of the available material resources. Sheridan (1992) and Benyon (2012) pointed out that the users’ ability to modify the environment could be considered as a determinant for a highly immersive experience. At the same time, Reid et al. (2005) have observed that the use of landmarks and physical objects related to the virtual narrative, can provoke a more unified hybrid experience, by bridging the virtual and the physical world in location-aware mobile apps, thus inducing higher immersion. Based on these arguments, as part of this study, we hypothesized that the greater coupling between physical space and the narrative of the AR learning activity will result to increased levels of immersion (H1).

3.2. Learning hypothesis (H2)
The embodied cognition theory and, in particular, embodied learning approaches may also provide support on the potential pedagogical value of strong-coupling location-aware mobile activities, grounded in the integration of real objects and physical cues. Firstly, embodied interactions corresponding to and related to certain educational concepts allow, for instance, the contextualization of abstract ideas in physical experiences, which facilitate the development of mental representations of the concepts being studied (Alibali and Nathan, 2012; Bujak et al., 2013). In addition, embodied interactions support students’ multimodal learning in the context of psychomotor activities, thus allowing deeper levels of processing the educational content (Anastopoulou et al., 2011). On a different note, embodied interactions can allow students to reduce their cognitive load, leaving more cognitive capacity for other activities or cognitive processes (Sweller, 1988). As argued by Antle et al. (2009), this idea relates to “how children exploit physical action to dynamically offload parts of mental operations to physical action in the environment” (p. 29). Finally, research has supported that learning can be enhanced by spatially anchoring virtual content to physical locations and objects (Bujak et al., 2013). In particular, research has found that memories are registered in connection with a context (Matassa and Rapp, 2015), and as such, memory retrieval and learning are enhanced when information is associated with physical locations (Bujak et al., 2013). Based on these arguments, as part of this study, we hypothesized that greater coupling between physical space and the narrative of the AR learning activity will result to higher conceptual learning gains, due to the increased affordances for embodied interaction in the strongly-coupled AR activity (H2).

4. Study 1
Both hypotheses, as presented in the previous section, had emerged in the context of a prior study (Study 1), in which we investigated the factors affecting immersion during a narrative-based AR intervention for environmental science learning. This study was motivated by the lack of research on the design of narrative-based AR activities which can successfully promote students' immersion and learning. As part of this prior work, which is reported elsewhere (Georgiou and Kyza, 2017b), we conducted a design-based research study with 11th grade students.

4.1. Methods
The study was comprised of two design iterations during which students (n1=18, n2=10) used a context-aware AR app during a collaborative, environmental science problem-solving activity at a local lake. Data were collected during and after the AR activity at both implementation rounds. In particular, each pair's discussions were audio-recorded through a seamlessly integrated recorder within the AR location-aware application employed, while students’ history of actions, such as time spent on each activity during the intervention, were captured in a log file.

These data were analyzed according to a coding scheme adapted from Nilsson and Svingby (2009), in order to classify students’ discourse around their learning actions during the collaborative location-based AR activity. In addition, data were also collected from students’ reports of their own experiences, right after the learning activity. The latter were collected during two 90-min group interviews, using the nominal group technique (MacPhail, 2001). According to this technique, students were initially asked to individually write down and justify their viewpoints regarding their learning experience during the location-based AR activity (likes, dislikes, challenges, engaging and disengaging aspects). Students were, then, asked to share their ideas with the group; the interviews concluded with a debriefing discussion. In this way, individual input from all group members was obtained while also having access to richer discussions resulting from group interaction on the topic. These data were analyzed to identify main themes relating to students’ immersive experience, using a thematic analysis approach (Attride-Stirling, 2001).

4.2. Findings
As part of the first iteration, the students (n = 18) worked in pairs employing a loosely-coupled version of the AR activity, in which they collected data from several AR hotspots placed randomly around a lake; the hotspots were not enriched with any physical objects. By the end of the activity, when the students were asked to report their immersive experience during the group interview, their evaluation of this experience was mostly negative. Among others, the students attributed their low immersion to a set of locality-related factors. In particular, the students noticed the loosely-coupled nature of the AR activity and highlighted the need for greater coupling between the physical and the virtual world, through the combination of both digital and real artifacts. According to their statements, they would have preferred to follow a more challenging, yet meaningful path of inquiry, during which the hotspots would be more intertwined with the physical space. Finally, the analysis of students’ discourse during the activity indicated that the students were mostly engaged with off-task discussions and, as such, most of the student pairs did not manage to reach an evidence-based explanation regarding the environmental problem they were asked to solve.

Considering these findings, a key goal of the redesign effort was to integrate the physical and virtual aspects of the activity as best as possible, in order to engage the students with both the physical and the virtual world. After the implementation of the revised version of the location-based AR activity with a second cohort of students (n = 10), students reported that they had the opportunity to get immersed and learn about the lake's ecosystem. Students attributed these statements to the fact they had the opportunity to test the quality of the lake water to examine whether water contamination may be contributing to the problem they were trying to solve. In addition, more experiential activities were added, requiring students to collect primary data from the physical environment. For instance, in addition to collecting data from digital sources, students were asked to collect data by interacting with the real objects and real-life props, which were placed in the natural environment (e.g., artificial bird nest with duck egg shells, pesticide containers, etc.). The students acknowledged the strongly-coupled nature of the revised activity without prompting, stating that the use of artifacts and real-life props enhanced their immersive experience, as they helped create connections between the virtual and the real world. Finally, the analysis of students’ discourse during the activity indicated that students were more engaged with problem-solving practices, which in turn allowed them to successfully reach evidence-based conclusions regarding the environmental problem they were asked to solve.

5. Conclusions
Overall, the findings of this design-based study, provided preliminary evidence that semantic coupling can affect students’ immersion as well as students’ learning (i.e. problem-solving, explanation building). Based on this study, it also seems that the students were able to perceive the coupling phenomenon (low versus high) without a priori prompting and gave explanations on how it can affect their experienced immersion. Due to these findings, we decided to avoid a conventional manipulation check, which would intrude with, and alter, the actual experimental procedure as outlined in the present study. Several researchers (i.e. Hauser et al., 2018; Sigall and Mills, 1998; Spencer et al., 2005) argue that a conventional manipulation check (e.g., a verbal measurement) can disrupt the flow of the events or initiate new processes that would otherwise not occur in a given experimental study. Instead, these researchers suggest that manipulation checks should take place in separate experiments or studies with different samples. As a result, Study 1 served as a manipulation check which also helped us specify our research hypotheses.

6. Methodology
The next paragraphs present the research design for the investigation of our research hypotheses within the context of the present experimental study. The study employs a mixed methods design (Creswell and Clark, 2007) and is grounded on an explanatory sequential design composed of two phases. During the first phase, we adopted a two-group experimental design, which included two groups of middle school age students. Εach group of students was randomly assigned to one of two semantic coupling conditions (Condition 1: Strongly-coupled AR educational activity, Condition 2: Loosely-coupled AR educational activity) to investigate students’ experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains per condition, as well as their potential relationship. During the second phase of the study we collected qualitative data to better understand the factors affecting students’ immersion, in terms of flow and presence, in each one of the two conditions.

6.1. Participants
Fifty-five (55) middle school students, who were enrolled in a summer camp at a public university in Cyprus, participated in this study. Data from ten students were removed from the corpus because students missed key activities; therefore, the final sample included data from 45 students. Students were randomly assigned to each condition. Condition 1 had 22 students (13 boys, 59.1%, mean age=12.3 years) and Condition 2 had 23 students (12 boys, 52.2%, mean age=11.7); there was no statistically significant difference is students’ age between the two conditions (Z=−1.50, p=.135) nor in the baseline assessment, which evaluated students’ attitudes towards tablets and their interest in science (see section “6.1 Setting the baseline” for information). Permission was provided by the university authorities to conduct this research study during the university summer club, given that the students’ parents and legal guardians would provide written informed consent; these were indeed obtained from all legal guardians.

6.2. Intervention
Students in both conditions used the “Mysterious disease” AR activity, which took place at one of the university buildings. The AR activity was a narrative-driven, 45-min investigation running on Android tablets with a WIFI connection. Students were randomly divided in groups of two or three and were assigned the task to collaboratively investigate a case about the outburst of a mysterious disease at the university. The pedagogical goal of the AR activity was to engage students in an explanation-building process about the problem-based case, and support students’ understanding of scientific concepts related to the nature of microbes (i.e. types, characteristics, etc.) and the transmission of pathogens. According to the narrative, the mysterious disease was caused by a massive food poisoning due to insufficient adherence to food safety procedures at the university cafeteria. Before the enactment of the intervention the students also attended a 15-min presentation, which introduced them to the problem-based case on the outburst of a mysterious disease at the university. Furthermore, as part of the presentation, a set of instructions about the functionality of the AR activity was presented, to familiarize students with the notion of the Quick Response (QR) codes.

The activity was based on vision-based AR, as it overlaid digital media to learners after they pointed the camera of their mobile device at QR codes (Dunleavy and Dede, 2014). Upon the activation of each QR code, students had access to video-based characters (i.e. university nurse, professor of microbiology, health services officer), whο provided them with access to information on different aspects of the topic, including relevant evidence (Fig. 1). To promote the active involvement of all students during the activity, we assigned a role to each member of the groups: the Navigator was in charge of the tablet for activating the QR codes and retrieving their content, while the Reporter was responsible for keeping notes (in the case of groups of three, two students served as Reporters). Roles were reversed after the activation of each QR code.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (267KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. QR code enactment with a virtual character providing information to the students on the topic.

The narrative-based AR activity took advantage of mobile technology and QR codes to counter-act several socio-material constraints reported in prior research. First, as the activity took place during the summer period, it was enacted inside the university building to minimize the impact of adversities related to the weather (i.e. high temperatures), or the glare of the screen due to intense sunlight (e.g., Cheng and Tsai, 2013; Efstathiou et al., 2018; Georgiou and Kyza, 2017b; Kyza et al., 2019; Nilsson and Svingby, 2009). Second, as the Global Positioning System (GPS) performs poorly inside buildings, which in turn causes navigation errors and frustrates users, the activity was based exclusively on QR codes, a type of vision-based AR (Dunleavy et al., 2009; Jang, 2012; Kjærgaard et al., 2010). Third, QR codes are self-contained (information can be retrieved by activating the code itself), versatile to use, and user-friendly for young students who are challenged to discover the “hidden” content (Rikala and Kankaanranta, 2014; Yoon et al., 2011). Finally, rather than employing AR technologically advanced platforms, which are often costly, proprietary and require programming skills (Dunleavy and Dede, 2014; Kyza and Georgiou, 2019a), QR codes provide a low-cost solution, allowing the replication of this study by other researchers or the enactment of the intervention by teachers in other contexts.

Since the goal of this study was to investigate the impact of loosely-coupled and strongly-coupled AR activities on students’ immersion and subsequent learning, two different versions of the “Mysterious disease” AR activity were developed: a strongly-coupled version and a loosely-coupled version; students in each condition participated in one of the two versions of the activity on different days (one condition at the end of the first summer school day, and the second condition in the morning of the second day). As students came from different parts of the cities and were not classmates outside of the summer school, there was limited, if any, opportunity to interact and share their experience of joining one experimental or another between the two experiments. We next describe each version of the AR activity.

6.2.1. Strongly-coupled AR activity
The strongly-coupled version of the activity, which was used by students in Condition 1, was designed to increase the relation of the content in the mobile environment and the physical space in two ways. First, the QR codes were placed at specific points of interest that were tightly connected to the narrative (e.g., at the university's medical center, where the nurses recorded the symptoms of the affected students; at the university cafeteria, where the cooks did not follow food safety rules; at a lecture hall where a professor lectured about microbes, etc.). In this version, the path that students walked along was designed to fit the theme and the narrative structure (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (202KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. QR codes’ placement in the strongly-coupled activity.

Second, the places where the QR codes were activated were also enriched with physical cues which were aligned with the narrative i.e. broken freezer, disposable gloves, printed posters and diagrams, symptoms’ notebook, fermented food whose production uses microbes such as beer, yogurt, etc. (Fig. 3, Fig. 4). Such designs of the strongly-coupled activity have been argued to support strong blending between the narrative and the physical space by creating “natural coincidences” between events in the virtual and the physical world (Reid et al., 2005b).

Fig. 3
Download : Download high-res image (775KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Example of strong coupling between the physical space (cafeteria cuisine) and the digital information provided by the health service officer (text translated from Greek).

Fig. 4
Download : Download high-res image (571KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Example of strong coupling between the physical space (University's medical center) and the digital information provided by the university nurse.

6.2.2. Loosely-coupled AR activity
The loosely-coupled version of the activity, which was used by students in Condition 2, took place at the same location (at the university premises) where the narrative unfolded. In this way, the location induced the same ambience (e.g., same building, physical conditions) as the narrative plot. However, there were no further relations between the AR activity narrative and the physical place. The QR codes were placed randomly within the main building corridor and were not meaningfully related to the narrative (Fig. 5). In addition, the location was not enriched with any physical cues or real objects. As a result, the relation of the narrative to the location was weaker, which according to Rossito et al. (2016) may have the added benefit that it could allow students to imagine their own connections between the story and the physical space.

Fig. 5
Download : Download high-res image (200KB)
Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 5. QR code placement in the loosely-coupled activity.

6.3. Data collection
This study employed a mixed methods approach. The collected data included baseline data, questionnaires investigating students’ immersion and learning gains, and post-activity interviews with 14 students from Condition 1 (63.6%) and 14 students from Condition 2 (60.9%). The following sections provide more information about the data collection methods and the instruments employed.

6.3.1. Baseline data
We collected baseline data using a survey, to create individual profiles for the students and to examine the equivalency of the two experimental conditions. The survey had two main parts: Interest in science and Attitudes towards tablets.

•
Interest in science was measured using 10 items (e.g., “Science lessons are fun”, “I would like to do science experiments at home”), on a five-point Likert scale, derived from the Test of Science-Related Attitudes (Fraser, 1981). We administered an adapted version of the survey, as this was employed and validated in the study of Bressler and Bodzin (2013). Three of the items were negative and required reverse coding. Subsequently, we defined the average intensity of Interest in Science per student, by summing up the values of the responses on respective items, divided by the number of items comprising the construct. Cronbach's alpha for the adapted instrument was 0.90. Students completed the survey within fifteen minutes.

•
Attitudes towards tablets were assessed using an adapted version of the Computer Attitude Measure for Young Students (CAMYS, Teo and Noyes, 2008), which was composed of 12 items, each on a five-point Likert scale. Even though the survey was initially developed for measuring students’ attitudes towards computers, it was slightly adapted for this study, by replacing the term “computer(s)” with the term “tablet(s)” in all of the items (e.g., “I feel that I am in control when I use a tablet”, “It is fun to use the tablet”, “The tablet allows me to do my work faster”). The 12-item scores were summed and divided by the number of items, to calculate the average intensity of each individual's attitudes towards using tablets (Teo and Noyes, 2008). The CAMYS is considered a valid instrument and has a documented reliability alpha coefficient of 0.85. Students also completed the survey within fifteen minutes.

6.3.2. Immersion survey
After the implementation of the “Mysterious disease” AR activity, the students in each condition completed a questionnaire which measured their experienced immersion (Georgiou and Kyza, 2017a). Specifically, students were asked to complete the Total Immersion scale, which is comprised of two subscales with a total of seven items, on a seven-point Likert scale, as follows:

•
Flow (3 items – e.g., “The activity became the unique and only thought occupying my mind”) and

•
Presence (4 items – e.g., “I felt that what I was experiencing was something real, instead of a fictional activity”).

Each item of the administered questionnaire corresponded to one of the optimum immersive stages (Flow or Presence), while all seven items corresponded to the dimension of Total Immersion. As part of this study, we defined the average intensity of each stage per student simply by summing up the values of the responses on respective items, divided by the number of items comprising each subscale. Likewise, we followed the same procedure for defining the average intensity for the dimension of Total Immersion. Cronbach's alpha for the Τotal Ιmmersion scale has a documented reliability alpha coefficient of 0.82, while Cronbach's alpha for the Flow and the Presence subscales are 0.87 and 0.80 correspondingly. The students were allocated fifteen minutes to complete the questionnaire.

6.3.3. Conceptual understanding test
A conceptual understanding test was administered to assess any differences in students’ conceptual learning about the scientific concepts related to topic of the AR investigation, after the end of the activity. The test was composed of two parts:

The first part consisted of 10 multiple-choice items (e.g., Choose the right statement: “(1a) There are more beneficial microbes than there are harmful, (1b) There more harmful microbes than there are beneficial, (1c) There is an equal number of harmful and beneficial microbes” or “(2a) Microbes are also known as viruses, (2b) Microbes are classified into viruses and bacteria, (2c) Microbes are classified into viruses, bacteria and fungi”). These multiple-choice items evaluated students’ factual knowledge. Each correct answer was scored with one mark, for a total of ten marks. The Kuder-Richardson Formula 20 (KR20) reliability measure of the multiple-choice post-test was 0.78, indicating satisfactory reliability.

The second part of the test included five true-false questions with an explanation part required per question, for a total of ten additional marks. The aim of these questions was to evaluate students’ reasoning about food hygiene and microbes, or the transmission of pathogens (e.g., “Microbes grow at very low temperatures: True or False? Explain your answer.”, “There is no way for people to protect themselves from harmful microbes: True or False? Explain your answer.”). Students were required to write down and justify their answers. A scoring rubric was developed for evaluating students’ performance on each question, and in this case, correct answers were scored with two marks. Each correct answer was scored with 0.5 marks, while each correct explanation was scored with another 1.5 marks.

Students’ scores for each of the two parts were added to calculate the Total Learning Score per student. The maximum score was 20 marks. Students were allocated thirty minutes to complete the conceptual test.

6.3.4. Post-activity interviews
Fourteen students from each condition, were invited to participate in semi-structured individual interviews, which took place immediately after the intervention. The sample was purposive, ensuring that the participating students came from different groups, in an attempt to increase representativeness of experiences. The average duration of the interviews was 19:09 min (SD = 4:34 min). Students were initially asked to report feelings associated with their experience during the immersive AR activity, and were then probed to discuss feelings of presence (e.g., “To what extent did you experience this problem-based investigation as a fictional case?”, “Did you perceive the narrative-based storyline as a real one or not?”), their feelings of flow (e.g., “How focused did you feel during the problem-based investigation?”, “To what degree did this investigation manage to capture all of your senses?”), as well as the factors which had affected these feelings positively or negatively (e.g., “What were the main factors affecting your feelings?”, “How did these factors affect your feelings?”).

6.4. Data analysis
The data analysis was conducted in two phases. The first phase included the analysis of the quantitative data collected via the baseline surveys (Interest in science and Attitudes towards tablets), the Immersion questionnaire and the Conceptual understanding test. The second phase included the analysis of the qualitative data collected via the individual, post-activity interviews. These analysis procedures are described next.

6.4.1. Phase 1 – quantitative data analysis
Initial checks on the distributional properties of data under analysis used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of normality for the assessment of the distributional assumptions. Taking into account that most of the distributions differed significantly from the norm and were not homogeneous, as well as the small number of participants per condition, nonparametric tests were used to analyze the data, with the significance level set at 0.05. Differences between the two conditions in terms of students’ Interest in science, Attitudes towards tablets, Immersion and Conceptual understanding were examined with the Mann–Whitney U non-parametric test (using an exact p value; Mehta and Patel, 2011). As the non-parametric tests are not affected by violations of distribution assumptions (Howell, 2009), the Mann–Whitney U test was a valid statistical test for the purposes of our study. The z-score associated with the Mann–Whitney test was converted into the effect size r, then converted to d using the typical transformation (Borenstein et al., 2011); 95% confidence intervals for d are also reported (Cumming, 2013). As part of this study, we adopted Hattie's (2008) suggested benchmarks for the effect size magnitude, as follows: small d = 0.20, medium d = 0.40, large d = 0.60 and above. In addition, the potential correlations between students’ Immersion and Conceptual understanding were also investigated per condition, with the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. Spearman's rank correlation coefficient (ρ) was selected as the variables were not normally distributed and the sample sizes were relatively small (n1=22, n2=23).

6.4.2. Phase 2 – qualitative data analysis
The post-activity individual interviews were transcribed, and analyzed via a quantitative content analysis, following the eight functional steps of verbal data analysis proposed by Chi (1997). More specifically, at the first step the transcribed protocols were reduced, keeping students’ reports about their experienced immersion only. Next, we proceeded with the segmentation of the reduced protocols according to stand-alone “units of meaning”, indicating student perceptions regarding their immersive experience. The analysis which followed took place at two grain size levels. Initially, the data were analyzed at a large grain size, as the qualitative corpus was classified in two main themes corresponding to one of the optimum immersive states: (a) Flow, as a sense of full absorption in the AR activity, and (b) Presence, as a sense of feeling surrounded by the blended environment. At a second step, the data classified per theme were analyzed at a fine grain, as multiple codes (representing the factors affecting students’ sense of flow and presence) were identified via an inductive analysis and grouped under higher order categories. Statements per code were classified as negative or positive, thus providing a more nuanced indication in relation to the valence of students’ self-perceived factors. After coding 25% of the interview data corpus, the first author selected and shared excerpts of the coded data with the second author, who independently reviewed the excerpts as well as the coding scheme. Subsequently the two authors discussed the emerging themes, codes, and higher order categories and their definitions, in relation to the coded excerpts. As part of this process, all disagreements were resolved, the coding scheme was refined, and the two authors reached intersubjectivity. The analysis was completed with the representation of the coded data in a tabular form, along with numeric counts presenting the frequency of each factor's appearance. Finally, we conclude with the interpretation and discussion of the emerged categories and codes, focusing on the most salient topics.

7. Findings
We next present the main findings, as derived from our data analyses. After reporting on the baseline assessment between the two conditions, the findings are presented in regard to: (a) students’ experienced immersion between the two conditions, (b) students’ conceptual gains in the two conditions, and (c) the factors affecting students’ experienced immersion, namely students’ sense of presence and flow.

7.1. Setting the baseline
A Mann–Whitney U test was used to identify any initial differences between the two conditions, in terms of students’ prior Interest toward learning science and Attitudes towards tablets. As shown in Table 2, there were no statistical differences between the two conditions.


Table 2.. Baseline assessment of students’ interest in science and attitudes towards tablets in each condition.

Condition 1 Strongly-coupled AR	Condition 2 Loosely-coupled AR	Z
Mean rank	Sum of ranks	Mean rank	Sum of ranks
Interest in Science	26.05	573.00	20.09	462.00	−1.52
Attitudes towards tablets	22.86	503.00	23.13	532.00	−0.07
Note. *p ≤ .05, **p ≤ .01, ***p ≤ .001.

The mean rank of Interest in science of the students who took part in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=26.05) was not statistically different when compared to that of the students who participated in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank = 20.09), U = 186, p=.128, d = 0.45 [95% CI 0.18, 0.72]. Likewise, the mean rank of Attitudes towards tablets of the students who took part in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=22.86) was not statistically different to that of the students who participated in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=23.13), U = 250, p=.945, d=−0.08 [95% CI −0.23, 0.06].

7.2. Total immersion: experienced feelings of presence and flow
A Mann–Whitney U test was used to identify any potential differences between the two conditions in terms of students’ experienced Immersion. Firstly, as shown in Table 3, both experienced flow and presence contributed to students’ immersive experience in each one of the conditions. However, students in the loosely-coupled AR activity evaluated their experienced sense of flow higher that their sense of presence. On the other hand, students in the strongly-coupled AR activity evaluated their experienced sense of presence higher than their sense of flow. The comparison of the two conditions showed that the students in the strongly-coupled AR activity outperformed their counterparts in the loosely-coupled AR activity, in terms of Total immersion and reported sense of Presence; this difference was statistically significant. Specifically, the mean rank of Total immersion for the students in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=28.07) was significantly different than that of the students in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=18.15,  U = 141.50, p=.011, d = 0.67  [95% CI 0.29, 1.05]. Similarly, the difference in mean rank of Presence for the students in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=28.30) was statistically significant when compared to that of the students in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=17.93), U = 136.50, p=.008, d = 0.81 [95% CI 0.34, 1.28]. No statistically significant differences were detected in terms of students’ sense of Flow between the two conditions. The difference in the mean rank for the reported sense of Flow of the students in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank= 26.02) was not statistically significant when compared to that of the students in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=20.11), U = 186.50, p=.129, d = 0.21 [95% CI −0.15, 0.57].


Table 3.. Comparison of the two conditions in terms of flow and presence during the narrative-based AR activity.

Condition 1Strongly-coupled AR	Condition 2Loosely-coupled AR	Z
Mean rank	Sum of ranks	Mean rank	Sum of ranks
Total immersion	28.07	617.50	18.15	417.50	−2.54**
Presence	28.30	622.50	17.93	412.50	−2.65**
Flow	26.02	572.50	20.11	462.50	−1.52
Note. *p ≤ .05, **p ≤ .01, ***p ≤ .001.

7.3. Learning gains: reasoning and factual knowledge
A Mann–Whitney U test was used to identify any potential differences between the students’ learning gains in the two conditions. As shown in Table 4, the students in the strongly-coupled AR activity outperformed their counterparts in the loosely-coupled AR activity, in terms their Reasoning. This difference had a marginally statistical significance. In particular, the mean rank of the Reasoning for the students who took part in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=26.91) was statistically different to that of the students who participated in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=19.26), U = 167, p=.050, d = 0.55 [95% CI 0.18, 0.91]. No differences were identified in terms of the Total learning score and the factual knowledge between the two conditions. The mean rank for the Total learning score of the students who took part in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=26.34) was not statistically different when compared to that of the students who participated in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=19.80), U = 179.50, p=.095, d = 0.46, [95% CI −0.18, 1.11]. Similarly, the mean rank of the Factual knowledge for the students who took part in the strongly-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=24.89) was not statistically different to that of the students who participated in the loosely-coupled AR activity (Mean rank=21.20), U = 211.50, p=.334, d = 0.26 [95% CI −0.12, 0.64].


Table 4.. Comparison of learning gains for the two conditions.

Condition 1Strongly-coupled AR	Condition 2Loosely-coupled AR	Z
Mean rank	Sum of ranks	Mean rank	Sum of ranks
Total learning score	26.34	579.50	19.80	455.50	−1.67
Reasoning	26.91	592.00	19.26	443.00	−1.96*
Factual knowledge	24.89	547.50	21.20	487.50	−0.97
Note. *p ≤ .05, **p ≤ .01, ***p ≤ .001.

7.4. Immersion in relation to students’ learning
We further examined the bivariate correlations between students’ experienced immersion and conceptual understanding by testing Spearman's rank correlation coefficient in each condition.

In Condition 1 (Strongly-coupled AR), several statistically significant correlations were found between students’ experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains (Table 5). In particular, students’ factual knowledge was positively related to flow (ρ=0.43, p≤.05). Students’ reasoning was positively related to flow (ρ=0.44, p≤.05), presence (ρ=0.42, p≤.05) and total immersion (ρ=0.49, p≤.05). Finally, students’ total learning scores were positively related to flow (ρ=0.45, p≤.05), presence (ρ=0.47, p≤.05) and total immersion (ρ=0.52, p≤.05).


Table 5.. Spearman's rank correlations between experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains in the strongly-coupled AR condition.

Flow	Presence	Total immersion
Factual knowledge	0.43*	0.32	0.39
Reasoning	0.44*	0.42*	0.49*
Total learning score	0.45*	0.47*	0.52*
Note. *p ≤ .05, **p ≤ .01, ***p ≤ .001.

On the other hand, only a limited number of statistically significant correlations between students’ experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains was identified in Condition 2 (Loosely-coupled AR) (see Table 6). As in Condition 1, students’ factual knowledge was positively related to flow (ρ=0.46, p≤.05) as well as with total immersion (ρ=0.42, p≤.05).


Table 6.. Spearman's rank correlations between experienced immersion and conceptual learning gains in the loosely-coupled AR condition.

Flow	Presence	Total immersion
Factual knowledge	0.46*	0.36	0.42*
Reasoning	0.19	0.02	0.14
Total learning score	0.39	0.21	0.32
Note. *p ≤ .05, **p ≤ .01, ***p ≤ .001.

7.5. Immersive factors affecting the experienced sense of presence and flow
The analysis of the interviews, conducted with a subset of 14 students per condition, led to the identification of the immersive factors for the sense of presence and flow during the two AR learning activities. As part of the analysis, students’ statements were also counted and classified as negative or positive, thus providing a more nuanced indication in relation to the valence and frequency of students’ self-perceived factors. The factors identified as affecting students’ sense of presence were classified in two basic themes: (a) Realism, expressing the extent of the activity's fidelity for the students, and (b) Agency, expressing students’ perceived sense of control and volitional involvement in the activity. Τhe factors identified as having affected the students’ sense of flow were also classified in two basic themes: (a) Focus, expressing students’ attention during the activity, and (b) Level of challenge, expressing the level of perceived difficulty for the students. These factors are presented in Table 7 and discussed in the following sections in relation to each condition.


Table 7.. Categorization of factors reported as affecting the immersive states of flow and presence in each condition.

Condition 1Strongly-coupled AR	Condition 2Loosely-coupled AR
Immersive states	Themes & Factors discussed	+	–	+	–
1. Sense of
presence	1.1 Realism	27	4	13	6
1.1.1 Augmentation of reality	0	2	2	2
1.1.2 Video-based characters	2	0	2	1
1.1.3 Multimedia material	3	0	1	1
1.1.4 Narrative plot	6	1	8	2
1.1.5 Artifacts and real props	9	1	0	0
1.1.6 QR codes arrangement	7	0	0	0
1.2 Agency	14	0	2	3
1.2.1 Problem-solving process	3	0	0	0
1.2.2 Narrative plot	5	0	2	0
1.2.3 Artifacts and real props	6	0	0	3
2. Sense of
Flow	2.1 Focus	33	5	21	10
2.1.1 Augmentation of reality	5	0	1	0
2.1.2 Problem-solving process	14	0	13	0
2.1.3 Narrative plot	10	1	6	3
2.1.4 Navigation and orientation	1	2	1	2
2.1.5 Collaboration	3	0	0	2
2.1.6 Technology hardware	0	0	0	3
2.1.7 External interruptions	0	2	0	0
2.2 Level of challenge	1	4	3	5
2.2.1 Problem-solving process	1	2	3	5
2.2.3 Artifacts and real props	0	2	0	0
Note. The (+) and (-) signs indicate whether a factor was positively or negatively evaluated by the students.

7.5.1. Sense of presence
To understand what contributed to the differentiation of students’ experienced sense of presence between the two conditions we next discuss the factors identified as affecting students’ sense of presence, according to the themes of Realism and Agency.

Realism: students reported that their feelings of presence depended on the perceived level of realism of the activity. Students in both conditions discussed four factors as positively or negatively contributing to the realism of the activity: (a) the augmentation of reality, (b) the video-based characters, which were activated at each QR code, (c) the multimedia material (e.g., videos, photos, etc.) which were provided during the activity, and (d) the narrative plot. The most positively evaluated factor by students in both conditions was the narrative plot which provided an authentic case for investigation. E.g.

Generally, it was quite a true story. For instance, it was not about a dragon, who killed the students and then disappeared. It was not very fictional. It was making sense. [#16, Boy, Strongly-coupled activity]

A difference between the conditions was that realism was reported more frequently by the students who participated in the strongly-coupled activity due to two additional factors: (a) the artifacts and real props and (b) the QR codes’ purposeful placement in the physical space. According to the students, the artifacts and real props allowed the collection of “realistic” evidence and made the investigation come “alive”. E.g.

When we found the notepad, I was carried away as it did not seem as something fake. […] I thought that it was real, as there were also (handwritten) notes inside. [#20, Boy, Strongly-coupled activity]

Students also reported that the QR codes’ purposeful placement in the physical space heightened the relation between the narrative plot and the real space. E.g.

For instance, when we visited the cafeteria, it was a real cafeteria! It was not something that I would have just seen through the tablet. [#25, Boy, Strongly-coupled activity]

Both of these factors, which emerged as positive factors only in the case of the strongly-coupled activity, appeared to be the most influential in terms of affecting the activity's fidelity for the students.

Agency: students reported that their feelings of presence also depended on their perceived level of agency. Students in both conditions discussed three main factors as positively and negatively contributing to their sense of agency: (a) the problem-solving process, (b) the narrative plot, and (c) the artifacts and real props. According to students in both conditions, the narrative plot positively contributed to their sense of agency, as they felt a personal involvement with the case. E.g.

It was really nice. It felt like that you were “inside”, as you were making the activity. […] It felt like you were a detective and you were looking to find the truth that was hidden in the mystery. [#10, Girl, Loosely-coupled activity]

However, a difference between the conditions was that the sense of agency was reported more frequently by the students who employed the strongly-coupled activity, due to the artifacts and real props, which allowed students to interact with “realistic” evidence and collect data through a more interactive process. E.g.

It was different, because in the tablet there were only some images. However, when there were props it was different. You could hold the evidence, you could see it, you could study it better… [#24, Girl, Strongly-coupled activity]

In contrast, the lack of artifacts and real props was negatively evaluated by the students who participated in the loosely-coupled activity. Some of these students pointed to a need for integration of real props, which could provide more interactivity to the investigation process, even though they were not prompted on this topic. E.g.

There were no real clues, we were just scanning the QR codes with the tablet. […] I would prefer the QR codes to be smaller or even hidden to search for them… as well as to provide us with real clues as evidence, and not only the website-based ones. [#8, Boy, Loosely-coupled activity]

Overall, the use of artifacts and reals props emerged as the most positively influencing factor for students’ perceived level of agency in the strongly-coupled condition, while their absence emerged as the most negatively influencing factor for the condition in the loosely-coupled version of the activity.

7.5.2. Sense of flow
We next present the two themes (Focus, Level of challenge) which were identified as contributing to students’ sense of flow in the two conditions.

Focus: students in both conditions indicated that their feelings of flow depended on their focus during the activity, and mentioned the following seven factors as attracting or distracting their focus during the learning process: (a) the augmentation of reality, (b) the problem-solving process, (c) the narrative plot, (d) navigation in real space, (e) collaboration, (f) the technology, and (g) external interruptions (from other student pairs). The most frequently reported factor affecting students’ focus was the problem-solving process, which was equally positively evaluated in both conditions. As students mentioned, the problem-solving process increased their focus and attention. E.g.

I was focused during the activity… As we had to look for evidence, organize it, and then find out the answer. (I was focused) as we had to reach a conclusion. From all the available data, we had to reach a conclusion. From the first, second, third… From all the data anyway. From all the data you should find a basic… You should combine everything. [#13, Girl, Loosely-coupled activity]

In addition, in most cases students in both conditions emphasized how the narrative plot captured their focus. E.g.

At the beginning, we felt anxiety. What will we find out? … What is the case about?… And because of the continuous action you feel impatient, to see what is going on until the end. [#24, Girl, Strongly-coupled activity]

Level of challenge: students in both conditions suggested that their feelings of flow depended on their perceived level of challenge. Students discussed two factors as affecting their experienced level of difficulty: (a) the problem-solving process, and (b) the integration of artifacts and real props (only mentioned in the case of the strongly-coupled activity). In particular, students of the strongly-coupled condition reported that the integration of artifacts and real props negatively affected their experienced level of difficulty, in only two cases. The most positively and negatively evaluated factor in both conditions was the problem-solving process. According to the positive evaluations, the level of the problem-solving was challenging but yet satisfactory. E.g.

It was difficult but interesting. It was complicated… It was difficult as you had to had to gather many data. During the activity, time flew. It was really nice.” [#2, Boy, Loosely-coupled activity]

In contrast, according to the negative evaluations, the problem-solving process seemed very easy or very difficult for some students. E.g.

We were investigating the case…. However, the solution was obvious… It was all about food poisoning. We had no purpose to search anymore for something that was already obvious. [#26, Girl, Strongly-coupled activity]

8. Discussion
This study investigated the hypotheses that the greatest the coupling between the physical space and the narrative of an AR activity, the greater will students’ immersion and subsequent learning be. In this context, we purposefully compared two conditions: Students in Condition 1 participated in an AR activity with strong coupling between its narrative and the physical space, while students in Condition 2 participated in a loosely-coupled version of the activity.

The findings from the analysis of the data from the two conditions indicated several differences. The middle school age students who participated in the strongly-coupled version of the AR activity showed no statistically significant difference in their experienced flow when compared to students who participated in the loosely-coupled version of the activity. However, students in the strongly-coupled version outperformed their counterparts, in terms of the experienced sense of presence. This finding is aligned with findings reported elsewhere, supporting that one's sense of presence is increased when the virtual world of the activity is aligned with the surrounding physical environment (Ballagas et al., 2008; Colás et al., 2016; Paay et al., 2008; Reid et al., 2005; Reid, 2008). In contrast, this result contradicts the position of Rossitto et al. (2016), who argued in favor of loosely-coupled AR activities, or findings reported in prior studies (e.g., Karapanos et al., 2012), which did not find statistically significant differences in their adult sample (tourists) sense of presence.

The analysis of students’ post-activity interviews can explain some of the findings in terms of how students experienced flow and presence in each condition. In particular, the integration of real props, as well as the purposeful placement of the QR codes in the physical space, did not seem to affect the students’ focus or their perceived level of challenge; as such, this could explain the lack of statistically significant differences between reports of experienced flow among students in both conditions. On the other hand, the integration of real props, as well as the QR codes’ purposeful placement in the physical space, had a significant positive impact on students’ perceived realism, as well as on their perceived sense of agency, and were highlighted as the most positively influencing factors for achieving a sense of presence. This finding could explain why the students who participated in the strongly-coupled version of the activity outperformed their counterparts, in terms of their experienced feelings of presence.

These findings are aligned with prior arguments in the literature, claiming that a key feature provoking a sense of presence in digitally-enhanced environments is the ability to interact and modify the environment instead of passively observe it, thus suggesting presence as a sense of “doing there” rather than a sense of simply “being there” (e.g., Floridi, 2005; Seegert, 2009). Kim's study (2013) with mobile-based AR apps, suggested that presence in AR applications seems to be based on the idea of contextual immersion. Kim defined contextual immersion “as user experiences of being aware of real context through the embodied interaction and constructive relationships in mobile AR” (p. 81). Likewise, from a pedagogical point of view, it has been argued that place-dependent learning experiences, such as those provided by strongly-coupled educational AR activities, may provide a “narrative” hook as well as an increased sense of agency or sense of control during the activity (Squire et al., 2007). In contrast, a place-independent educational AR activity, even though increasing the portability of the activity, may decrease the amount of authentic interaction with the environment (Klopfer and Sheldon, 2010). Our findings provide empirical support for, and extend this claim, as they point to the conclusion that a strongly-coupled activity can heighten students’ feelings of presence.

The differences between students’ learning outcomes in the two conditions could be attributed to the differences in students’ perceived immersion. In particular, we found a statistically positive relation between flow and students’ factual knowledge in both conditions; this finding is not surprising given that there were no statistically significant differences in students’ sense of flow between the two conditions. However, we have found that students in the strongly-couple condition outperformed their peers in terms of experienced presence and reasoning. In turn, we have also found a statistically positive correlation between presence and students’ reasoning only in the strongly-couple condition. These findings provide empirical support for Cheng and Tsai (2013) assumption that the perception of presence is expected to affect students’ learning performance during AR educational activities, and also define their learning outcomes. Overall, our findings are aligned with prior studies providing empirical evidence supporting that heightened levels of immersion in digitally-enhanced educational spaces can increase students’ performance and subsequent learning (Georgiou and Kyza, 2017b, c, 2018; Cheng et al., 2016; Rowe et al., 2011; Schrader and Bastiaens, 2012).

In conclusion, Zydney and Warner (2016) have argued that more research is needed to determine how AR-based activities can be designed to immerse students in the construction of new knowledge. Slotta (2015) has pointed out, for instance, that researchers should aim at providing powerful new forms of tangible and physical interactions within immersive digital environments, given that such interactions can bridge the digital and the physical world, while also supporting students’ embodied learning. The findings of this study provide empirical substantiation to these recommendations indicating that strongly-coupled AR activities, enriched with physical cues and real objects, can heighten students’ experienced immersion and learning due to providing various opportunities for students’ embodied interactions. Slotta (2015) has also argued that researchers should invest more effort in developing immersive learning activities, in which students can physically engage by interacting with tangible objects. We suggest that such an “embodied interaction” perspective can be of paramount importance in the development of narrative-based AR activities, both in terms of supporting experienced immersion and subsequent conceptual learning.

9. Limitations and future studies
Even though the findings of this study contribute to a better understanding of the coupling phenomenon in relation to middle-school students’ immersion and learning outcomes in narrative-based AR apps, some limitations of this work are also important to note. First, the sample of the study was small and drawn from a population of convenience (i.e., students attending a summer school club). Consequently, the findings of this study should be treated with caution, taking into account the statistical power of the study, since the sample size was relatively small. Future studies could replicate this research with bigger samples. Second, this study relied on self-reports and retrospective measures of immersion, which may be regarded as a limitation. Similar to other existing measurements of immersive experiences, asking participants to respond retrospectively after a specific activity can be criticized as not being capable of fully capturing the temporal nature of immersion, or could even distort the reported experience of immersion. Future studies could take into consideration new methodologies for objectively investigating immersion-in-situ, in addition to participants’ own reports. Another limitation of our study may relate to the operationalization of students' learning gains, which in this study were defined in terms of students’ Factual knowledge and Reasoning. Even though our findings suggested that immersion may be positively related to students’ reasoning, it is also possible that immersion is associated with other learning outcomes (e.g., problem-solving skills, inquiry skills), on which future studies could focus on. Finally, our findings are most relevant to the specific narrative-based AR activity employed in this study. The latter is only one example of a narrative-based AR activity for educational purposes, which may have a different impact on students’ immersion as compared to other AR narratives. Future studies could compare different narrative-based AR activities to investigate the validity of the reported findings.

On a different note, the present study provides empirical support in favor of strongly-coupled AR activities for young students. However, it should be taken into account that prior research has focused on the investigation of the topic with adult populations, mainly tourists, using mobile-based apps to support users’ awareness about the history of a monument or a place, in a playful manner (e.g., Ballagas et al., 2008; Colás et al., 2016; Karapanos et al., 2012; Paay et al., 2008; Reid et al., 2005; Reid, 2008; Rossito et al. (2016)). Therefore, while our findings have been presented and discussed vis-à-vis the prior corpus of studies, it should be noted that results always relate to the context of the research (e.g., type and purpose of the AR activity, goals and duration of the activity, type of users, etc.). It might be the case, for instance, that strong-coupling is more necessary for supporting younger students’ immersion and learning, but not for adult tourists, who might enjoy a loose-coupling version of an AR activity more, drawing their own connections between the virtual and the physical world, as reported in the study of Rossito et al. (2016). Prior studies also found a differentiated effect of location-aware multimedia stories on experienced immersion according to the relation of the users with the augmented space -e.g., residents, non-residents, and foreigners- (see for instance Nisi et al., 2008). Therefore, future studies could investigate in more depth the effect of the coupling phenomenon on users’ experienced immersion, taking into account the users’ prior relationship with the physical space where the narrative-based AR activity unfolds.

10. Conclusions & implications
Overall, the outcomes of this study contribute to the fields of immersion and learning, by providing empirical substantiation for two claims. First, the greater the coupling between the physical space and the narrative of the AR activity, the higher the levels of experienced immersion are, in terms of presence. Second, strongly-coupled AR activities, enriched with physical cues and real objects, can also result in increased conceptual learning gains due to their immersive affordances as well as their opportunities for students’ embodied interactions. These findings, therefore, provide empirical evidence opting for strongly-coupled narrative-based AR activities. Even though most mobile-based AR activities remain loosely coupled due to their “portability” and their affordances to be enacted almost everywhere (Dunleavy and Dede, 2014), it seems that emphasis should also be given to the development of place-dependent AR activities, even if these activities are typically hard to enact at multiple locations. For instance, according to Wetzel et al. (2011) there are plenty of loosely-coupled mobile-based AR apps, which can take place literally everywhere (e.g., Human Pacman, ARQuake, NetAttack, The Alchemists, Epidemic Menace, Cows vs. Aliens, Interference). In particular, most of these AR apps are marker-based games, which do not rely on a specific location, and as such the markers can be placed anywhere. On the other hand, according to Wetzel et al. (2011), there is a much lower number of strongly-coupled mobile-based AR apps, in which the real environment is truly embraced, as an integral part (e.g., Eduventure, which is played in the medieval Marksburg castle situated in the Middle-Rhine valley in Germany, or TimeWarp, which is played at the banks of the river Rhine in Cologne). Seeing this as a shortcoming, Wetzel et al. support that the real environment needs to be brought into the context of the AR activity, connecting the mobile-based AR app more closely to reality, in order to contribute to the enhancement of users’ engagement. Our study provides empirical documentation for this claim, indicating that strongly-coupled AR activities can support high levels of students’ immersion and learning.